Lloyd D. Newell, Divine Connection: Understanding Your Inherent Worth ( 1992)

CHAPTER 7

A DIVINELY INHERITED PERSONAL MANIFESTO

We are not endeavoring to get ahead of others but only to surpass ourselves.

—Hugh B. Brown

When I was a child, my father used to chart the growth of his children on our furnace-room wall. From time to time he would take us down to the furnace room and mark off how much we had grown. Especially for the boys, this was a major event, a ritual remembrance of just how tall (and thus how "grown up") we were. Sometimes alone with Dad and sometimes with other family members, we would gather in the furnace room for the moment of truth.

I remember standing against that wall with all the height I could muster, straightening my back, lifting my neck, and even holding my breath until my dad etched a mark in the wall that corresponded with my "hard-won" height. As soon as the marking pencil lifted, I would turn around and reflect on my growth. Sometimes I was elated with the latest demarcation; sometimes I was disappointed to see just how close it was to the last mark; sometimes I wondered if I would ever be as tall as my older brother and sisters; and sometimes I was in awe to think I could ever have been so small.

I always talked to my dad about the marks on the wall, and was reassured by his words: "Just a few more years, Lloyd, and you will be up to your full-grown height," he would say. "A couple of years ago you didn't even reach the top of the furnace." "That is the most you have ever grown in one year," he repeatedly assured. I loved this quiet moment of reflection. My father always made me feel tall, even when my growth, compared with that of my siblings, was at times rather minimal. He pointed to the lowest marks on the wall and filled me with encouragement and wonder: "Can you believe you were ever that little? Just think how much more you will grow!" And he was always sure to emphasize the latest—and highest—mark, inspiring me to keep on growing and never to stop stretching. Sometimes he would lift me up and show me how tall I might be "someday."

Eventually, I grew to be as tall as my father. He was as proud as I was of this "accomplishment." He told me that he always knew I would be at least as tall as he was. But he did not need to tell me that. I had felt him believing in my growth from the first times I was measured. He charted my progress not to show me how short—or how tall—I was in a given year but to illustrate how far I had come and how much farther I would be going. The furnace-room wall was not a record of a part of my life; it was a picture of an ever-evolving and increasingly fuller life. Even when the blank portion of the wall was more expansive than the marked portion, its blankness seemed to represent the pos sibilities for growth I had yet to discover—possibilities that my father, from his full-grown height and encompassing understanding, had always seen fit for me.

Even as an adult, I still go down to that furnace room occasionally, and though my father is no longer alive, the principles he taught fall so sweetly upon me as I read the scribbled markers: "Lloyd at five," "Lloyd at eight," "Lloyd on his fifteenth birthday." This wall means so much to my family that even when we recently refinished that portion of the basement, we could not bring ourselves to paint over those markings.

The carefully charted wall, in a simple way, has always served as a lesson in goal-setting for me. It is a picture of progress, a graphic display of growth. When we set realistic goals, reflective of this year's marks but still anticipating more growth, a realization of where we came from and what heights we can achieve as children of God will round out our goals with an eternal perspective. (See Romans 8:17.)

A Goal Is Not A Wish

Goal-setting is a necessary part of all self-improvement. We can best advance from one point in our development to another when we designate ends, or goals, toward which our efforts will be directed. A goal is not the same as a wish. While wishes are hoped for, goals are planned for. Whether reached in the short term or worked for over a longer term, goals are an integral part of personal progress, and help to formulate a personal mission statement or philosophy or creed.

When we set (and write down!) specific goals based on clearly defined values, we have more control over our lives. We reward ourselves with a sense of direction and a feeling of accomplishment. We fill our lives with the power of purpose. By regularly evaluating our performance, writing down our conclusions, and taking inventory of our goals, short-term commitments turn into lifelong habits. Our goals become magnets that pull us toward the fulfillment of our dreams and align us with the principles that are most dear to us.

While there are probably as many ways to set and achieve goals as there are goals to set, the methods are not as important as the nature of the goals themselves. When we set goals based upon a recognition of our eternal worth, our goals more fully reflect God's goals for us—or our unique potential. The mission statements we write will become personal manifestos, written from the perspective of children of God. Goal-oriented improvement programs will become most effective not just because we have guideposts of improvement but more importantly because those guideposts are in harmony with God's plan for our eternal progress.

How do we decide upon such worthy guideposts? How do we know if our goals are in harmony with such godly purposes as everlasting joy, eternal life, and immortality? How will a recognition of our self-worth help us know what God's goals or desires for us are?

Be Ye Perfect

Just as my father believed I would grow as tall as he was, our Heavenly Father has promised us everything that

He has. And the Lord has pledged, by way of challenge, that we can be even as He is—that we can ultimately become perfect. He did not say, "Be ye therefore okay," "Be ye therefore mediocre," or "Be ye therefore all right." He said, "Be ye therefore perfect." (Matthew 5:48; italics added.) Because we can become perfect, "even as [our] Father in heaven is perfect," we most effectively set and reach goals when a recognition of our worth inspires our goal-setting; when, because we realize we have a divine connection to success, we understand how very much God expects from us. We will never achieve perfection in this life, but when we set goals that lead us to strive for perfection, we measure up to the nobility our Father knows we can attain. We take meaningful steps to fulfill the measure of our creation when our goals become God's goals and we become more godlike.

The great Christian writer George MacDonald explains: "Every father is pleased at the baby's first attempt to walk. [And yet], no father would be satisfied with anything less than a firm, free, manly walk in a grown-up son. In the same way, God is easy to please but hard to satisfy." [^1] While God is pleased with every step we take and every inch we grow, He is not satisfied with just a single step or with one small inch of development. He still sees the yards of improvement that are ours to achieve—and His to lovingly bequeath. Because He knows we are giants-in-embryo with much growth ahead, He expects us to do all we can with all of the talents and capabilities He has given us.

He knows that growing pains are part of the process and that life sometimes hurts. We all go through painful periods of progress. But how would we know joy if we did not experience pain and sorrow? How would we understand peace if we did not sometimes experience turmoil? We all need to go through certain carefully customized refiner's fires. We all need to have some of our rough edges rounded out. And a recognition of our inherent worth, or, as Norman Vincent Peale calls it, our "untapped, unused potential power," will help us get through those difficult periods. Dr. Peale insightfully observes:

How . . . do we go about overcoming our obstacles— large or small? First, by realizing who and what you are: the average individual has no idea of the untapped, unused potential power within himself.

Lord Chesterton, an eighteenth century English statesman, said that some people live all their lives and die without ever having their power unleashed. It is a sad fact that all of us are pushed around all our lives by difficulties and obstacles over which we have power—if we will only take and use it. Do you realize who you are? In every one of us, there is a giant; not a pygmy, not a weak little person, but a giant. [^2]

When we act on the belief that every time we stretch, the Lord stretches to help us, that every time we fall He can pick us up, we will ultimately become the giants our Father has always seen us as being.

Our Divine Nature

My father's attitude toward the marks on the wall—and toward me—is an instructive example of how our Heavenly Father wants us to set and achieve goals that will lead us to Him—and to become more like Him. Paul taught the Romans that they, and we, are "joint-heirs with Christ," and he informed the Galatians, "Thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ." (Romans 8:17; Galatians 4:7.) In other words, we have been given a divine inheritance of worth that entitles us to become perfected through Christ, to be joint heirs with Him in the endowment of our Father. The Psalmist explained in the words of the Lord, "I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High." (Psalm 82:6; italics added.) Not only can we be the beneficiaries of all the gifts and glories that our Heavenly Father has in store for us, but we can also become like Him because we are literally "children of the most High."

This simple truth that "ye are gods, and all of you are children of the most High" is one of the most empowering understandings of the gospel. Dwight D. Eisenhower affirmed, "I would not lift my little finger to defend the western world against communism if I thought that man were just a machine with no spark of divinity in him." [^3] When we change our thought processes and patterns to reflect this truth, our goals will better represent our divine nature. Such a "paradigm-shift," as current usage calls it, changes the way we see ourselves, the nature of our goals, and our methods for achieving those goals. Instead of seeing ourselves as unworthy and even incapable of personal achievement, our shift in thought would have us improve and achieve because we have been endowed with the ability to transcend our human tendencies, to realize that our weaknesses are strengths-in-embryo, and that our strengths are developed gifts from God.

Reflection versus Comparison

The important feature in all of this goal-oriented and God-centered improvement is to reflect on our progress without comparing it to other peoples' successes—and even failures. Reflection is uplifting contemplation, a purposeful and pensive evaluation; while comparison is detrimental judgment, a damaging and misguided perception. Comparison would have us feel "less than" others because our house, our car, our grades, our physical features, and even our bank account are not as good as another's. Or, conversely, comparison would have us feel "greater than" other people if our house, car, grades, and so on are bigger and better than others'. Reflection, however, breeds an attitude of abundance. We glory in others' successes even while we cherish our own (sometimes small and sometimes great) accomplishments. We enjoy the meaningful moments in others' lives and enrich our own special occasions by reflecting on those joyful feelings. Our identity cannot be measured on a comparative scale because it is defined by our infinite and inherent worth, a worth that makes any human scale of measurement or comparison seem meaningless.

The furnace-room wall was not an exercise in contrast and comparison. My father made marks on the wall for purposes of reflection—and introspection. It was a place to contemplate my personal progress. My marks (or goals) were not based on my siblings' growth patterns but on my own "program" for growth and development.

Just as the furnace-room wall was a reflective rather than a comparative record, the charting of our goals should be introspective—written to help uncover our divinely endowed abilities. Perhaps that is why journal-writing is so central to goal-setting. When we write down our goals and then take personal inventory of our progress, we reflect on our efforts and have a chance to evaluate ourselves—against ourselves and by ourselves. We compare our improvement with our own development, and our achievements become inspired by a recognition of our potential and our worthiness to achieve.

This is not to say that learning about the accomplishments of others is not beneficial—and even essential. Some of my favorite books are biographies and autobiographies. I love to read about peoples' lives, to glory in their successes and learn from their mistakes. I am encouraged and strengthened by the stories of such great people as David O. McKay, Spencer W. Kimball, Mother Teresa, Winston Churchill, C. S. Lewis, and Helen Keller. I reflect on their accomplishments and am inspired by their greatness. My spirits are lifted for days after reading their accounts. I try not to compare my own life with theirs, but I do enhance my living with the story of their lives.

Perhaps the most beneficial reflection in which we can engage is reflecting on the life of Christ. Is there any more inspiring way to work improvement into our lives than by filling our minds and hearts with the story of the Master Improver, the Means for improvement? Certainly such enabling reflection comes nowhere near the pitfalls of comparison.

Divine Discontent versus Devil's Dissonance

Elder Neal A. Maxwell succinctly explains the difference between Godly reflection and damaging comparison: "We can distinguish more clearly between divine discontent and the devil's dissonance, between dissatisfaction with self and disdain for self. We need the first and must shun the second, remembering that when conscience calls to us from the next ridge, it is not solely to scold but also to beckon." [^4]

Reflection is analogous to what Elder Maxwell calls "divine discontent," or an impetus to improve that is based on our feelings of worth as children of God. Comparison is more like the "devil's dissonance," or a dissatisfaction with self that arises from feelings of inadequacy and even unworthiness. "Devil's dissonance" would have us respond to the Lord's invitation to "be . . . perfect" with feelings of inferiority and thoughts of doubt. We might be discouraged by such an invitation because we feel undeserving of the Lord's blessings—and even of His atoning sacrifice. But when our conscience calls for improvement because we know we can do and be better, because we know our Heavenly Father expects more from us and will bless us to achieve it, this "divine discontent" leads us to set goals that reflect our self-worth.

A Personal Manifesto

This kind of reflection inspires us to define our lives' purposes, to look to God and change our thinking to match His reasons for our being.

Just as any successful organization prepares a corporate mission statement that reveals a company's values (what is most important to the company, its reason for being, and its sense of direction), we would all benefit from designing a personal manifesto—a written declaration of our values, motives, and goals.

Xerox Corporation has an informal mission statement: "Quality means providing our external and internal customers with innovative products and services that fully satisfy their requirements. Quality improvement is the job of every Xerox employee." For Xerox, quality products and services are the object of their greatest estimation.

Bonneville International Corporation similarly promises "to provide personal growth opportunities for employees, to enhance the effectiveness, power, influence, and value of properties, and to exert positive leadership in the broadcast industry." In a sentence, the company's values and vision are presented.

Wendy's restaurants have a clearly developed sense of who they are and what they are about. The mission statement displayed on the wall of each Wendy's restaurant includes these words: " . . . to serve the freshest quality products as quickly and efficiently as possible. Quality is our recipe." From Xerox to Bonneville to Wendy's, corporations of all sizes and interests declare their procedures and purposes in concise and meaningful mission statements. They present their goals publicly; by so doing, they hope to better align their decisions with their values. The result is a more unified corporation moving in a clearly defined direction.

Just as a well-defined mission statement can give a company a sense of direction and purpose, a "personal manifesto," a concise statement of our value-oriented goals, can guide our decisions and clarify our intentions. A manifesto is not a description (or a rundown of height, weight, and hair color); neither is it just one goal ("I want to be president of my company"). Instead, a personal manifesto defines us in the way the Constitution defines the United States: it reveals what is of ultimate significance in our lives. It represents our vision of the future, translates that vision into a direction, and states what we are committed to do in order to realize that vision.

In writing a personal manifesto, we clarify the purpose of our life and identify our unique essence. An example of a personal manifesto might include something as simple as this: "I will be honest, loyal, and sensitive to my family and friends; I will bring quality to the tasks I perform." Or this: "My mission is to love God, myself, and others. I will seek to learn from past experiences and grow by taking prudent risks and taking responsibility for my life. I will invest in myself and in others by placing value in people and relationships, not in things and programs." Whatever form a personal manifesto might take, it need not be written in permanent ink, as it will probably change several times in a lifetime. A changing personal manifesto documents growth and is a healthy demonstration of the evolution of our character. Writing several drafts and sharing them with trusted friends will provide added insights and extra motivation.

Abraham Lincoln wrote the following creed:

I believe in God, the Almighty Ruler of nations, our great and good merciful Maker, our Father in Heaven, who notes the fall of a sparrow and numbers the hairs on our heads. I recognize the sublime truth announced in the Holy Scriptures and proved by all history that those nations are blessed whose God is the Lord. I believe that the will of God prevails. Without him, all human reliance is vain. With that assistance I cannot fall. I have a solemn vow registered in heaven to finish the work I am in, in full view of my responsibility to God, with malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right, as God gives me to see the right.

Mahatma Gandhi penned this powerful resolution:

Let . . . our first act every morning be to make the following resolve for the day:

I shall not fear anyone on earth.

I shall fear only God.

I shall not bear ill toward anyone.

I shall not submit to injustice from anyone.

I shall conquer untruth by truth.

And in resisting untruth I shall put up with all suffering.

The most meaningful way to formulate such a manifesto is to write it on the basis of our God-given worth. The very act of writing goals that reflect our self-worth forces a succinct expression of our deepest beliefs, heartfelt aspirations, and worthy goals. A personal manifesto should be:

Such a manifesto will be a great source of wisdom, power, and guidance.

The Family Manifesto

Just as corporations and individuals can benefit from documenting their mission, families can also derive strength from a clear presentation of their purpose. Whether representing a single-parent, widowed, or traditional household, a family manifesto that is prominently displayed on a wall or concisely written in a family scrapbook or journal reaffirms to family members their collective purpose and confirmed goals. (And visitors who happen upon such a statement reinforce the family's vision for itself with sincere questions and exterior support.) Family members can derive strength and solidarity from a manifesto like this one: "We are committed to the development, growth, and happiness of each family member, helping them discover their worth and fulfill their potential. Our family will reinforce each others' independent abilities, teach each member of his or her interdependent responsibilities, and give them freedom and encouragement to develop their unique, individual talents." Who could help but take pride in the direction and bask in the security of such a statement? And perhaps most important, who could help but feel the unity such a declaration might bring?

Such a manifesto is made stronger when each member of the family develops his or her personal manifesto. Each individual manifesto feeds into and complements the family manifesto. An organization is only as strong as its individual members. And the personal manifesto becomes the source of strength and vision that it should be when written with an awareness of our self-worth—when written from the perspective of a child of God.

Self-improvement ideologies have suggested the writing of a goal sheet or something like a mission statement for years. Certainly, this is not an innovative practice. But when mission statements are written with the understanding that we have already been given a divine manifesto, when mission statements are divine-centered and worth-inspired personal manifestos, this time-honored practice takes on much more meaning.

An Eternal Birthright

How might our vision for ourselves change when we define our goals around the knowledge of an eternal birthright? How might our goals better reflect our potential when we recognize our capabilities as God's offspring? How might the rest of our manifesto read if the first, unalterable line stated, "I am a child of God, and because of that abiding truth . . . "?

Paul suggested the power of such an awareness when he preached to the Athenians about the "unknown God": "In him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring." (Acts 17:28; italics added.) When we understand that because we are God's children "we live and move," our lives become more than just an existence. When we realize that our divine parentage has given us our "being," we truly can be all we were meant to become. When we set goals that are founded on correct principles, we adhere to values that will show us the way, shower us with more truth and light, and give meaning to our lives. When a personal manifesto is written as a declaration of our self-worth, we inscribe a godly vision for our lives. Beyond the marks on the furnace- room walls of our own dream houses, our goals become markings on the walls of the mansions that God has prepared for us. And this greater understanding, while giving us more of an eternal vision and uncovering more of our infinite opportunities, also inspires a deeper sense of responsibility about our actions, thoughts, and lives.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Lewis, Mere Christianity, p. 178.
[^2] Practical: Can it really be lived by? In Plus: The Magazine of Positive Thinking, June 1991, p. 3.
[^3] Inspiring: Will it require stretching? Does it make the divine connection? In Richard Evans' Quote Book, p. 136.
[^4] Neal A. Maxwell, Deposition of a Disciple (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 29.
