Lloyd D. Newell, Divine Connection: Understanding Your Inherent Worth ( 1992)

CHAPTER 8

NO MORE EXCUSES

The acceptance of total responsibility for our lives is the chief hallmark of mature human beings. The acceptance of responsibility means that from then on in life, we have no more excuses.

—Brian Tracy

Agency, or the right we have as human beings to choose, is perhaps the most fundamental principle upon which self- improvement depends. Because we are not totally determined by our genes, our environment, our childhood, our aptitudes, or even by our mistakes, we have the ability to mold ourselves and our lives according to our own choices. We have the ability to improve and develop because we have the ability to choose: to decide whether we will exercise or not, whether we will read or not, whether we will listen or not, whether we will relax or not. And this recognition of our agency is one of the greatest facilitators for change. When we really come to know that because we are children of a loving God we can choose to change, we will more readily change—and become like Him.

Agency and Self-Worth

God, in His infinite wisdom and foreknowledge, did not send us to earth as clones, programmed for perfection—or for damnation—with fixed fates and determined destinies. Instead, He sent us as agents unto ourselves, fully equipped to work out our own salvation through the redeeming sacrifice of His Son. While He did not make the choices for us, He endowed us with all that we would need to make good choices: a perfect Model, a personal Savior, a keen conscience (to sense the disparity between right and wrong), self-awareness (the ability to evaluate our own thoughts, feelings, and actions), and an unchanging and infinite worth. All of these components for the effective use of our agency may sound familiar, except perhaps the inclusion of self-worth. Why would a recognition of our self-worth be fundamental to making good choices? How does self-worth influence the way we make decisions?

The more we become aware of our divinely endowed worth, the better we can accept responsibility for our choices—and the more responsible our choices will be. Self- worth serves as an equalizer for both the good and the bad choices we make: while a bad choice may (at least partially) damage our self-esteem and a good choice fortify it, neither a bad nor a good choice can affect our self-worth. This inherent, unchanging worth withstands all the buffetings of our agency and can help us to achieve more of an equilibrium with regard to our self-esteem. As a result, we can more fully accept responsibility for our lives because we know that despite the bad—and even outside of the good— decisions that we make (or have made), our self-worth remains constant.

The Power to Choose

One effect of realizing this steady force inside of us is that we need not put ourselves at the mercy of outside and negative influences. We need not be chameleons who take upon ourselves the moods and natures of the people around us and the situations in which we find ourselves. Because we have personal claim to an infinite and unchangeable worth, we are our own best agents for everything from moods to attitudes to actions. Ultimately, we are the ones who have to decide how we feel, what we think, and what we do.

Many years ago I gained an insight into this empowering principle of agency while working for a man I will call Bill. Bill was a business executive who had successfully risen to a place of financial security and prominent social status. Bill was a leader in the office, in the company, and in the community, and I was his "right-hand man."

I usually got to work before Bill, and I would be at my desk writing, typing, or phoning when he walked in. "Hello, Bill. It's nice to see you. Good morning," was my usual greeting. Often he would grumble: "Good morning? What's good about it?" Then he would storm into his office and slam the door, and I would slouch in my chair and say to myself: "Bill is in a bad mood. Okay then, I am in a bad mood. It is going to be a bad day." And it was a bad day. Other times Bill was cheerful: "Lloyd, hello. How are you? It sure is nice to see you today." On these occasions, I would straighten my back, look out the window with a smile, and think: "Bill is in a good mood. Great! I am in a good mood. It is going to be a good day." And it was a good day. If Bill was in a good mood, somehow I was in a good mood. But if Bill was upset and grumpy, somehow I began to feel upset and grumpy.

In effect, I was allowing Bill to determine what kind of day I would have. My boss who controlled my work assignments was also controlling my thoughts, my actions, my feelings—my day. I soon learned that a life based on the weaknesses—or even on the strengths—of others is a roller-coaster ride in "non-response-ability." One day I would be feeling up because my boss was up, and the next day I would be feeling down because he was down. I was not taking responsibility for my own emotions and attitudes. I was not controlling my own thoughts and responses, following my own course of action and accounting for the choices I made. I was not using my safety belt of worth to stabilize my life and keep myself from being affected by the jolts and jarrings of my boss's behavior. Instead, I was being driven from the hill of Bill's positive response to the valley of his negative reaction—without doing enough of my own steering along the way. I let Bill put his hands on the steering wheel of my life and his foot on the gas pedal of my progress.

Fortunately, life is a process of change, growth, and maturity. And I made a few attitudinal changes that brought a greater sense of control to my work and more fulfillment to my life. I realized that I (and every other human being) was worthy of better treatment and could respond with more mature and responsible behavior. While I could not change his feelings or his behavior, I could change my reaction to it. While facing the fact that Bill was a negative influence in my life, I chose to respond to Bill more positively. I wanted to choose for myself what kind of day I would have. And this experience (at least in part) taught me that the ability to choose is what positive and responsible thinking and behaving depend upon—and what Christianity teaches.

Our Own Barometer of Behavior

While popular self-improvement literature might call such behavior "proactivity," Paul and the disciples of Christ would call it "walk[ing] by faith," or making decisions, as Paul continued, "not by sight." (2 Corinthians 5:7.) We make choices every time we wake up, open the blinds, or pull the drapes. If the sun is shining or if a haze is settling or if the rain is pouring or if the snow is falling, we have the power to choose what kind of day we will have—no matter what the weather may be like. We can walk as if the sun were on our shoulders even when the sky is overcast. We become our own personal forecasters and can determine our own "emotional, attitudinal, and spiritual weather." With a warm heart and a calm disposition, we can remain unaffected by the cold and stormy weather outside. But all too often our mood is a function of the climate or of the social environment (or, for me, of my boss's mood). Just because it is bleak outside or gloomy in the office or stressful at home does not mean we need to be bleak, gloomy, and stressed inside.

We have the power to see "not by sight" but with Godly vision, to walk by faith because we are the beneficiaries of Christ's guiding light. As children of God, we are endowed with a conscience that highlights the distinction between right and wrong. Because God gave His Son as the Light of the World, and because we are all blessed with the ability to choose between dark and light, wrong and right, we too can be lights in the world. (John 8:12.) No matter what religion we may be, we are all born with the light of Christ, or a conscience. While sin may dim that light, somewhere deep inside, it is still shining. And the more we align our lives with Christ-like ideals, the more the Light of the World will grow and shine in us, and the more we can choose to radiate a happy countenance and a cheerful disposition.

One of the greatest blessings of Christ's perfect and unwavering light is that it maintains our agency and empowers us with responsibility: the light of Christ allows us to make choices even on a darkened day. Just as a beacon of light cuts through the dark of night, the light of Christ allows us to see even through the fog of human fallibility. The Lord Himself explained: "A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may . . . glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 5:14-16; italics added.)

Whenever we choose to act according to our conscience, and to let our "light so shine," we glorify our Father in Heaven and light the eternal flame of worth that He gave us—and that may be lying dormant within us. We make claim to the universal birthright of worth that facilitates all decision-making. Our self-worth is the candlestick upon which the candle of our agency rests, and we are the responsible illuminators. Will we draw upon the light of Christ and become empowered by our worth, or will we stay in the self-evading dark? Will we let our light shine, or will we be consumed by the darkness around us?

Never Be SNIOP

A middle-aged woman I met at a seminar in Richard's Bay, South Africa, taught me a great lesson. She came to talk to me during a break between sessions, and with tears in her eyes she showed me a piece of paper on which someone had written "Never be SNIOP." A friend had given her the piece of paper when the woman was in the hospital, lying flat on her back, and believing—as the doctors had prognosticated—that she would never walk again. Her friend had explained the meaning of the cryptic message: "Never be Subject to the Negative Influence of Other People." The message made a real impact on her life.

She began to believe this faith-promoting thought and feel the power that came from carrying her own "weather" around with her. She was not going to let the "experts" rain on her life; she was not going to let her associates fog up the windows of her career. She recalled with great resolve: "If I had listened to the doctors, I would never have walked again. If I had listened to some of my 'friends' and co-workers, I would never have been where I am. I would have given up a long time ago."

Now she is a happy, healthy, and productive office manager because she knows that taking responsibility for her life is prerequisite to really living. She refused to let the attitudinal and emotional climate in the hospital, in the office, and even in her home, control her. Instead, she created her own atmosphere of positive influence.

At another seminar in another part of the world, a group of seminar participants responded to this idea of "climate control" in a completely different way. As is often the case in a hotel conference room, the temperature was too cool. I usually have difficulty determining whether or not the temperature is comfortable for the participants, because while I am up and moving around, they are sitting still and are not as affected by their own body heat. So on this occasion, when we took a break and mingled in the hallway, I heard several people complaining about the frigid temperature—and my insensitivity to it. They could not see me around the corner, and they conversed loudly, without knowing that I could hear their complaints. With sweat trickling down my own face, I was rather surprised at their remarks:

"It is so cold in there. We should do something; we should tell Lloyd."

"I don't know. I just know I am freezing!"

"Look, feel my hands—they're frozen."

"My feet are numb."

"Any minute we'll be able to see our breath."

"What do you think we should do?"

Finally, one woman summarized their discussion with this ironic remark: "Well, he should just know that it is cold!"

In a seminar on proactivity and personal responsibility, this woman had responded with a typically reactive statement. Instead of approaching me and asking if there was anything that could be done to change the temperature in the room, this woman sat back and decided to further impede her learning by just "deciding to freeze." She was not taking personal responsibility for her comfort; she was expecting me to be her personal mind (and body) reader. I would have been more than glad to have the hotel staff adjust the temperature, but I first had to know that it needed to be altered.

Actors, Not Reactors

While the woman in the seminar in Richard's Bay refused to let conditions and conditioning control her life, these people—in a minor way—were letting the climate impede their opportunities for learning. They were being reactors instead of actors, passive onlookers instead of active participants. Taking responsibility for our lives is a vital element in developing our self-esteem and an empowering benefit of realizing our self-worth.

When we are secure enough in our relationship with God that we believe in our inherent worth, we will feel more secure about taking action and more confident in making decisions. Our approach to problem-solving and conflict-management will be more assertive and proactive. We will not worry so much about what our associates may say and what the doctor might do—and even what Lloyd might think about adjusting the room temperature. Instead, we can fashion our day and our life according to the controls of our inner self—a self that is defined by our God-given worth. We will not aggressively take charge and offend other people but will assertively take responsibility for our lives and our circumstances.

The key to being responsible for our own lives is in making decisions from the inside out. When we look deep inside ourselves for direction, we will be led by the light of Christ and more attuned to the whisperings of our conscience. We will become more aware of our self-worth and, as a result, make decisions that build our self-esteem.

At times we are tempted to disobey our inner promptings, to submit to selfishness and pride. But if we disobey, we deny our deepest natures as children of God, and we lose the self-respect that comes from self-mastery.

Living from the inside out brings a constancy into our lives, no matter what our circumstances. It enables us to realize that, as God's children, we have a stewardship over our lives—over our bodies, our time, our talents, our possessions, and our relationships with others and with ourselves.

Inside-out living teaches us humility as we learn to depend on the Lord. And it teaches us gratitude for His constant care and support, and for His own example of inside-out living.

Choices and Consequences

In the New Testament story of Mary and Martha, Mary chose to live from the inside-out. She made her own decision about how she would spend her day. Luke records that when the Savior "entered into a certain village, . . . a certain woman named Martha received him into her house. . . . But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to him, and said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me." (Luke 10:38,Luke 10:40.) Martha seemed irritated that her sister Mary "sat at Jesus' feet, and heard his word" (v. 39) while she was busy preparing the repast.

The Savior's answer to Martha's task-oriented inquiry is a lesson in choice and accountability. He simply replied, "One thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her." (V. 42; italics added.) Mary's choice to learn more about the gospel of Christ was "that good part which shall not be taken away from her." Martha's choice was to be "careful and troubled about many things" rather than to learn at the Lord's feet.

It seems that the Lord was not just teaching Martha about the eternal nature of the gospel, "that good part which shall not be taken away," but was perhaps just as significantly instructing her on the eternal principle of agency: we cannot choose without simultaneously choosing consequences. For example, we can choose whether or not we will jump from an airplane, but we cannot choose what will happen to us once we jump. Consequences are based on natural laws that cannot be defied. We may not recognize certain consequences as the flip-side of our choice; consequences may be clothed in some other raiment than what we expected them to wear. But they are nevertheless there and are always a function of our decisions.

We Are Responsible

Just as Mary and Martha made different choices with different consequences, we are constantly making choices for which we must accept the consequences. Responsible people who are interested in meaningful self-improvement will not blame others for the consequences of their choices. They will realize that they are their own stewards who ultimately must answer to God for that stewardship. Reactive statements like "My boss didn't like me so I didn't get the promotion," "My kids are making me miserable," "I can't help it," "The devil made me do it," and "I've never been any good at math since I had that terrible algebra teacher in high school" will be replaced by more proactive and positive pronouncements. The language of the reactive loser has no place in the responsible, proactive winner's vocabulary because he or she believes in a God-given birthright—an inheritance of worth that demands accountability.

A graphic illustration of the difference in language between those who really understand their self-worth and those who do not is instructive:

For the Christian, it is not enough to explain away faults or minimalize negative tendencies with statements like "That's just the way I am," "I'm not a morning person," or "That's what always happens to me," because anyone who believes in Christ must ultimately believe in his or her worth—and subsequent potential—as a beneficiary of the atonement. Those who defer responsibility are not only offending their own value, but, more important, they are offending Him who created them, Him who endowed them with that worth, Him who blessed them with the means to repent and to return to Him. When we think and act in such a way that denies our self-worth, when we believe we are not "response-able," we insult God with underestimations of His creations and of His plan for our salvation.

As the popular saying goes, "God didn't make no junk." So if for no other reason, taking responsibility and avoiding personal scapegoats is the correct and worthy thing to do because it gives deference to our Creator. It reveals our belief that God really did not make any junk. And while dysfunctions, disabilities, and disadvantages continue to complicate these issues of blame and accountability, if we will remember that God has different levels of expectations for each of us and that we all answer to varying degrees of responsibility, we will better understand the importance of doing all that we can with what we do have. C. S. Lewis explained it this way:

To judge the management of a factory, you must consider not only the output but the plant. Considering the plant at Factory A it may be a wonder that it turns out anything at all; considering the first-class outfit at Factory B, its output, though high, may be a great deal lower than it ought to be. No doubt the good manager at Factory A is going to put in new machinery as soon as he can, but that takes time. In the meantime low output does not prove that he is a failure. [^1]

Where much is given, much is expected; what is put into a factory in large measure determines what is expected to come from that factory. Where misfortune and malady mark our path, our Heavenly Father's expectations (and our own accountability) are adjusted accordingly.

Acknowledge God in All Things

Giving credit where credit is due is important in developing responsible attitudes and taking charge of our lives. Frequently, when our lives take a turn for the better and we are filled with newfound hope and blessings, we ascribe our successes to hard work or happenstance and thank the stars that "lady luck" found her way to our doorstep. But this sort of deferment is just as void of God-fearing responsibility.

When we are blessed with bounty and success, if we fail to acknowledge God as the giver of all that is good, we demonstrate false security and look to inferior sources of strength. One of the greatest manifestations of responsibility is gratitude—to God and others for the good things of life. Ironically, we seem to more readily turn to God when bad things happen, and we frequently forget Him while we enjoy the very blessings that He has sent our way. When we recognize the good things of life as blessings from God, we become responsible stewards and godly caretakers. We take better care of ourselves and our lives when we realize that our lives are not just our own—when we believe that we are on God's errands, we are His instruments, and our successes are His glories.

This principle is explained in a humorous and heartwarming way in the classic film Shenandoah when Jimmy Stewart, a widowed Virginian farmer, gathers his family to say grace on the food. Feeling a bit uncomfortable about even offering a prayer, the farmer honors his deceased wife by carrying on the Christian tradition: "Lord, we cleared this land. We plowed it, sowed it, and harvested. We cooked the harvest. It wouldn't be here, we wouldn't be eating it, if we hadn't done it all ourselves. We worked dogbone hard for every crumb and morsel, but we thank you just the same anyway, Lord, for this food we are about to eat. Amen." Even though the farmer's gratitude seems a bit half-hearted, in his own way he gives credit where it is due. If with nothing else than the actual gesture of bowing his head and leading his family in an all too dutiful prayer, he makes an effort to thank the Lord for the bounties they enjoy. And he demonstrates a certain amount of responsibility and humility (minimal though it may be) by even saying a prayer, or by attempting to give credit where—at least his deceased wife would say—it is supposed to be due.

Even though the Shenandoah farmer and many of us might struggle to understand how works without faith can be dead, if we start by doing no more than just going through the motions of prayer, we will see how our lives take on deeper meaning as we begin to recognize the Lord's hand in all that we do. Taking action and being responsible are by-products of agency, and agency—like worth—is a gift from God, an integral component of the decision-making process that leads to self-improvement. When we realize that we have inherent worth as children of God, we make better use of the agency He has blessed us with: we begin acting instead of reacting, we begin to walk by faith and "not by sight." We, like the apostles of Christ who minister in His name, must look to God in order to fully take charge of our lives and to take responsibility for our choices. The book of Acts repeatedly reminds us that only when Peter and the other disciples wholeheartedly accepted the "consequences" of their choice to follow Christ did they stop denying Him and really start acting in His name: healing the sick, preaching to the poor in spirit, and spreading the good news of the gospel. In the same way, when we wholeheartedly accept the responsibility that our God-given worth gives us and that our dependence on Deity prescribes for us, we will uncover the opportunities for development that are uniquely ours. Only then will we realize our personal best.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Marvin J. Ashton, Ye Are My Friends (Salt Lake
