Lloyd D. Newell, Divine Connection: Understanding Your Inherent Worth ( 1992)

CHAPTER 9

OUR PERSONAL BEST

I do the very best I know how—the very best I can; and I mean to keep doing so until the end.

—Abraham Lincoln

This section on intrapersonal development has discussed "becoming all that we are meant to become," "discovering our inherent and infinite capabilities," not comparing our progress with others, or, quite simply, doing our personal best. As the many examples, scriptures, and success stories have demonstrated, these are not empty words. Each of us really can improve and, ultimately, realize our God-given potential. The process of growth is usually long and sometimes challenging, but we all have a divine endowment of agency, the ability to make choices and to work meaningful change in ourselves and in our lives.

Before we proceed with a discussion of interpersonal success, we need to remind ourselves of the principles that make all of this personal progress possible. We need to briefly review and more closely examine how a recognition of our self-worth is the operative precept upon which lasting improvement depends. As we define what it means to do our personal best, put this book to the test and begin to witness for yourself how a deeply internalized self-worth kindles a quiet explosion of personal power.

The Parable of the Talents

One of the Savior's explanations of doing our personal best comes to us in the parable of the talents. In the twenty- fifth chapter of Matthew, the Lord likens the kingdom of heaven to a "man travelling into a far country, who called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods." (V. 14.) He had three servants among whom he divided his inheritance. To the first he gave five talents; to the second he gave two talents; and to the last he gave a single talent.

When the master returned from his travels, the servant who had received five talents "came and brought other five talents, saying, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me five talents: behold, I have gained beside them five talents more." (V. 20.) And the master responded: "Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord." (V. 21.) So the servant with five talents doubled his stewardship, and the lord rewarded him by making him "ruler over many things."

The same sort of recompense took place between the second servant and the lord. This servant reported to his returned master: "Lord, thou deliveredst unto me two talents: behold, I have gained two other talents beside them." (V. 22.) And the master replied in kind: "Well done, good and faithful servant: thou has been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord." (V. 23.) The second servant received the same reward as the first servant, even though the first servant made a return of five talents and the second servant increased the lord's holdings by two talents. Both servants doubled their allotment of talents, and because of their faithful and responsible stewardship, the lord made them rulers over many things.

Despite the fact that they started out with a different number of talents, they each received the same reward because they had done their personal best with these holdings. What they did with the money their master gave them was more important than the actual amount of money by which they increased his holdings.

The same principle applies to the development of our talents, or to the stewardship God has given us over our individual abilities. Whether we were given five talents or twenty, one talent or ten (monetary or otherwise) is not as important as what we do with those talents. As Peter said, "God is no respecter of persons," and because we are of equal and unchanging worth to our Father, He will reward us commensurate with our efforts, on a customized—and even personalized—scale of improvement and not in accordance with any overt measurement of success. (See Acts 10:34.) Whether we were born in a ghetto or near a country club, on the streets or in a loving home, in disease and poverty or in health and wealth, because we all have the same worth, we can all earn the same heavenly reward. God is interested in our individual performance on our own stage of ability and experience, and whether our acts have been in our own backyard or the object of public applause, we will be accountable only for those talents, privileges, and opportunities that have been given to us.

Because an equal endowment of worth has been given to all of God's children, we are all expected to do the most with what we have—in the best way we can. Our personal bests will all be different, but they will universally reflect our unchanging and infinite worth.

When Jesse Jackson was running for president in 1984, I was assigned to cover one of his political rallies for the local TV station. The audience was mesmerized by the inspiring message of his speech. Jesse Jackson repeatedly said, "You may have been born in the ghetto, but the ghetto does not have to be born in you." And he had his audience chant, "I am somebody!" No matter where we come from or what mistakes we have made or what limitations we may endure, "I am somebody" is the electrifying chant of his rallies and the unspoken message of this timeless parable.

You may have heard the same idea in these terms: No body is a nobody. We are all somebody to the Lord.

The talents we may or may not have do not make us worthy or unworthy of the Lord's blessings. Righteous individual stewardship and personal development of those talents with which we are blessed will allow us to enter into the joy of our Lord.

The parable goes on to explain that the one thing that keeps us from having our talents added upon is the failure to develop our God-given abilities—no matter how apparently weak or strong they may be. The third servant with one talent had just as good a chance as the other servants at being made a "ruler over many things," but fear dictated his stewardship. He explained to the lord: "I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth." (Matthew 25:25.) Faith in himself and in his lord was replaced by the fear of losing what little he had. As a result, the master called him an unprofitable servant, a "wicked and slothful servant" (v. 26), and gave his one talent to the servant with ten, the servant who had already proven his stewardship.

Fear and Faith

The last servant did not achieve his personal best because fear instead of faith motivated his improvement. He was afraid to lose what he had because he did not recognize what he had already been given: a divinely endowed worth that was full of potential and characterized by possibilites. Elder Marvin J. Ashton explained that this sort of self- defeat is the most disappointing—for ourselves and for others: "How sad, how long the day when we become low on ourselves. The worst form of defeat is to be conquered by self. Defeat is not pleasant, but nothing is so painful and devastating as self-defeat. A person is poor when he places despair over hope." [^1]

Just a few steps removed from despair is fear, the fear of failure—and sometimes even the fear of success. Such self-doubt or fear was the cause of the third servant's failure and remains at the root of most of our disappointments, both large and small.

The implications of this parable are far-reaching. If we look to self-help books and other self-improvement sources because we are afraid of losing our job, afraid of losing our spouse, afraid of failing as a parent, afraid of not realizing our own hopes and dreams, afraid of who we really are, then our efforts to improve will be swallowed by fear and buried in self-doubt. Any advancement that takes place will only be a cosmetic improvement that attempts to hide uncertainty; it will not be an "inside-out" remedy that brings our divine worth to the surface. Heavenly Father will not make us a ruler over more things if we rule ourselves and our lives on the basis of fear. When a faith in God—and a belief in our God-given worth—motivates our improvement, we will reap the rewards of a responsible stewardship.

All too often we proceed upon the basis of past mistakes, yesterday's failures, and unfulfilled desires. We carry emotional and psychological baggage that weighs us down and prevents us from exploring and developing the unique abilities that God has given us. Psychologists call such living "gunny sacking," or carrying around negative mental sacks that are full of disappointments, marked by failures, and colored with fears. But when we believe in God enough to believe that we are His children—endowed with inherent worth—we can begin to let go of this baggage and feel the lightness of His love. We will look at talents as blessings, as opportunities for personal development, and not as dreadful responsibilities that (like the third servant) we would rather hide in the earth.

What's Right with You?

This kind of mindset has become glaringly apparent to me as I have conducted a certain "strengths-and-weaknesses" exercise in hundreds of seminars with thousands of different people all around the world. At a certain point in my presentation, I will stop and ask the participants to take two minutes to write down ten of their strengths. "What's right with you? What do you like about you?" I ask. Without fail, whenever I make this request, the men and women squirm in their chairs and rack their brains in order to make a list of ten good things about themselves. They struggle and strain and usually cannot come up with more than a few strong points. Immediately thereafter, I ask them to write down ten of their weaknesses, things they would like to change about themselves. Almost reflexively they can make their list of ten (and sometimes even a few extra) weaknesses in just a moment. With time to spare, they often turn to their neighbors and compare their lists of weaknesses, complaining about their inadequacies and wishing they could be like someone else.

A verbal rendition of this exercise elicits the same response. In smaller groups where there is more familiarity between participants, I ask the men and women to turn to their neighbors for sixty seconds and verbally share their strengths with this assigned listener. Often the exercise begins with extended silence; then that silence turns into giggles and sighs and expressions of "I don't know. I just can't think of anything." But during the next sixty seconds when I ask them to share some of their weaknesses with their neighbors, the room fills with chatter, and an immediate sort of bonding seems to take place between speaker and listener. They have so much more to talk about.

The Divine Connection

Something as simple as how we present ourselves to other people or how we accept a compliment also reveals the degree to which a divine connection to our self- perception has been made. If someone tells us that we look nice and we brush the compliment aside because we are thinking: "Oh, that's not true," or "You should see me at home," or "This old thing? It's my sister's," or "I got it on sale," our self-talk reveals our limited perspective. We are not seeing beyond how we look "at home" and the fact that we got our dress "on sale"; we are not recognizing our eternal claim to a positive self-image. The worth we have outside of what we look like and what we are wearing eludes us, because we are focusing on the constraints of the here and now.

But if we graciously accept a compliment, we align ourselves with a godly perspective. Although we realize we are imperfect, we see ourselves as worthy of that (and all other) sincere gestures of praise because we have God-given worth—because we are God's children, endowed with the great gift of life. When we like ourselves not just because we look nice today but, more important, because we are children of God wearing the noble robes of royal birth, we make the divine connection to self-esteem. We think well of ourselves not just because someone complimented us but also because, by liking and respecting ourselves, we show more love and honor to Him who created us.

Self-effacing behavior is akin to what the Savior sadly described when He told of the third servant hiding his talent in the earth. Instead of capitalizing on what he did have, the servant was self-conscious and fearful about losing the talent he had already been given—not to speak of the many more talents his master might later have assigned to his stewardship. He lost what he had not just because he was afraid of losing it but also because he hid his talent. He lost his talent to the false security of the earth in which he buried it.

In the same way, we bury our talents every time we do not graciously accept a compliment or become gratefully aware of and honestly express the strengths we possess. This is not to say that we should put our strengths on parade and flaunt our talents, but it is to recommend that we be appropriately proud of what we have been given—even while we thank God for giving them to us. All of us have distinctive abilities, strengths and weaknesses, that cannot be exchanged for others' abilities but that can be developed in personalized ways. All of us have individualized blessings that we would probably not want to trade for others' opportunities. And all of us have unique trials and personalized problems. But in the words of an embroidered sampler that hangs on my wife's parent's wall, "If all of our troubles were hung on a line, you would take yours, and I would take mine"—and not just with regard to "troubles." It's probably true that if all of our blessings, abilities, talents, and even opportunities were hung on a line, "you would take yours, and I would take mine."

When a recognition of self-worth accompanies the development of our individual strengths, we will not be afraid of using and improving our talents because our worth will constantly fortify us. Our talents may fluctuate in the process of improvement, but our worth will not. One day we may seem more "gifted" than another, but as long as we are doing our personal best to discover and develop those gifts, our capabilities will manifest themselves and our sense of worth will fortify us. When the perspective of infinite worth defines our development, we do not think we are better than someone else as we discover our strengths, nor do we think less of ourselves when someone else seems to possess a talent we lack. Internalizing the belief that "no one is better than ourselves" and, on the flip side, "we are no better than anyone else" will lead us to the personal best that we are all meant to achieve. We can neither belittle nor boast about our strengths as long as we look to God as the giver of all gifts and the source of our worth.

S.A.C.K.

When we make a consistent effort to avoid the "gunny- sacking" of negative feelings and inadequacies, we fill our mental, emotional, and spiritual "sacks" with discovered talents and positive reinforcements. Or we:

S=Strengthen ourselves by A=Acknowledging our worth, C=Counting our blessings, and K=Keeping our talents in good repair.

We can S.A.C.K. (strengthen, acknowledge, count, and keep) an attitude of gratitude. Because even if our mental, emotional, or spiritual sack is only partially filled, even if many of our talents remain "hidden," gunny-sacking will reveal a half-empty sack, while "S.A.C.K.ing" will disclose a half-full one. And while gunny-sacking feeds on inabilities and even disadvantages, "S.A.C.K.ing" concerns itself with strengths (or talents) and concentrates on abilities—discovered or undiscovered though they may be. Taking time to discover and develop the unique gifts God has given us will make our lives more full—and more meaningful. Our personal "bag of tricks" or "S.A.C.K. of talents," when stuffed full of all the good things with which we have been endowed, is an individual reminder of our inherent worth. God loves us so much that He gave us a unique combination of blessings, talents, and abilities that will enable us to achieve our personal best and that can also help to sustain us when we are at our personal worst.

Follow Your Bliss

Capitalizing on our talents in this way will fill our lives with a greater degree of happiness and a more accurate understanding of our potential. When we are pursuing those niches of personal performance that bring us the most joy, each day can become the first day of the best of our lives. The distinguished scholar Joseph Campbell encouraged his students to search out their talents by reflecting on the happiest moments of their lives. He advised: "The way to find out about your happiness is to keep your mind on those moments when you feel most happy, when you really are happy—not excited, not just thrilled, but deeply happy. This requires a little bit of self-analysis. What is it that makes you happy? Stay with it, no matter what people tell you. This is what I call 'following your bliss.' " [^2] The fear of failure sometimes keeps us not only from following that bliss but also from recognizing what that bliss is. Sometimes we are so afraid not just of losing a talent but of even discovering it that we deny ourselves the joy of personal development. We stay in the melting pot of mediocrity and never really uncover our uniquely molded and divinely endowed strengths.

Henry David Thoreau tells of an alternate and more fulfilling approach to life. He says that one who "advances confidently in the direction of his dreams, . . . will meet with success unexpected in common hours." A recent study by author Srully Blotnick substantiates Thoreau's theory and proves Campbell's advice to "follow your bliss" to be sound—and even profitable. Blotnick and his associates studied a group of 1,500 people in their chosen professions over a twenty-year period. While most of the group emphasized money in their career choice, 17 percent chose a career in which they were genuinely interested. At the end of the twenty years, 101 individuals had become millionaires. And of those 101 people, all but one were from the 17 percent who "followed their bliss." [^3] They had become successful in their professions because they were successful in discovering and then doing what they really enjoyed. They had found their personal best and worked to achieve it by designing a life, not just by making a living.

So how do we get the courage to follow our dreams? How do we acquire the confidence to search deeply inside ourselves and accept the combination of strengths and weaknesses that is uniquely ours? Certainly this is a difficult task to undertake by ourselves, on our own merits. But when we fully understand the message of several of the Savior's parables—and the premise of this book—we begin to tap the extraordinary power that quietly rests inside of us: the power of self-worth. From the prodigal son to the lost sheep to the lost coin to the parable of the talents, the Lord repeatedly reminds His disciples then and now that their worth (and every human being's worth) is great, even infinite and unchanging, in the sight of God. And this understanding is the key to unlocking the potential, the "best," that is latent within us. Only then do we realize our dreams.

Forgiving Ourselves

Even then, however, if we fail to forgive ourselves for the mistakes we have made, the fumbles and foibles that have hitherto prevented us from meeting with "success unexpected in quiet hours," we are equally neglectful. Paul bore witness to the Philippians hundreds of years ago that putting the past behind us and moving forward with faith is essential to our eternal progress. He declared: "I count not myself to have apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before." (Philippians 3:13; italics added.) While Paul admits that he does not know all things, he does understand the need to "forget those things which are behind," to forgive ourselves for the things of which we have already been forgiven. He bears powerful testimony that before we can "[reach] forth unto those things which are before," we must put our mistake-filled past behind us.

To achieve our personal best, we must put those things that were not "our best" out of our lives—and out of our memories. Such a recognition of our self-worth requires an acceptance of the gospel of repentance and forgiveness (even of self-forgiveness). Scholar Hugh Nibley has summarized the gospel of Jesus Christ in two words: repentance and forgiveness. He says there are only two things we can do: (1) to repent and (2) to forgive. And he matter-of-factly suggests that we start doing them now! He makes the correct claim that those two processes are the irreplaceable concerns of any real Christian. In fact, a good measurement of the degree to which we have accepted the gospel of Christ and recognized our self-worth is the degree to which we can forgive ourselves for the failings of which we have already repented—to God and to others. Holding on to our "gunny sacks" of past mistakes and failures can be just as detrimental to realizing our personal best as the failure to recognize that we each have a divine endowment of talents.

Learning to Forgive Ourselves

The story of Bob McFarlane, a promising neurosurgeon who was following his bliss of medicine, offers some valuable insights into the subject of self-forgiveness. During his residency, this dedicated doctor started using injected opiates to relax his overworked nerves. Before long, he became addicted to the narcotics and was debilitated by his dependency. He was expelled from his residency and fell into a pattern of finding and losing jobs. For over a decade, he struggled to put his life back together: sometimes trying to cure his addiction by himself and sometimes going in for professional treatment. After entering a long-term chemical dependency program, he finally started to make some real progress. And he attributes this long-sought-after success to jumping the hurdle of self-forgiveness. He reflects: "My first hurdle was the overwhelming sense of shame and guilt at what I had done and the depths to which I had sunk. Two little phrases that I learned there aided in my deliverance from the bondage of guilt: 'He retaineth not His anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy.' (Micah 7:18) and 'God has absolutely no attitude of condemnation toward man.' Armed with these I could now set about learning to forgive myself." [^4]

Faith in God was crucial to McFarlane's forgiving himself—and to his recovery. Because belief in God eventually translates into belief in oneself, McFarlane was finally able to find the power to beat his dependence. And now he helps many others do the same. After traveling the long road to recovery, Bob McFarlane returned to the medical profession as a specialist in chemical dependency and a committed consultant to the Drug Enforcement Administration.

Letting Go of Bananas

Sometimes the only thing between ourselves and our personal best is the lack of self-forgiveness. We, like the captured monkey, cannot let go of the "bananas" in our lives. Did you know that monkeys can be caught by putting bananas inside a trap? The monkeys put their paws inside the trap to get the bananas and do not realize that they cannot be freed unless they let go of the fruit. The monkeys try everything to get away. They try to pull the traps with them and even attempt to chew an opening through the metal. But they refuse to let go of their delicious prize. And eventually, despite a lot of effort and more than enough noise, the monkeys are captured without much trouble.

We have a lot more reasoning power than monkeys, and yet we may still refuse to forgive ourselves for the times we have slipped on our own banana peels. All too often, we hold fast to the "bananas" of guilt, revenge, resentment, hate, and envy that feed a poor self-esteem and keep us from recognizing our self-worth. One of the most empowering understandings of godly improvement is that we are all changing, fallible people who are in need of repentance and forgiveness. We have all made mistakes. We have all failed at one thing or another. But we must realize that we are not our failures; just as we are not our mistakes or our mental and physical surroundings. We are worth more to our Father in Heaven than all the mistakes we have made (and will yet make). Because we are greater than our failures, we can always achieve greater personal successes than we are currently enjoying.

That is exactly what the now famous Colonel Sanders believed when, at the age of sixty-five, he embarked on what would be two years, thousands of miles, and more than one thousand unsuccessful attempts to sell his chicken recipe to restaurants across the country. Not satisfied with his $99 Social Security check and what he thought would be an uneventful life of a retired laborer, he decided to make the most of his later years by marketing his chicken recipe to any and all interested restaurant owners. Sleeping in the back of his car and traveling from one end of the nation to the other, he faced rejection over and over again until, on the one-thousand-and-tenth attempt, a restaurant owner decided to try it out and pay him a portion of the profit. As we all know, the rest is history. With a Colonel Sanders Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurant in almost every city in the United States, we have visible evidence of the power that comes from separating ourselves and our identity from our setbacks and failures—and from believing in our dreams enough to take action and fulfill our personal visions. Colonel Sanders knew that he was a person with worth and that his failures were only events in his life. And with that self-awareness, he was able to pick himself up time and time again until a restaurant finally accepted his recipe.

Believing in Ourselves

Just as Colonel Sanders achieved his personal best by putting his failures behind him and going forward with the faith that someone would eventually want his tasty chicken, so can all of us achieve our greatest potential by believing in our strengths and by not being discouraged or consumed by our failures. Thomas Edison conducted more than 10,000 experiments before inventing the incandescent lamp, but he learned from his "failures." In fact, he described the events prior to his breakthrough as "10,000 discoveries of how electricity did not work." He turned his failures into discoveries because he learned from his mistakes. He did not condemn himself for not doing things right the first time.

We may never concoct a winning chicken recipe, and the incandescent lamp certainly cannot be rediscovered, but all of us have defeated odds in some way or another and achieved our personal best. I think of a woman I observed while attending college. She went from one class to another in a wheelchair, barely able to move her hands and having no mobility in her arms and legs. I watched as she received not just a bachelor's degree but also a graduate degree in her field of study. For me, she was an unsung hero, a quiet achiever who did all in her power to achieve her personal best. And certainly her story is not isolated. I am well acquainted with a young single mother who is doing her best to raise four children alone. I am awed by her strength and patience, her miraculous resiliency in the face of serious challenges. Her commitment to care for and love her family—even while she is struggling to work and finish school—is truly remarkable. We see such wonderful accomplishments all around us. But do we ever stop to encourage others, let alone to pat ourselves on the back, for reaching a personal best? If not, we can start today.

I know a young man who practices the piano regularly, and after he plays a song without making too many errors, he stops his playing and claps for himself! This youth seems to have realized a life-enhancing truth: sometimes no one else may be applauding our efforts, and at such moments it is important to stop and "clap for ourselves," to recognize our efforts by rewarding ourselves in some way. Maybe your reward will take the form of a refreshing walk, a cold glass of water, or a fresh bouquet of flowers for yourself to enjoy; it does not matter what we do to encourage ourselves on our worth-guided road for improvement, but it does matter that we stop to recognize both the achievers around us as well as the personal achievements within us: those developed strengths in ourselves and in others that reflect best efforts.

God has given each of us specific and uniquely defined strengths to aid in our personal development. While we may seem to have more talents or fewer talents than others, and while those talents may go through different stages of development, we all have equal and unchanging worth. And we all have the promise of a glorious reward: immortality and eternal life.

Footnotes

City: Deseret Book Co., 1982), p. 29.

---
Notas:
[^1] Marvin J. Ashton, Ye Are My Friends (Salt Lake
[^2] Joseph Campbell, The Power of Myth, Betty Sue Flowers, ed. (New York: Doubleday, 1988), p. 193.
[^3] Think and Grow Rich Newsletter, July 1991, p. 8.
[^4] Lindsey Hall and Leigh Cohn, eds., Recoveries: True Stories by People Who Conquered Addiction and Compulsion (Carlsbad, Cal.: GÃ¼rze Book Co., 1987), p.141.
