Lloyd D. Newell, Divine Connection: Understanding Your Inherent Worth ( 1992)

SECTION 4

TURNING OUTWARD

We are all worthy of God's love. This realization leads to a greater acceptance, appreciation, empathy, and love for others.

CHAPTER 10

OUR JUDICIAL ROBES

How far you go in life depends on your being tender with the young, compassionate with the aged, sympathetic with the striving, and tolerant of the meek and the strong. Because someday in life you will have been all of these.

—George Washington Carver

The divine connection to interpersonal success becomes significantly more meaningful—even possible—when we realize that not only do we as individuals have God-given worth, but that every other human being also has infinite and unchanging worth. Acknowledging and respecting others' self-worth allows us to appreciate diversity, stay open to uniquenesses, avoid crippling judgments, and believe in others' abilities. Just as the internalization of our own worth empowers us to turn personal goals and dreams into realities, the deep recognition of all people's worth is an interpersonal enabler: the key to unlocking the door of a more universal success.

So what does it mean to acknowledge another's worth? What kind of behavior manifests such an acknowledgment? The Savior answers such questions when He concludes His Sermon on the Mount (the greatest discourse on interpersonal relations). After having delineated the desirable attributes of a truly righteous and well-adjusted person, He concisely summarized: "Judge not, that ye be not judged." (See Matthew 5-6; 7:1.) Then he continued to teach with some penetrating questions: "Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye?" (Matthew 7:3-4.) The Judge, the One who has all rights and responsibilities for judgment as our intercessor with the Father, finished His remarks on righteous living by counseling His followers not to judge— or not to form an opinion when their vision was clouded by the motes of mortality and the beams of their own misbehavior.

Mote-Beam Disease

Some have called this kind of judgment the "mote-beam disease," or the malady of misperceptions. It manifests itself in most of the minor as well as many of the major problems we confront. The mote-beam disease may inflict a nation, a neighborhood, a company, a family, or a marriage. Many of the problems between couples are found in such mutual misperception. Perhaps a husband sees only the things his wife does wrong: she is late for an appointment, she miscalculates the checkbook, the children are unkempt, or the house is less than presentable. And maybe the wife concentrates only on what her husband is not doing: he does not come home on time, he neglects certain chores, he doesn't pay enough attention to her and to the children, and he doesn't share the household duties. While each spouse concentrates on the things the other is doing wrong and forgets his or her own failings, he or she may lose sight of all of the other things that are going well for the couple: the promises that are kept, the chores that are done, the compromises that are achieved. Perhaps the greatest danger of such motes and beams is that the "real" picture becomes so distorted in the process of continually "picking apart" and finding fault that the original beauty of the relationship may be damaged—or even lost.

Similarly, many of the skirmishes between countries are rooted in such hypocritical judgments. One nation expects another to meet certain demands and make particular promises that the other nation is not prepared to make. Or even when that nation is meeting those demands and fulfilling those promises, it sometimes measures the other's expected output by its own input—or its own training, resources, history, people, and problems. In the process, both nations become more concerned about the actual "balance of trade" than a peaceful solution to the problems.

The same scenario often characterizes our neighborhoods. One side of the block expects the other side to be its clone: to have its standards, interests, and life-styles. And whenever one side defies the other's expectations, that side may make damaging judgments against the other by concentrating on the motes in neighboring houses and missing the beams that bar its own windows. When we perceive the world only through our own prejudices and expectations, we will never really see the warm hearth that may burn deep inside our neighbors' homes. But when we have been in their homes and looked through their windows, we can begin to understand why they have built their house—and all that it holds—in the way they have. Only then can we begin to comprehend their dwelling place.

The same principle applies to the interpersonal exchanges within those neighborhoods and homes, within an office or in the marketplace: between the people themselves. If we prescribe a life-style, an action or a reaction, or even a certain appearance that is based exclusively upon our own experiences and judgments, we are spreading the "mote- beam" disease. But when our perceptive prescriptions are restricted to our own behavior and beliefs—and not to the behavior and beliefs of those around us—we begin to treat the malady of misperception that plagues our society by curing the cancers within our own souls. The healing process is bound to be slow and will sometimes even involve secondary infections, but if we can begin to diagnose the problems of perception in our own person, we will make great breakthroughs to achieving a more universal cure.

C. S. Lewis explained the danger of this interpersonal disease of making false judgments:

What can you ever really know of other people's souls—of their temptations, their opportunities, their struggles? One soul in the whole creation we do know: and it is the only one whose fate is placed in our hands. Because there is a God, you are, in a sense, alone with Him. You cannot put Him off with speculations about your next door neighbours or memories of what you have read in books. [^1]

When we assume that we know why other people do what they do and say, we may put ourselves between them and the most accurate and loving kind of judgment. Because we are ultimately "alone with God," we need to let other people be "alone with God," and one of the best ways we can do that is to appreciate diversity and love people for who they uniquely and individually are.

Strength in Diversity

If, in our relationships with our spouses, our children, our friends, and even with the strangers in our lives, we can appreciate differences and be strengthened by diversity, we will stop wasting our own prescriptive medicine on those who have different situations and problems than we do. We all have unique strengths and weaknesses. And because of that, our interpersonal sensitivities, reactions, and requirements will always be different from everyone else's—even from those who are closest to us.

With this recognition and with the realization of our infinite and inherent worth, we can more effectively interact with the people around us. When we begin to look at a spouse's difference of opinion not as a threat to our own way of thinking but as the means for together coming to a more expansive, informed, even inspired understanding, differences will strengthen—rather than put wedges into— our relationship. In a marriage as well as in an office or in any other relationship, the synergy that results from open discussion of alternate viewpoints leads to better solutions and ideas than would be possible if everyone thought the same way. If we can teach our children that their unique set of rules is the best set of rules for them, and that their friends' different rules are their friends' business, we will better help them to recognize the opportunities that come from obedience and the strength that can be derived from diversity.

I know a woman who, for religious reasons, had been taught not to drink certain types of beverages. She grew up in an area and went to a high school, however, where everyone else her age participated in the sort of drinking from which she abstained. But because she felt strongly about her beliefs and because she did not insult or condemn her friends for their beliefs (she was their friend), her personal stand became a more public project of abstinence. Her friends would arrange beforehand for her special drinking diet, and they only invited her to those parties where they knew she would be comfortable. Because she did not judge them for their beliefs and behaviors, they did not ridicule her for choosing a different life-style. In fact, they supported her in living up to her standard and would have been disappointed if she had relented. They would not allow her to slip. There was real friendship and respect between them, unmarked by the motes of self-righteous judgment (from either side). Because of that mutual respect, this woman was strengthened by her friends who had different beliefs and alternate approaches to life.

Real synergy is created from diversity. The precious perspective that we are all one of a kind and that we all have unique abilities makes the whole of our society, office, neighborhood, and home greater than the sum of its individual parts.

Not only would the world be a less-than-interesting place if we were all the same, but it would also be less efficient and enjoyable. Imagine associating with people who really were exactly like you: who talked the same, walked the same, dressed the same, and thought the same. It would be like listening to Tchaikovsky's 1812 Overture— or some other symphonic favorite—in which only French horns were playing. Because there would be no instruments of distinctive sizes, shapes, and sounds, the chords would not resonate as deeply, the harmonies would be less brilliant, and the range of sound would be much more limited.

Just as the strength of a symphonic composition is derived from the diversity of the instruments, real power and beauty come from bringing differences together. The balance of contrasts is what makes a rainbow so pleasing to the eye, a symphony so pleasing to the ear, and different foods so pleasing to the palate. Variety and contrast make for more pleasing presentations of everything from music to nature to food. The diversity of elements accounts for much of their beauty and power.

The same principle applies to all of us. If we were each given the same talents, if we all pursued the same interests, if we all possessed and cultivated the same strengths, we would not really need to rely upon one another—or even to work together. But because, as Paul taught, "there are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit," we need to realize that we are in this life together. (1 Corinthians 12:4.) We are all engaged in the process of living—not by ourselves, in a vacuum, but with other people who are both different from and similar to us. In A Christmas Carol, Charles Dickens suggested that we concentrate on our commonality, even while recognizing our differences. He advised us to look upon other people "as if they really were fellow passengers to the grave, and not another race of creatures, bound on other journeys." [^2]

Because of the divine parentage that connects us, we have the blessing and the responsibility of being "fellow passengers," of respecting and appreciating the diversity that makes us each unique. As Henry Martyn Field has written, "There is no brotherhood of man without the fatherhood of God."

The Lord's Model

The blessing of a good friendship, brotherhood, or sisterhood, is based upon mutual respect and love. Having a perfect love and a complete understanding of the worth of all God's children, the Lord Himself was characterized as "a friend of publicans and sinners." (Matthew 11:19.) As One who knew the power of righteous judgment, of divine discernment, the Savior was quick to caution us not to put another's progress (as well as our own) at the mercy of limited and limiting discriminations. Certainly, He would have us choose our friends and associates wisely, but He would not want us to have exclusionary (or exclusive) circles of friends. As One who fully realizes the eternal worth of each of God's children, Christ affirms our worth by admonishing us not to underestimate the worthiness of any of His children through ill-founded or unrighteous judgments: judgments which often take the form of unfriendly, condescending, or unfair behavior.

Nevertheless, neither His life nor His teachings suggests that we should walk around in a fantasy land, believing that everyone is honest, all causes are upright, every situation is safe, and all diversity is good. He knows better than we do that there are men and women who will "curse you," "despitefully use you and persecute you," "revile you," and "say all manner of evil against you falsely." (Matthew 5:44, 11.) He is aware that it is necessary to distinguish between right and wrong behavior, good and bad performance, moral and immoral conduct.

He knows that excessive "open-mindedness" can close our hearts and minds to simple faith and godly direction. The popular "anything goes" mentality lends itself to too much doubt, skepticism, and disbelief than is worthwhile. And in all of our apparent "open-mindedness," we end up closing ourselves off to the whisperings of our conscience. We sequester ourselves from much that is good and right in our efforts to separate ourselves from anything that makes another person, idea, or thing seem wrong. Paul taught the Philippians centuries ago, "Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things." (Philippians 4:8.) By so seeking after righteous ways and godly practices, we will truly allow the Lord's forgiving and accepting love to work in us.

Christ cautions us, "Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves." (Matthew 7:15.) And His disciple Paul admonishes us not to be "tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive." (Ephesians 4:14; italics added.) And we might add, they who "lie in wait to harm, corrupt, destroy, and even selfishly charm." Christianity does not suggest that we believe ourselves out of reality, forgetting the basic distinctions between righteous and unrighteous behaviors and beliefs, or that we be "tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine"—all in the guise of love and acceptance. The Lord knew there would be people and causes that "lie in wait to deceive."

Discernment versus Judgment

While He wants us to discern between false prophets and true prophets, between those who despitefully use us and those who really care about us, between those who tell the truth and those who lie in wait to deceive, He commands us not to judge. So in our efforts to avoid judgment, we must remember that it is given to each of us to discern. We have all been blessed with a conscience, the Light of Christ. Neither the Savior nor His disciples would have us purposelessly subject ourselves to a "den of thieves."

As stewards, we are responsible for maintaining a discerning character and following our God-given conscience. Just because someone asks us to supply our credit-card number, or to deposit now, or to enroll today does not mean that we should do it. We all make daily decisions about what we should support, where we should buy, what we should avoid, and whom we can trust.

Such judgments are vital to our well-being. God, our Father, would have us be discerning. And whether we are aware of it or not, we already are discerning—to one degree or another. Life requires us to be so. How many times have you altered a certain business transaction because of a feeling: you just were not sure if you could trust the company or its representative. Or while in school, did you ever drop one class to add another that just seemed to suit your purposes better? As a parent, have you ever steered your children to choose one video over another even when its rating suggested propriety? As a teenager have you ever had a distinct feeling to avoid a certain activity—not clearly understanding why?

We all make choices that reflect our innermost, principle- centered values. And just because we choose one mode of life over another, we do not need to condemn those who have chosen different approaches and life-styles. This does not mean we don't try to persuade others with longsuffering, gentleness, and love unfeigned. But we must also accept their right to make their own choices. We simply need to take inventory of our motives for making decisions and then make sure our own lives are in harmony with the righteous discernments we have made.

The way to acquire this attitude of discernment, rather than of judgment, is to realize the inherent worth of all of God's children. When we realize that people who are different from us are still members of our heavenly family (they are, in fact, our brothers and sisters), the "judgments" we make are softened by the recognition of their unchangeable worth. Judgment evolves into discernment when we make decisions based on the uplifting belief that, regardless of mistakes, misbehaviors, and even evil intentions, all people are worthy of God's love. When we make such a realization, no matter how dishonest or dirty or undesirable a person or situation may seem to us, we bless our own lives with positive thoughts and inspiring insights. Even though we discern their character or intentions, we do not deny them their God-given worth by passing damaging or unrighteous judgments on them.

The Power of Godly Love

I have always been touched by the words to a hymn, "Lord, I Would Follow Thee," by Susan Evans McCloud. Each verse expresses the power that a Godly love and acceptance has in influencing others' lives as well as in transforming our own:

Savior, may I learn to love thee, Walk the path that thou hast shown, Pause to help and lift another, Finding strength beyond my own. Savior, may I learn to love thee— Lord, I would follow thee. Who am I to judge another When I walk imperfectly? In the quiet heart is hidden Sorrow that the eye can't see. Who am I to judge another? Lord, I would follow thee. Savior, may I love my brother As I know thou lovest me, Find in thee my strength, my beacon, For thy servant I would be. Savior, may I love my brother— Lord, I would follow thee. [^3]

Our discussion of judgment could be summarized in the simple but penetrating question of this song: "Who am I to judge another/When I walk imperfectly?" And our suggestions for avoiding judgment are captured in its final plea for divine assistance: "Savior, may I love my brother/As I know thou lovest me." A Christ-like love, based on an inherent and unconditional worth, is the catalyst for turning a self-centered judgment into a conscience-centered discernment.

This paradigm-shift from judgment to discernment is not an easy process. We all know that it can be difficult to distinguish between good and bad options, let alone between good and better choices. But when we begin to let the pure love of Christ, or charity, guide our choices, we will progressively move away from judgment and rely more wholly upon discernment. When we are motivated by understanding and love, we are inspired to make more righteous evaluations.

The Les Story

As the second half of the Savior's admonition (" . . . that ye be not judged") implies, the avoidance of judgments is as beneficial to us as to those we might misread. I learned this valuable lesson a long time ago, after several years of misperceiving an acquaintance who is now a dear friend. I first met Les during my college days. I used to see him everywhere (and I mean everywhere) I went. He would be at the student center the same times I was there. He had classes in the fine arts building just when I had classes. I would see him in the bookstore almost every time I went to get supplies. And, it seemed, I never went to a party at which he did not make a grand appearance.

I never actually met him. I just noticed him—a lot. He was always surrounded by women, always talking, always standing taller than everyone else, and somehow always irritating me. I did not know his name until several months after first noticing him, and even then I found out through another person.

Shortly after graduation, I applied for a job in the surrounding community. After years of observing but never really knowing this person, I was not surprised to find that Les was applying for the same job. So there we were, both of us really not knowing each other, neither of us very relaxed, and one of us talking far more than the other of us wanted. The more Mr. Talkative carried on, the more I thought to myself: "He is really bothering me. I wish he would just be quiet. I am trying to mentally prepare for an important interview." But the chatter did not stop until we were both called into our respective interviews at, of course, the very same time.

After the interview, I made a quick getaway and thought that I would not be seeing this Les character again. But sure enough, on my first day of work, Les was there. We had both been hired. I do not remember much about my first days on the job, but I vividly remember sitting across from him in meetings, watching him talk, observing his animated gestures, and wondering how long I could cope with his nonstop "sociability."

I never did get away from him.

After several months of interactions at work (and now years of association outside of work), I am most thankful that I had as many chances as were given me to get to know a man whom I now consider a true and trusted friend. I discovered a warm, gentle, and truly caring individual in Les. And while I then thought that he had changed since our initial exchanges on campus, I now realize that I was the one who had changed. I was the one who had been blinded by false perceptions and unfair judgments.

Les was the same person I first saw on campus several years ago, but somehow I was a different person for having become better acquainted with him. I had changed. Les had always been a great person with an accepting heart and an abundant attitude, but I had misperceived him. Once I put my "judicial robes" aside and embraced him with the nondiscriminatory garb of real friendship, I began to see Les for the good friend and loyal confidant I now know him to be. And we have since enjoyed an enriching and enduring friendship.

Taking Off Our Judicial Robes

As we have all done at some point in our development, I set myself up as an all-knowing judge of someone's character and was so wrapped up in the judicial robes of my own experience and limited understanding that I failed to discern a sincere and loving heart—a real friend who genuinely cared about my well-being. Fortunately, life is a process of maturation and growth. I learned a lot from my initial rejection of Les many years ago—as I am sure all of us have learned from similar experiences. In large measure, I was transformed by this extended encounter, and my life has been blessed with so many friendships and eaningful relationships as I have developed more accepting attitudes— as I have tried to avoid judgment and look into the hearts and souls of other people. I will ever be grateful that I was "forced" into cultivating what initially was an undesirable association, because I not only discovered the real Les, but, just as important, I unlocked a fundamental door to interpersonal success: not wearing judicial robes.

This "wearing of judicial robes" can be a humorously effective image to help us understand what we do to ourselves and others when we participate in inappropriate and unrighteous judgments. Imagine yourself in long black robes, sporting an ornately curled and flawlessly powdered white wig, walking into a room and having the audience stand for you, bow for you, and quiet down for you—and then see you trip on the very robes you wear so proudly. Most of us do not own, let alone wear, real judicial robes, but all of us have been metaphorically dressed in the distortionary robes of judgment. And all of us have tripped on those robes from time to time when our initial evaluation has been altered by the truth and hemmed with the measurement of true character. When we prescribe from our own autobiography, we are bound to stumble over our own definitions of how things should be (or seem to be) and into the revelatory reality of how things really are.

But when we base our interpersonal relationships on the belief that each one of us has equal worth in the sight of God, we will more readily and sincerely refrain from judging.

We all operate under different sets of expectations and different combinations of opportunities, but because we have an abiding worth that runs deeper than any and all of the circumstances and descriptions that characterize us, we have neither the right nor the responsibility to judge unrighteously. We are under God's stewardship, and He is the rightful owner of all judicial robes.

The Gentle Power of Empathy

By realizing our own and respecting others' self-worth, we replace judgment and discrimination with empathy and love. Empathy is the demonstration of Christ-like love. Or, as Denis Waitley so aptly said, empathy is "the recognition that each human being on earth is a person with equal rights to fulfill his or her own potential in life. It is understanding that skin color, birthplace, sex, financial status, religion, intelligence, and political beliefs are not measures of worth or worthiness." [^4] Because our self-worth is an immeasurable source of strength and comfort, we all have the right—and the ability—to enjoy the warmth of empathy and to shun the frigidity of cold, harsh judgment.

Aesop told an enlightening fable about this principle. The wind and the sun had an argument about which one of them was stronger. They decided to test their strength on a traveler coming down the road. The one who could get the traveler to take off his coat the fastest would win the contest. The wind tried first, blowing with all his might, but the more the wind blew, the tighter the traveler drew his coat around him. Then the sun took a turn, warming him with his light. Soon the traveler removed his coat.

Warmth and gentle persuasion are always stronger than fear and force. And when we practice such warmth and gentleness, we show our empathy for others. Empathy is a powerful influence in helping others to change for the better.

When we have empathy for others, we try not just to understand but also to feel what they are feeling. We can have such empathy when we see their God-given potential as we see our own. By showing empathy, we demonstrate the eternal worth of ourselves and others, and we communicate love, which is the message we all need most.

Although we differ in many ways, we still share a common bond—we are all children of God. And no matter what our differences, we all have many more similarities: doubt, fear, and discouragement; faith, hope, and courage.

We can empathize with others when we understand our similarities. We can put aside our negative assumptions and unnecessary judgments, for God Himself finds us all worthy of His love. As Jesus said, "This is my commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you." (John 15:12.)

As God has loved us, let us love one another, looking for the spark of divinity that burns in the hearts of all people, the seed of godhood that may grow and bear fruit as it is nourished in love. As the oak grows from the acorn and the butterfly from the caterpillar, so may we grow in our Father's love and in the love and empathy of one another.

I will always be grateful for an experience I had while traveling that taught me the importance of empathy's gentle touch. After spending nearly twenty-five hours on several airplanes, I arrived in another country on a Sunday morning. To say I was exhausted would be an understatement. My clothes felt dirty, my face was unshaven, and my luggage was lost. But it was Sunday, and I wanted to attend church before embarking on what would be even more of a work- weary week. I found a church in the area, and because I did not have a change of clothes, I wore what I had traveled in—a sweatshirt and some wrinkled pants. The people at the service had every reason to look at my apparel and wonder why I was not dressed appropriately (they were all in suits and ties and dresses), but none of them did. They welcomed this American with open arms, showed me around the building, invited me to come back whenever I was in town—several even invited me over for dinner. They may have been wearing their Sunday best, but they certainly were not wearing their judicial robes. And because of their warm acceptance, I was more readily able to feel God's love during the worship service.

What Is Essential

In Antoine de Saint-ExupÃ©ry's timeless tale The Little Prince, the fox teaches an insightful lesson. After traveling the universe, the little prince encounters interesting characters from whom he learns much. But he learns the most profound secret from a fox. The wise fox divulges: "And now here is my secret, a very simple secret: It is only with the heart that one can see rightly; what is essential is invisible to the eye." [^5] Herein lies a cornerstone for interpersonal success: seeing beyond the visible and into the hearts of the people with whom we interact. What is essential about ourselves as well as our associates is the invisible reservoir of worth that is our birthright.

This well-spring of worth is accessed through a Christ- like love, or an empathetic attitude. So we could say that what is essential for our interpersonal development is LOVE. Or,

L=Looking for the good and O=Overlooking the bad by V=Valuing each other's worth and E=Empathizing, or putting ourselves in each other's situations, "walking in another's shoes."

Having a loving attitude means that we avoid unrighteous judgments by recognizing the divinely endowed worth in other people. And how do we demonstrate such a recognition? By looking for their innate goodness and overlooking some of the human foibles that (to varying degrees) characterize us all. When we approach our family, friends, and associates in the spirit of love and acceptance rather than of judgment and condemnation, we are better able to understand from where they are coming. We are better able to see all of the great and noble places they could be going. We are better able to love them as the Lord loves us.

We are able to empathize—and not just sympathize— with them. Sympathy has its place in human interaction. We all have moments when we need to commiserate, or as Webster defines it, "to be in keeping, accord, or harmony" with another person. But even commiseration falls short of understanding, or real empathy, which Webster defines as "vicariously experiencing the feelings, thoughts, and experience of another." We can have sympathy and not understand. But we cannot have empathy without really valuing the feelings and comprehending the worth of other people.

Christ's life is a perfect model of this empowering principle. Love brought Him into the world; love was the essence of His life and teachings; and love was the motivation for His redeeming sacrifice. John records: "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved." (John 3:16-17; italics added.) And because Christ is our Exemplar, the same purpose applies to us all: God sent not each of us into the world to condemn the world, but to make the world a better place, a place filled with an empowering and motivating love, by exhibiting Christlike empathy.

The Power of Love

Our need for such selfless, even divine, love manifests itself in the interactions we have with our family members: those with whom we associate daily. It is much easier to love and accept someone with whom we have only passing exchanges and infrequent conversations, but it requires an entirely deeper and different sort of understanding and affection to satisfy the daily requirements for love in our own family. Referring specifically to the marriage bond but also describing a more general love, President Spencer W. Kimball explains:

Love is like a flower, and like the body, it needs constant feeding. The mortal body would soon be emaciated and die if there were not frequent feedings. The tender flower would wither and die without food and water. And so love, also, cannot be expected to last forever unless it is continually fed with portions of love, the manifestation of esteem and admiration, the expressions of gratitude, and the consideration of unselfishness. [^6]

This flower metaphor became instructive and poignantly real for my wife and me when, early in our courtship, we planted some tulips together. The flowers became "love blossoms" of sorts, and as we worked together to nurture these perennial buds, we discussed the importance of understanding each other's daily needs for love and acceptance. While one bud may need more sunlight and another require extra portions of water, so our needs—though different—could be met by looking beneath the surface and into each other's hearts. By empathizing, by being a nourishing light instead of a damaging judge, we could fertilize our relationship with the discerning warmth of love. We look forward to the annual rebirth of these spring blossoms, just as we daily anticipate a renewing of our eternal commitment to love and cherish one other.

Because empathy is antithetical to judgment, when we allow empathy (or Christ-like love) to direct our interpersonal vision, the motes that have previously marred our outlook will be replaced with more compassionate understanding. When we make the divine connection in our interpersonal relations, the beams that once barred our interpersonal progress will now decorate the portal by which we gain entry into each other's hearts and by which we help each other to realize our full potential. Avoiding judgment and realizing that "what is essential is invisible to the eye" allows us to see a world full of capable, changing people who are worthy of our unconditional love, encouragement, and forgiveness.

The Gentle Power of Empathy

By realizing our own and respecting others' self-worth, we replace judgment and discrimination with empathy and love. Empathy is the demonstration of Christ-like love. Or, as Denis Waitley so aptly said, empathy is "the recognition that each human being on earth is a person with equal rights to fulfill his or her own potential in life. It is understanding that skin color, birthplace, sex, financial status, religion, intelligence, and political beliefs are not measures of worth or worthiness." [^7] Because our self-worth is an immeasurable source of strength and comfort, we all have the right—and the ability—to enjoy the warmth of empathy and to shun the frigidity of cold, harsh judgment.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Of You It Is Required to Forgive," Ensign, November 1980, p. 62.
[^2] Nathaniel Hawthorne, The Scarlet Letter, in Norton Anthology of American Literature, 2nd ed. (New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1985), pp. 1193-94.
[^3] Walter Anderson, "My Toughest Struggle," Guideposts, November 1989, pp. 30-33.
[^4] Boyd K. Packer, "Balm of Gilead," Ensign, November 1977, p. 60.
[^5] William Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice, IV, i, 184.
[^6] Spencer W. Kimball, Marriage (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978), pp. 46-47.
[^7] Reason emotionally. We interpret our own negative feelings as a sign that we don't deserve happiness. 7. Lewis, Mere Christianity, p. 173.
