Lloyd D. Newell, Divine Connection: Understanding Your Inherent Worth ( 1992)

CHAPTER 11

FORGIVE AND FORGET

I have learned that life is an adventure in forgiveness. Nothing clutters the soul more than remorse, resentment, recrimination . . . . Forgiveness is a gift we need to give not only to others but to ourselves, freeing us from self- punishment and enabling us to see a wider horizon in life than is possible under circumstances of guilt or grudge.

—Norman Cousins

The avoidance of judgment is not enough to ensure interpersonal success. When feelings do get hurt, when judgments have been made, and when wrongs are committed, we need to forgive—and to be forgiven. And we all know how difficult the practice of forgiveness can be. It's hard. Very hard. But the hurts we endure can be healed. No matter how deep the cut and how sensitive the sore spot, we can find the strength to forgive when we draw upon the healing power of Jesus Christ—when we allow others to change as we ourselves are changing.

The Divine Connection

Unconditionally forgiving and forgetting requires even more inner strength and godly love than not passing judgment. It is one thing to quell our own negative thoughts, but it is entirely another thing to not be hurt by the negative words, thoughts, and actions of others. While not passing judgment opens the door to good relations, forgiving and forgetting is the hinge around which all interpersonal progress revolves. For example, when we only suspect that a neighbor is throwing grass clippings on our side of the fence, it is easier to maintain a Christ-like attitude toward our neighbor than if we actually see him or her throw those clippings. If we only suspect the neighbor of wrongdoing but have no proof, we can do no more (nor no less) than withhold accusations. We can work toward good relations by refraining from judging. But in the second case, because we know a certain neighbor has offended us, we take our interpersonal skills to an even deeper level of understanding by forgiving those trespasses. We not only withhold judgment, but we also withhold resentment, revenge, and recrimination.

The degree to which we can forgive others and can forget the mistakes they make is a measure of our interpersonal maturity—a scale by which we can chart our progress. The more we allow others to change by forgetting their errors, their past shortcomings and offenses, the more fully we have acknowledged their infinite worth. The more we forgive, the better we demonstrate a recognition of our own and others' worth, and the easier it is to lose ourselves in the forgiveness of others. People who are forgiving are always more selfless. They have found their own and others' worth by losing themselves in building up other people. They have demonstrated an understanding of the unconditional claim all people have to a perfect Father's forgiveness, love, and understanding by being more forgiving, loving, and understanding themselves.

Because we are all children of God and beneficiaries of the atonement, we have equal rights to repentance and forgiveness. We have the undeniable ability to repent and the unequivocal responsibility to forgive—and to forget. Forgiving and forgetting are such essential components of the improvement process that neither we nor our associates can walk the difficult road of life—and experience real growth— without these redeeming precepts. As Henry Ward Beecher so aptly said, "I can forgive but I cannot forget is another way of saying I cannot forgive."

A Piece of String

The extent to which an unforgiving attitude can halt our progress is well illustrated in the story "A Piece of String" by Guy de Maupassant. The main character, Hauchecome, goes to the village one day and has an argument with the harness maker. That same day, one of the villagers reports a stolen purse, and the village rallies together to catch the thief. Hauchecome happens to be on his way back home about the time the crime is reported, and the harness maker (with whom he is at odds) happens to see him stop and pick something up along the roadside. The harness maker does not see that Hauchecome only picked up a piece of string and, already disgruntled by their previous dispute, goes to the authorities to report "the crime." The harness maker claims that he saw Hauchecome pick the purse up off the ground and take it. The police officials immediately go to Hauchecome's home and arrest him. He protests and even shows them the piece of string that he retrieved. But they refuse to believe him. They ridicule him for the claim he makes and send him to prison.

The next day, someone finds the purse, and Hauchecome is released. He becomes bitter over the false arrest and refuses to forgive his accusers. He dwells obsessively on his mistreatment, telling everyone he meets how he was falsely accused and humiliated. He thinks of little else, and, over time, he begins to neglect his work, his loved ones, and even his own health. His obsession with the injustice renders him seriously ill. Even with his dying breath, he utters, "A piece of string, a piece of string."

Just as the harness maker's unforgiving attitude colored his perception of Hauchecome's roadside bending, Hauchecome's anger and resentment penetrated the farthest reaches of his life and ultimately led to his physical and spiritual destruction.

Many of us have a "piece of string"—whether it be a thin strand or a rope-like weave—of which we refuse to let go. But even when we are right in our facts, we may be wrong in our attitudes. If "correctness" keeps us from forgiving others' wrongs, our own "rights" may evolve into even worse wrongdoings. President Gordon B. Hinckley captures this concept well:

How difficult it is for any of us to forgive those who have injured us. We are all prone to brood on the evil done us. That brooding becomes as a gnawing and destructive canker. Is there a virtue more in need of application in our time than the virtue of forgiving and forgetting? There are those who would look upon this as a sign of weakness. Is it? I submit that it takes neither strength nor intelligence to brood in anger over wrongs suffered, to go through life with a spirit of vindictiveness, to dissipate one's abilities in planning retribution. There is no peace in the nursing of a grudge. There is no happiness in living for the day when you can "get even." [^1]

In all cases, the unforgiving attitude is potentially more harmful than the actual injustices. When we have been wronged, we can still go on with our lives—even if it is painful to do so. But when we refuse to forgive—whether forgiveness has been solicited or not—we invoke more pain and suffering on ourselves and ultimately become emotionally debilitated by our stubbornness. Often the wrongdoers do not even suffer. They may be totally unaware of the hurtful things they have done. Even when they know they have offended and are piqued with some guilt, their pain is usually not as damaging as the self-inflicted sores that come from the refusal to forgive. An unforgiving attitude is like a life-threatening cancer that eats away at our insides and affects other parts of our life and being. Only the Lord's redemptive surgery is strong enough to prevent such a disease.

The Letter A

Once removed, the sore spots we endure may well make us more sensitive, more aware of the cancerous condition that once plagued us—and that may afflict others. In the famous novelette The Scarlet Letter, Nathaniel Hawthorne demonstrates how the Puritan community suffers more than the convicted sinner because of its refusal to forgive. The community disallows Hester Prynn from putting the sin of adultery behind her by causing her to wear a scarlet A on her chest for as long as she lives. Even though Hester becomes a great asset to the community, a selfless nurse and a charitable doer of good deeds, the Puritanical culture insists on her wearing of the scarlet letter.

After several years, a few people in the community are so appreciative of Hester's services that the A no longer signifies adultery to them. It comes to mean everything from "able" to "angel" for these forgiving few: "The letter was the symbol of her calling. Such helpfulness was found in her,—so much power to do, and power to sympathize,— that many people refused to interpret the scarlet A by its original signification. They said that it meant Able; so strong was Hester Prynn, with a woman's strength." For the handful of people who saw Hester's A as an emblem of all her good qualities, they found a real friend with an unprecedented and nonjudgmental compassion. They found comfort in the scarlet letter's promise of forgiveness, and they found solace in its representation of repentance: "The scarlet letter had the effect of the cross on a nun's bosom" for them. [^2]

File Cabinets by the Dozen

We may no longer put scarlet letters on adulterers, but we all engage in a more subtle sort of condemnation when we refuse to forgive—by not forgetting others' grievances. Or when we keep "files" on all of the wrongs we have suffered or on all of the mistakes others have made. Human nature would have us keep file cabinets by the dozen. But no matter how badly we have been hurt, and no matter how much we have learned from mistakes (both ours and those of others), nothing good comes from unforgivingly keeping track of others' wrongs—whether they have been repented of or not.

When we keep a file of every mistake our parents make, a file for every malicious word a brother or sister speaks, a file for every unkind look from a co-worker, a file for jealous responses from friends, and a file for the selfish actions of a spouse, we only hurt ourselves. Our file cabinet becomes cumbersome and heavy, too stuffed and stretched with resentment and anger to allow for personal or interpersonal growth.

Letting Go of the Past

All too often we thwart our own progress by holding on to others' mistakes—mistakes for which they may have already repented. And we do not bless our lives, and the lives of our associates, with the healing balm of selfless forgetting. An acquaintance of mine, whom we will call Mike, recounted a boyhood experience in forgiveness that had evolved into a manly struggle to forget. When he was an impressionable young Boy Scout in his community troop, he had a Scoutmaster whom he loved, respected, and even idolized. He looked to this man as a mentor and held on to his loving words of wisdom and experience.

Then, suddenly, the Scoutmaster stopped coming to troop meetings, and the boys were told that a replacement would be called. Mike explained how empty and disappointed he felt—how slighted and forgotten. He wondered why his grown-up friend would abandon them, and he held on to the belief that the change would be only temporary. Surely their Scoutmaster would be back for the summer campout.

But almost as soon as he comforted himself with that thought, he was told that the Scoutmaster would not be back. He had been caught shoplifting. He had not adhered to the Scouting ideals, and he was no longer considered a good influence for the boys. Mike felt personally betrayed. In his boyish way, he had invested much belief in his Scout leader, and that trust had been defiled. His initial disappointment turned to anger and disgust. He could no longer trust his old friend, and he would not let himself love the new Scoutmaster in the same way.

Shortly thereafter, Mike and his family moved to another city, and he did not hear from his Scoutmaster for many years. Mike is now in his forties. He was reading the newspaper one day when he came across a short article announcing the appointment of his former Scoutmaster to a respected position in his church and community. Mike thought: "Since when have they been asking shoplifters to be prominent citizens? Don't they know he is a criminal?" He was angry, deeply disappointed, and convinced that the Scoutmaster had lied to the authorities about his past.

Then something happened inside of Mike, and he demonstrated what I would call real forgiveness. He looked back at the article, lifted the picture of his former Scoutmaster close to his face, and remembered the man he had loved and respected. He reminded himself of the man who had sometimes carried Mike's backpack in addition to his own when the trail was rough. Mike recalled the man who had always had time for another story before they put out the fire. He remembered the man who had laughed with him, cried with him, and even knelt beside him in prayer at the end of a long day. And he forgot about the man who had made a mistake during one weak moment a long time ago. The Scoutmaster had never asked this Scout for forgiveness. Maybe he had not even known that he had hurt Mike. Nevertheless, Mike forgave him. He replaced his resentment with positive remembrances of his boyhood leader, and he gloried in his Scoutmaster's newfound success by recalling the good times of years gone by.

An Eternal Reservoir of Worth

We all may not have the providence to forgive another by replacing the bad with the good. Many times we are hurt by people and circumstances in which we have difficulty finding any good. We may not know our offender as being anything but bad and doing anything more than hurtful things. In those cases, more than in others, it is necessary to draw upon the eternal reservoir of worth to which all of God's children are entitled.

It may be necessary to search faithfully and to energetically believe that such unpleasant people have good qualities deep within them, that those qualities will eventually be found, and, most of all, that those people do have a divine inheritance of worth. As Andrew Carnegie puts it, you may have to "mine for gold; you must literally move tons of dirt to find a single ounce of gold . . . . You do not look for the dirt—you look for the gold." Sometimes we have to remove a lot of protective covering. Sometimes we may even need to explore our own inner caverns of complacency. In all cases, we will be able to replace the bad with the good when we pause long enough to discover the wealth of possibility, the reservoir of worth, to which we all have claim.

Walter Anderson, the senior editor of Parade magazine, teaches us of the interpersonal power that comes from "digging for the gold." As a young boy, he was physically abused by his alcoholic father. At sixteen he was desperate to leave home, and he dropped out of school. The next year he joined the Marines and was sent to Vietnam.

His experience in the service, however, had a maturing effect on him, and he began to turn his life around. He finished school and learned how to write. Then came marriage and a career in journalism. Though he was overcoming his childhood in many ways, Walter Anderson still nursed the scars of his father's violence. He found it difficult to control his own temper and often did things he regretted. At those stressful moments, Anderson recalls, "I saw my father standing before me, his fists raised, his eyes narrowed in rage. I had inherited that rage. I suffered from it—even now, ten years after his death."

He realized that, for his own progression, he needed to forgive his father. And he started that difficult and painful task by remembering his father's good qualities. One such quality was courage. His father had fought in World War II and had served as a volunteer fireman. Anderson also reflected on how his father's parents had themselves been alcoholics and how his father had grown up in poverty. The more he learned about the nature of alcoholism, the more sympathetic he grew toward his father. He explains the process of forgiveness: "I found that the more I worked on forgiving my father, the easier it was to forgive myself. I didn't have to be angry. I didn't have to fight." Anderson was finally able to forgive his father when he repeatedly remembered the good qualities he possessed and no longer allowed himself to brood over and resent the bad. The more he understood his father's own wounds, the more he forgot his own scars, and the stronger his interpersonal muscles became. [^3]

While we cannot control what another person might say or do, we can control how we respond to those thoughts, actions, and mistakes. We cannot undo another's wrongdoing. But we can keep from doing more wrong by refusing to equate the mistake with the person, by remembering that what someone does is separate from who that person really is. We may dislike the performance, but we can still like the performer.

When a "file" of mistakes keeps us from recognizing the worth of the person behind those mistakes (grievous though the mistakes may be) as well as prevents us from realizing our own worthiness and maintaining our own happiness, our filing system needs to be reorganized around a Christ- like, or a forgiving, love. And perhaps our files of the past need to be replaced with more hopeful files for the future. By holding on to a file of mistakes, we let others act upon us, and we refuse to take action ourselves. We are letting their mistakes and misbehaviors misdirect and even control our lives. Such unforgiving files destroy faith and ignore worth—in ourselves and in others.

Leave It Alone

In a classic address, "Balm of Gilead," Elder Boyd K. Packer told of a man he called John who was embittered by a doctor's mistake. When John's wife, Mary, was delivering their first child, John's doctor came from another house call just in time to ease the crisis of the baby's unsupervised birth. But some days later, the young mother died from the very infection that the doctor had been treating at the other home on the evening of the baby's birth. John was so embittered by the doctor's carelessness that his whole life was shattered by this devastating event. He could not forgive him; never could he forget the injustice wreaked upon him.

A wise religious leader came to John and counseled him to "leave it alone." He reminded John that there was nothing he could do to bring his beloved Mary back, and the best thing he could do for his child and himself would be to come back to church and fill their souls with the enabling power of God's love. Not until John was much older could he finally muster the strength and understanding to do this, to put aside his bitterness and forgive the overworked country doctor who was just trying to help as many people as he could under very unfavorable circumstances.

We all know that it is always easier to talk about forgiveness than to actually practice it, especially when—like John—we are victimized by another's mistake. From observing this and similar experiences, Elder Packer advised: "If you have festering sores, a grudge, some bitterness, disappointment, or jealousy, get hold of yourself. You may not be able to control things out there with others, but you can control things here, inside of you." [^4] When the wedge of a wrongdoing gets between us and another person or group of people, we diminish our own as well as other people's happiness. We deny them their right to change, to grow, and to repent, and we do not acknowledge their ability to be forgiven—by ourselves and, more important, by God. When negative interactions keep us from recognizing the universal worth of God's children and the undeniable birthright to repentance and forgiveness, we stop the spiral of self-improvement (both ours and theirs).

The Casting of Stones

In the Savior's profound terms, we cast the first stone. When the scribes and Pharisees brought a woman "taken in adultery" to be judged of the Savior, He defeated both of their unrighteous purposes (to convict the woman and to catch Him disobeying the law of Moses) by first responding nonverbally: "Jesus stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as though he heard them not." (John 8:6.) By ignoring their rude remarks and minimalizing this public "hearing," He clearly demonstrated that the woman's sin did not keep Him from loving the sinner. Trying to maintain as much of the woman's dignity as was left to uphold, He lifted himself up and invited, "He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her." (V. 7.) "And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground." (V. 8.) Still not acknowledging the Pharisees' unkind demands nor publicly addressing the adulterous woman, Christ gave us a model of sensitivity when "again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground." With such meaningful silence, He solved the problem and taught a timeless lesson in interpersonal relations.

He affirmed both the woman's unchanging worth and the accusers' eternal worth by placing a private grievance back in its rightful (personal) domain and demonstrating that only "he that is without sin among you" can incriminate a sinner or refuse to forgive a wrongdoer. Sometimes we find it easy to categorize ourselves as being "without sin." Sin is such a serious word that it seems to reach beyond our everyday, "mundane" wrongdoings. Many of us pride ourselves in having never done anything really wrong. But the Savior may well have said, "He who is without mistakes, failures, disappointments, without the need to be forgiven," cast the first stone. In other words, let only Him who does not need to be forgiven, Him who is truly without sin (in all of its "large" and "small" forms), exercise justice.

The crowd's response tells of the effectiveness of Christ's methods: "And they which heard it, being convicted by their own conscience, went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last: and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst." (V. 9; italics added.) He did not need to point His finger. He did not even need to determine the accusers' right (or lack thereof) to accuse. He simply put the problem back into the hands of those who created it, without embarrassing or mistreating them and even while showing compassion to them and to the victim of their unkindness.

Only when the accusers left did He speak directly to the woman. And again, His words are a manifestation of the woman's (and of all humankind's) worth: "Woman, where are those thine accusers? hath no man condemned thee? . . . Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more." (Vv. 10-11.) The Savior's response to sin is a model for us all. Even when we are the ones who have been sinned against, if we can love the sinner without loving the sin, if we can refrain from throwing the stones of self-righteousness by gossiping and labeling and making more accusations, our lives will be filled with the peace that the Savior demonstrated when He serenely "stooped down, and wrote on the ground."

While we are not told what happened to the woman taken in adultery, about where she went and what she later did, we can imagine the kind of impact this encounter must have made on her life from the experiences we have had when someone has loved us unconditionally and forgiven us for wrongs of which we may or may not have yet repented.

Transformational Forgiveness

One of my favorite stories is the poignant account of forgiveness in Victor Hugo's Les MisÃ©rables. The main character, Jean Valjean, steals some food for his hungry family in a moment of desperation and is thrown into prison and forced into almost twenty years of hard labor. This experience leaves him hardened and bitter, and though a bishop treats him well after his release, Jean "repays" his kindness by stealing the bishop's silver. It does not take long for the police to capture him, find him in possession of the bishop's silver, and haul him back to the bishop's home to confess his thievery. With Jean Valjean fully expecting to be severely punished and subjected to another even longer prison term, the police bring him before the bishop, with the silver in his hand. The bishop looks at the silver, smiles, and treats the traitor like a friend. He explains to the police that he gave the silver to Jean Valjean, and then he dumbfounds the prisoner by "reminding" him that he forgot to take the silver candlesticks as well. He says that they were also intended for him. This act of forgiveness and charity deeply moves Jean Valjean, melting away his bitterness and causing him to literally transform his life.

The Power of Forgiveness

For the woman taken in adultery, for Jean Valjean, and for each of us, the power of forgiveness can work a mighty change, even a transformation, not just in the life of "the forgiven" but also for the Christ-like forgiver. A forgiving attitude can dramatically change the way we look at other people and the way we respond to all kinds of situations. When we have a forgiving approach to life, we allow people to change, we see the goodness around us and within us, and we inspire others to become more godly. The effect is cyclical: the more forgiving we are, the more others forgive us, the more readily God forgives us, and the better we are able to forgive ourselves. As the Lord says: "If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." (Matthew 6:14-15.) As with all of the precepts of interpersonal progress, we cannot take the "personal" out of an interpersonal relationship. We cannot forgive others and be open to their development unless, as the Lord demonstrates, we ask God to "forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors." (Matthew 6:12.)

All too often we block our own progress by holding on to others' "debts"—"debts" for which the price may already have been paid. As a result, we incur unnecessary expenditures of judgment, anxiety, and worry in our own lives. Whenever we substitute a forgiving deposit for a condemning withdrawal in another person's emotional bank account (whether the "wrongdoer" has made reparative deposits or not), we risk our own emotional bankruptcy. And we diminish our ability to make meaningful deposits in our interpersonal relationships.

Not long ago a friend told me an enlightening story. He said that he had been walking through the grocery store with his mother when they ran into one of his mother's old friends. They stopped and talked to the woman for several minutes and then parted ways as they turned down separate aisles. As soon as the woman was out of hearing range, the man's mother turned to him and said, "You know, she had to get married."

The man stopped talking for a few minutes and thought about the implications of what his mother had said. Because he knew that the woman had been married to the same man for more than thirty years, had raised a fine family, and had long ago put her problems behind her, he was puzzled by his mother's comment. His mother still remembered the woman for a mistake that was more than three decades old. And by continuing to label the woman with this bygone incident, the man's mother was failing to let forgiveness follow its complete course. The woman's progress was not crippled by her mistake of years gone by, yet in some small but meaningful way, his mother's relationship with the woman was not as rewarding because of this unfavorable and unforgiving remembrance.

William Shakespeare alternately tells of the sweetness of a more positive or merciful remembrance:

The quality of mercy is not strain'd. It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven Upon the place beneath: it is twice blest: It blesseth him that gives and him that takes. [^5]

And so it goes for all of the self-helps that relate to interpersonal progress. We cannot expect to get something out of a relationship that we are not putting into it. We cannot expect to be forgiven if we ourselves are not forgiving. And we cannot expect to be forgiving if we fill our souls with hate, regret, resentment, and revenge—if, like Hauchecome, we brood over the wrongs that have been wreaked upon us. But when we turn those feelings of injustice around and make the divine connection to improvement, we can constructively forgive.

We can lose our own grief to the relief and prevention of others' grief. When Candy Lightner's daughter was killed by a drunk driver in California, she decided to channel her heightened emotions into the founding of an organization that would fight drunk driving. Instead of succumbing to anger and pain, she rallied other mothers who had similarly been victimized and started what we now know as MADD (Mothers Against Drunk Driving), a nonprofit organization that educates our nation on the risks of driving under the influence of alcohol. Subsidizing her efforts with an intricate telemarketing system and organizing presentations for school groups as well as programs for adult support groups, Candy turned her resentment into an empowering form of healing and forgiveness. She not only came to terms with her own grief, but she has also helped numerous others go through the same cathartic process.

Small Acts of Forgiveness

We can make such an attitudinal turn-around by not letting everyday opportunities for forgiveness pass us by. As ethereal as it may sound, it is possible to develop a forgiving attitude by first mastering our responses to the simple and sometimes subtle misbehaviors that we deal with all the time. When a toddler spills his cereal for the fifth time in one day; when a child forgets to take her lunch to school— again; when a teenager fails to call home before staying "just an hour later"; when a spouse loses your house key; when a co-worker calls you by the wrong name over and over again; when a friend forgets your birthday—if we can respond to such minor offenses with a gentle, sensitive reproof (immediately followed by an increase of love), we will more readily "turn the other cheek" when we are confronted with more damaging offenses. (See Matthew 5:39.) We will begin to make the careful balance between justice and mercy that the Savior exemplified when He told the adulteress, without condemning her, to "go, and sin no more." (John 8:11.)

But because we are not perfect and because our understanding is limited, because we do not have the same power of forgiveness and discernment as the Lord, the scriptures suggest that our interpersonal scale of justice and mercy should be weighted on the side of mercy.

The Savior implored, "Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful" and "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy." (Luke 6:36, Matthew 5:7.) But nowhere in the New Testament are we told to right all of our wrongs, take the law into our own hands, or have all of our grievances redressed. The Savior fulfills the law of Moses and no longer admonishes an "eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth." Instead He suggests that we turn the other cheek. (Matthew 5:38-39.) Otherwise, the whole world would end up blind and toothless!

Seventy Times Seven

We are commanded to unreservedly forgive. Peter posed a question to the Lord that most of us have probably asked at some time: "How oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?" (Matthew 18:21.) We have all probably wondered when we can stop forgiving someone for a repeated offense. At certain moments, we would like to force retribution and forgiveness and write our own formula for justice. There have been moments when each of us has probably wanted to stop forgiving and forgetting, to stop turning the other cheek and "go for the throat."

But the Lord makes clear to Peter, and to all of us, that our responsibility is to be forgiving, and His calling as our Redeemer is to achieve the perfect balance between justice and mercy that we long for in this life but that we may not realize until the life to come. He responded to Peter's query, "I say not unto thee, Until seven times: but, Until seventy times seven." (Matthew 18:22.) When I read this scripture as a youth, I used to mischievously multiply seventy by seven and remind myself that I had to forgive someone only 490 times! I have since come to understand the saving implication of this counsel: we are to forgive without limit and without price. Because He paid the ransom for our sins, we will be alone with Him in determining the cost of our penance. No one else will ultimately determine when we have been forgiving or forgiven too mercifully or too many times.

Christ-like Forgiveness

As imperfect children, one way we can acknowledge the eternal worth of others is by sincerely forgiving. When we unconditionally forgive other people, we show them how much we believe in them, how fully we recognize their inherent worth and potential, and how completely we are willing to help them make changes for the better.

My father was a very forgiving person, even though as a child I did not fully appreciate his forgiving attitude. I remember a few occasions when his Christ-like attitude frustrated me. I wanted him to strike back, fight for his rights, cash in on his debtors, and get an eye for every injured eye, a tooth for every broken tooth. But he repeatedly forgave—and forgot. He demonstrated a Christ- like love and understanding that amazes me to this day.

I learned from his forgiving acceptance of others. Certainly not all of the time, but many times his mild manner would change the very tone of a conversation. His sincere smile would turn a situation around. And I would see countenances change and hearts confide. By loving others in spite of their differences, he reminded them of their God- given worth. His love bespoke God's love and touched a familiar place in my heart—as well as in the lives of many others. In his own humble way, my father had made the divine connection to interpersonal power.

We all can make such divine connections to better human relations when we practice the enabling principle of forgiveness. By relying on the redeeming power of the atonement and recognizing the universal worth of God's children, by forgiving, we put our human shortcomings aside and demonstrate a more divine understanding. We lose ourselves in the building of each other, and we ease our own suffering by relieving others' pain—or by having faith enough to forgive. A forgiving attitude is a believing attitude. And just as believing in ourselves is a prerequisite for personal progress, believing in others is essential to interpersonal success.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Paul Thompson, "How to Get from Plateau to Peak," in Empowering Business Resources, p. 60.
[^2] Elizabeth Longford, Wellington: The Years of the Sword (Panther Press), p. 506.
[^3] See Think and Grow Rich Newsletter, March 1991, p. 4.
[^4] See Stephen R. Covey, The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, pp. 219-20.
[^5] William Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice, IV, i, 184.
