Lloyd D. Newell, Divine Connection: Understanding Your Inherent Worth ( 1992)

CHAPTER 12

BELIEVING IN OTHERS

When we treat a man as he is, we make him worse than he is. When we treat him as if he already were what he potentially could be, we make him what he should be.

—Goethe

God, our Father, has a perfect faith in each of us. He demonstrated this empowering trust by offering His Son as a sacrifice for our sins, giving us the individual opportunity for redemption and the personal responsibility for righteous living. By allowing us to choose between spiritual life and death and by giving us the means to repent and to be forgiven, He has already given us the assurance that we can return to Him. He has expressed a perfect belief in our ability to succeed while here on earth by virtue of His sending us here. And this belief is proof of the inherent worth we all possess. Because God believes in the worthiness of His children, in that very gesture of belief He endows us with an infinite and unchanging worth. His perfect faith is empowering in the truest sense. We are endowed with power and worth because He believes in us.

To a lesser degree, the same process takes place every time we believe in someone else. When we sincerely believe in the abilities of others, we help them to create these abilities. Conversely, when we doubt the capabilities of others, to some extent we prevent them from developing those capabilities. The Lord promised us that "all things are possible to him that believeth," not because we are all fully developed but because He has a perfect understanding of the power within us. (Mark 9:23.) Because our God- given and faith-inspired worth ultimately enables us to do "all things through Christ which strengtheneth [us]," the degree to which we recognize that worth and believe in its universal power determines how well we can help each other to do "all things." (Philippians 4:13.)

We Find What We Look For

Perhaps this rather intangible truth is more approachable from the pedestrian perspective of a country whittler. The story is told of an old man who sat in front of a country store, whittling away, not making anything in particular, just whittling, chewing on a blade of grass and occasionally sipping a glass of lemonade. One day a station wagon with an out-of-state license plate and a car full of furniture, bags, pets, and children pulled up. A middle-aged man got out of the car and asked the old man for directions to a neighboring city.

"Can you tell me how to get to the next town?" asked the driver.

"Sure can," answered the old man, not missing a beat with his knife and wood. "Yonder," he said, pointing with his pocketknife. "Down that road a piece."

"Thanks," said the driver. "Say, what are the people in the next town like?"

"What were the folks like in the town you just came from?" asked the old man.

"Not very friendly," said the driver. "Always thinking of themselves and how to get ahead. We were glad to get out of that place."

The old man nodded his head. "I think you'll find the folks in the next town are about the same."

Disappointed, the man got back into his car and drove down the road.

Not long thereafter, a second station wagon, also overloaded with furniture, bags, children, and pets, pulled up alongside the country store. A middle-aged man got out of the car and asked the old whittler, "Can you tell me how to get to the next town?"

The old man told him, and the second driver asked what the people in the next town were like.

"What were the folks like in the town you just came from?" responded the old man.

"Some of the best people we have ever met. Friendly, always willing to help you out. We're sure going to miss that place."

The old man nodded his head. "I think you'll find the folks in the next town are about the same."

Pleased, the driver got back into his car and drove in the direction of the "friendly" town.

The old whittler in this story seems to know one of the great truths of life and one of the keys to interpersonal success: we tend to find what we look for. Our mindset or orientation toward a certain place, situation, person, or group of people usually determines the nature of that place, situation, person, or group of people. We can literally create the kind of experience we will have with someone or something by the way we perceive and what we expect from that person or thing. The essence of our belief in large measure determines the nature of our reality. Our thoughts and attitudes formulate our own self-fulfilling prophecies.

What We Expect—We Find

I came to this understanding in my own life the first time I left for a business trip to Atlanta (and I have seen it in many other cities all over the world). I talked to several different people before I went, and they all told me how much they enjoyed Atlanta. They told me about the beautiful weather, the wonderful Southern people, and the fast- paced but friendly city. I was eager to enjoy the city for myself. And as might be expected, I found everything to match their description. I had a terrific time in Atlanta, and I continue to find it very pleasant every time I return.

Conversely, before another business trip in a different part of the country, I was told terrible things about the city I would visit. Several different people told me to watch out for the temperamental weather, the dirty streets, and the unfriendly people. I had conjured up an unpleasant image of the place before I actually saw it, and, as might be expected, that image was much like my perception once I arrived. I was told to watch out for all of the negative features of the city, and because I was on the alert for them, I discovered them. In retrospect, I am sure that I missed many of the wonderful people and things there. But I did find what I was "looking" for. (Of course, not every time someone has told us a place is undesirable do we find it so. Many times we find a location to be contrary to its description— positive or negative. But oftentimes, our expectations of a place paint our perception of that place.)

The same principle applies to our interpersonal relations. If we start a job expecting to dislike our new employer and to be uncomfortable with the other employees, we will most likely develop those negative feelings. If we believe that a spouse will be unpleasant and respond in a certain predictable way, our spouse will most likely react in just that way. If we think a child will make wrong choices, our disbelief in the child's ability to make good choices will certainly affect his or her decision-making. When we suspect that a friend will not be loyal, that friend may detect our distrust and feel less responsible for keeping up his or her end of the relationship. The degree to which we believe in others is perhaps the greatest determinant of how well we get along with others, how well others respond to us, and how much of an influence for good we are able to have in the lives of others.

Small Acts and Simple Words

This enabling belief in other people is most often demonstrated with small acts and simple words of praise. I remember the generous report a Sunday School teacher gave my mother one Sunday after church. She pulled Mom aside and said that I was such a delightful student, so good natured and so well prepared. She could always count on me to give the answer she wanted to hear. When my mother came home and told me what my teacher had said, I blushed with pride. I was only nine years old, but I remember it as vividly as if my mother had told me just this morning. The next Sunday when I went to class, I sat a little straighter in my chair, folded my arms a little tighter, and wanted to behave even better for my teacher. I knew that she believed in me, and I wanted to uphold—and even exceed—that belief.

The effects of heartfelt praise are far-reaching and long- lasting. We all have the need to be appreciated. When we try to improve, we need to know that our daily efforts to learn and grow (no matter how small they may be) are acknowledged by someone. We all need to know that we matter. Unfortunately, some of us may go for days without hearing a kind word, an encouraging comment, or even the faintest expression of approval from someone else. As any employee knows, we generally hear a lot more criticism from our bosses or co-workers than we do praise. Paul Thompson, the former dean of the BYU Marriott School of Management, said: "Managers should realize that many professionals who are deemed to be 'low potential' are not really low potential at all. Viewing or labeling employees as 'low potential' is a perception or practice that may create the reality. Thank goodness many employees considered to be low potential greatly outperform their labels." [^1]

This trend toward destructive labeling and criticism seems to characterize our society. One study showed that the average parent-to-child criticism/compliment ratio is twelve to one. For every one instance of praise, there are twelve moments of criticism. And the numbers are even less encouraging in the classroom. On the average, teachers offer their students eighteen criticisms for every one compliment. While constructive feedback has its place, a critical attitude and approach to life is debilitating—for both the giver and the receiver. Children as well as adults usually live up (or down) to expectations, and constant criticism can convince them that greatness is out of their reach—as it is beyond your expectations.

It takes only a few seconds of time, even a few ounces of energy, to let someone know that he or she is appreciated. If we take special care to be on time, stop to ask "How are you?" pause to smile, give a hug, or express gratitude; in effect, we acknowledge another person's worth. We let others know that they are important to us—so important that we would stop what we are doing or put our plans on hold for them.

The Power of Praise

A highly decorated statesman, the Duke of Wellington, was asked late in life what he would have done differently if he could live his life over again. He did not say he would change the way he fought the magnificent Battle of Waterloo—or any other battle. He simply said, "I should have given more praise." [^2] And many of us could probably say the same of our behavior. No matter how much praise we give to others now, we could all give even a little bit more. If we look for them, there are opportunities for praise all around us: in the first steps during rehabilitation, in the improved responsibility of a son or daughter, in the helpful assistance of a spouse, in the dedication of a co-worker.

Sincere praise, or the expression of a worth-inspired belief in others and in their abilities, can be a sustaining force for us throughout our lives. Words of praise and feelings of commendation are never forgotten. We hold on to such kind and uplifting words. Those expressions of encouragement fill reservoirs of praise that we—as well as our children, spouses, and friends—can draw upon for days, and even years, to come. They motivate us to give more praise, and they inspire us to live more praiseworthy lives.

In all of our efforts to offer praise, it is important that we not become flatterers. Flattery is insincere and excessive and may be prompted by ulterior motives. But praise by nature is not manipulative. It is motivated by the sincere desire to extend kindnesses and support. It is a deserved commendation, sincere expression, and heartfelt recognition.

For all of us who give and receive praise, let us not seek after "the praise of men more than the praise of God." (John 12:43.) The most meaningful praise we can receive is the peaceful assurance we get from doing what is right, from aligning our actions with our conscience and with an understanding of our divine worth. When we feel the soul satisfaction that comes from righteous living, we are the recipients of a perfect and completely selfless praise, praise from our Heavenly Father. And from this perfect model of praise, we are inspired to look for more opportunities to praise and to believe in each other's praiseworthiness.

Others' positive comments and believing attitudes enable us to perform at increased capacity. When I got a job as a TV news anchor in Pennsylvania, I was just out of my graduate program and a little nervous to be on the nightly news. I had to remind myself regularly that the news director and the general manager had gone to great lengths to get me to move to Pennsylvania. I knew they had a lot of confidence in my abilities, and I knew they had invested a lot of time and money in my position. Because my supervisors voiced their belief in my potential and demonstrated great confidence in me, I wanted to meet their level of expectation. And eventually I did. Now, when I look back at the video tapes of my first broadcasts, I smile at my rookie ways and critique my own beginnings. But I am grateful that my employers had enough foresight to see past my inexperience and believe in my broadcasting potential. In substantial part, they believed me into succeeding at my position.

The Power of Belief

The enabling power of belief has been chronicled through the ages: someone recognizes the worth of another human being and leads that person to discover his or her potential. The Greeks were so captivated by this idea that they related how Pygmalion, king of Cyprus, fell in love with an ivory statue of his own carving. His sincere affection and abiding love were so strong that Aphrodite, goddess of love, breathed life into the statue.

Modern playwrights and screenwriters have given contemporary interest to this ancient myth—and the abiding truth behind it. In My Fair Lady, for example, an uncultured woman grows into a picture of grace and beauty because Professor Higgins and his colleague believe in her. Eliza R. Dolittle learns to correctly speak, walk, dress, act, and even eat under their tutelage. And the street girl eventually passes herself off as a duchess at a grand ball. The professor is strict because he has high expectations for her; as a result, she undergoes a delightful and endearing transformation.

Not only do we tend to find what we look for, but we also tend to become what other people find in us. When someone takes the time to acknowledge who we really are and what our divine capabilities are, when someone makes the divine connection for us—and helps us to make it for ourselves, we can become transformed by their understanding of the greatness within us.

I am inspired by the story of a friend of mine, an outgoing businessman who grew up on a farm in a small town in Idaho. He describes himself as having been a shy, almost backward youth who found security in the rigors of his chores and solace in his animals' acceptance of him. He had difficulty speaking. His slight but noticeable stuttering often made speech uncomfortable and sometimes embarrassing. He would hurry home from school to spend time with his barnyard friends, and he avoided most kinds of social interaction with his peers.

A speech teacher at school had taken notice of the boy, observing him in the halls and in the lunch room for several months. He wondered if the boy would ever find his way into his classroom. But after several more months of only passing hellos and what seemed to be one-way conversations, the teacher decided that if the boy was not going to come to him for help, he would go to the boy—in his grain fields, where he felt most at home. One crisp day in late fall, when the harvest was over and the winter weather seemed to be settling in, the teacher waved to the boy across the partially plowed field. The boy stopped the tractor and walked over to his teacher, meeting him about midway. The teacher had a proposition for the student; he wanted him to enter the district speech competition. To do so, the boy would first have to win the school's tryouts. To say that the boy was shocked would be an understatement. He could not understand why the teacher would even consider him for such a competition. How could he address an auditorium full of people?

Several months and many tutoring sessions later, the boy not only competed in the district competition but he also won first place. The teacher had worked with him every day, sometimes all night long, inviting him home, feeding him dinner, meeting him at the school, and helping him practice at the podium until the stuttering was less and less noticeable—and then completely gone. They also spent many hours together writing the speech the boy would give. Encouraging but not overbearing, the teacher guided the boy to write something of which he would be proud. For a farm boy who loved the land, it was only natural for him to speak on the award-winning topic of soil preservation.

Who would have guessed that this quiet boy with a subtle speech impediment would not only win the competition but also become a proficient and heartwarming speaker? As an adult, the boy thanks his speech teacher for believing in him, for loving him enough to know that he had the ability to speak. The teacher had recognized the worth of this one shy student, and the student has gone on to help numerous others recognize their individual worth. In fact, "the worth of souls" is one of his favorite topics.

As a successful businessman, he spends most of his day speaking to other people and using the power of positive belief to motivate them to perform well—both on and off the job. He has become a mentor to many people, an example of the power of believing in others, because he (like his teacher) believes that all people have immense worth in the sight of God.

As with other worth-inspired precepts of interpersonal relations, the effects of believing in others are synergistic and rewardingly cyclical. The giver of encouragement is always a receiver. What goes around in our daily interactions truly does come around. The more we believe in others' divinely endowed worth, the more others seem to believe in us.

Charity Never Faileth

This undaunting belief in other people is what the Apostle Paul terms "the pure love of Christ," or charity. In his classic speech to the Corinthians, he describes a charitable person as one who "beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things." (1 Corinthians 13:7; italics added.) And then he promises, "Charity never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge it shall vanish away." (V. 8.) But charity, or abiding love and belief, never

fails. We may have all the facts and figures in the world, all the right equipment and all the necessary knowledge, but unless we have a resilient belief that withstands adversarial blows and overcomes even another's disbelief, if we "have not charity, it profiteth [us] nothing." (V. 3.) Only when we have charity and wholeheartedly believe in other people and in true principles, can we come to understand what really matters. We bless our lives with a recognition of God's perfect belief in us, and we empower others by sharing that godly belief.

We often see this interpersonal force at work in the relationships grandparents have with their grandchildren. Children often behave better for their grandparents than they do for their parents (and not just because their grandparents usually spoil them). Frank Morris in his book Grandparent Wisdom explains that grandparents often have higher expectations for their grandchildren than do their parents. And the children often live up to those higher expectations. Grandparents just expect the children to be polite, friendly, or quiet, whereas some parents seem to operate under the opposite expectations. Parents' perceptions may become so clouded by all of their children's daily demands and misbehaviors that they forget the sometimes less visible and certainly more meaningful attributes that those children possess as children of God. [^3]

In other words, sometimes we may forget that our own children are first and foremost children of God, endowed with divine capabilities and inherent worth. Consequently, we may exhibit a less believing attitude toward them. Grandparents, however, may find it easier to believe in children's divine potential because they are usually a few steps removed from the children's day-to-day challenges and interactions.

The Abundant Mentality

Sometimes it is easier to understand what this grandparental, even godlike, positive belief in others is like by ascertaining what it is not like. One of the most apparent indicators of a believing approach to life is a mentality of abundance rather than a mentality of scarcity. [^4] When we rejoice in another's success, glory in another's victory, and cheer for another's accomplishment, we have what has been called an abundant approach to life. We are well enough grounded in our own worth that we do not need to feel threatened by another person's achievement and ability. But when another's success seems to diminish our own sense of accomplishment, we suffer from a scarcity mentality— or a lack of personal as well as interpersonal recognition of worth.

We may want others to do well but not too well. For example, we are happy for our friend's son as long as he is not competing against our own son. Or we are glad our neighbor bought a new car as long as we have a better car— or at least as long as our car is in good repair. And we glory in our co-workers' advancements insofar as they do not threaten our own position. As long as their success does not overshadow our own, we are glad to see them excelling. We look at success—and worth—as a scarce commodity that can be added to and subtracted from, not as the constant source of strength that it really is.

Of course, most of us probably fluctuate between an attitude of scarcity and an attitude of abundance. On some days we may exhibit both attitudes at different times. But working toward an abundant mindset is the challenge and opportunity of life.

You might evaluate your progress by determining where you (in general) and your actions (in particular) fit on the scarcity/abundance scale:

Surprised by Greatness

A good measure of where we stand on the scarcity/ abundance scale is the degree to which we are surprised by greatness. Sometimes we tend to have such negative expectations of others that when someone really does do something commendable—when someone exceeds our expectations—we are shocked by their outstanding performance. We do not know how to congratulate them because we are so stunned that they could do something so congratulatory.

I have a friend who worked long and hard to become a heart surgeon. After studying diligently for many years in college and during medical school, and then working for six years as a resident, he finally entered the medical profession as a highly trained specialist. But when he goes home to visit friends and family, many of them undermine his achievements and treat him as the little boy he once was. They joke about his proficiency and, in subtle but hurtful ways, demonstrate their disbelief in his professional expertise. He hears remarks like, "I would never let the little brat who broke my window operate on me!" "How could a mischievous little boy grow up to be so successful?" and "Who took his tests for him? There's no way the teenager I knew could have passed such difficult exams."

But people change. We grow and develop. We learn and live anew because there is power and potential within us all. And whether that greatness manifests itself late or early or in the middle of our lives, it has always been and always will be there. As sculptor Henry Moore so aptly wrote, "The sculpture is in the stone." There was nothing he gave the stone that was not already contained within it. The masterful sculpture had always been a part of the rough stone he carved. But it took an imaginative and believing eye to uncover that potential.

A Work of Art

So it is with each of us. There are masterpieces all around us, waiting to be discovered, shaped, and admired. Within each of us is a sculpture of greatness. As children of God, we all have the raw material necessary to become a human work of art—even as we help others to become their own masterworks. The art of interpersonal relations is a function of seeing the sculpture in all of the "stones" around us, believing in the visible and invisible capabilities of our friends, family, neighbors, and associates, as well as in the grouches, grumps, and difficult people in our lives. When we stop being surprised by greatness will we really see and help others uncover their inherent talents and beauty. We can become a worth-inspired sculptor who carves stones into sculpted wonders.

Pause to evaluate how much greatness you see in those around you. Would you be surprised if the little "bookworm" next door turns out to be a computer wizard and a multi- millionaire, writing innovative software programs to help the world? Would it shock you if the plain-looking teen who is not much of a babysitter inspires thousands with her practiced playing as a concert pianist? Or what about the woman at work who seems antisocial and never goes with her co-workers to lunch. Would you be surprised if she spends her lunch hours serving others at a homeless shelter? Or do you already look for these noble traits in your associates? Do you already see much of the greatness that resides in those around you?

These are important questions to consider. The degree to which the people in the time of Christ were surprised by greatness seemed to determine their acceptance of Him. When Christ announced His divine Sonship at His local synagogue in Nazareth, the people responded with disbelief. He finished reading several prophetic passages in the scriptures, closed the scroll, and said, "This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears." (Luke 4:21.) Many of the Nazarenes were surprised by his declaration of greatness: "All bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph's son?" (V. 22.) They knew Jesus as the local carpenter's son and could not see Him as the Son of God. They were blinded to the divinity within Him because of the humanity that surrounded them.

Masterworks around Us

How many of us fail to see the masterworks around us because we have not yet discovered the worth within ourselves—and within all people? If we stop believing in our own and in each other's abilities, we are implying that we (and all people) are incapable of improvement, beyond change, and essentially without worth. Our thoughts and actions may be undermining the very belief to which we adhere. In fact, the failure to believe in each other's possibilities for change and improvement is one of the most subtle but penetrating forms of judgment—and one of the most unforgiving paradigms we can have.

As simple and even as "Sunday schoolish" as it may sound, when we remember that we and all of our associates are children of God, we will find it easier to surmount our interpersonal problems, to deepen our understanding, broaden our mental and emotional horizons, and change our limiting paradigms. C. S. Lewis reminds us of the extraordinariness of each of us, and of the divinity within us: "There are no ordinary people. You have never talked to a mere mortal. Nations, cultures, arts, civilizations—these are mortal, and their life is to ours as the life of a gnat. But it is immortals whom we joke with, work with, marry, snub, and exploit—immortal horrors or everlasting splendors."

No matter how abundant our attitude and how accepting our love, we all experience a certain amount of empowering splendor when we stop to realize that there really are no ordinary people! All family members, friends, neighbors, associates, and even strangers are children of God, immortal heirs of a divine endowment of worth. This truth alone can cause us to evaluate our interpersonal habits and to work at making our thoughts and actions more accurate reflections of such an understanding.

It becomes a lot more difficult to hold a grudge against someone who is not just a boss or a friend or an associate but also a brother or sister in God's family. It is harder to be resentful of another's abilities and successes when we realize that those abilities are developed, God-given endowments. Differences of opinion can become less threatening when we remind ourselves of the overriding similarity we all have as children of God—when we recall and make claim to the unchanging worth that surpasses our human misunderstandings.

We will find it more natural to focus on others instead of ourselves when we have charity and sincerely look for the sculptures in the stones, the masterpieces around us and within us.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Debating. We debate when we disagree with someone. Even if we have a valid point, sometimes we do not allow the other person to fully express himself or herself because we interrupt with our own contending viewpoint. If we will just wait and hear the other person out, we may find that we have less of a difference of opinion than we initially thought. Acceptance 2. Appreciation 3. Attention Carlfred Broderick, Marriage and the Family (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1979), pp. 187-94.
[^2] Detouring. We detour when we change the subject. Have you ever tried to talk to someone, only to have the person start talking about something else? It becomes increasingly frustrating to express yourself when the person with whom you are speaking insists on changing the subject. Neither topic of conversation (the speaker's nor the listener's) gets fully addressed when detouring disturbs our listening. Neal A. Maxwell, All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979), p. 3.
[^3] Jumping ahead. The average rate of speech is around 125 words a minute. But we are capable of listening and comprehending at speeds of 500 to 600 words a minute. We can all listen a lot faster than we can speak, so people often jump ahead and make conclusions about what the speaker is saying before everything has been said. In the meantime, the listener may be mistaken about the speaker's conclusion and may also muddle what is presently being said.
[^4] Private planning. Even while we exhibit all of the outward gestures of effective listening, we may inwardly be formulating our next response or quietly organizing the rest of the day's activities. Someone may be telling us one thing while we are privately considering other ideas or planning for alternate activities. Private planning can be a plague to effective listening because it busies our minds with irrelevant and distracting thoughts.
