Lloyd D. Newell, Divine Connection: Understanding Your Inherent Worth ( 1992)

CHAPTER 13

FOCUSING ON OTHERS

One thing I know: the only ones among you who will truly be happy are those who have sought and found how to serve.

—Albert Schweitzer

If we have really internalized the belief that we are children of God, we will ascribe that same belief to all people. We cannot fully realize our God-given worth if we do not simultaneously acknowledge the divine birthright of all of God's children. But sometimes we suffer from the "mirror malady," the self-inflicted condition of seeing only ourselves and our own needs. As we go through life with a mirror in front of us, we may think we see ourselves as the child of God who we are. But until we can look away from the mirror—into the faces of other people—and still see the same picture of worth, we have not fully caught sight of our divine character.

Just as our intrapersonal discussions on self-worth aimed at taking the "self" out of self-improvement, our worth- inspired suggestions for interpersonal relations will help us improve the quality of our lives by focusing on others. When we find something that brings us greater happiness or fulfillment, we naturally want to share it with others. And this principle applies to our divine connection. When we have a deep sense of our own worth, one of the first things we desire is to help others discover their infinite worth. The joy of our own enlightenment is compounded by the happiness and purpose we help others to achieve.

Pay Value to Others

An effective way to guide others to this greater understanding of their worth is to show them appreciation, or to pay value to them. Psychologist William James said, "The deepest principle of human nature is the craving to be appreciated." When we let other people know that their efforts, sacrifices, and improvements are noticed, we remind them of their inherent value to us—and to God. By pausing to appreciate, we stop to say, "You matter to me," "Your efforts are worthwhile," "Your goodness is remarkable," and perhaps most important, "You are demonstrating the divinity within you." When we sincerely appreciate others, we reassure them of their inherent worth.

Unfortunately, most people suffer from what Ruth Stafford Peale calls "appreciation starvation," a deficient supply of grateful recognitions. Many of us go for days, months, and even years without really being thanked—or sometimes even noticed. I learned an important lesson about this from a conscientious and diligent hotel employee who helped me set up for a training seminar I was conducting in Austin, Texas. He was in charge of the set-up and catering, and, as part of his job, he regularly checked to make sure everything was just as it should be in our meeting room. He was responsive to my needs and cheerful about conducting his duties. After the seminar was over, I sent him a brief note thanking him for his excellent services.

I soon received a letter from him in return. He wrote, "I have worked at this hotel for many years, and not once have I ever received a note from anybody thanking me for what I'm paid to do. This is my job. I just wanted you to know I appreciate your giving me that little note thanking me." In all of the years he had worked there, no one had ever thanked him (in writing) for his services! Yet it required so little of my time and energy to write that simple note.

This experience reminds us of the importance—and of the fulfillment—that comes from paying value to others. We all seem to have lower self-esteem than we should have. We all need to hear more positive feedback than we do. And, paradoxically, when we forget about our own needs long enough to sincerely appreciate others and reinforce their positive efforts, we somehow have our needs filled. I did not write the thank-you note to the hotel employee so I would receive a note in return. But I certainly felt better— about myself and life in general—for having done so. (I am always surprised by how many notes I get, thanking me for my thank-you notes!)

Worth-inspired interpersonal appreciation is always reciprocal. Whether the reciprocity comes in the form of another thank-you note or in the warm feeling that accompanies selfless service, in the gesture of appreciation we pay value to ourselves and ultimately to God. The Savior Himself proclaimed, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matthew 25:40.) Whenever we serve each other by paying value, or by demonstrating appreciation, we are also honoring Him who endowed us with infinite value and unchanging worth. We thank God by thanking His children.

Once we start looking for opportunities to serve others by paying value, we will find them all around us: in the grocery store, at the bank, in the office, in our neighborhood, across the extended family, and in our own homes. When someone bags our groceries in just the right way, deposits our check with efficiency, unselfishly helps with an important work assignment, watches our home while we are away, sends us an article about a distant relative, or cleans the kitchen without being asked, we can—and should—pay value to them by sincerely thanking them. Sometimes more than a verbal expression of gratitude, a written "thank-you" shows real appreciation and allows us to read and re-read our positive reassurances.

Have you ever noticed how hard it is to throw such a note away? We all tend to hold on to these notes from long ago, file them away among our earthly treasures, and internalize their messages. Once when I presented this idea in a seminar, a woman in the middle of the room started waving a note back and forth like a flag. She was causing such a stir that I stopped speaking for a moment to find out why everyone was staring in her direction. When I saw the note in her hand, I asked her if she would share it with the rest of us. She said that she and her daughter had not been seeing eye to eye. After their extended disagreement, her daughter had given her this note of apology and appreciation. Their argument had taken place six years before our meeting, yet the woman still carried the note in her purse, read it regularly, and was uplifted by its message! The note was just a few lines long, but it meant so much to a sensitive mother.

Two-Minute-Single-Stamp Program

Such a simple investment in another person continues to produce priceless dividends. Our appreciation notes need not take more than two minutes of our time and a single stamp, but their effects will be well worth that small bit of energy and expense. I call this the two-minute-single-stamp program for interpersonal success. And I can attest to the fact that it works! I have a friend who wrote me a note every month for well over a year encouraging me to continue work on this book. Every month I could count on receiving a motivational message from this person, inspiring me to keep writing and letting me know how anxious she was to read my book. Her short notes were encouraging, and her simple way of paying value was most meaningful to me.

Small, simple acts have great consequences. I am always amazed by how much a warm smile can do, how far an inspirational word can lead, and how motivating an encouraging touch can be. Why do such apparently insignificant things mean so much? Perhaps because they give us tangible demonstrations of our otherwise intangible worth. Our understanding of the worth within us becomes more clear as we focus on others and help them discover the very worth we may ourselves be struggling to recover. When we look away from the mirror and into the glass of another's world, we are able to see our own reflection of worth. Only then does the Lord's light shine through us and highlight the divinity within us.

Little Things Matter

A common roadblock to serving others is the perception that our service has to be of impressive proportions—on a grand scale. But as marriage counselor Carlfred Broderick points out in Marriage and the Family, the "little" services we render are perhaps most effective in building another's sense of worth:

Both research and experience show us there are many things one can do directly to help increase a partner's sense of worth. Some techniques are so well known that it is almost embarrassing to recount them here: a compliment, a nondemanding touch, an appreciative look, a smile. Perhaps one might add remembering important things, avoiding hurtful or sensitive areas, and paying attention when the other person is talking. Yet despite the almost universal awareness of the power and value of these gestures, they are missing altogether from many relationships and exceeding rare in many more. [^1]

In the interpersonal relationship of marriage or in any other relationship, the same principles of service apply. When we serve others because we want to demonstrate how much they mean to us, it hardly matters what form our service may take. The service itself is not as important as the motive behind that service. We serve because we value their friendship, support, effort, example, love, and association—because they are of worth to us.

Unfortunately, however, we sometimes think that we cannot serve others unless our service makes a life-changing difference and significantly contributes to others' well- being. But that is not true. A prosperous and prominent businessman is well known for the money he donates to universities, hospitals, charities, and homeless shelters. His wealth has been estimated at $450 million, yet he first started sharing his earnings when he was making only $222 a month as a Navy ensign. Recalling those early years, he says, "We would give a certain percentage to those on the ship who were struggling—and we got through life very fine in those days." He gave of his earnings before he had excess funds to give. The joy he experiences now is no greater than the joy he felt when giving to others meant sharing only a few dollars each month. Service does not need to cost a lot in terms of monetary goods; it just needs to come from the heart—not always from the pocketbook. Because we do not have to be rich or powerful to effectively serve or give, the money does not matter nearly so much as the motive for our service.

The Widow's Mite

The Lord taught such a lesson when He "sat over against the treasury, and beheld how the people cast money into the treasury: and many that were rich cast in much. And there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites, which make a farthing." (Mark 12:41-42.) Jesus noticed the widow and called His disciples together that He might teach them a lesson from her donation. He explained, "This poor widow hath cast more in, than all they which have cast into the treasury: for all they did cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did cast in all that she had, even all her living." (Vv. 43-44.) She gave

all of her money to the Lord because she valued Him and His gospel more than "even all her living."

To fully appreciate the meaning of this account, it helps to know just how much (or how little) a mite was worth. A mite was the smallest bronze coin used by the Jews, and, as the scripture notes, two mites made a farthing. It took sixteen farthings to make a denarius, or penny. So, from a monetary perspective, the widow's contribution was insignificant—literally next to nothing.

But from Jesus' greater understanding, the widow's mite was beyond monetary measure. She had given freely, from her heart, with the pure intent of showing respect and love to the Lord. She was not giving to flaunt her own worthiness or "to be seen of men" but rather to recognize the worth of those who would be the beneficiaries of the treasury.

Modern versions of this story take place in quiet ways all around us. A successful businessman was waiting for a ride at a street corner in Salt Lake City when a panhandler approached and asked if the man could spare a quarter. The businessman literally had empty pockets at the time and pulled both of his pant pockets inside-out so the inquirer could witness his present poverty. And then a tender, beautifully human interaction took place. The vagrant reached into his own pocket and pulled out a dime. He turned to the businessman and sincerely said, "Maybe you will need this more than I will today." The businessman gently refused the offer, the panhandler went on his way, and both were touched by the spirit of giving. While there were many attitudinal and economic differences between the two, this moment seemed to witness to both of them that there was a connection between them—and between all mankind— even a divine connection. They were on equal standing because they were equally willing to give, to pay value to each other by sharing of themselves and by affirming each others' worth.

As Mother Teresa has said, "Do small things with great love." Or as the poet Wordsworth has written, "That best portion of a good man's life / [Is] his little, nameless, unremembered, acts / Of kindness and love." Whether the services we perform are anonymous or clearly identifiable, whenever we extend kindness and love to others we enjoy "that best portion of a good man's life."

Often small and almost habitual acts of service can bring us more fulfillment than many of the more visible and celebrated contributions. I know a woman who frequently leaves work a few minutes early so she can check the parking meters near her office building and put money in those that have expired. She walks along the curbside and puts loose change in the meters, getting a special thrill from helping people she does not even know and who will probably never even realize she helped them. Kind acts have become so much a part of her character that she is simply in the habit of helping others in her own quiet, anonymous way. I have joked with her about giving her life's savings to a parking meter, and she has been quick to respond, "It only costs me a few cents a day, and I feel great for weeks after. It's the best investment I could ever make with that money."

The Snowball Effect

I have been on the other side of such anonymous service, and I know how affirming such thoughtful gestures can be. I recall getting ready to go to work one morning after a heavy snowstorm, expecting my car and driveway to be buried in snow. To my surprise, someone had already swept the snow from my car and shoveled my driveway. This simple, thoughtful gesture was so meaningful to me. I never found out who did it, but I knew that someone was thinking about me. In a small and yet personalized way, I knew that I mattered.

Even if that person did not know my name and could not recognize my face, I was touched by someone's caring attitude—about me specifically and about people in general. My worth was affirmed by another's thoughtfulness, and, as a result, I looked for an opportunity that day—and for days thereafter—to affirm someone else's worth, to build another's self-esteem by returning an anonymous favor.

The effects of one simple act of service are immeasurable. One favor leads to another—and then to another. One affirmation of worth builds another's esteem, and then that person is in a better position to recognize someone else's worth—and so on. Worth-validating service has a "snowballing effect." Greater than any of the actual services we provide, paying value to each other through those acts is the more meaningful thing we do. When we take a moment of time, a portion of our goods, an ounce of our energy to lighten others' loads and alleviate their burdens, we serve not only by helping but most of all by recognizing each other's worth.

Are You Listening?

One of the most affirming recognitions of worth we can extend is a listening ear. No matter how many plates of cookies we may bring, how many leaves we may rake, and how many dishes we may wash, if we do not take time to serve by listening, our other efforts to help will not be as worthwhile. Listening is an especially important form of service because it is a direct affirmation of another's worth. By closing our own mouths and letting another person talk, we are, in effect, saying that we value what that other person thinks and says. We care enough to put our own thoughts and feelings in the background while someone else has the conversational foreground.

Certainly such listening takes courage. We may hear things that we do not want to hear. We may disagree with what the other person is saying. But we will invariably learn more about ourselves and other people if we stop talking and start listening. As the old proverb advises, "There is no one so deaf as he or she who will not listen." And as the Lord Himself implored, "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." (Luke 8:8.) We have all been given two ears and only one mouth. Maybe this is a message from our Creator to each of us: we should listen twice as much as we speak!

Hearing is a faculty; listening is a skill. No matter how well we may hear, we can become better listeners than we are right now. In fact, those of us who think we need no improvement in listening probably have the greatest need to sharpen our listening skills.

A good place to start acquiring these skills is by observing people close to you whom you consider to be excellent listeners. Those people probably always seem to ask the right questions, rephrase what they have been told, and check to see that they are understanding. They will use open-ended questions that require more than a one-word reply and "what," "how," and "why" questions that lend themselves to more discovery and explanation. Good listeners "play back" feelings or rephrase what someone is telling them. They also pause to make sure that they understand what someone has been saying.

Let's consider some of the traits of a poor listener. Four recurring roadblocks to effective listening are "debating," "detouring," "jumping ahead," and "private planning." And each pitfall merits careful scrutiny:

Regardless of how savvy we are in the latest listening skills, if we are motivated by anything less than genuine concern and real interest, if we listen with anything less than a worth-inspired empathy, our listening abilities will be inhibited. We will always be less attentive than we could be and less responsive than we should be when a recognition of the speaker's worth and an understanding of the speaker's feelings does not guide our interest. When we wholeheartedly understand that we are not just listening to our spouse, a boss, a neighbor, a friend, or a sibling and instead remind ourselves that the person is also a member of God's family, we will more readily give him or her the respect and attention that is their God-given birthright—and our familial responsibility and privilege.

No Man Is an Island

We are all in this together. Whether we are carrying on a conversation, driving a car, eating in a restaurant, making a business transaction, or getting a permit to build our own home, we cannot get away from the reality of our connectedness as human beings. Every day we are "forced" to rely upon and trust people, from our close friends and family to the complete strangers in our life. Every time we get in the car, our safe journey is dependent upon other drivers' skills as much as upon our own driving techniques. Each time we fly in an airplane, we are, in a sense, turning our lives over to the pilot and flight crew. Even when we eat canned or processed food, we are trusting in the fact that those who have packaged and prepared it have done so in such a way that it is safe for us to eat.

It is probably impossible to go through a day without putting our trust in the products or services of other human beings.

Life is by nature interpersonal. We are all interdependent components of one great whole. Philosopher and poet John Donne explained this phenomenon centuries ago in his famous creed in "Devotions XVII": "No man is an island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the main; if a clod be washed away by the sea, Europe is the less, as well as if a promontory were, as well as if a manor of thy friends or of thine own were; any man's death diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind; and therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee."

Just as all the parts of the earth—the islands, the seas, the continents, the heavens—come together to form one great planet, all of the people on earth compose one great family. With God as our Father, we are all brothers and sisters, working individually and collectively to achieve the best possible lives. And when we give credence to this most important interpersonal relationship, we better understand how all of our thoughts, actions, and daily interactions— no matter how apparently insignificant—ultimately affect our way of life. The more we contribute to the great whole of humanity by losing ourselves in the service of others, the more satisfying and fulfilling all of our interpersonal relationships will become. The sooner we accept this human interdependence as a divinely inspired condition for personal improvement, the more fully we will take advantage of the refinement that comes from "having" to get along with other people.

At some point, all of us have probably contemplated moving far away, escaping all of our troubles, becoming a hermit. We may have thought to ourselves how controlled, kind, and sensitive we would be if we could just do things in our own way on our own schedule. We would be such a loving parent if only we could escape our parenthood for a while. We would be a much better employee if only we had the office to ourselves for several days. We would be a more sensitive friend if only our neighbors would not call every day—hour after hour. We would be a more courteous and patient driver if no one else were on the road. We would be a more pleasant spouse if only our husband or wife knew when to leave us alone. And yet, none of us really likes the thought of being totally alone. We seem to want other people—but perhaps on our own terms.

But an entirely different and more demanding sort of development takes place when our personal progress is so intertwined with others' lives—when we must adjust our personal expectations and desires to comply with others' pressing needs. For this very reason of interdependence, just recognizing our own worth is not enough. In fact, we cannot fully realize our worth unless we also recognize that all human beings are beneficiaries of that same God-given value.

Three A's of Interpersonal Success

Once we make this multilateral commitment to becoming a better person and focusing on others, the three A's of interpersonal success (which we have discussed throughout this section without labeling them as such) will fall more naturally into our hearts, minds, and actions:

The first A, acceptance of others, refers to avoiding judgment, loving unconditionally, and forgiving trespasses. The second A, appreciation for others, is demonstrated when we believe in and verbalize their inherent abilities and capabilities. And the third A, attention, is the subject of this chapter: paying value to each other by serving, listening, and, in general, focusing on others instead of ourselves.

The Lord's Fold

In spite of our differences of race, color, and creed, we are all sheep in the Lord's fold. We are all of equal and unchanging worth to the Master Shepherd. When the Lord explained, "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me," He did not mean that some sheep (or people) could not be in His fold. (John 10:27.) He simply explained our relationship to God in terms of agency. He preceded this description with the explanation, "I told you, and ye believed not." (V. 25.) Many of us who do not know the Lord or hear His voice have chosen not to accept our relationship to Him: perhaps we do not believe He is our mediator with the Father or we do not accept our own infinite and inherent worth—as well as the worth of others.

In other words, the lost sheep are those of us who refuse to believe (of their own free will) that they are part of Christ's saving fold. They separate themselves from the Lord and ultimately from their brother and sister sheep because they have not made a divine connection to personal worth. The Lord does not separate or leave us; we separate ourselves from Him. In All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience, Elder Neal A. Maxwell writes of those who erroneously think God withdraws from them:

To those who mean well but thoughtlessly speak of 'building a better relationship' with God (which sounds like a transaction between mortals desiring reciprocity), it needs to be said that our relationship with God is already established, in a genealogical sense. Perhaps what such individuals intend to say is that we must draw closer to God. [^2]

By virtue of our birth—our eternal genealogy—we are already a member of the Lord's fold. And since the beginning of time, He has invited all of His sheep to graze in the rich and fertile pasture of righteous living. If we should choose to sample the terrain in other pastures and take the risk of becoming wayward, it is not the Lord who loses sight of us. We lose sight of His eternal rewards for us and follow our own less-fulfilling and rockier way.

Lost sheep often see themselves as independently worthy, not needing Christ's recompense; or they see themselves as worthless, unworthy to be succored by His stewardship. In both cases, they are self-serving and thereby self-centered. As a result, they do not fully realize their God-given worth because they close their ears to His voice, separate themselves from His guidance, and shut themselves off from the sustaining support of their brother and sister sheep.

But when we sincerely lose ourselves in the service of others, when we improve our interpersonal relationships by taking the "self" out of self-improvement, we will find ourselves in the comfort and warmth of the Lord's saving embrace.

Upon these precepts hinge all of the self-improvement theories advanced in this book. Just as the personal is not without the interpersonal, both personal and interpersonal improvement will not take place unless a deep and abiding understanding of our interdependent nature and God-given worth motivates these efforts. And in the process, both our own and others' needs, desires, and expectations will be met.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Debating. We debate when we disagree with someone. Even if we have a valid point, sometimes we do not allow the other person to fully express himself or herself because we interrupt with our own contending viewpoint. If we will just wait and hear the other person out, we may find that we have less of a difference of opinion than we initially thought. Acceptance 2. Appreciation 3. Attention Carlfred Broderick, Marriage and the Family (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1979), pp. 187-94.
[^2] Detouring. We detour when we change the subject. Have you ever tried to talk to someone, only to have the person start talking about something else? It becomes increasingly frustrating to express yourself when the person with whom you are speaking insists on changing the subject. Neither topic of conversation (the speaker's nor the listener's) gets fully addressed when detouring disturbs our listening. Neal A. Maxwell, All These Things Shall Give Thee Experience (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979), p. 3.
