Lloyd D. Newell, Divine Connection: Understanding Your Inherent Worth ( 1992)

SECTION 5

THE ABUNDANT LIFE

We have inherent power and purpose. The deep sense of hope and humility that comes from recognizing our self-worth will lead to a more abundant life.

CHAPTER 14

LIVING WITH POWER AND PURPOSE

No doubt the Lord God could have made life easy for us all if such had been His plan and purpose. He could so have surrounded us, could so have provided, that we could have lived all but effortlessly. But He has given us something infinitely greater than an effortless existence. He has given us eternal principles, freedom, the right to work, the right to learn (even the right to make mistakes if we must), the right to fail—and the incentive to succeed, with glorious promises and privileges and possibilities.

—Richard L. Evans

We are not pawns on a celestial chessboard, randomly put here, tossed about, and expected to figure out for ourselves the "game" of life. We have purpose, destiny, and reason for being. The very world in which we live manifests the purposefulness of all of God's creations. Just as every plant, insect, fish, and animal has a unique and individualized role in the earth's ecosystem, every human being has God-given abilities that enable him or her to make distinctive contributions to humanity: to be a purposeful player in life's many arenas. And the more we realize our worth—and with that, the worth of all of God's children—the more fully we will discover our purpose in the ecosystem of eternity. We will better be able to make correct choices, fulfill worthy expectations, and meet divinely inspired goals. A recognition of our own and others' self-worth gives us personal (and interpersonal) power as well as Godly purpose.

Power and Purpose

The first three sections of the book addressed the relationship between God-given worth and personal power. We explored how an understanding of our eternal relationship with our Heavenly Father could not only change the way we see ourselves but also alter our expectations for ourselves. The fourth section of the book advanced the truth that personal power is not really efficacious unless it also has interpersonal purpose, or godly influence in the lives of others.

These two blessings, power and purpose, give us the ability to endure life's challenges and to empathize with those who feel "worth-less" or unworthy. When we do so, we begin to develop a reverence and patience for the process of life. We have analyzed specifically how endurance and empathy are direct by-products of realizing our worth. But on a more general level, we have yet to discuss how this recognition allows us to "live until we die," to take full advantage of the richness of life. Living abundantly and believing wholeheartedly in our inherent worth are interchangeable descriptions of real self-improvement.

An Abundant Life

For me, these descriptions have come to be representative of my mother's abundant orientation toward life. Not much over middle age, Mom experienced what I consider some of the most challenging trials anyone could endure. Within just a few short years, she lost her eternal companion to an industrial accident and underwent major brain surgery. No longer having her loving husband's ready support, she was left to deal with a substantial loss of mobility and other neurological (equilibrium-associated) problems. Essentially stripped of her health and entirely without her husband, she spent a couple of months in the hospital and then returned to an emptier-than-ever home. These less than favorable circumstances could have made her bitter and angry. She easily could have felt as if she were "picked on," punished, or unfairly caused to suffer. But she did not let her trials destroy her inner resolve.

She not only maintained her positive outlook and resilient resolve to improve, but she also became even more grateful for the blessings she did have. Life took on a new preciousness and precariousness. Covered by all of the medical tubes, blankets, and bandages that were sustaining her physical life, she would frequently say things like "Life is so short" and "I'm so grateful to be alive." She reassured us, "Don't be so worried. I'm fine. I'm still alive!" Though her physical problems were serious and pressing, she would daily ask about her grandchildren, her children, their spouses, and even neighbors. Her unselfish concern for others transcended the physical challenges that could have consumed all of her thoughts and energies. She prayed in the horizontal position and looked to the Lord to help her make faith the active principle she knew it to be.

Her condition has not improved overnight. She still struggles physically. But spiritually, she is strong, hopeful, humble, and grateful. She spends much of her day making and taking phone calls, receiving friends and family, and, most of all, offering an empathetic ear, a welcome word, a loving embrace to all who enter. She may not be able to bring a meal to her neighbors, but she always offers them a listening ear. She may not be able to visit her family and friends as she would like, but a steady stream of visitors and loved ones come to draw from her inner strength. She knows that the Lord has a purpose for her, even though that purpose is different from what she had always thought it would be: spending the latter years with her husband, serving missions together, visiting grandchildren together, and enjoying the richness of life—together. Nonetheless, she knows that as a daughter of God, she has great inner power and unchanging worth. And she is determined to use that positive expectancy and faith to lead others to the abundant life she still enjoys.

Abundant living need not come in the form of daily exercise, an hour of reading, a period of meditation, a creative activity, or a weekly escape to nature. Living an abundant life is the result of a complete, abiding, and even transforming understanding of our God-given worth. Whether such a recognition manifests itself by inspiring us to run marathons or to relax and meditate without guilt is not important. There is no one right way to live abundantly. But recognizing our God-given worth (and acting upon that understanding) is the way to define a uniquely designed, divinely empowered, and abundantly fulfilling life. Living the "good" life means living a child of God's life, or making the most of life's circumstances by designing a life-style that reflects a recognition of our inherent worth.

What We Can Do

But how can we design a truly abundant life if we are still not sure that we have infinite worth? In plain terms, how can we recognize our worth? Perhaps the first step in achieving such a recognition is becoming aware of the possibility of realizing such a divine endowment. In large measure, raising our level of awareness has been the object of this book. But on a day-to-day, closed-book level, how can we come to this recognition of God's unconditional and all-encompassing love for us?

The answer to this question begins in many of the self- improvement books that we already love and live by. When we take time to exercise, read, pray, memorize, or meditate, we often feel a sense of accomplishment or worthiness that inspires us to become better and to do more—for ourselves and for others. We must recognize that there is a mind- body-spirit connection. Even if some of the self-improvement we are pursuing does not seem to have any apparent connection to God or spirituality, self-improving is an important step that leads to a realization of our God-given worth. If for no other reason, it makes us feel better about ourselves. And when our self-esteem is in good working order, we are in a better position to internalize the truth that each of us is literally a child of God. Such positive self-esteem and self-improvement leads us to become a better self: a self that is more like the child of God we really are. Just after an exhilarating walk or upon finishing an inspiring chapter or while meditating and praying, we feel a few steps closer to the divinity within us than when otherwise engaged in more distracting activities.

While a recognition of our worth begins with the activities we read about in one improvement book after another, it is not complete until the "self" is taken out of self- improvement—until we look to God and realize that we are not only empowered by Him but that we are also literally dependent upon Him for any lasting progress that we make. Ultimately, we would not be able to change and grow if we were not in the first place created by Him, endowed with eternal worth, and then saved through His Son's atoning sacrifice.

Unfortunately, however, after making some of the initial, popular efforts to self-improve, much of our real, transformational progress is never actualized because of a lack of hope or a shortage of humility.

The Power of Hope

Despite the fact that we all make mistakes, we all can have hope in a better tomorrow. Perhaps the most essential ingredient for personal and interpersonal improvement is the real sense of hope that comes from understanding the gospel of repentance and growth. Hope is the necessary forerunner not only of change but also of abundant living. Samuel Johnson said it well: "It is necessary to hope, . . . for hope itself is happiness."

Without hope, we cannot fully realize who we are or come to understand the well-spring of worth within us. Because we are surrounded by so many situations that are hostile to the human spirit, because so many people and philosophies would have us believe that we are worthless (even unable to grow and improve), a deep-seated sense of hope must guide our life and living. We must not mock faith by failing to cultivate its parent Hope—or by not believing in our divinely endowed worth. Because of God's perfect love and forgiveness, we are much more potential than we are actuality. As children of God, we are never hopeless. With His love and hope, we can discover our eternal potential and live the abundant life that is hallmarked by hope.

Although we may get discouraged from time to time and—if only for a moment—believe that we cannot change or improve, we must quickly separate ourselves from our failures and remember that failure is an event, never a person. God did not make any failures. Instead, He created changing, growing, developing sons and daughters who can become more like Him. We, with the Psalmist, can say, "In thee, O Lord, do I hope." (Psalm 38:15.) This precious perspective will strengthen our hope as life's lessons refine and define us.

The Power of Humility

Just as hope is essential in the midst of disappointment and despair, so humility is necessary during periods of prosperity. When everything does seem to be going well, when our expectations are met and our goals are achieved, we must give credit where it is rightfully due. If we fail to acknowledge the hand of the Lord in all our successes— even in all our daily and many times seemingly insignificant victories, we are ignoring our God-given worth. If we pat ourselves on the back and glorify our own abilities and achievements, we are relying on false securities to give us strength.

Do we ever base our self-worth on our net worth? I believe we often do. As we seek for the world's goods over the blessings of God, we begin to define our identity by our income. We begin measuring ourselves against others and their possessions, sometimes feeling superior because we have more than they do but at other times feeling inferior because their possessions are greater than ours. Round and round we go, in a never-ending cycle of getting and spending. But the truth is, we can never get enough of what we don't need. All the material possessions the world has to offer will never bring the peace and joy we were meant to experience as children of God. And as God's children, we are worth infinitely more than all our possessions—no matter how wealthy we may be.

The things of this world will not last, and if we build our happiness upon them, what will become of our happiness when they are gone? But if we build our happiness on eternal truths and lasting relationships, the loss (or even the acquisition) of material things will ultimately mean very little. As Jesus taught, "What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" (Matthew 16:26.)

For what price would we sacrifice honesty and integrity? Can we place a monetary value on relationships with family and friends? What would we trade for health and happiness? Can anything in the world replace trust and love?

But some continue to trade their birthright for a mess of pottage. As Albert Einstein said, "It is a mistake often made in this country to measure things by the amount of money they cost." And as Jesus said, "Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also." (Matthew 6:21.) Unless our "treasure" is the teachings of the Spirit, the love of our fellow beings, the things that really matter, our lives may be off balance, measuring the meaningful against the material.

When self-esteem is solely a by-product of accomplishment and success, it rests upon the shaky foundation of human performance—which, as we all know, can change and falter. Muhammad Ali, the legendary heavyweight boxing champion, said, "When you're as great as I am, it's hard to be humble." But he, and each of us, can more accurately say that it is hard not to be humble when we realize how truly great we are, how infinite our possibilities and how unchanging our worth in the sight of God. Jesus explained the danger of self-congratulation and the blessing of relying on the Lord: "Whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted." (Matthew 23:12.)

When our self-esteem is built upon a deep-seated recognition of our self-worth, we can enjoy a steady and encompassing feeling of success and worthiness. Then we can receive the Lord's saving grace and feel His empowering and inspiring arm around our shoulders.

The comforting warmth I felt after my father's death when I put his sweater over my shoulders came from the deepest sort of humility and heavenward dependence. At a moment in my life when circumstances forced me to find security in no other place than the Lord's peaceful assurance, I was given more inner strength and transformational understanding than ever before. The saving truth expressed by the Apostle Peter became real to me, "All of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble. Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time: casting all your care upon him; for he careth for you." (1 Peter 5:5-7; italics added.)

Our Father Lives

Greater than any of the blessings that come from a deeply internalized recognition of our worth is this deep sense of humility. Such meekness and submissiveness to God's will give us the ability to see past our own weaknesses, develop all necessary strengths, and realize our potential. From such God-fearing humility comes the exalting understanding that God is our Heavenly Father. And therein lies the power of self-worth and the means for real improvement. This quiet explosion of inner strength is founded on the simple belief that our Father lives. The words of a children's song explain this process well:

I know my Father lives and loves me too. The Spirit whispers this to me and tells me it is true, And tells me it is true. He sent me here to earth, by faith to live his plan. The spirit whispers this to me and tells me that I can, And tells me that I can. [^1]

Every one of us, adult and child, will say, "I can" when we come to know that "it is true": our Heavenly Father lives, loves, and knows us. Every one of us progresses when we lose ourselves in the service of God by transforming ourselves through a recognition of our self-worth, by serving others, realizing that we have purpose to our lives and having reverence for the divine power within us. I know my Heavenly Father lives. And because of that, I know my earthly father still lives and that we will meet again someday. I know there is reason for our being. And I know that each of us has inherent worth as a child of God. As we make the divine connection to self-improvement, we can be personally transformed through God's saving and eternal plan for progress.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Hymns, no. 302. 1992
