P Chapter 22 eter

Out in Front

Simon Peter was quite a character. Bold, energetic, But sometimes it was the sea, turned wild at a a real go-getter, always out in front, asking ques-moment’s notice, that would catch the fishermen, tions, wanting answers, engaging the moment. This pulling their bodies down into a watery grave. The was Mr. Type-A: competitive; driven to succeed, old Canaanite god of chaos and death, Yam (lit. wanting to be a part of things; taking on—and being “sea”), still swallowed predators into the world of given—multiple tasks; someone whose bold exteri-the prey. This practical aspect of the ancient pagan or made it hard to admit mistakes; who, when frus-worldview never quite let go of the first-century trated, tended to withdraw. If Jesus needed some-“moderns” who called the liquid abyss home. Fish-thing done, Peter was there. If the disciples needed ermen needed a backbone stronger than those who someone to stand up, there he was. If the Master spent their lives on shore, and it was this toughness was threatened, he was there. But when things re-in the face of uncontrolled risk that engendered ally turned sour, there went Peter, distancing himself personalities who would someday risk their lives from failure. He was perhaps the most fully human spreading the Gospel across other seas. of Jesus’ followers, wholly believable in word and Fishermen also used the sea to their advantage, deed, perhaps a little too much so for comfort. Pe-quickly going where foot traffic was unable, chas-ter’s life has been tracked by what he did, by the ebb ing opportunities, for instance, or running from and flow of his personality, and by how the church’s the taxman (e.g. Matthew; Mt 9:9). If contemporary collective memory of him has resonated down the documents from Roman Egypt are any indication, centuries. The events of Peter’s life can also be Caesar’s local representative took a hefty percent-traced “on the ground,” from the tight arena of the age of every haul from the Sea of Galilee, perhaps Sea of Galilee to the vastness of the Mediterranean. 30–40% (Tebtunis Papyri, 701). Peter by instinct would A geographical view such as this scans the horizon have dodged Matthew the revenuer whenever he of a life that was first rooted to a tight shoreline, thought he could get away with it. then gradually but inexorably opened to a world

very much bigger that the one he called home.

Peter (or, more properly, Simon, his name by

birth; cf. Jn 1:42) was a fisherman by trade, who wres-

tled a living for himself and his family from the sea.

He grew up on the water, learning life skills from his

father John, likely also a Galilee fisherman (cf. Jn 1:42).

The Big Fisherman. Shepherd

The Plain of Bethsaida, Peter’s home (Jn 1:44), en-

of the Church. Holder of

compassed the outlet of the Jordan River and other,

the Keys of the Kingdom. In

smaller tributaries that fed the northeastern corner

a lifetime buoyed by self-

of the Sea of Galilee. The waters lacing the region

confidence, swamped by

carried ample deposits of organic material on which

blunder and denial, and rescued

fish could feed, and offered a fertile breeding ground

by the Holy Spirit, the Apostle

where they could spawn, live and be caught by ea-

Peter strode from the shores of

ger eyes peering from above. Peter often walked the

Galilee to distant coastlands

shore near his Bethsaida home looking for schools

across the Mediterranean. This

one-ton bronze statue of Peter

of fish feeding among the rocks and reeds close to

in full stride welcomes visitors

the water’s edge, trapping them in a circular cast

to the Meditation Garden at

net thrown at just the right moment and with just

Capernaum. The form is solid

the right twist of his wrist (Mk 1:16). This was a safe

though full of motion, the face

way to harvest the lake, relatively inexpensive and

determined yet caring. The

risk-free. Peter also plied the waters of the sea by

artist, Philadelphia sculptor

boat, toiling long nighttime hours on end, trying to

Charles Madden, read well

read the mood of sea and sky (cf. Mt 16:1–3; Lk 12:54–56),

the passions of the man whose

hoping that the fish, invisible in the depths below,

energy and devotion gave living

might have congregated just where he had decided

shape to the earliest days of the

to drop his net (Lk 5:1–7).

church.

221

Peter

mercially viable for Jewish homes (those that had

fins and scales; Mishnah, Hullim 3.7); whether or not

one could empty a net on the Sabbath that had

been laid the day before (Mishnah, Shabbat 1.6); and

how closely a net could be thrown to a school of

fish that had already been spotted by someone else

(Babylonian Talmud, Baba Bathra 21b). To what extent such

scruples actually held to the day-to-day activities of

Galilean Jewish fishermen in the first century is un-

known, but likely the intent was similar.

In any case, Andrew likely was more spiritually

sensitive than his brother, for something prompted

him to journey down the Jordan Valley to Betha-

ny where John the Baptist was offering a baptism

of repentance for the forgiveness of sins (Mk 1:4;

cf. Acts 2:38). Andrew came under the influence of

the Baptist and was counted as one of his disci-

Ancient Harbors on the Sea Rabbinic tradition had mixed feelings about peo-ples. But when John baptized Jesus, Andrew was so of Galilee. When the water ple who sailed the seas:

level in the Sea of Galilee is A man should not teach his son to be a donkey- taken by “the Lamb of God who takes away the sin low, it is possible to make out driver or a camel-driver, or a barber or a sailor or a of the world” that he became Jesus’ disciple instead piles of boulders jutting from herdsman or a shopkeeper, for their craft is the craft (Jn 1:29, 1:35–40). Correctly sensing that here at last shore. These are traces of of robbers…[yet] most of the sailors are saintly, was the One sent from God, Andrew quickly told his brother: “We have found the Messiah!” Seeing

harbors and anchorage points

(Mishnah, Kiddushin 4.14) solid potential in the fisherman, Jesus didn’t ask Si-

that served villages and cities

around the lake in the first meaning of course that some were not. For those mon if he, too, wanted to follow. Leaving no room century. Ancient Capernaum who lived by the sea, the opportunity to act like a for application forms or interviews, Jesus simply said boasted as many as seven scoundrel always lay close at hand. Like everyone straight away, “You are Simon the son of John. You piers, the most of any town else in the lower echelons of Galilee’s economy (and shall be called Cephas” (Aramaic for “rock”; the

around the lake. Some of the this was the vast majority of the people), Peter had Greek form Petros, “Peter,” was more appropriate for Jn 1:42 ). sea’s best fishing was found to learn to “make his own way.” He was a rough-the larger Greek-speaking world of the time; just east of Capernaum, in the and-tumble sort of guy who fought continually to With that, Peter was caught, though it was a long area of the Jordan delta, and get life to work for him.

time reeling him in.

to the west at the warm springs Simon Peter’s brother, Andrew, was also a fish- Simon returned to Galilee and resumed life right of Heptapegon (Tabgha). erman. The blood of their brotherhood ran deep. where he had left it. Sometime later Jesus came Curiously, no ancient harbor

has yet been found at Tiberias, As boys, they seem to have been raised in a ko-back north and, leaving Nazareth, brought his fledg-the capital of Galilee during the sher home (cf. Acts 10:14), where Torah was kept to ling ministry to the shoreline Peter knew so well. It time of Jesus’ ministry. the extent that it could be in Galilee. This was was the morning following an unsuccessful night of

not always easy, and later rabbinic tradition re-fishing, and Peter and his fellow fishermen (James

cords several ways that Torah impacted how one and John the sons of Zebedee, who would also soon ) fished. The rabbis determined, for instance, which follow the Master; Mt 4:21–22; Mk 1:19–20; Lk 5:9–11 kinds of fish were kosher and hence were com-were cleaning and preparing their nets for what

they hoped would be a better catch next time out.

Jesus, with eager listeners in tow, got into Peter’s

boat and used it as a pulpit to teach the multitudes.

There was no necessary reason for him to have done

so—there were plenty of places to speak from the

shore—except that he apparently wanted to engage

Peter in the conversation. Peter certainly overheard

The view of the Sea of Galilee from the rise above

Capernaum to its eastern shore takes in the sweep of

waters around which the Gospel story was born. The

sea is nicely confined by a rim of hills that nearly fill its

perimeter and offer an arena for life that can be seen and

seized by anyone with the confidence and competence

to do so. Peter was a big fish in a small pond here. But

when he was thrown into the Mediterranean, a sea with

a landless horizon line, he not only survived but thrived,

and carried the message of Jesus all the way to Rome.

222

Peter

everything Jesus said—especially the last part: “Put

This first-century a.d. mosaic

down your nets into the deep water for a catch”

from Migdal (Taricheae,

(Lk 5:1–4). He protested—what could landlubber Je-

which means “the place where

fish were salted”) on the

sus, eloquent as he was, teach him about fishing? Yet

northwestern shore of the Sea

Peter did as Jesus commanded, perhaps half out of

of Galilee depicts a boat typical

prior conviction, half to prove his own point—and

of the craft that plied the waters

to his surprise pulled in a huge catch. His response

of the sea during the time of the

betrayed both amazement and an exposed sense of

New Testament. The boat was

unworthiness: “Go away from me Lord, for I am a

propelled by a single mast fitted

sinful man (my trying to keep kosher notwithstand-

with a square-rigged sail and

ing).” But Jesus pulled on the line. “From now on

two oars on either side. A fifth

you will be catching men” (Lk 5:5–11).

crewman steered with a long

Matthew (4:18–22) and Mark (1:16–20) record a

rudder. Fully loaded, a boat of

shorter version of Peter’s call, or perhaps a second

this kind could transport twelve

people or carry nets, equipment

call somewhat later since the details of the fishing

and crew for a night of open-

expedition in their account differ from those of

water fishing.

Luke. Peter was the kind of fellow who needed to

feel the tug of the hook more than once, though

once he did decide to follow, he did so wholeheart-

edly, “leaving everything to follow Him” (Lk 5:11). Yet

there is no reason to think that Peter left fishing

entirely. The focus of his life certainly changed, but Peter’s work in the Gospels was on ways “that [Pe-he brought his talents along. After all, Peter still ter] might be with Him, i.e., Jesus,” instead (Mk 3:13; had easy access to boats—they seemed to always cf. Mt 19:28–29).

be at hand for Jesus’ travels from shore to shore; For the first few months of Jesus’ ministry Peter, An early-morning mist clouds he fished for tax money at Jesus’ behest (Mt 17:24–27) like the rest of the disciples, listened, learned and the Sea of Galilee as fishermen

cifixion and stepped right back into fishing after Jesus’ cru-absorbed all that he could. These were days of awe from Kibbutz En Gev winch in

(Jn 21:3) . When his travels eventually took and anticipation as Jesus moved from one village to their nets, hopeful of the kind of catch that Peter hauled up

him far out onto the coastal plain, Peter ended up the next, from Galilee to Gaulanitis and the Decap-after Jesus commanded, “Put

(Acts 10:6) settling for awhile in a house in Joppa by the sea olis and back, healing, teaching and meeting needs. down your nets into the deep (Lk 5:4–7; cf. Jn 21:6, 11).

. Fishing was in his blood—and besides, it Sometimes Peter’s understanding of what it water!” With modern equipment the

was still way too early in church history to think in meant to live right—to “keep kosher”—was chal-details of fishing have changed, terms of professional ministry.

Peter quickly became the leader of Jesus’ twelve lenged, such as when a woman who had had a flow yet the essentials remain: the

disciples, and of the inner circle of three. In every of blood for twelve years touched Jesus and became importance of teamwork, the list of names his appears first (Mt 10:2–4, 17:1, 26:37; well. According to Levitical and rabbinic law the bonds of camaraderie, the Mk 3:16–19, 5:37; Lk 6:14–16, 8:51). Peter was a born lead-woman was in a state of perpetual uncleanness, necessity of hard work, the er, but a detail of geography might also help explain since her blood flow never stopped (Lev 15:19–30). risk of the unknown—and the

why he was able to stay out front. Peter was from She knew that before God and the religious au-pleasant satisfaction of a day’s Bethsaida in Gaulanitis, the territory of Philip, yet thorities she was unclean, and had learned to hide work well done. he married a Capernaum gal (Mt 8:5, 8:14; Mk 1:21,

1:29–30; Jn 1:44) and seemed to be at home as much in

her father’s household as in his. Certainly he used

Capernaum as a base for fishing the northwestern

shore of the sea. Of all Jesus’ disciples it was perhaps

Peter then who had the greatest number of contacts

along the northern shore, who was best known in

both Bethsaida and Capernaum, and so who already

commanded a broad base of attention.

Not long after his call, Peter’s mother-in-law

became ill with a debilitating fever. Because her

husband plays no role in the episode (Mt 8:14–17;

Mk 1:29–31; Lk 4:38–39) it is likely that he was dead and

that Peter had stepped in to assume responsibility

for the home. Neither Peter’s wife nor any of their

children appear in the Gospel narrative, although

1 Corinthians 9:5 indicates that she eventually ac-

companied him on his travels. Rather, the focus of

223

Peter

Jairus’ servants ran to tell him that his daughter had

died—there was no need to bother the rabbi. Jesus

disagreed. Taking Peter, James and John, he entered

Jairus’ house. According to rabbinic law, a corpse

exuded the highest level of uncleanliness and the

house and everything that overshadowed the body

within, including people, became ritually unclean

by virtue of being there (Mishnah, Kelim 1.4; Oholoth 1.2–4,

3.4). Jesus strode right in anyway, seized the dead girl

by the hand and spoke “Child, arise!” (Mk 5:21–24,

5:35–43; Lk 8:40–42, 8:49–56). His touch and spoken word

were personal, (re)creating and giving life to the

dead (cf. Gen 1:26–27, 2:7). Of Jesus’ disciples only his

inner three witnessed the event. Peter, the spokes-

man, surely told the other nine what he saw. Jesus

knew that a student knows something only when he

has to find the right words to teach it to others.

Sometime later, in the spring of the year when

storms could blow up quite suddenly, the disciples

were heading across the lake in a boat. It was night;

Peter with Jesus in Galilee. her condition well. Peter was at Jesus’ side as she everyone was tired after a long day with the multi-The Gospels include more approached, furtive yet bold, the crowd close and tudes; Jesus had just fed 5,000 people with only five stories involving Peter than everyone jostling everyone else. Rabbinic tradition loaves of bread and two fish (Mt 14:13–21). The boat any other of Jesus’ disciples. held that once the hemorrhaging woman touched was full, riding quite low in the water, some distance Of these, only some can be Jesus her uncleanness should have passed to him, from land, when suddenly the wind picked up. The located in a specific place, but then on to everyone who happened to be touching waves were “contrary”—against them—crashing they are enough to see that him at the moment, including likely Peter himself. into the boat (Mt 14:22–24). Tired and worn, the dis-wherever Jesus went, there But this time cleansing power flowed the other way, ciples quickly realized the seriousness of their situa-was Peter, following his every purifying and healing her, making her whole. “Go in tion. A later rabbinic tradition preserves a legend of footstep across land and sea. peace,” Jesus said. Shalom. For the woman, for the how some sailors might have responded:

Capernaum was an “adopted” first time in more than a decade, life could be the Rabbah said: Seafarers told me: The wave that sinks home for both, and became a

convenient anchorage point for way it was supposed to be (Mk 5:25–34; Lk 8:43–48). a ship appears with a white fringe of fire at its crest, their ministry around the lake. Jesus was on his way to the home of a synagogue and when stricken with clubs on which is engraven

official named Jairus when the bleeding woman “I am that I am, Yah, the Lord of Hosts, Amen, touched him. Though he was steeped in the laws Amen, Selah,” it subsides. of purity, Jairus was more concerned at the moment (Babylonian Talmud, Baba Bathra 73a) with his own daughter who was on the point of death

and needed Jesus’ healing touch. Just when Jesus Ever more practical, Peter simply strained at the healed the woman with the flow of blood, some of oars (Mk 6:47–48). Then, out of the storm came a fig-

Partially reconstructed walls trace the dimensions of small

rooms lying within blocks of houses (insulae) in ancient

Capernaum. These living spaces date to the first century

a.d. and are typical of village homes in the Galilee during

the time of Jesus. Archaeologists have suggested that one

particular room among the many was used as a meeting

place for Christians as early as the late first century a.d.;

above it a large octagon-shaped church was built in the

second half of the fifth century formally commemorating

the space below as the room in Peter’s house that Jesus

called home. Today, the ruins of the Byzantine structure

are preserved by a new church, “St. Peter’s Memorial,”

erected by the Franciscan Custody of the Holy Land

exactly above. This building, with a glass floor to allow

the faithful to peer down into time, is slung on exterior

pillars so that no support columns penetrate the sacred

space below. The church is sometimes maligned as a

“spaceship,” although its Italian architect, Ildo Avetta,

intended the image to reflect a boat sailing the waters of

the sea.

224

Peter

ure walking on the water. It was Jesus to the rescue.

Peter, probably half crazed with the excitement of

the moment, had to be a part of it all and asked Je-

sus to “command me to come to you on the water”

(Mt 14:25–28) . What he surely meant was “tell me I

really do have the courage, and command the waves

to hold me up.” And so they did—until he realized

what he was doing and started to sink. Now it was

his hand that Jesus seized, drawing him back from

the brink of death, giving him a second chance at

life. It was personal—no second-hand sailor’s leg-

ends here—and for the first time Peter realized

that this one, this One, was himself the Son of God

(Mt 14:29–33; cf. Mt 8:27, 9:8). Seeing, listening and tak-

ing part, Peter was starting to learn.

Eventually some scribes and Pharisees came up

from Jerusalem to confront Jesus on matters of re-

ligious purity. Jairus’ daughter aside, things had to

be done properly, even up in Galilee. Jesus stated

his case, reversing the polarity of ritual uncleanness:

“It is not what enters into the mouth that defiles or one of the prophets, but Peter was sure that he The massive cliff at Caesarea the man, but what proceeds out of the mouth that knew: “You are the Messiah, the Son of the living Philippi (Banias) is decorated defiles him” (Mt 15:11). Peter, who had kept kosher all God” (Mt 16:13–16) . The answer was correct, concise with niches that once held his life and would continue to do so for a long time and complete. Cognitively, Peter knew; but in terms sacred statues dedicated to yet (cf. Acts 10:14), asked Jesus what he meant. Jesus’ of the ramifications of the revelation, he still had a Pan, the Greco-Roman god reply spoke of matters of the heart: long way to go. After informing Peter that he would of nature and fertility. Ruined

The things that proceed out of the mouth come from play a foundational (rock-like) role in establishing foundations of temples and the heart.…It is these that defile the man, not eating the church (the extension of God’s people world-ceremonial courtyards still line with unwashed hands. wide), Jesus announced that he himself would soon the site. Here, on pagan holy

With that, Jesus took his disciples directly into (Mt 15:18–20) go to Jerusalem to be abused and killed. Peter would ground, Herod the Great built a

Caesar, to bolster cultural and

Gentile territory, toward Tyre and Sidon and the have none of it—such things weren’t supposed to temple to Augustus, the divine

Hellenized coast (Mt 15:21) . Someday, sooner than happen to the Messiah (Mt 16:17–21). His response political connections between Peter could yet imagine, he would make a similar was strong, decisive and big-brother protective: his kingdom and Rome. “You trip and come face-to-face with God’s call to the God forbid, Lord! This shall never happen to you!” are Peter, the rock,” Jesus told

(Mt 16:22) his lead disciple in the vicinity

Gentiles (Acts 10:1–48). In the meantime, Jesus took

him by the hand and led him through the motions, Jesus’ reply was equally forceful, calling that attitude of the place. “And upon this

rock (the image was striking) I

teaching him “how to observe all that [he] com-the camp of Satan (Mt 16:23). manded” (cf. Mt 28:20). Peter was a good study. By- Peter was rebuked, but not demoted. Disciple-will build my church, and the

gates of Hell—(even Rome

and-by, here and there, many who followed Jesus ship, he had to learn, would be costly (Mt 16:24–26). itself!)—will not overpower it” turned back and no longer walked with him. Jesus Even his ego would be at risk. Six days later, with (Mt 16:18). asked his lead disciple, “Do you, too, want to go James and John, he saw Jesus, Moses and Elijah away?” But by now Peter knew that not only was he transfigured “on a high mountain apart.” The loca-caught, he was caught willingly.

tion was most likely somewhere on the upper slopes

Lord, to whom shall we go? [It is] you [who] have of Mount Hermon east of the Jordan Valley, above the words of eternal life. We have believed and have Caesarea Philippi (Mt 17:1–3). Eager again to prove come to know that you are the Holy One of God. his worth, Peter volunteered to quickly make huts

(Jn 6:68–69) for each of them: “It is good we are here to help…”

Their journey together was about to reach a new (Mt 17:4). What that was, was gibberish—the nerv-

level. Jesus took his disciples up to the district of ous response of someone who knew he should be Caesarea Philippi, a Gentile region north of the Sea doing something but had no idea what. It had been of Galilee. There, far from the meld of multitudes an emotional week, and Peter’s roller coaster dipped that was always at his feet and within the geograph-and turned. Fortunately God himself interrupted ical and world-view context that reflected, in mi-the moment:

crocosm, the basin of the Rome-gripped Mediter- This [Jesus] is my beloved Son. Listen to him!

(Mt 17:5)

ranean Sea, Jesus asked his disciples “Who do you

say that I am?” Peter spoke right up; others might Returning to Capernaum, Peter was eager to ask say that Jesus was John the Baptist, Elijah, Jeremiah questions. He knew that something quite special

225

Peter

The Hasmonean kings

countered that there was to be no end to forgive-

established the principle that

ness: Do it “seventy times seven,” he said, giving

the annual temple tax, one-

a number that surpassed practicality of purpose for

half shekel according to the

sincerity of the heart (Mt 18:21–22). Or, when Jesus

sanctuary weight paid by every

spoke in parables, it was Peter who looked for a spe-

Jewish male over twenty years

cific point of application: “Is this for us, or for eve-

of age (cf. Ex 30:13), was to be

ryone?” (Lk 12:41). Peter was a tell-me-exactly-what-

paid with the Tyrian shekel. The

I-should-do kind of guy. Jesus refused to quantify:

choice appears odd, as the coin’s

a good servant should just know what his Master

obverse shows the Phoenician

wants and strive to do it continually (Lk 12:35–48).

god Melqart and the reverse the

Greco-Roman eagle. Although was swirling around Jesus and that both by force of Peter was also a bottom-line kind of guy: “Look. this half-shekel depicts graven personality and divine choice he was going to play a We’ve left everything and followed you. What do images, it was apparently leader’s role in it all. The anticipation, the possibili-we get out of it?” (Mt 19:27). That question, coming as judged to be less offensive than

coins minted by the Romans ties, were boundless. Jesus had started talking about Jesus was about to begin his final climb to Jerusalem themselves. The silver content going to Jerusalem to die (Mt 16:21, 17:22–23, 20:17–19) , and the Cross, must have hurt, although the Gospel of the coin was tightly regulated but surely, Peter thought, he could help straighten writers don’t betray Jesus’ inner thoughts. All Peter (14.5 grams of silver; Jewish that sort of thing out if and when it would actually and the others saw coming was a Triumphal Entry coins, minted without graven come. One more tangled net to wash and clean! into Jerusalem. So Jesus’ reply: images, were generally struck In the meantime, Peter started to work on some Truly I say to you, in the new world, when the Son with inferior metals). Perhaps practical issues. The taxman came calling to ask for of man shall sit on his glorious throne, you who have Jerusalem’s high priests payment of the annual dues owed the Temple, won- followed me will also sit on twelve thrones judging conceded the coin’s images in dering why Jesus was in arrears. Peter covered for the twelve tribes of Israel. And every one who has favor of its dependability. There his Master: “Of course we pay,” then went to Jesus left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother

was apparently a Tyrian shekel and fished around for why they hadn’t. Jesus’ reply or children of lands for my name’s sake, will receive (Mt 19:28–29) in the mouth of the fish that was that as the Son of God he was exempt, but that a hundredfold and inherit eternal life. Peter hooked to pay the annual

temple tax for himself and Jesus no offense should be given and of course both of Jesus’ words were of the world-to-come, a rab-(Mt 17:24–27) . (photo: L. Ritmeyer) them would make good on the amount (Mt 17:24–27; binic concept (ha-olam ha-ba) that included reward

cf. Mt 22:15–22). Or, after Jesus spoke of forgiveness, it for the righteous, especially for the righteous suf-was Peter out of a need to organize and control who ferer (cf. Exodus Rabbah 52.3; Babylonian Talmud, Sanhedrin 101a; asked for clarification. “How often shall I forgive? Ta’anith 25a; Avodah Zarah 65a). Wholly consistent with I’m big enough to do it up to seven times!” Jesus Jewish expressions of future reward, Jesus couched

his terms with reference to realities of the present.

Stretching heavenward, the

Surely Peter seems to have qualified; like Job, what-

upper branches of a fig tree

ever loss he absorbed would be restored, if not here

unfold their new spring leaves

and now, then and there (cf. Job 42:10–16). But with

at the same time that its first

Jesus, there was always a tag line:

fruit—early, inedible green

But many that are first will be last, and the last first.

figs called paggâ—pokes from

(Mt 19:30)

the tree’s light gray branches,

otherwise bulbous and bare.

And which of these would Peter be?

These figs will ripen somewhat

Then the climb to Jerusalem, up and over the

by early summer, but passersby

Mount of Olives to the cheering throngs. Peter and

prefer to wait for the better-

the others followed Jesus into the Temple and wit-

quality figs that the tree will

nessed their coming king in action—overturning

produce later in the season.

the moneychangers’ tables, challenging insincerity

Jesus passed by a fig tree at

and corruption, energizing the crowds, leading the

Passover time and found only

leaves—not only was it not

charge, speaking of the days to come (Mt 21:1–24:3;

time for ripe figs, the pre-season

Mk 11:1–13:3; Lk 19:28–21:4). There was some local op-

paggâ weren’t there either—

position, but that was to be expected. Everything

and cursed the tree because it

was proceeding right on schedule for a coronation.

held no promise for fruitfulness.

Peter was anxious and, with Andrew, James and

Peter was impressed: “Look! It

John, pulled Jesus aside at the end of a busy day.

withered!” (Mk 11:12–14,

They were on the Mount of Olives, overlooking a

11:20–25). Jesus used the

city pressed with the cares of the day.

moment to impress upon his

Tell us, when will these things be, and what will be

lead disciple the power of faith

and, by implication, the need to

the sign when all these things are going to be fulfilled?

remain faithful—and fruitful.

(Mk 13:4)

226

Peter

Jesus’ reply was ominous. Hard days were com-

ing, days of persecution and turmoil. And he didn’t

say exactly when, only “watch therefore, for you

know neither that day nor the hour” (Mt 24:4–25:46;

Mk 13:5–37; Lk 21:8–36). It all seemed so immediate, yet

so far away.

For Peter and John, things more pleasant lay at

hand. It was the morning of the eve of Passover

(erev Pesach) and Jesus asked them to prepare the

meal (Lk 22:7–13). This was a real privilege, and they

wouldn’t let him down. Everything had to be exactly

right, a fitting climax to a week of anticipation, the

right beginning to the real freedom and redemption

that surely lay just ahead.

The meal was intimate, the setting secure. But

for Peter, something wasn’t quite right. By all ap-

pearances he was Jesus’ right-hand man, the sec-

ond in command, yet Jesus had given the seats of

honor at the table (those at his right and left hand;

cf. Mt 20:21, 22:44 ) to John and Judas—Judas!—in-

stead (Jn 13:23–26). Peter had to sit somewhere “down

table,” in a seat of lesser importance. Then, during

the order of service (seder), Jesus himself stood up

to wash the feet of everyone in the room. The Mas-

ter—a common servant? Peter would have none of

it, until Jesus reminded him:

If I do not wash you, you have no part with Me.

(Jn 13:8)

Never one to go only part way, Peter, in nervous

and confused energy, quickly conceded:

Lord, then wash not only my feet but my hands and

head also. (Jn 13:9)

But dark clouds formed; a chill swept the room.

Jesus announced he was going to be betrayed by

someone within the circle of twelve. Unbeliev-eral people approached, sure that he was part of the Peter in Jerusalem. Before able! Peter was dumfounded. (Mt 26:20–25; Mk 14:17–21; Jesus-conspiracy. Peter couldn’t take any chances— Jesus’ resurrection Peter was Lk 22:21–23; Jn 13:21–30) . Then the climax: after the there were probably spies everywhere. Cornered, he brash and defensive; afterward, meal, as they were making their way through the succumbed to the fatal power of self-preservation bold and confident. Jerusalem still city to the garden of Gethsemane, Jesus an-and denied his Master three times. Jesus, just in-became the center of his activity nounced he would be going away and Peter himself side, heard it all. Morning broke. It was a new day— as he played the pivotal role would deny even knowing him. Impossible! “I’m and Peter, realizing what he had done and crushed in the founding and earliest ready to go with you to prison and even to death!” by the irreversibility of the events, ran for his life days of the church. The small (Lk 22:31–34; cf. Mt 26:30–35; Mk 14:26–31; Jn 13:36–38). (Mt 26:56–75; Mk 14:50–72; Lk 22:54–62; Jn 18:25–27). band of Jews who believed that Faithful Peter had brought a sword (cf. Jn 18:10). He missed seeing Jesus die. He was probably wan-Jesus was the Messiah took

Later that night, in the Garden of Gethsemane, dering the streets in a daze when it happened. their charge seriously so that

the world fell in. A cohort of soldiers surrounded It must have been a tortuous Shabbat. “repentance for forgiveness of

sins would be proclaimed in

Jesus and his groggy disciples. The sudden realiza- Early the morning after, Mary Magdalene, Mary Jesus’ name to all the nations, tion of the moment slapped Peter awake, and he the mother of James, and Salome came to Peter, beginning from Jerusalem” whopped off the ear of the emissary of the high running:

(Lk 24:47) .

Jn 18:10–11) priest Caiaphas (Mt 26:47–55; Mk 14:43–49; Lk 22:47–53; They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb and

. It was a gutsy move in the shadow of the we do not know where they have laid him!

Temple Mount. If he were as good with a sword as

(Jn 20:2)

he was with a net, Peter probably would have been

hauled off with Jesus. As it was, after Jesus was tak- What a panic! The tomb was already violated. en away he followed—he had to follow, though at a Responsible Peter would know what to do. But he distance, as an unknown. He made it as far as the didn’t—he and John examined the tomb and found inner courtyard of the house of the high priest. Sev-it to indeed be empty, then spent the rest of the day

227

Peter

The Jewish Diaspora in

the Time of Jesus. By the

time Christianity was first

established, Jewish communities

could be found throughout

the lands of the eastern

Mediterranean and ancient

Near East. Each centered on a

local synagogue where Jewish

teachings and traditions fostered

an active social and spiritual

life. Scattered throughout were

God-fearers: Gentiles who were

interested in, and sympathetic

to, Jews and Jewishness. Jews

from across the known world

were present in Jerusalem

when the Holy Spirit descended

at Pentecost; those who

responded helped to prepare

the groundwork for the Gospel

to spread “from Jerusalem and

all Judea and Samaria to the

(Acts 1:8) uttermost parts of the earth” not comprehending what might have happened went back to the Sea of Galilee and started fishing

.

(Lk 24:12; Jn 20:1–10). Reports filtered back to the dis-again. It seems to have been a first, small attempt ciples: the women said they saw an angel who told to get on with their lives. What the resurrection ac-them Jesus had risen from the dead and would meet tually meant hadn’t sunk in, and Peter apparently everyone back in Galilee, and Mary Magdalene had grown edgy just waiting around Jerusalem. But said she saw the resurrected Lord himself. But Pe-there, out on the water, in the early morning, it all ter scarcely knew whether—or how—to believe came back. Not their luck in fishing—they toiled (Mt 28:1–8; Mk 16:1–11; Lk 24:1–11; Jn 20:11–18). That even-all night and still caught nothing—but Jesus’ call. ing, as the disciples (sans Thomas) were gathered “Cast your net on the right side,” a voice from the together in a closed room (they were hiding from shore commanded. And when they did, the haul who knew what, scared, suspicious of everything, was immense (Jn 21:1–6, 11; cf. Lk 5:1–4). Peter imme-hoping yet not daring to hope), the resurrected Je-diately recognized Jesus and couldn’t wait to get to sus appeared to them all. Then two who had been shore. They shared a common meal—simple fare of on the road to Emmaus confirmed that they, too, loaves and fishes, but it was with Jesus. An early had seen Jesus (Lk 24:13–35; Jn 20:19–25). He was alive. church tradition codified by the pious pilgrim Egeria

Sometime later, Peter and six other disciples in the fourth century a.d. places the breakfast in the

same location as Jesus’ earlier multiplication of the

loaves and fishes (at Heptapegon, modern Tabgha).

It’s a convenient collapsing of events onto a sin-

gle spot of holy ground. For Peter, the multitudes

were gone but that didn’t matter. Jesus had returned

(Jn 21:7–11).

After breakfast, Jesus asked Peter three times if he

“Me? With Jesus?! I’ve never

loved him. Peter had denied Jesus three times and

heard of the guy!!” Peter’s

had a lot of making-up to do. Now each time Peter

denial, both incredulous and

replied that yes, he did, but his choice of words (in

believable, has echoed down

Gk. phileo rather than agape) was somewhat non-

the halls of time. This image is

committal. For the moment, Jesus would have to

found in the courtyard of the

take what he could get. With each assertion Jesus

Assumptionist Church of Saint

commissioned his lead disciple: “Tend my sheep”

Peter in Gallicantu (“of the

(Jn 21:15–17). Peter had started out as a fisherman but

cock crowing”) in Jerusalem.

ended up a shepherd (cf. Lk 5:10). This change of vo-

Cast by Robert Shiloh, it

cation was apt: not only were shepherds the image

captures the moment of the

of choice of Old Testament writers who wanted to

self-preservation of denial, the

most human of all of Peter’s

illustrate effective, redemptive leadership in ancient

emotions.

Israel (e.g. Ps 23:1, 80:1; Isa 40:11; Jer 31:10; cf. Ezek 34:1–10;

228

Peter

Zech 11:4–17; 1 Pet 2:25, 5:1–4), but in common terms

“From Jerusalem to Judea

a shepherd’s goal was to keep sheep healthy and

and Samaria…” Under

opposition by Saul of Tarsus

whole; fishermen killed fish. Years later, Peter wrote

(soon to become Paul the

about Jesus’ sufferings to Christians living out in the

Apostle), believers in Jesus

Roman world. He spoke of their experiences as his

headed for the hills, scattering

own:

throughout Judea, Samaria

And [Jesus] himself bore our sins in his body on the

and eventually Galilee. When

cross so that we might die to sin and live to righ-

the Jerusalem church heard

that people in Samaria were

teousness; for by his wounds you were healed. For

coming to faith in Christ, Peter

you were continually straying like sheep, but now

and John went to “a city in

you have returned to the Shepherd and Guardian of

Samaria,” perhaps Sebaste,

your souls. (1 Pet 2:24–25)

to check out the situation

Peter’s encounter with Jesus had become a template

personally. They found the

for everyone.

Samaritan’s belief to be genuine,

and the church, by the power

Forty days after his resurrection Jesus gathered

of the Holy Spirit, took a giant

his disciples to the top of the Mount of Olives where

step forward.

he commissioned them to speak on his behalf “in

Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and even to the

uttermost parts of the earth” (Acts 1:6–8). From where

they stood they could see all of Jerusalem and some

Linford Stutzman and students

of the hills of Judea; Samaria lay only a few miles

of the Gospel reflect on Peter’s

north; the “uttermost parts of the earth” began

second call from a life of fishing,

twenty miles west, on the Hellenized coastal plain. wind. It was God’s creative spirit/wind (Heb. ruah; at a spot on the northern shore Lifetimes of work were at hand, and Peter took the ) and his empowering presence all wrapped of the Sea of Galilee that lead to not disappoint his Master and Lord. cf. Gen 1:2 up into one, a gracious provision of life-power for tradition remembers as the

After Jesus ascended to heaven the disciples his people (Acts 2:1–3). Early church tradition (Cyril place of his breakfast with the

(now apostles, envoys, “sent ones”) entered the of Jerusalem, early fourth century resurrected Jesus (Jn 21:1–17). fray. They walked down the mount, and then up the place as the same upper room in which the Last a.d.) remembers A hymn with a flowing melody into the city where memories of Jesus’ crucifixion Supper was eaten (and why not?). Recent sugges-line, composed by the Spanish were still raw on the ground. All returned to the tions place the gathering on or near the stairway priest Cesareo Gabarain,

upper room in which they had been staying, perhaps leading to the southern (Hulda) gates of the Tem-carries the moment: lakeshore… the same place they had eaten the Passover meal ple Mount (also why not?) near the public mikva’ot Lord, you have come to the six weeks before (once again tradition doesn’t fail) (ritual immersion pools) where people from across with your eyes you have me, searched

and, along with a small crowd of faithful (includ-the Jewish world would have been able to hear Pe- kindly smiling, have spoken name. ing Jesus’ mother and brothers), awaited the Holy ter’s words, and where the many who embraced Je- my Now my boat’s left on the Spirit whom Jesus had promised to send (Acts 1:9–14). sus as Messiah that day could have been be baptized shoreline behind me, Peter, anxious, couldn’t wait to begin. With Judas . The coming of the Holy Spirit caused by your side I will seek other dead there was a hole in the band of disciples and (cf. Acts 2:41) quite a stir, as many who were filled began to speak seas. Peter proposed that it be filled with someone who

had been with Jesus from the beginning. Lots were

cast (the Spirit moved even though He had not yet

formally filled the room) and Matthias was enrolled

with the eleven (Acts 1:15–26).

The festival of Shavuot (“Weeks”; Gk. pentekoste,

lit. “fifty”) was at hand. Like Passover fifty days be-

fore this was a pilgrimage festival when Jews from

across the Diaspora, from Parthia to Rome, filled

Jerusalem (cf. Acts 2:8–11). The celebrations of Sha-

vuot marked the end of the annual grain harvest in

Judea. By the end of the third century a.d. at least, if

not earlier, the festival also began to commemorate

the giving of Torah on Mount Sinai, God’s gracious

provision of life-instruction for his people (Babylonian

Talmud, Pesachim 68b) . On the first day of this Shavuot

Jesus’ followers were all together “in one place”

when the Holy Spirit descended onto—into—them

like flames of fire, with the sound of a rushing

229

Peter

“…to the Uttermost Parts

salem played in delivering Jesus to the sentence of

of the Earth.” Joppa had been

death, and their need to repent before God (“…I

Judah’s port, on and off, for

know that you acted in ignorance, just as your rulers

centuries. Although way out

also did”; Acts 3:17). Many responded favorably.

on the coast, it was certainly

The temple authorities, though—especially the

known to the Jews of first-

aristocratic Sadducees who had a status quo to pro-

century Jerusalem, and a place

tect (cf. Acts 5:17)—were not pleased that this Jesus

where many of them could

movement was resurrected from the dead (it should

feel comfortable along with an

have been taken care of back at Passover…). They

otherwise Hellenized shore.

arrested Peter and John and hauled them before

Caesarea, on the other hand,

the high priest (Acts 4:1–7). Peter had avoided fac-

was a new city, thoroughly

Roman, that offered both

ing Caiaphas during Jesus’ trial by choosing to deny

opportunities and threats for

his involvement in that affair, but now he was in

Jews. From its synagogue the

the hot seat himself and responded boldly and at

revolt began that led to the

length. Jesus, who had spoken only one sentence to

destruction of Jerusalem in

Caiaphas during his hearing (Mt 26:64), would have

a.d. 70, and from its port the

been proud. Unable to dispute the miracle that had

Gospel was launched into the

taken place and unwilling to risk unrest among the

Mediterranean world. For

crowds who were taken in by it all, the temple au-

Peter, the jump from Joppa to

thorities turned Peter and John loose with a warning

Caesarea was the push that

to stop speaking in the name of Jesus. Encouraged

altered his life—and that of the

church—forever. in other known languages (Acts 2:4–13) by the body of believers and by their own confidence

moment, Peter addressed the crowd and explained . Seizing the in the resurrected Christ, Peter and John only spoke that God had just fulfilled words of the prophet Joel: out more boldly (Acts 4:8–31).

“And it shall be in the latter days,” said God, The fledgling body of believers grew by leaps

“that I will pour forth of my Spirit on all and bounds (at this early stage the movement was

not yet a “church,” just a community of Jews who

mankind…

and it shall be that everyone who calls on the name believed that Jesus was the Messiah and sought to

shape their lives accordingly; the term “Christian”

of the Lord will be saved.” (Acts 2:17–21; cf. Joel 2:28–32) wasn’t coined until a decade later, up in Syrian An-

A double dose of the presence

tioch; Acts 11:26). The movement was characterized

of God—descending as a dove, This was Peter’s first public sermon, and with it by a willingness of each of its members to help the then radiating like tongues of and the power of the Spirit of God the church was other, as in a family in which the financial and per-fire—fills the apse behind the born. Three thousand people repented and were sonal needs of one are met by the abilities of oth-chancel of St. Peter’s Church “baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the for-ers (Acts 2:43–47, 4:32–37). When two new followers of in Joppa (Yafo). Peter missed giveness of sins” (Acts 2:37–42; cf. Mk 1:4). Certainly Jesus, Ananias and his wife Sapphira, secretly put seeing Jesus’ baptism in the many were pilgrims who returned to their homes their own needs over those of the new community Jordan River (his brother across the Roman world carrying news about Rabbi to which they now belonged, Peter confronted them Andrew likely was present), Jesus the Messiah as they went.

for lying to God and the Holy Spirit (Acts 5:1–11).

but he certainly felt the onrush The church was born, but Peter and all the rest For centuries the two foundational values of Jew-of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost considered themselves fully Jewish—nothing had ish (and Israelite) village life had been family and when he received power from

on high. With its presence, changed, yet everything had. Peter continued to land, and all decisions that affected the individual he was finally able to live the observe Shabbat and the holidays (Acts 2:1), eat ko-were made with the continuity of one’s family on words of Jesus. sher food (Acts 10:14) and go to the Temple to pray one’s ancestral land in mind. By the time of the

(Acts 2:46, 3:1). But filled with the power of the Holy New Testament these values were starting to break Spirit, his energy found full release in the direction down as complex economic structures (some of of the words and teachings of Jesus. which were related to the influx of Hellenism and

On one visit to the Temple he and John met a Roman political control, others to urbanization)

man who had been lame from birth, a beggar at the began to alienate people from their families and/or eastern gate called Beautiful. The man asked for their family land. The earliest community of Jesus’ alms; “in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene” Pe-followers in Jerusalem sought to fill the need to be-ter and John gave him back his health. Jesus’ power long by encouraging its members to pool their re-to heal still stirred the city (Acts 3:2–10). Crowds gath-sources for the benefit of their new “family” in Jesus ered in the Portico of Solomon, likely the eastern (cf. Mt 12:46–50). When Ananias and Sapphira sold a colonnade of the Temple’s public courtyard, where plot of (ancestral?) land and gave only a portion of Peter preached his second sermon, focusing on its proceeds to the common pot, withholding the Christ crucified and risen again (Acts 3:11–26). He was rest for their own use, they disinherited not only quick to point out the role that the people of Jeru-their own blood descendants but cheated their

230

Peter

new family as well (cf. Moses’ curses against those

Neither Josephus or the

among the people of Israel who acted against their

Mishnah mentions the

“Beautiful Gate” by which

covenant with God in secret; Deut 27:15, 17–18, 24).

Peter and John healed the lame

Shocked that they should be found out, both fell

beggar in Acts 3, although

dead at Peter’s feet.

Josephus does refer to a gate “of

Peter continued to speak and heal in the name

Corinthian bronze” (War v.5.3)

of Jesus, and the movement continued to grow

outside of the sanctuary that

(Acts 5:12–16). Clearly the prior warning by the temple

may be another name of the

authorities had gone unheeded and several of the

same. Likely both are the gold-

apostles, including Peter, were rounded up again in

colored gate at the entrance

an attempt to squash the movement (Acts 5:17–18).

to the Women’s Court of the

Between the excesses of Rome, the crazy ideas of

Temple at the bottom of the

fanatics and the fickle mood of the masses, the lo-

photo. An alternative suggestion

cal leaders of Jerusalem already had their hands full

is to equate the “Beautiful

Gate” with the Nicanor Gate

keeping a lid on their city; further divisions among

at the top of the curved steps

the people wouldn’t serve anyone’s interests (espe-

leading into the inner Court of

cially theirs). But an angel of the Lord opened the

Israel and the Temple itself

prison doors that night and commanded Peter and

(cf. Acts 3:2). Both would

the apostles to

have been prime locations for

Go, stand and speak to the people in the temple the

beggars.

whole message of this [new] life. (Acts 5:20) (Simon the magician, who offered to purchase the Of course they listened to the angel rather than Spirit with money was a notable exception), they

the high priest. When brought in again the next prayed for the Holy Spirit to reveal Himself to the morning for another hearing, Peter simply replied Samaritan believers (Acts 8:9–24). Empowered, Peter “We must obey God rather than men” (Acts 5:21–32). preached the gospel in many Samaritan villages on The Sanhedrin was fit to be tied. If God were to the way back to Jerusalem (Acts 8:25). In terms of lo-speak, surely he would do so through proper tem-cus of ministry and world-view, he had come a long ple channels! One of their members, Gamaliel (as a way from home.

Pharisee, he was more in tune with the needs of the Now that he had broken out of the geographi-masses and their susceptibility to following charis-cal and cultural barriers that enclosed Jerusalem, matic holy men than were the aristocratic Saddu-Peter traveled throughout Judea, Samaria and, cees) cautioned prudence. If Peter’s crowd followed likely, even Galilee with the good news (Gospel) the pattern of other messianic movements whose of Jesus. His journeys eventually took him toward leaders had been killed, it would surely soon spin the coast (Acts 9:31–32). The year was around a.d. 37, itself out. But if it really were of God, opposition and everyone in Judea and Samaria was breathing a would be fruitless. Again the Sanhedrin turned the sigh of relief because Pontius Pilate, the overbear-apostles loose with a stern warning; emboldened, ing Roman prefect, had been removed from office

sus Peter spoke even more forcefully in the name of Je-and his replacement, Marcellus, voiced a concilia-(Acts 5:33–42).

With this kind of start it wasn’t long before the tory stance toward the Jews. Saul of Tarsus, in the

body of believers spread from “Jerusalem to all meantime, had seen the risen Christ in a vision as Judea and Samaria” (cf. Acts 1:8). Opposition in Je-he was traveling to Damascus to oppose the growing rusalem was spearheaded by a zealous Pharisee, body of believers there, and ended up joining them Saul of Tarsus, who inadvertently helped the cause instead (cf. Acts 9:1–30). Eventually Saul would come

when believers in Jesus scattered before his blows to Peter in Jerusalem and be accepted by its body of . Meanwhile, into the countryside, carrying the apostles’ mes-Jewish believers in Jesus (Gal 1:18) sage with them (Acts 8:1–4). Philip the Evangelist the church throughout all Judea and Galilee and Sa-(cf. Acts 6:3–6) proclaimed Christ in “the city of Sama- maria enjoyed peace, being built up. Continuing in

ria,” likely Sebaste, a city with a large Gentile popu- the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy (Acts 9:31) lation from which both Herod the Great and the Spirit, it continued to increase. prefects had drawn soldiers to man Rome’s occupy- Traveling west, Peter made his way to Lydda, ing army (Acts 8:5–8). When word reached Jerusalem just out of the hill country of Judea, then all the that there were now believers there, in a community way to Joppa on the sea, healing the sick and rais-that clearly stood on the edge of mainstream Juda-ing the dead as he went (Acts 9:32–42). News about ism (if not outside the rabbinic boundaries altogeth-Jesus spread up and down the coast, a Hellenized er), Peter and John went down (the verb in Acts 8:5 land that was the gateway of “the uttermost parts is used in terms of elevation, not compass direction) of the earth” (Acts 1:8). Here Peter was far out of to assess the situation. Finding the response genuine his comfort zone (understandably so), and so vis-

231

Peter

colleagues for support (Acts 10:17–23). The next day in

Caesarea he had a frank discussion with Cornelius,

a centurion of the Italian cohort (Peter couldn’t

have found someone who better represented “the

uttermost parts of the earth” if he had tried). But

Cornelius was also a God-fearer who was attracted

to the tenets of Judaism (Acts 10:24–43). Upon hear-

ing the Gospel, Cornelius and those whom he had

gathered to hear Peter believed, and though all were

Gentiles, the Holy Spirit fell on them, too. Seizing

the moment, Peter baptized everyone into the body

of believers in Jesus (Acts 10:44–48).

When Peter returned to Jerusalem he had some

explaining to do. The Jewish believers who had

heard of his exploits down in Caesarea were not

pleased. “You went to uncircumcised men and ate

with them!” they scolded (Acts 11:1–3). Peter was

firm and compelling in his reply: “What God has

cleansed, no longer consider unholy” (Acts 11:8;

cf. Acts 10:15)—or in other words, everything that

Boats, cars and people converge ited (quite naturally) cities with sizeable Jewish God created, is good (Gen 1:31). His Jerusalem col-at the port of Joppa (Yafo) on populations. His base of operations was the home leagues acquiesced (Acts 11:16–18). a sunny Shabbat afternoon in of another man named Simon, a tanner who lived About a decade had passed between the coming late winter. Not many keeping at the edge of Joppa by the sea (cf. Mishnah, Baba Bath-of the Holy Spirit in Jerusalem and His descent on kosher here! The spirit of ra 2.9) and who was also a Jewish believer in Jesus Cornelius’ family in Caesarea. During that time the internationalism still reigns (Acts 9:43). Leatherworking, though a necessary trade, church had grown consistently, sometimes rapidly, on Judea’s coast. The spires was a nasty, smelly business, and its practitioners, under favorable conditions and amid controversy, of the old city tell the tale considered unclean by Jewish law, were generally both within and without. Peter had grown, too—he of the ancient coastline: the despised by those who were religiously observant had found other seas. lighthouse to bring commerce (Lev 11:39–40; Mishnah, Shabbat 1.2; Megillah 3.2; Ketuboth 7:10). In a.d. 41 Herod Agrippa I took the throne of safely home; the minaret and By staying with Simon the tanner, Peter was pushing Judea, Samaria and Caesarea (it was a reward of church bell tower guiding the his security envelope just about as far as it could go. friendship by Claudius, the new emperor in Rome). ways of the faithful. Under the

courtyard next to the bell tower One bright day Peter was on the rooftop for a The Jews in his realm were genuinely happy that (of St. Peter’s Church) remains meal and noontime prayers when out of the blue one of their own, rather than another Latin prefect, were found of the Roman he had a vision of a great white sheet sailing down was again the local ruler of the land. Agrippa fa-city. Tradition holds that the from heaven, filled with every kind of animal that vored his Jewish subjects and came down hard on mosque (under the minaret) Levitical and rabbinic law considered unclean. The the growing band of Christians. He executed James marks the site of the home of Greek word used here for sheet, othone, is also the the brother of John with the sword (Acts 12:1–2). Simon the Tanner, where Peter technical term for the sail of a ship, and to Peter Seeing that his actions pleased the Jews, Agrippa stayed when he was in town. the sheet descending from the sky certainly rep-arrested Peter as well, at Passover, likely in either today. The building is a private home resented the cultural pollution of the Hellenistic a.d. 43 or 44 (Agrippa would die in the summer of

world that kept popping up over his western horizon a.d. 44 after a short reign in the fast lane; Ant. xix.8.2). (cf. Ps 57:20). Three times a command, clearly from As he sat in prison Peter must have remembered God, ordered Peter to eat from the squirming, squig-the tragic events of the Passover a decade earlier gly mess. Peter, who had kept the Jewish dietary laws when Jesus had also been arrested, then executed. all his life, of course refused. Surely, he must have But the same was not to be Peter’s fate: the night thought, it was a divine test (or maybe a trick?), before Agrippa planned to parade Peter before the that if he ate, he would be giving his heart and soul people, an angel of the Lord escorted him out of to the Hellenists who had sailed to Judea to spit prison. After quickly reporting to a desperate and on the ways of Torah. Peter had denied Jesus three despondent gathering of Christians who were pray-times before—he wouldn’t do it again (Acts 10:9–16)! ing for his release, Peter disappeared (Acts 12:3–19). As soon as the vision passed there was a knock at And with this, except for a few quick references the gate: it was soldiers, wanting to take him to the that pop up here and there in the rest of Acts and centurion at Caesarea for questioning. In his gut the Epistles, Peter largely fades from the literary he must have assumed that he was being arrested scene of the New Testament. Of course he played again, and this time, out in exposed Gentile land, an important role at the first Apostolic (Jerusalem) it was serious. But reassured by the Holy Spirit Pe-Council, speaking up in favor of bringing Gentiles ter went willingly, though he took along some of his into the larger community of (Jewish) believers

232

Peter

without requiring them to become cir-

cumcised or keep Jewish ceremonial

laws (Acts 15:6–12). In a note that is some-

how related—though how is highly

debated—the Apostle Paul told the

church in Galatia that while in Antioch

he had confronted Peter for appearing

to backtrack on his commitment to the

Gentiles after being confronted by Jews

zealous for Torah (Gal 2:7–16). From An-

tioch Peter’s travels took him generally

westward, although a single connected

journey cannot be posited. His first

epistle was addressed to “pilgrims of the

dispersion scattered throughout Pontus,

Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia”

(1 Pet 1:1), all regions of the high country

of northern and western Anatolia, and

it is likely that he had actually visited

the people to whom he wrote. Notes by

Paul in 1 Corinthians 1:12 and perhaps 9:5 suggest further (previously hidden) teachings and exploits Peter’s Journey to Rome. that Peter also taught and baptized in Corinth. of the apostle. These include the Gnostic writings Although it is not possible to

Finally he came to Rome, the “Babylon” from Acts of Peter and the Twelve Apostles, the Epistle of draw a single continuous route

which he wrote his first epistle (1 Pet 5:13) and where, Peter to Philip and the Apocalypse of Peter. All are following Peter from Jerusalem according to the early church fathers, he and Paul certainly more a witness of responses to various her-to Rome, clues in the New established the church in the city. The accounts esies within the church than a reflection of the man Testament and in writings of vary (cf. Irenaeus, Adversus omnes haereses iii.1.1 and Euse- himself. More to the point is Peter’s own testimo-the early church fathers suggest bius, Historia ecclesiastica ii.25.8), but all point to Peter as nial, portraying himself not as a fisherman but as a that his steps generally tracked the first bishop (later called pope) of the church shepherd’s shepherd whose first care was for sheep: the direction of the travels of the in Rome. Somewhere along the way, according to I exhort the elders among you, as your fellow elder Apostle Paul. It is reasonably Eusebius (Historia ecclesiastica iii.39), Peter transmitted an and witness of the sufferings of Christ and a par- clear that the two great apostles to the Gentiles met a similar

eyewitness account of his experiences with Jesus to taker also of the glory that is to be revealed, shepherd fate, martyrdom at the bloody

ond Gospel. Mark, who committed them to writing as the sec- the flock of God among you, exercising oversight not hands of Nero sometime before

under compulsion but voluntarily. the outbreak of the Jewish revolt

It was in Rome that both Paul (first) and then Pe- So in the end Peter was still out in front, though (1 Pet 5:1–2) of a.d. 66–70. That was a

ter were eventually martyred for their faith (cf. the not for self-assertion (he had done plenty of that in decade that would change the testimony of 1 Clement 5–6). The executions took his younger years), but simply guiding and protect-world. place in the reign of the noxious emperor Nero (a.d. ing the people under his charge as Jesus had him, 54–68), likely during his first grand and gory perse-keeping them healthy and whole. cution of Christians in a.d. 64 (cf. Jn 21:18–19). Later He waited after no pompe and reverence tradition (e.g. the sixth-century The Acts of Peter Ne maked him a spiced conscience, and Paul) holds that Nero had Paul beheaded and But Cristes lore and his apostles twelve Peter crucified, both for causing the death of Simon He taughte, but first he folwed it hymselve. Magus (the Samaritan magician of Acts 8:9–24 who (Chaucer, Canterbury Tales, 525–528) just happened to pop up in Rome and accuse Peter

and Paul of all sorts of nefarious deeds). Peter took

Jesus’ call on Peter’s life carried

his cross unflinchingly (cf. Mt 16:24):

him from sea to shining sea,

from the security of Galilee to

“Since my Lord Jesus Christ, who came down from

the unbounded opportunities

the heaven upon the earth, was raised upon the cross

of the Mediterranean. By the

upright, and He has deigned to call to heaven me,

time his own sun had set, Peter

who am of the earth, my cross ought to be fixed head

had carried Jesus’ message of

down most, so as to direct my feet toward heaven;

good news to faraway Rome,

for I am not worthy to be crucified like my Lord.”

the capital of a cultural and

political order that had washed

Then, having reversed the cross, they nailed his feet

across most of the known

up. (The Acts of Peter and Paul)

world. The roll of the Roman

Numerous literary works appeared in the early

sea was unrelenting; the Gospel

centuries of Christianity purporting to describe

tide would prove to be more so.

233

Deluxe Then and Now Bible Map Book with

Clear Plastic Overlays + CD

Deluxe Then and Now® Bible Map Book includes

full-color Bible maps with clear-plastic overlays that

show modern cities and countries. Now you can see

where Bible places are today. This best-selling book

brings new relevance to your studies and teaching,

and compares Bible locations with modern-day sites. .

Book ................... 9781596361638 ...........$29.99

Also available as a PDF and eBook.

Then & Now® Bible Maps

The bestselling pamphlet Then & Now® Bible Maps!

This full-color, fold-out reference tool contains 17 Bible

maps that show ancient cities and countries in black

with modern-day boundaries marked in red. Then &

Now® Bible Maps is fantastic for comparing places in

the news with places in the Bible.

Pamphlet............9781596361300............$3.99

Also available as PDF, in Book, Wall Chart, eBook,

PowerPoint®.

Rose Then and Now Bible Map Atlas

Then and Now® Bible Map Insert - Ultra-thin

atlas fits in the back of your Bible

The Best “Then and Now” Bible Atlas Ever — It has Features No Other

Then and Now® Bible Maps Insert includes 44 pages

Has! 120 stunning detailed Bible maps, clear plastic overlays of modern

with 8 clear plastic overlays; 22 full color maps; larger

cities and countries so you know where Bible places are today, incredible

print; every major city in the Bible; separate maps for

insights into the lives of 30 important Bible characters, and much more!.

each of Paul’s journeys; a Bible time line; and an index.

This atlas focuses on people – not regions -- and how the geography

5.5 x 8.5 inches (ultra-thin).

affected their lives and decisions.

Insert ................... 9781596362932 ...........$16.99

Book ................................................. 9781596365346 ................. $39.99

Also available as an eBook.

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible eCharts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines, and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
