Jaroldeen Edwards, Celebration! Ten Principles of More Joyous Living ( 1995)

A Basketful of Thoughts on Celebration

There is no duty we so much underrate as the duty of being happy. Robert Louis Stevenson 1850-1894

One bright summer morning as I was walking down the main street of Laguna Beach, a man fell into step beside me. I glanced over, slightly alarmed, and saw that it was one of the several homeless men who make the beach their summer refuge.

He was dressed in discarded clothing: an old army coat tied with a rope, filthy trousers, strips of discolored rags wound around his feet and legs, and an ancient, broken backpack over one shoulder. His hair was grizzled, long and wild, and his beard, the same gray as his hair, was an untamed bush that reached down to his chest.

His face was baked by the sun to the color of mahogany, deeply wrinkled from long exposure to the elements and creased with dirt, but his eyes were an astonishingly clear blue. Despite all his layers of dirt and neglect, there was something dignified about him. In his erect bearing and his lean, craggy face, I felt the essence of the true man behind the tragic facade, and my uneasiness abated.

The street was busy, and because I walk with a slight limp (the result of an automobile accident), I thought I would look ridiculous trying to outwalk the man, so I relaxed and simply kept my pace. He walked in step beside me as though we were old friends. He was muttering to himself, and since it seemed I was destined to keep him company, I decided to listen to what he was saying. When he observed that I was listening, he directed his words toward me.

"It's like I say," he declared cheerily. "I don't know why I bother to get up in the morning. Feet don't work. Legs don't work. Eyes don't work. Stomach don't work." A pause. "Head don't work too good neither."

Something about the way he said the last sentence made me smile involuntarily. He saw my smile and exclaimed, "It's the absolute truth, ma'am. Head don't work. Matter of fact—I'm just plumb crazy!" He said this in a voice of such great good cheer that I laughed out loud. I couldn't help it. I stopped walking and turned to look at him. He stopped walking, too, but continued talking. "Yup. Like I say, nothing works. So I ask you—what else is there to do on a beautiful morning like this but get up, look at the sky, laugh, and be happy!" He broke into a gap-toothed smile, and as we grinned at one another, he began to laugh.

It was a wonderful, irresistible laugh, gentle and rueful, as though he had taken all the misery of his life and faced it, accepted it, and learned to appreciate both life's absurdity and its joy. His good humor was so infectious that I laughed, too.

There we stood on the street corner, laughing together into the sun: two friends who might never meet again. In the midst of our difficult and imperfect lives, we had shared a brief moment of pure, wonderful, human celebration.

Celebration is the conscious decision to live our lives with joy. In the midst of turmoil, pain, and adversity, in bad times and good, joy is the great companion our Heavenly Father intended us to have. To feel joy, however, requires a decision on our part—a chosen approach to life, a chosen attitude, a constant awareness. This decision is the necessary beginning to recognizing, feeling, and developing the joy with which Heavenly Father has filled our creation.

To live with celebration we must begin with an absolute and personal conviction that we have the ability to change our lives in small, meaningful ways. We must feel that we can learn better patterns of thinking, feeling, and doing that will allow us—wherever we are individually at this moment—to feel better, accomplish more, and rise higher.

The ability to live with celebration centers on three things: first, faith in the Lord's great plan for mortal happiness; second, the determination to examine our own lives to know what will truly bring us joy; and third, the acquiring of skills and knowledge with which to create joy. We do not necessarily have to do more but rather do differently the things we are already doing—to live with a retrained point of view.

Anyone can live with a sense of celebration: working women, busy mothers, single women, older women, teenagers—everyone.

Celebration is self-made. Very slight changes in our attitudes, in the way we use our time, and in our knowledge of ourselves and of the Lord can bring enormous rewards.

Our Father in Heaven will not force our hearts to feel positive emotions. He wants us to use our God-given agency to choose happiness, to create our own celebrations and measures of joy. The Lord gives us all the raw materials, but he leaves it to us to learn how to find joy in what he has given.

The experience of trying to develop a new understanding, of looking with new vision at familiar things, reminds me of an incident in the movie The Scarlet Pimpernel. Percy, the dashing Scarlet Pimpernel who rides off periodically to rescue endangered nobility during the French Revolution, lives in disguise as a carefree dandy. Everyone in the audience knows instantly that he is not the fop he pretends to be, but his wife has never penetrated his disguise.

In one of my favorite scenes, the Pimpernel's wife sees Percy leaving unexpectedly. (Of course, he has done this umpteen times before.) She has lived with him for years and frequently watched him gallop away at a moment's notice with his band of debonair young men. She has noticed the dramatic change in his manner and dress and has recognized that his absences coincide with the exploits of the Pimpernel in France, and yet, until this moment when she is left alone in her husband's study (a room she has visited many times before), none of those obvious clues has given her the slightest suspicion of who he really is. As she glances about the room, her eye falls upon the moldings at the ceiling, and for the first time in all her years of marriage she notices that the pattern of the molding is a carved pimpernel (a small, distinctive flower). Her eyes open in startled recognition, and then she begins to really look at the familiar room as though she were seeing it for the first time. She stares at the fireplace—sure enough, more pimpernels carved across the mantel and on the supports. She looks at his desk—yes, more pimpernels.

For years she has sat in this room surrounded by pimpernels, but this is the first time she has really looked at them. Suddenly, now that she has noticed them, the room is a garden of pimpernels. Finally, she looks up at the life-sized portrait of her husband above the mantel. There, on his finger, is the family crest on the ring he has been wearing the whole time. And the crest? A scarlet pimpernel.

The point is, we can be walking through a world of scarlet pimpernels, but until we start looking with scarlet-pimpernel eyes, we might not see them.

Celebration—which I define as the conscious creation of happiness and joy in our own lives—is built on the patterns, emotions, and events that attend a heightened awareness of what joy is and of what our responsibilities for our own happiness are. A life of celebration will be the natural flower of the principles of faith, gratitude, knowledge, and obedience.

We misunderstand the nature of joy if we think that it is something that "happens" to us—an emotion that is inserted into our hearts or a bonus offered from outside. The admonition to feel joy is given not as a reward but as a commandment. By implication we realize that if we are commanded to be joyful—of good cheer, filled with gladness—those feelings must be within the scope of our own abilities and require our own decisions and efforts.

The source of all joy is the Lord. He has filled this earth and our lives with all the possibilities for joy. As Luke describes it, in "good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over" is the way the Lord gives (Luke 6:38). But to feel joy in our hearts, to experience it in our daily lives, and to live with it through adversity and prosperity, we must teach and train our hearts and our minds. We must learn to focus on our gifts, blessings, and potential rather than on our hurts and trials. We have to believe that living joyfully is within our power and that the Lord expects us to do so today—not "when our ship comes in."

We have heard many stories of people who have spent their lives in grim and silent suffering as they worked toward a single goal that they believed would give them joy. One such story tells of a young couple who wanted a beautiful home. They were certain that when they owned a home that was as large and elaborate as those of their neighbors, their lives would be filled with joy. Until then, life would just be hard work. The couple scrimped and saved, denying themselves and their children all the simple pleasures. They worked through Saturdays and holidays, neglecting all the sweet and tender years of their children's growing up. They had no birthday parties, few presents, no family outings or vacations. Life was hard and cheerless, but how, they asked themselves, could anyone expect to be happy in their tiny, cramped, old house? They needed their dream house to be happy.

Everything bright and light-hearted disappeared in the grim feeling that the only purpose of each day was to labor for the imagined future. Kind words, patience, treats, fun, humor, and freedom—all were put aside for some later date when the family would live in the impressive home where joy would be waiting.

The grayness of their daily lives was alleviated only by the thought of that dreamed-of house. And so the parents pinched and struggled their way toward joy.

After twenty-five years the couple finally built the lovely home they had spent their lives working toward. It was everything they had ever dreamed of, with its ample bedrooms and splendid furnishings. They moved in, expecting joy to be waiting there for them. But the rooms of the mansion were empty of joy. The children had long since grown and scattered, their childhood memories dull and cheerless. Now, busy with their own lives, they had little desire to come home to visit.

Indeed, the rooms of the great new house were empty of all the things that had been neglected through the years. The mansion was empty of laughter, family, friends, warmth, and fun because the parents had failed to feel or create those things. The parents discovered in their huge, hollow home one of the great truths about joy: a family that cannot be happy in a cottage cannot be happy in a mansion. Happiness is not a place—it is a way of life.

Joy is not found in the waiting rooms of our dreamed-of tomorrows. True joy must be found in the crowded, complex, painful, challenging, cluttered rooms of "right now." We should ask ourselves honestly how many of us are living our lives in just the same way as those unwise people. We may not be waiting for a bigger house, perhaps, but are we always waiting for someone or something to make us feel joy? Are we expecting to find happiness waiting for us when we have crossed some barrier or hurdle?

Joy is not a reward for which we must wait until our distant, celestial life. The Lord's plan is a plan of happiness; clearly, he does not intend happiness to be inaccessible. He wants us to be joyful now, in the midst of mortal stress, adversity, and sorrow. We are that we might have joy and have it more abundantly—and have it now. Isn't that good news?

Perhaps we are waiting for the Lord to show us the way to joy, but the truth is, he has already given us the example and the means. He loves us very much, and like a tender father who sends his child away to school, he wants us to be happy here. He yearns for us to live the great plan of happiness by using his blessings and following his example as we gather our own baskets of joy.

Our grandson Randall, just barely two years old, was visiting from New York. One evening he was up past his usual bedtime, and he had entered that frenzy of activity typical of an overtired toddler. He emptied the toy box, the bookshelf, and the family room drawers, but nothing interested him. He was wandering frantically looking for something to do, something to engage his attention. He had explored the rooms so often that there was nothing to satisfy him. He walked toward his mother, who was in the kitchen fixing him some warm milk, and for the first time he noticed the two cupboard doors under the stove top counter. He had thought he knew our house inside out, but suddenly, here was something new and unexpected.

In an instant he had dashed over and flung open the doors of my pots and pans cupboard. He was so astonished by what he saw that he literally took a step backward and stared in open-mouthed amazement.

"Wow!" he whispered to himself, his eyes as big as saucers, "Look at all this stuff!"

Pots and pans enough to delight the most avid two-year-old—and they had been there all the time. How had he missed it? He was ecstatic.

When we start looking for the Lord's patterns of celebration they are all, like my pots and pans, right there, almost under our noses—all around us. Beauty, joy, and glory everywhere! They are there all the time and yet are so little observed. Cupboardfuls of wonderful things! If we open the right doors, we too will be amazed. "Wow, look at all this stuff!"

If we read the scriptures carefully, we can discover the Lord's own patterns and principles of conscious, consistent celebration. The Lord celebrates the earth itself. He celebrates and rejoices in relationships, human events, family, worship, teaching, work—everything. By discovering the Lord's principles of creating celebration and joy, we can learn how to practice those same principles.

When we search the scriptures for examples of the Lord's designs of happiness in his life and in his dealings with his children, we begin to discern his principles of living with celebratory joy. When we look, we see examples of the Lord's principles of celebration in the most familiar and unexpected passages of scripture.

What was the Garden of Eden, if not the most splendid celebration of beauty, growth, and creativity ever imagined? The Lord himself says that he placed in the garden every tree that was pleasing to the eye and to the taste—every lovely thing. It pleased him.

He created a profusion of lovely things as a celebration of creation. He didn't have to make such a variety—raspberries, strawberries, blackberries, blueberries, currants, thimbleberries, and all the other delicious and delightful gifts—the work itself, done beautifully, was his way of celebrating.

He intended that his children should celebrate, too. To Adam he said, "Go forth, dress this earth and have joy therein" (see Abr. 5:11). In other words, adorn the earth—make it more beautiful. Celebrate, as did the Lord, with work and creativity.

Another principle of joy was shown when the Lord finished each day's creation. He paused and regarded his handiwork with profound savor and celestial delight. He saw that it was good! He assessed his work and celebrated it with words and feeling. And when he finished the whole of the earth, he took a day off for rest and joy.

How often do we pause to celebrate the important moments? Often we just move on to the next duty. But the principle of living with joy and celebration taught by our Lord's example is that we should pause in our labors and take time to rest and rejoice.

In many ways, the completion of the Garden of Eden was the most splendid birthday party ever given, celebrating the birthday of mankind. Think how the garden must have looked—birds festooning the air, the munificence of sun and rain, the glories of the clear, new skies. What great party decorations!

How can we fail to see in all these things a parallel for the way in which we should celebrate, treasure, and adorn this earth, our homes, and our own lives?

The Lord has shown us how to use creativity, love, and wisdom to transform a necessary task into a celebration. The story of Noah and the ark is a good example. The Lord could have just lifted Noah's family and the animals above the water, as he lifted up the city of Enoch, and then returned them after the Flood. Instead, he used Noah's talents and efforts, showed Noah how to build the ark, and helped him bring the magnificent beasts aboard.

The scriptures tell us that the Lord smiled on the ark and carried it in his hand. Celebration!

As I read Noah's story in the scriptures, I envision all the children through the centuries who have had toy arks with tiny animals, two by two, holding them in their hands and smiling just as the Lord did. What a splendid toy the ark makes! What a lasting celebration of the Lord's love, of the wonders of this earth, and of the great adventure of the mighty flood.

When the adventure was over, the Lord celebrated the end of Noah's journey with one of the most magnificent symbols ever designed: the rainbow arching across the clearing skies, trailing every splendid color of the spectrum over a newly washed world! That visual expression of God's covenant with man is a tremendous example of how the Lord takes an essential task and creates in it a celebration of wonder and delight.

I wonder if, at the moment of disembarking, Noah's wife was worrying about how she was going to clean up all the mud. I believe the spectacle of the rainbow would have made the mud seem unimportant. That is the miracle of what a heart of celebration can do—it can change our focus from the drudgery of life to the sublimity.

Another example of the Lord's design of living with celebration is seen in how frequently the Lord takes his prophets to the summit of mountains to teach and confer with them. Instead of a dull meeting, he creates a celebration in the high and glorious places of the earth, giving both spiritual and physical renewal.

In the accumulation of varied scriptural examples, as we observe and analyze them, we see the Lord's principles of celebration emerging. These are patterns we should emulate. After Adam was sent from the Garden of Eden, he learned firsthand the challenges and adversity of mortality. Nonetheless, Adam, rejoicing, "blessed God . . . , saying: . . . in this life I shall have joy. . . . Eve, his wife, heard all these things and was glad" (Moses 5:10-11).

One of my daughters has a favorite saying: "Duty makes us do things well; love makes us do them beautifully." If those words describe the measure of love, then we are surrounded with inexhaustible evidence of how much our Heavenly Father loves us, for he has made our world beautiful. He wants us to create our own lives with love—beautifully, not with gray drudgery. That is the pattern the Lord has set.

Every single day upon this mortal earth begins and ends with heavenly fireworks—the rising and setting of the sun, the first and last great celebrations of each mortal day. I have stood on the endless plains of Canada, on frozen lakes in upstate New York, in burning deserts, on tall mountains, on the hills of Galilee, and everywhere, everywhere, as the sun rises and sets, I have looked at the glorious festival of the sky, the splendid celebration of the Lord's creation, and the reassurance that this beautiful earth turns on its axis in the orbit for which it was designed—not just with steadfast, plodding duty but with a blaze of splendor that promises tomorrow will as surely and truly come as it will surely and truly go.

With the fireworks of sunrise and sunset, the Lord celebrates each ordinary day of our life. Should not we do the same? To celebrate our daily lives we should make the splendor of the earth a part of it. Develop patterns of personal delights. Bask in moments of quiet, music, hiking, letter-writing, woodworking, sewing, cooking, traveling, talking, serving, working, reading, loving. In the cluttered crevasses of our daily lives, create our own fireworks of joy.

I do not pretend it is a simple thing to live a life in which we create celebration. We must wrest happiness from the daily, hard stuff of our challenging and sometimes disappointing lives. We must build it into the repetitive, painful, and discouraging moments.

It can be done—in small increments, with slight and creative changes. Not big changes, just wise ones. It isn't a prescribed program or a flight of stairs that must be climbed—it is tiny changes of feelings and methods, knowledge and attitudes, and the will to be and feel in better ways. It is done at our own pace, in our own way. There is no timetable or how-to book, only the learning of new principles on which to design ways to reinforce positive feelings and experiences.

The best thing about celebration is that it builds on itself. It is both the start and the finish, the means and the end to joy. That is why it is so important for us to learn the skills that make celebration possible.

A young couple were married shortly after the young man's mission. He and his wife were students and working very hard. On a Wednesday afternoon the young husband realized they had no obligations the coming Saturday and eagerly proposed to his wife that they go on their first camping trip together. She was as elated at the idea as he was.

They both worked hard through the week, finishing classes, getting assignments and jobs completed, and, late on Friday, after a hurried bite of supper, they put their camping gear in their old car and drove about four hours to a remote spot in southern Utah. They arrived in the dark, threw up their small tent, pulled out their sleeping bags, and fell into heavy slumber.

The next morning, the young man was the first to waken. He opened the flap of the tent and walked out into the early morning sunshine with eager anticipation. Before him stretched an empty landscape and his car. Nothing was going on.

"I had the funniest feeling," he told us afterward. "Always when I had gone camping it had been as a boy, with the family. I was used to finding that the minute I got out of the tent, the fun began! But here I was, on a camping trip, awake, and outside the tent. I stood there waiting for the fun—and nothing happened!"

He ducked back into the tent and spoke to his wife. "What shall I start fixing for breakfast?" She woke and looked at him in confusion. "I don't care," she murmured. "Whatever you brought."

In an instant it became clear that each of them thought the other had arranged the food and activities. They took inventory. No matches. No food. No wood. No water. No canteens. No clean clothes. No map of the area—no planning—no fun.

As he told the story, the young man laughed at himself. "All my life the fun was just there, waiting for me. I didn't fully realize until that moment that someone had to create the means by which the fun was generated. I thought fun was something automatic. You just had to go to the right place, and there it was."

At that moment, he explained, "I found out that fun is the result of somebody's efforts—it has to be made. It also dawned on me that now it was my turn to be the one to make it—for myself and for others."

The happy part of this story is that, like the young man, we can all learn how to create celebration. When we walk out of the tents that shelter us from the night, we won't be expecting joy to be waiting for us, created by someone else. We will gradually have learned how to bring delight with us, how to build it within us, how to create it wherever we are.

Creating joy is the full purpose of celebration. It is ultimately the finest, most godlike way to live. It is City of Enoch living—and it is very contagious. When we live by the Lord's grand design of happiness, not only are our own lives blessed but the lives of everyone within our circle of influence are blessed as well.

The development of celebration in our lives is a joyful task. It has no taskmaster—only love—and its only purpose is to increase happiness. It is accomplished in just one small, self-chosen step at a time. Even in the fullest life, there is time to cultivate more joyful patterns of living. Goethe said, "One always has time enough, if one will apply it well."

There are many ways to celebrate. We are, happily, the architects of the style and manner in which we rejoice in our own circumstances, talents, satisfactions, perceptions, family, goals, and delights. As one of my sons said, "An orange probably tastes different to everyone who tastes it. But it still tastes good to all of them."

There is no one way to celebrate and no step-by-step pattern for joy. Happiness is a highly individual and personal experience that will come forth from our own unique needs and feelings and from our own talents and perceptions. The important thing is that we are striving to feel and create it and searching for principles that will help us understand how.

This personal interpretation of principles is illustrated by a story told by a sister in our ward. This wonderful woman and her husband had helped bring a family from Vietnam to the United States. On the night the Vietnamese family arrived in America, my friend, in joy and celebration, had prepared an American feast for the Vietnamese family. She had prepared roast beef, mashed potatoes, apple pie, and cinnamon rolls. She wanted the new family to celebrate in their new country.

The Vietnamese family, used to a diet of rice, vegetables, and chicken, could not eat even a bite. Though they tried to be polite, the unfamiliar food, which to us would have been a joyous feast, was to them a nightmare.

The principle of feasting in celebration is a principle that is taught and lived by the Lord himself. The principle of feasting is the same for all humankind—but when we celebrate around the world, our tables are spread to individual tastes, delights, and wonders. That is one of the joys of celebration. We get to choose our own interpretation of true principles of joy.

My favorite expression of the Lord's exhortation to live with joy is found in the words of a glorious hymn:

Rejoice, the Lord is King! Your Lord and King adore! Mortals, give thanks, and sing And triumph evermore. Lift up your heart! Lift up your voice! Rejoice, again I say, rejoice! (Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985, no. 66)

I like that hymn enormously—it tells us how we should be. When I am ninety-plus years old, I hope that I, like the aged Miriam the prophetess, standing on the very edge of the endless wilderness, will feel such impelling gladness that I will pick up the timbrel, streaming with bright, rainbow-colored ribbons, and lead my friends and sisters in a great dance of celebration, singing, as did she, in praise of the Lord. A lifetime—a habit—of celebration.
