Jaroldeen Edwards, Celebration! Ten Principles of More Joyous Living ( 1995)

2

The Daffodil Principle

I wandered lonely as a cloud That floats on high o'er vales and hills, When all at once I saw a crowd, A host, of golden daffodils. William Wordsworth, 1770-1850

Several times my daughter had telephoned to say, "Mother, you must come see the daffodils before they are over." I wanted to go, but it was a two-hour drive from Laguna to Lake Arrowhead. Going and coming took most of a day—and I honestly did not have a free day until the following week.

"I will come next Tuesday," I promised, a little reluctantly, on her third call.

Next Tuesday dawned cold and rainy. Still, I had promised, and so I drove the length of Route 91, continued on I-215, and finally turned onto Route 18 and began to drive up the mountain highway.

The tops of the mountains were sheathed in clouds, and I had gone only a few miles when the road was completely covered with a wet, gray blanket of fog. I slowed to a crawl, my heart pounding.

The road becomes narrow and winding toward the top of the mountain. As I executed the hazardous turns at a snail's pace, I was praying to reach the turnoff at Blue Jay that would signify I had arrived.

When I finally walked into Carolyn's house and hugged and greeted my grandchildren, I said, "Forget the daffodils, Carolyn! The road is invisible in the clouds and fog, and there is nothing in the world except you and these darling children that I want to see bad enough to drive another inch!"

My daughter smiled calmly. "We drive in this all the time, Mother."

"Well, you won't get me back on the road until it clears—and then I'm heading for home!" I assured her.

"I was hoping you'd take me over to the garage to pick up my car. The mechanic just called, and they've finished repairing the engine," she answered.

"How far will we have to drive?" I asked cautiously.

"Just a few blocks," Carolyn said cheerfully. So we bundled up the children and went out to my car. "I'll drive," Carolyn offered. "I'm used to this."

We got into the car, and she began driving. In a few minutes I was aware that we were back on the Rim-of-the-World road heading over the top of the mountain.

"Where are we going?" I exclaimed, distressed to be back on the mountain road in the fog. "This isn't the way to the garage!"

"We're going to my garage the long way," Carolyn smiled, "by way of the daffodils."

"Carolyn," I said sternly, trying to sound as if I were still the mother and in charge of the situation, "please turn around. There is nothing in the world that I want to see enough to drive on this road in this weather."

"It's all right, Mother," she replied with a knowing grin. "I know what I'm doing. I promise, you will never forgive yourself if you miss this experience."

And so my sweet, darling daughter who had never given me a minute of difficulty in her whole life was suddenly in charge—and she was kidnapping me! I couldn't believe it. Like it or not, I was on the way to see some ridiculous daffodils—driving through the thick, gray silence of the mist-wrapped mountaintop at what I thought was risk to life and limb. I muttered all the way.

After about twenty minutes we turned onto a small gravel road that branched down into an oak-filled hollow on the side of the mountain. The fog had lifted a little, but the sky was lowering, gray and heavy with clouds. We parked in a small parking lot adjoining a little stone church. From our vantage point at the top of the mountain we could see beyond us, in the mist, the crests of the San Bernardino range like the dark, humped backs of a herd of elephants. Far below us the fog-shrouded valleys, hills, and flatlands stretched away to the desert.

On the far side of the church I saw a pine-needle-covered path, with towering evergreens and manzanita bushes and an inconspicuous, hand-lettered sign, "Daffodil Garden."

We each took a child's hand, and I followed Carolyn down the path as it wound through the trees. The mountain sloped away from the side of the path in irregular dips, folds, and valleys, like a deeply creased skirt. Live oaks, mountain laurel, shrubs, and bushes clustered in the folds, and in the gray, drizzling air, the green foliage looked dark and monochromatic. I shivered. Then we turned a corner of the path, and I looked up and gasped.

Before me lay the most glorious sight, unexpectedly and completely splendid. It looked as though someone had taken a great vat of gold and poured it down over the mountain peak and slopes, where it had run into every crevice and over every rise. Even in the mist-filled air, the mountainside was radiant, clothed in massive drifts and waterfalls of daffodils. The flowers were planted in majestic, swirling patterns, great ribbons and swaths of deep orange, white, lemon yellow, salmon pink, saffron, and butter yellow. Each different-colored variety (I learned later that there were more than thirty-five varieties of daffodils in the vast display) was planted as a group so that it swirled and flowed like its own river with its own unique hue.

In the center of this incredible and dazzling display of gold, a great cascade of purple grape hyacinth flowed down like a waterfall of blossoms framed in its own rock-lined basin, weaving through the brilliant daffodils. A charming path wound throughout the garden. There were several resting stations, paved with stone and furnished with Victorian wooden benches and great tubs of coral and carmine tulips.

As though this were not magnificence enough, Mother Nature had to add her own grace note—above the daffodils, a bevy of western bluebirds flitted and darted, flashing their brilliance. These charming little birds are the color of sapphires with breasts of magenta red. As they dance in the air, their colors are truly like jewels. Above the blowing, glowing daffodils, the effect was spectacular.

It did not matter that the sun was not shining. The brilliance of the daffodils was like the glow of the brightest sunlit day. Words, wonderful as they are, simply cannot describe the incredible beauty of that flower-bedecked mountaintop.

Five acres of flowers! (This too I discovered later when some of my questions were answered.) "But who has done this?" I asked Carolyn. I was overflowing with gratitude that she had brought me—even against my will. This was a once-in-a-lifetime experience. "Who?" I asked again, almost speechless with wonder, "and how, and why, and when?"

"It's just one woman," Carolyn answered. "She lives on the property. That's her home." Carolyn pointed to a well-kept A-frame house that looked small and modest in the midst of all that glory.

We walked up to the house, my mind buzzing with questions. On the patio we saw a poster. "Answers to the Questions I Know You Are Asking" was the headline. The first answer was a simple one. "50,000 bulbs," it read. The second answer was, "One at a time, by one woman. Two hands, two feet, and very little brain." The third answer was, "Began in 1958."

There it was. The Daffodil Principle. For me that moment was a life-changing experience. I thought of this woman whom I had never met, who, more than thirty-five years before, had begun—one bulb at a time—to bring her vision of beauty and joy to an obscure mountaintop.

One bulb at a time. There was no other way to do it. One bulb at a time. No shortcuts—simply loving the slow process of planting. Loving the work as it unfolded. Loving an achievement that grew so slowly and that bloomed for only three weeks of each year.

Still, just planting one bulb at a time, year after year, had changed the world. This unknown woman had forever changed the world in which she lived. She had created something of ineffable magnificence, beauty, and inspiration.

The principle her daffodil garden taught me is one of the greatest principles of celebration: learning to move toward our goals and desires one step at a time—often just one baby-step at a time—learning to love the doing, learning to use the accumulation of time. When we multiply tiny pieces of time with small increments of daily effort, we too will find we can accomplish magnificent things. We can change the world.

A friend of mine began years ago to save one dollar a week in a special account. Whenever she bought groceries, she put an extra dollar in her account. She started this practice from the first week she was married. She put away just that little bit of money at a time, but she did it regularly and through many years.

As the family became more affluent, she increased the amount to five dollars, to ten, and finally to twenty-five a week. Each time she wrote a check for groceries, she wrote the small check for her savings account. Through the years the consistent week-by-week saving added up and earned its own interest. Time plus consistent small effort multiplied into a valuable gift of security for herself and her family.

Another friend has just completed her studies for a doctorate in music pedagogy. She has four children, has been Relief Society president, and maintains a full and active life. "How did you do it?" I asked her.

"I will tell you the truth," she replied. "About eight years ago I had to teach a lesson in Relief Society on time management, and I read and taught the concept of 'five minutes a day' to the women. I taught the concept so well that I believed it myself.

"I had lots of really little children at that time, but I enrolled in graduate school and began my classes—and I maintained my school work with a consistent 'five minutes a day.' I could not believe how much that little amount of time, used consistently toward a single goal, could accomplish!" All those five minutes a day over the years have added up to a doctorate.

The trick to living with celebration is to enjoy the one-at-a-time part of it as well as the final goal. I remember watching a friend tile a bathroom. I looked at the whole room and wondered how he would ever finish it.

He knew exactly what he was going to do. He had already made the decisions about patterns and colors. Now, as he worked, never looked around to see how much there was left to do or how much he had accomplished.

There was no impatience in him or frustration. He simply picked up each individual tile, and, working at a careful, precise pace, he made certain that each single tile—the tile he was working on at each moment—was put in place perfectly.

The bathroom slowly began to be transformed. He was enjoying the work, the pace, and the moment. In two days, he stepped back to admire the completed room. He had done only one tile at a time, but he had done it flawlessly and continuously. One unhurried tile at a time had created a beautiful room.

The important thing to remember is that in the celebration of life, magnificent things are accomplished with small, consistent, daily acts that build through time into all the great achievements that change our lives—and change the world.

We can set great goals, and then, with a pattern of patient, consistent, careful effort—if only for minutes a day—we can eventually achieve our goals.

Pablo Casals, arguably the greatest cellist of this century, died in his ninth decade. On the day of his death, he spent the early hours of the morning practicing his scales. He had become a great cellist one day at a time—a lifetime of one day at a time.

Choose great enterprises and work toward them in the midst of the fray—just one bulb at a time. Those few minutes each day spent working toward a larger goal give the repetitive actions of our lives a fresh aspect.

I wrote my first novel when the youngest of my twelve children started kindergarten. I simply kept my typewriter in the kitchen and wrote for a few minutes a day every time I could find the time.

That year my husband was traveling 80 percent of the time, I had nine children at home—and no household help—my first two grandchildren were born, I was teaching seminary and doing the ward roadshow and being active on several PTA and community boards. When I read my journal of that period, I find it hard to know how I possibly found the time to place all those words, one letter at a time, onto paper.

At the end of an entry in March, in which I speak of a sick child, household guests, a church assignment, and my husband's trip—is this observation: "Today, I wrote the last sentence of my book."

It isn't enough just to turn our one-at-a-time efforts into a future event of celebration. We must learn to rejoice in the daily steps as well as in the anticipation of the far-off goal. How many vacation trips are spoiled for our children because they spend their time asking, "When will we get there?" All that seems important to them about the trip is the arriving. The glories of the world are passing by their eyes in the windows of the car, but all they can ask is when will they arrive!

We sometimes live our lives in just the same way. We are so eager to get to the final accomplishments that we forget to enjoy the process of achieving them. If our trip is well begun, well planned, and in the direction we desire, then each turn of the wheels, each step of the hike, each push of the bicycle wheel should be a joy along the way and will add up to arrival at our destination. Impatience for the goal will not speed the steps. The very best, most celebratory way to live is to enjoy each day's journey as well as its arrivals. Choose great goals and work toward them patiently, consistently. Let time and increments of progress work together to accomplish mighty things.

When I was a little girl in Canada, I remember visiting a friend at her home. It was early twilight, and my mother phoned to tell me it was time to come home for supper. Because it was dusk, I did not want to walk alone, and I asked my friend's mother if she could walk with me.

"It is such a long way to my house!" I complained to her. (I think, actually, it was about two blocks, but it seemed a long way.)

"I'm sorry, dear," the mother told me, "you must go alone. We are going to eat our supper. It is not far, Jaroldeen, and you have done it many times."

She could see I was still reluctant, unhappy, and a little fearful.

"Don't be worried," she reassured me. "You don't have to think how far it is. All you need to do is take the next step. Just know where you are going, and then concentrate on picking up your back foot and putting it in front of your other foot. Do that. Just think about the next step, and the next. You will be at your home before you know it."

It was years before I got over my amazement at how well her advice worked! I concentrated on lifting up my foot and putting it in front of the other, and suddenly, I looked up and I was home!

"Carolyn," I said that morning on the top of the mountain as we left the haven of daffodils, our minds and hearts still bathed and bemused by the splendors we had seen, "it's as though that remarkable woman has needle-pointed the earth! Decorated it. Just think of it, she planted every single bulb. For more than thirty years. One bulb at a time! And that's the only way this garden could be created. Every individual bulb had to be planted. There was no way of short-circuiting that process. Five acres of blooms. That magnificent cascade of hyacinth! All, all, just one bulb at a time." The thought of it filled my mind. I was suddenly overwhelmed with the implications of what I had seen.

"It makes me sad in a way," I admitted to Carolyn. "What might I have accomplished if I had thought of a wonderful goal thirty-five years ago and had worked away at it 'one bulb at a time' through all those years. Just think what I might have been able to achieve!"

My wise daughter put the car into gear and summed up the message of the day in her direct way. "Start tomorrow," she said with the same knowing smile she had worn for most of the morning. Oh, profound wisdom! It is pointless to think of the lost hours of yesterdays. The way to make learning a lesson a celebration instead of a cause for regret is to only ask, "How can I put this to use tomorrow?"

I also learned on that gray and golden morning what a blessing it is to have a child who is not a child anymore but a woman—perceptive and loving beyond her years—and to be humble in that awareness.

Thank you, Carolyn. Thank you for the lessons of that unforgettable morning. Thank you for the gift of the daffodils.
