Jaroldeen Edwards, Celebration! Ten Principles of More Joyous Living ( 1995)

3

The Last 3 Percent

I cleaned the windows and I swept the floor And I polished up the handle of the big front door. I polished up the handle so carefullee That now I am the Ruler of the Queen's Navee! Sir William S. Gilbert, 1836-1911

I remember hearing as a child the nursery rhyme that began, "For want of a nail the shoe was lost; for want of the shoe, the horse was lost; for want of the horse the battle was lost." I recall feeling sad, because it seemed to me such an unfair thing to lose the whole battle just because someone forgot to put in a nail.

In the years since childhood, I have come to know that much of our joy and satisfaction depends on the way in which we complete the last 3 percent of our responsibilities. That vital last 3 percent consists of three things: 1 percent is the final detail of work; 1 percent is the way we feel and think about what we have done—our reasons, motivations and satisfactions; and the last 1 percent consists of original and creative thinking with which we crown the finished product.

It has been said that genius is an infinite capacity for taking pains. Much of the work and many of the activities in which we take part we do out of duty in habitual ways—but if we are to intensify our awareness and delight in our life, then we should assess how we can multiply the effect of ordinary and repetitive events.

How often when our children set the table do they consider the job finished when the plates, glasses, and cutlery are set out? True, at that point they have done most of the work—but the job is not finished. That last percent of effort—the napkins, the water, the salt, pepper, and butter—must be in place before the job is really and truly and happily finished. That last 1 percent of effort added to the bulk of the work makes the table complete and comfortable.

That last small quantum of work primarily holds the gift of satisfaction in it. The finishing details give us the confidence that we have done well—that we have carried our work to the level of loving service.

In the satisfaction that comes from work well completed, the most common tasks are enhanced. In that last small fraction of extra effort, we also think of ways to make the moment memorable (for example, adding to the table candles, or napkins folded a new way, or funny place cards, or a newspaper tablecloth, or fresh flowers, etc.). Then the last 3 percent of effort has made an ordinary, everyday chore into a moment of genuine celebration.

Training ourselves to do the last essential fraction of work is an extremely important skill. In professional settings it is called task completion and is one of the most important measures of an effective employee. The concept of task completion is essential to success in any field.

Many people work extremely hard and for long hours. They work hours and hours and feel that as long as they are working, work is being accomplished. Of course it is, but that does not mean that essential tasks are being completed. Work alone does not mean that the job is getting done.

Working without the skills of finishing the last essential part is like a carpenter hammering nails into a board but with no concept of what he is building—and no way of knowing how to finish. He is working, but the work is not leading to accomplishment or celebration. It becomes drudgery.

Think of all the college students who write letter after letter home but do not get the letter into a stamped envelope and into the mail. The truth is, an unsent letter is not a letter, because, although writing the letter is most of the work, the small but essential finishing effort has not been done. And so the work is barren.

When we understand the last-3-percent principle, we see to it that we have stamps and envelopes on hand, and we are sure to finish the essential act of letter-writing, which is to mail the letter.

Identifying the essential final fraction of effort that is required for task completion is an important skill. It is the putting away of the vacuum; it is the putting away of the folded laundry; it is the attractive cover on a school report; it is the books thoughtfully placed on the night table in the guest room; it is the clean towels in the clean bathroom; it is the thank-you note written and sent. It is fresh fragrances in a tidy house; it is candy in the pockets; it is the wreath on the door; it is the timely visit to the sick; it is writing with a pen you love to hold; it is remembered birthdays; it is cleaning up after the cookies are made.

Frequently our ability to rejoice, to use our creativity, to feel our own abilities, uniqueness, and effectiveness—our opportunity to celebrate—is contained in those last precious moments of effort and thought. When everyone else would have quit, walked away from the job, left it till another day, or said, "Good enough is good enough," the celebratory worker keeps on going for the few extra moments which make all the difference.

I have watched young women work tremendously hard to clean and organize their house. They work from dawn until dusk without pause—and when the day is finished, nothing looks different because they leave a path of clutter in their wake. The end result is frustration and despair.

It would be better for them to work less hard physically, to pause in their work and ask, "What must I do to give my home the appearance of orderliness? What is keeping it from feeling and looking organized?" In other words, "What do I need to do to make my work achieve its objectives?" Almost always, the answer will be something that is only a small part of the huge job of cleaning the home. It may be a large basket into which all the toys can be thrown, so that the room is uncluttered. It may be that the dishes need to be put into the cupboards. It may be that a clutter of magazines and papers needs to be organized, put away in drawers or baskets, or discarded. It may be that rooms need to be rearranged.

So often, when we have worked hard, we are tired and bored as a chore reaches its end, and we are tempted to shrug our shoulders at the last ounce of effort. "The clothes are washed, and I'm too tired to fold them and put them away. I'll leave them in the basket and do them first thing in the morning." A day ends with a basket of laundry in the family room or laundry room, and often the children get at it and scatter the clean clothes—more mess—or it gets mixed up with the unwashed laundry, and the sense of being overwhelmed is added upon. The sad part is, the last part is only a fraction of the long job of washing, drying, and folding the clothes. But that last ounce of effort makes all the work that has gone before satisfying and complete.

Closing the cupboard doors, taking out the garbage, picking up the dirty dishtowels, adding bleach to the load of whites—these are the final details that give us a sense of joy, empowerment, and celebration in our work.

It is in the details that we know we are doing it well. Those details create much of the celebration of our daily life.

Identifying the essential part of each task is an important part of working with joy. Sometimes we can learn to short-circuit the bulky part of the work and finish the job more quickly by judiciously attending to the most significant features. For example, I know that the cleanest house will not look clean with clutter in it, and so I have established a simple motto: "Leave every room looking better than when you entered it." Pick up as you go. That is true not just of housework—it is true of any pursuit.

"Picking up" is usually part of the "last 3 percent," but if it is done consistently and regularly, we have shortened all phases of every project.

The difference between excellent and good, between job satisfaction and feeling overwhelmed, between success and failure is often the result of a very small proportion of effort and creative thought. Benjamin Franklin spoke of the misery of the person who has one dollar and spends one dollar and a penny. He contrasted that with the plenty, happiness, and joy of the person who has one dollar and spends ninety-nine cents. The difference between sorrow and happiness—just two cents.

Our happiness is bound up in the final fraction of effort, in the determination not just to endure to the end but to add one last touch of glory. When we fail to continue through that last bit of commitment, we often miss the mark—and all our effort toward happy enterprises can be lost by our having neglected the final small things. Life then becomes a series of disappointments rather than celebrations.

The "last 3 percent" is a principle of hope because it helps us understand that joy and success are often within our ready reach. With more wisdom, effort, creativity, and hope, we can discover those fine differences that will help us make the substance of our lives a little more divine. Things that we are currently doing with little satisfaction may, with an extra fraction of effort, become sources of real delight in our ordinary, daily lives.

One of my children had a report on Brazil that was due in her fourth-grade social studies class. She had done excellent work in compiling the information and writing the report. Each section of the report had a heading—geography, agriculture, wildlife, arts, and so on. "We're supposed to have some pictures or visual aids with the report, Mother," she told me.

"Shall I help you find some magazines or maps that we could use to cut out pictures?" I asked.

"No," she said. "I want to draw my own, but I want to do them with my colored chalks."

She loved to draw, and I had recently purchased a box of pastels. My first impulse was to suggest that the chalks wouldn't work because the colors would rub off. Then I remembered that in portfolios of pastels, a tissue is placed in front of the chalk-drawings to protect the colors from imprinting the other pages. I suggested that she do the drawings and then place a sheet of tissue paper between the drawing and the page of text. Then we could staple it all together like a book.

She drew maps, toucans, rubber trees, boats, and Brazilian designs. Each illustration was a full page and faced the page on which the report of that subject was written. Between the two pages we put a delicate page of tissue paper. Suddenly, an ordinary child's report took on the aspect of something precious and wonderful. The tissue, just like the tissue that wraps a fine piece of china, or a beautiful dress in its box, elevated the whole project to a different level of creative delight.

Such a little thing—just hanging in with the last 3 percent, and yet this child, now grown to a splendid young woman, still remembers that report. That one small experience taught her delight in the experience of learning—and from it sprang years of wonderful to-the-last-drop schooling. She is a terrific and remarkable student.

From my youngest son I learned the principle in serving others. For his Eagle project he decided to create a library in the Church camp on a lake in upstate New York. It was a two-hour drive from our home to the camp.

William's goal was to take a small, abandoned cabin, clean it, paint it, carpet it, build shelves, and conduct a book drive to fill them. We made several trips to the camp with as many members of the troop as possible and worked on the small building until it was painted inside and out and the new carpeting and shelves were installed.

By now, we were all—except William—beginning to lose enthusiasm for the project. The round-trip drive was getting longer and longer. Nonetheless, for what I hoped was the last time, I drove him and one stalwart friend with the boxes of collected books up to the camp. The trim on the windows and the front porch of the cabin still needed to be painted green, and the books needed to be placed on the shelves. While the boys painted outside, I emptied the boxes of books. The library looked wonderful—clean, inviting, and everything William could have wished. I was sure that many a child would spend happy hours and rain-washed days sitting in its pleasant comfort, lost in the pages of some wonderful books.

It was late in the day, and I was anxious to return home. As I walked outside the cabin I saw William's friend heading down to the lake. Even he had had enough and was calling it good.

William was climbing down from a ladder. He had just finished painting the last window trim.

"Are we ready to go?" I asked.

"Not quite," William replied. "I have to sand down the steps and paint them. It's the last thing that must be done."

I, like William's friend, felt my patience run out. "Honey," I said, "Everything is wonderful—it's just great. You've done more than anyone could have expected. It's so late, and we are all so tired. The steps just aren't important."

William paused for a moment. "They are to me, Mother. You see, this is my Eagle project—it's a gift I'm giving, and I don't want to remember every time I think of it through the years that I didn't finish the steps."

We painted the steps and drove home through the dark.

It is important to understand, as William did, that if a certain detail will improve the completion of the task or the event and we do not do it, the memory of the unfinished detail will always take some of the celebration out of the achievement.

Another example of the joys of the last 3 percent was demonstrated to me by another daughter. I was busy canning peaches when a neighbor called to ask if my five-year-old daughter could go over to play. I asked my twelve-year-old to escort her little sister to the neighbor's house. Robin said she'd be happy to, and the two little girls walked out of the kitchen. A few minutes later they were back, and my five-year-old came up to kiss me good-bye. I looked at her. Her older sister had washed her face and hands, had brushed and braided her hair, and put a bright red bow in it. Patricia looked as fresh, loved, and pretty as a child could look. Just a few minutes of effort, but what a difference. Not only had Robin agreed to take her sister to the neighbor's house but she had envisioned the last 3 percent of the job and taken the time to make her sister look like the wonderful guest she was! In doing the last fraction she had given all three of us a moment of genuine celebration.

Life itself is a whole piece of work—and therefore we should contemplate what the last 3 percent of completing it well must be. There should be wonderful goals we have saved for our later years. And if we are privileged to have children under our care, each day, each moment we should be looking for the essential part of our efforts, the part that will give them meaning and crown those child-rearing years with celebration. Often at the end of a long, hard day of caring for our families, it is easy to think we are too tired for family prayer, too tired to read a story, too tired to sit by a bedside and whisper words of love and sharing. These things take such a little extra effort, and yet they are the part that makes all the rest meaningful.

When we recognize the minute gap that separates ordinary accomplishment from accomplishment that gives satisfaction and joy, we can feel a tremendous surge of hope, because we understand that by seeing our lives with new eyes, we can identify little things that can lift our spirits, our memories, and our ability to rejoice in work nobly completed. Everyday occasions can be transformed into experiences of joy. The power of improving the delight of our lives is not an enormous thing—it is a small proportion of all the hundreds of things we are already doing right.

To make room for the satisfying 3 percent, we can find ways to throw out or cut through, some of the mass of stuff that comes in the regular work. For example, after hours spent on preparing a lesson or a speech, as I begin work on the visual aids, I could spend more hours trying to impress my listeners with the professional quality of the lettering on my posters or word strips. I ask myself, "What is the essential 3 percent of visual aids?" My answer is that they are to enhance the quality of learning, nothing more. Therefore, I spend time thinking of ideas for visual aids that will truly illustrate the points of my lesson. That is the essential part. I spend no time at all on worrying about the posters looking impressive. It is the ideas that must be impressive—and the visual aids must have originality and flair that seize the imagination.

I use original and unexpected things, such as long rolls of brown paper stretched across the room with time lines or sequences of events or biography tacked clear across the front of the classroom with my ever-present reusable adhesive, one of my essential 3 percents. How many teachers have you seen with wonderful visual aids who spend half their lesson time trying to get the visual aids to stay up on the wall or board—and they fall down inopportunely, interrupting the spirit of the lesson? The frustrated teacher has put much work into the visual aids but has forgotten the last, important little detail: an easy and effective way to secure them. This is a very good example of how the final, small details hold the key to success and celebration.

The last 3 percent is like a kiss at the end of the day. All the long labors of our day are the affirmation and evidence of our dedication and affection for others, but the kiss makes it all glow.
