Jaroldeen Edwards, Celebration! Ten Principles of More Joyous Living ( 1995)

5

I Did It My Way, and I Am Getting Better at It All the Time

If you want to be happy, be. Leo Tolstoy, 1828-1910

Celebration is often a homemade product. It is as personal as the individual, as original as the mind that creates it, as happy as the boundaries of the heart and spirit that feel it. When we choose to create events of celebration they will grow out of our own individual talents, skills, desires, tastes, and concepts of delight.

To one person a formal sit-down dinner may be the ultimate expression of celebration. To another it may be a camping trip or a rock-climbing expedition. The goal for which one person may save with eager anticipation might be a mountain bike; for another, it might be a piece of furniture or a university course.

Celebration is the bounteous feast of human experience, a table spread with wholesome, joyous, delightful, precious opportunities.

We get to make up our own plate.

Some of the ways and means of celebration I have discovered may give you some new thoughts about more celebratory experiences in the daily patterns of your own life. Some of these ideas may just sound like work or a waste of time. You may have a very different way of finding delight. It is not how you do it that matters—it is that you do do it. And actually, all these ideas take much more time to explain than they take to do. With most of them, the event is unchanged, just put in a different setting by a few moments of thought and effort. That is what celebration is all about.

My family has lived in seven states and twelve different communities. It has been important in the celebration of our lives to have a sense of resource and intellectual and emotional investment in the geographic area around us. We celebrate living in new areas by practicing the art of day-tripping. It is a wonderful way, wherever you live, to celebrate your own unique life.

Day-Trips

When we move to a new area, often with very unhappy and homesick children in tow and often with a homesick and unhappy heart of my own, the first thing I do is look for books on local history and local points of interest, and I study the books.

For a really great day-trip we do not go to big commercial attractions like amusement parks. All of our family have an aversion to crowds and standing in line.

There are many ways to hunt for a prime day-trip location. Some great day-trips might be to small towns where your ancestors or relatives might have settled. Ask friends and neighbors about interesting locations. I found a great book on ghost towns in a bookstore. What a lot of great day-trips were in that book!

Always, always, always be searching for books and information about the area in which you live. Scour the library, bookstores, and your family history. Be prepared to stop at historic markers on the highway. When you see an interesting building, turn off your usual route and explore it. Ask questions, and read.

For example, on the outskirts of Park City, Utah, is a wonderful nineteenth-century farmhouse, now an inn. We passed the establishment year after year and then decided we had to know more. Our subsequent day-trip to Park City and dinner at Snowed Inn turned into a wonderful evening of food, conversation, and the story of a woman's memories of her grandparents' farm, which she had re-created on that piece of land.

What we like best in day-tripping is to find an unusual possibility—a town, or historic place, or natural region that we have never heard about before but that has enough information in the guidebooks to catch our attention.

Look for locally published books on day-trips. They usually have such titles as "Children's Outings around and about _______" or "Day-Trips in and around _______." Another good source of information is books titled "Walking Tours of _______." In New York, for example, we read in a small local pamphlet about the John Jay home (not exactly a household word or a tourist attraction but a splendid day-trip); in California, the town of Julian and the J. Paul Getty Museum (off-season); in Dallas, the towns of Jefferson, Mineral Wells, and Waxahachie (all with local guidebooks that told us what to look for); in Ohio, the nutting farms and chrysanthemum fields; and many, many more, too numerous to enumerate, almost too numerous to remember.

Here are some of the guidelines and policies we have adopted for successful day-tripping:

We have numerous games we play in the car, as I am sure every family has. We play Twenty Questions, Just Suppose, singing games, Trivial Pursuit without the board, and so on. But mostly, on the way to a day trip, we spend the time talking about where we are going and what we hope to see and do. The history or importance of the place is discussed in some detail.

The reason we take no food or toys in the car is that they create a mess—and arguments. One of the most exciting events of the day will be discovering unusual and wonderful places to eat—a classic diner, homemade pies, a hundred-year-old inn, a tiny Mexican house in Old Town, a sandwich and soup shop on the main street run by two spinster sisters—just wonderful places. That is our one financial investment in the experience.

Your research has given you some idea of what you want to see, but the important part of day-tripping is the unexpected. Be as flexible as you can. If you see a sign by the side of the road—like the sign on I-15 in the desert between Los Angeles and Las Vegas that says, "Calico Ghost Town—Five Miles," with an arrow that points to a narrow road leading straight across the empty desert toward some barren, rocky mountains on the distant horizon—well, turn off the road and bounce across the desert!

We did just that—turned off the road, bumped across the barren desert, and discovered an abandoned ghost town, now being restored. The day we went there only ten or twelve other people were walking the hot, dusty main street.

The children bought penny candy in the old general store, rode the cog railroad, saw an abandoned mine, and learned the remarkable story of Lucy, who had lived alone in the last standing house on the main street when the town was otherwise completely deserted. She had lived there until she died. No grass, no trees, no shrubs—just the bare shacks and the one street baking in the sun.

As we left, the caretaker said, "You ought to go see the old dude ranch, too." What dude ranch? we asked, because there was nothing about it in our guidebook. He gave us directions, and the day became one of such unusual experience that it is hard to describe. We drove through the Texas countryside toward the Brazos River, and, following his detailed directions, we turned on country road after country road through cactus, cattle fields, and mesquite until, making a last turn by a stand of dusty live oak, we saw two stone pillars and a large, curved iron sign that said simply, "Dude Ranch." The sign was red with rust and looked about to collapse.

After entering through the gate we drove down a road that had once been graveled but was now just dust. On either side were the remnants of oleander and laurel, long since run wild and withering in the heat. At one time it must have been a beautiful drive.

We found the ranch. It was a low, Spanish-style brick building, square, with a courtyard, and an old tiled swimming pool that was green with moss. Beyond the residence was a huge empty stable, a rodeo ring with bleachers, and a race track oval overgrown with prairie grass—all going to ruin.

The proprietor, an old, gnarled, sunburned man, happily showed us into the main lobby—a long, once-beautiful room with windows overlooking the slope to the river and a stone fireplace at one end. The room was dimly lit because the windows were thick with dirt, and the space—from wall to wall—was crammed with dust-covered antiques, mostly large armoires, china cabinets, and bulky buffets. It was impossible to walk between them. Chairs and tables and old sofas were stacked one upon the other.

"We were in the antique business for a while after the dude ranch business began to decline. We keep meaning to ship this stuff off to a dealer somewhere but just haven't found the time," the elderly man told us. Some of the pieces, collecting dust, the wood drying out from lack of care, were absolutely beautiful.

He showed us walls of pictures of people who had been guests at the ranch in its heyday: Cary Grant, Clark Gable, Lucille Ball, Desi Arnaz—almost any significant actor or actress of the 1950s and 60s. In the pictures, which showed the beauty of the establishment when it was thriving, was a handsome, tall man in his mid years, wearing riding clothes and standing by a splendid palomino. The owner grinned as we looked at the picture. "Yes," he said, "that's me."

We looked at the old man carefully, but, just as we could see only a shadow of the former magnificence of the ranch, so we could hardly glimpse that handsome, vigorous, prosperous young horseman in this bent, weathered, aged man. How swiftly life sweeps on.

Before we left, the kind and lonely man took us through a stand of shrub oak, pine, and mesquite to another location. "This was our dance hall and recreational building," he said wistfully. "It burned down about fifteen years ago, and we've never seemed to get around to rebuilding it."

We saw the outline of a lovely building. Mexican tile, some of it in mint condition, paved what had once been the floor, and we saw the remnants of a tall, field-rock chimney and stone steps. Broken window frames clung to the remnant of a burned wall. Ivy and creeping oak were growing in the cracks, and vines were obscuring the foundation.

It must have been such a lovely place on a warm Texas night, filled with glamorous people, the orchestra playing, and the river sparkling in the moonlight. Now it was like seeing a dream.

Our children scrambled down the banks of the river and threw rocks in the swift waters, and then, mulling over what we had seen—amazed, as though we had been wafted into some other place and time—we returned to the car and drove home. A perfect day-trip!

I will never forget the day-trip to Solvang, California, when our college sons and their friends rode the bicycle buggies that are the mode of transportation in downtown Solvang. They are like two tandem bicycles joined together by seats with a striped awning over them. They are meant to be a very genteel mode of locomotion. Well, these young men saw different possibilities in them, and so they pumped their way to a side street and then began a wild race.

It got funnier and funnier as people gathered to watch these eight young men, pedaling as though demons were after them, perspiration drenching their faces, and the striped awnings flapping as they had never flapped before. It was one of the best afternoons ever.

A bicycle buggy race in staid Solvang! What a celebration!

Day-trips are an inexpensive way of traveling, learning history, seeing museums, enjoying family, having recreation—and growing to love and feel connected to the place in which you live.

Making Family a Celebration

I was a dinner guest at a young family's home. Next to their dining table was an open area of tiled floor on which there was no furniture. I soon understood why.

After the meal was over, the children went over to the stereo, which sits on a counter in that area, and put in a tape. It was classical music with a strong, colorful rhythm and melody that set the fingers tapping. In an instant all of the children were dancing. It was such fun! The boys were leaping and doing "boy" stuff, and the girls were pirouetting and jumping. It was beautiful and amazingly fun. Dancing after supper. Instant celebration.

To create recipes for delight is one of our great privileges as homemakers, as friends, as mothers and grandmothers.

Changing the ordinary into a celebration often requires just one thought. Just one simple idea. Just a fraction of imagination and effort. Fourteen of my grandchildren were coming over for the afternoon. I had already planned the activity: we were going to the arboretum to see the spring flower show, the biggest display of tulips in the state. I knew, however, that some of the older children would be less than excited when they heard our destination, and not one of the children was going to want to get back into the van and drive another half hour as soon as they arrived.

So . . . I came up with a celebration plan. I was going to take them on a "World Tour." I quickly got out paper and drew a map for each child. We were going to Mexico, Holland, and France!

Our first stop was "Mexico" (Taco Bell), and while we drove there we sang Mexican songs and tried to think of everything we knew about that country.

Another trick I have learned about having fun is to limit the time. When we go to a museum or a restaurant or a place where I feel the children need to have an added impetus to their fun, I set a time limit that makes the seeing, or doing, very tight. They have to hurry to get everything in, so finishing within the time limit becomes a challenge—and challenges are fun.

We had twenty minutes to order and eat, and then, all wearing the Mexican hats that were the gift of the restaurant, we hurried back into the van. (Getting into the car can also be timed and a prize given to those who get into the seat belts on time, turning a part of the day that is a chore into a game.)

"Holland" was next. The tulips at the arboretum were magnificent. The weather was perfect. The children ran in the open air, in the midst of complete and utter beauty. We divided into teams, and each team had to gather three new facts to share in the car when we met later.

The older boys had not expected to enjoy it, but the fresh air, the garden spreading before us, the old mansion, the lake—all worked their magic even on the boys, who found themselves eagerly and competitively becoming experts on tulips, hyacinths, jonquils, and forsythia.

Tired, excited, we left "Holland," and drove to "France," a French bakery near my home where everyone got to choose a pastry and eat it at the sidewalk tables. We talked about trying to decide what famous person we would like to have come down the sidewalk, and I taught them French words for several common objects.

Nothing was different about that day—I had simply done the activities I had planned—but putting them into the context of world travel made the children feel they had visited remarkable and extraordinary places. It made all the difference in making a splendid and special day. A fairly ordinary day became a real celebration.

Many of the same techniques work with adults. Several of our grown, married children were visiting, and we decided to see Much Ado about Nothing. It was just a movie, but I wanted to make the day one of celebration. We began the evening before with a menu of English food, and then we reviewed the plot of Much Ado and read portions of the play with different members of the family taking parts.

We planned, after the movie, to attend a medieval fair, but it was raining heavily and the fair was canceled. Nevertheless, the movie was spectacular—and especially wonderful to us because the night before we had reviewed the plot line and the characters.

At the end of the movie, wonder of wonders, the lights came on and the three rows of people in front of us stood up. They were all dressed in Elizabethan costume. Amazing! We learned they were the cast from the Medieval Fair. When it was rained out, they had decided to go to the movie.

What a great finale! We talked and laughed—and then, we went over to Pier One, where everybody purchased one item that reminded them of the evening. Forsooth! It was a grand time.

Making Ordinary Occasions Wonderful

Names. I have discovered that naming something gives it more delight—naming is a form of celebration in and of itself. It can be a very simple name. "The Nutcracker Night," for example, was the name I gave to an evening of celebration for my grandchildren. Christmas was coming, and the Nutcracker ballet was to be performed on television. I knew from long experience that the children might well become bored with the ballet, so I determined I would make it a night to remember.

First I gave it its name. Then, using that name, I told the children to find costumes for the evening show. They could dress like any of the characters in the ballet—and so, before they put together their costumes, I read them the story. As they were upstairs conspiring, going through closets, raiding the cupboards and linen shelves, I prepared a "Russian" supper. Actually, it was just cream of corn soup with meatballs and toasted rye bread. It was such an odd combination of foods that they were certain what they were eating was foreign.

For dessert we had "Russian Snowballs" (again, I gave the dessert a name, but it was really just ice cream rolled in coconut with chocolate sauce).

At each commercial break during the show we talked about what was happening in the ballet, and, during the ensemble scenes, all of the children got up and danced with the corps de ballet. It was a glorious "Nutcracker Night." The magic of celebration is that the one doing the planning and other work has as much fun as the participants.

Costumes. There is something about even the suggestion of a costume that marks an event as a celebration. When one daughter returned from her mission in Montreal, I wanted to have an evening of celebration. I found a charming French restaurant a short distance from our home, but I wanted to do something more, something to make it unique. I thought of Montreal and how chic the women are there, and so I decided it would be "hats." All my daughters and daughters-in-law who were going to be at the dinner came with me to an inexpensive store that carried hats. We tried on hats to our heart's content, and finally each of us chose one.

That night we sailed into the restaurant looking quite wonderful, a little conspicuous, and very, very festive. We had the most splendid time, and I always think of that evening with a thrill of delight at the memory of all those beautiful, beloved faces set off by their elegant hats.

But first a song. Books, art, and music are essential components of celebration. We have always sung as a family, and it has delighted us to see, as our children marry, how quickly they teach the extensive list of our family songs to their partners. We especially love rounds and have made quite a collection of them. Some of our favorites are "My Dame Has a Lame Tame Crane," "Chairs to Mend," "Buy, Buy, Buy," and "Black Socks."

Work. Work is the ultimate game. Our favorite method of turning work into a party is with a bowl in the kitchen. In the bowl are placed slips of paper, each listing one of the Saturday chores. Also in the bowl are several slips describing unusual tasks, such as "go around the house and tell every person something nice about himself," or "get a cookie out of the cupboard, pour a glass of milk or juice, sit down, and enjoy yourself for five minutes," or "run the circumference of the house three times singing 'Yankee Doodle Dandy.'" Those are the fun slips. If you draw a job slip, you just go do the job, but if you draw a fun slip, then you do it and place the fun slip back in the bowl. You may not do two fun slips in a row but must keep drawing until you get a job slip.

There are many ways to make work a game. And work, when it is finished, is sheer delight.

Other ideas to make the ordinary into extraordinary are notes, decorations, candles, ribbons, written menus, homemade tickets, eating in different places in the house, surprises, unexpected gifts, bubble-blowing, contests, challenges, and treats or notes placed on plates or pillows or in lunch boxes. Just add the unexpected to the expected.

Sports and Games

We can incorporate into our daily lives sports, games, and the lively arts. They are the bright, satin ribbons that highlight the threads of life we are weaving.

We all need physical activity to whet the keenness of our ability to enjoy celebration, and many games can become the center of celebration: tennis round-robin, Ping-Pong, touch football, soccer, dodgeball, swimming, mountain climbing, volleyball, playing in the local park. Physical activity may yield great joy.

Table games and word games can create moments of celebration. We love games, especially word games and games of wit. One son-in-law has a Monopoly board he has had since he was a boy. Each game he plays is recorded on the board—the date, who played, and who won. With that simple tradition he has made playing Monopoly a celebration.

Traditions

Traditions are an important part of the celebrations of our lives. The repetition of things we love leaves deep and happy impressions in our minds and spirits and helps us to live with rejoicing.

For several years I made sweatshirts for every member of the family to wear at Thanksgiving. (Thanksgiving is my favorite celebration! To me, Christmas is the carols, the being together, and the renewal of my relationship with the Savior. My big focus on doing is at Thanksgiving.)

Each year I chose a different theme and then used it in the table decorations as well. One year it was ducks; another, it was apples; another, home; another, quilts; and so on.

I did not decorate the men's sweatshirts, except with a little monogram on the sleeve, but we all had a shirt of the same color—from the biggest man to the smallest baby—to wear on the hike that is a traditional part of our Thanksgiving celebration.

Now, lest you be overwhelmed by the thought of my decorating all those sweatshirts, you should know that I did it with lots of help from my daughters, and I didn't do the shirts with anything like meticulous perfection. Once I even spray-painted them (talk about a quickie method!) with stencils.

When it stopped being fun and became a chore, I stopped making the shirts. I don't believe in tradition running away with joy—and so, the year that I sighed at the thought of all the work to make them, I just cancelled the sweatshirts. The family has the memory of the sweatshirts and the pictures—and good memories are a very nice part of celebration.

Probably no traditions are filled with more precious warmth than those of Christmas. Each family's Christmas traditions are perhaps the greatest expression of celebration.

One caution: when an event becomes so crusted with traditions that we find ourselves dreading the work rather than eagerly looking forward to the event, when the doing is no longer a delight, then we are serving the tradition—the tradition is no longer serving us. When those feelings occur, remember the principle of simplification and restore the things that matter so that the celebration will be untarnished and bright once again.

Funquik

It's hard to create celebration on the spur of the moment without some raw materials on hand. I call these supplies Funquik, and I like to have them on my shelves at all times. What might alert you that you need your Funquik box? (Your Funquik box should always be kept in its Funquik place, to which no one has access but you.)

Here are some of the clues that your Funquik box is needed: children are bored or quarreling, you are feeling sorry for yourself, the children are restless and cranky, you feel you have no money and no time to do something fun, you're resentful at being cooped up at home, or you feel like this day is just another in a long line of same-old-thing days.

When you are having these feelings, it is time to take control of what is happening. A Funquik box and a little imagination can create a project or a new experience or a quiet hour for the children while you can do something you want to do.

Some of the things in my Funquik box are writing paper, construction paper, pencils, marker pens, paints, tape, scissors, glue, glitter, ribbons, balls and paddles, music and video tapes, inexpensive gifts, felt, scraps, old magazines, and so on. The children use duplicates of some of these items all the time. The ones in my Funquik box are used only under my supervision—when I get the box out.

If there are no children in your life, your Funquik box may hold a new book you want to read, or a crossword puzzle, or an envelope for saving dollar bills toward a day on the ski slopes—you get the picture.

With a Funquik box and a little imagination, the fuse of celebration can be relit. The real secret of celebration is that it is usually just one idea away.
