Jaroldeen Edwards, Celebration! Ten Principles of More Joyous Living ( 1995)

6

The Glory of God Is Intelligence

To see a World in a Grain of Sand And a Heaven in a Wild Flower, Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand And Eternity in an hour. William Blake, 1757-1827

Books! The very word makes me shiver with wonder and delight. I was reared in a home where books and the gift of words were cherished. We had a dictionary next to our dining room table so that we could look up words because, as we were growing up, we frequently had heated discussions about the specific meaning of words.

My brothers, my sister, and I, as well as our parents, were constant readers. By every chair, bed, and resting place a book or magazine lay open. We talked and argued and shared—conversation was often centered on what we were reading.

The love of words was planted early, and now, in my mature years, I revel in the harvest of those early influences. My brothers—two scientists, a lawyer, and an economist—are all poets of merit, and my sister teaches creative writing at Arizona State University. The greatest inheritance our parents gave us was the love of books and learning.

Knowledge is the fundamental fuel of thought. Confucius said that learning without thought is labor lost but thought without learning is a perilous enterprise. As we read Doctrine and Covenants 93 we are taught the interrelationship between truth, knowledge, intelligence, and the glory of God. Wisdom, or intelligence, is described as light and truth. Light refers to the enlightenment of the spirit through the Holy Ghost, the scriptures, the inspiration of the Lord, and the light of Christ. Truth is "knowledge of things as they are, as they were, and as they are to come." This knowledge, combined with prayer, pondering, and spiritual light, becomes a lifetime pursuit of exaltation—the ultimate celebration.

Joseph Smith has told us that we are saved no faster than we get knowledge (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938], p. 217). The ability to comprehend, to become enlightened, is a gift from the Lord, but he expects us to study, search, think, and learn throughout our lives so that we comprehend the things he would teach us. We are encouraged to study all things in heaven and earth, things above the earth and under the earth. We are to study out of the best books and to learn of other peoples and languages, even unto the isles of the sea.

It is the true celebration of mortal life to be endlessly curious about everything, to know and understand, as Doctrine and Covenants 93 explains, all truth and intelligence, which is "independent in the sphere in which God has placed it" (v. 30). We have been given our agency to receive this truth and light, but it must be by our own agency, or effort. If we refuse to study and learn when we have the opportunity, then in that failure to gain knowledge, the scriptures say, we are condemned.

We stand on an earth that seems solid to us, yet the matter that we take for granted is in constant motion. Each atom is filled with motion, crystals are moving slowly and inexorably toward formation, the earth itself is rotating and swinging in majestic orbit—the whole of space is filled with motion. We do not even begin to comprehend the things that lie about us in full sight.

Discovery, says the scientist Albert Gyorgie, consists of seeing what everybody has seen and thinking what nobody has thought. What a perfect description of truth mixed with light which results in eternal intelligence—or the glory of God.

As parents we teach the eternal quest for knowledge both by precept and by example. Reading should be as much a part of our lives as washing our face and hands. We should read to ourselves, and we should read to our children and grandchildren.

We live in a world that is in jeopardy of losing the gift of language. Our children are more computer literate than word literate. Publications have lowered their vocabulary and sentence structure—their readability levels—significantly, to high school level or below.

The ability to read well, indeed, the ability to read at all, is being compromised in our culture. Even those with education often feel that the day they receive their diploma is the end of their years of study. Many well-educated men and women simply do not consider the acquisition of further knowledge a continuing part of life's experience. I contrast such stagnant attitudes with that of my mother, who, in her eighties took a course in anthropology because she wondered about the migrations of the "family of man."

In the continuing ability to feel wonder and curiosity—in the hunger and thirst that comes from awareness and the need to know—comes the lifelong motivation to study and learn. Seeking to gain knowledge is both the badge of the celebrating heart and the nourishment of renewed celebration. It should last as long as breath.

Knowledge is a great, self-starting pursuit—it perpetuates itself. Each little bit of knowledge we gain leads us to more questions, more desire to know. Gaining knowledge is not only the pursuit of glory, it is also the glorious pursuit. The search for knowledge and learning is not ended with a graduation from formal institutions of learning. That is just the beginning.

There are many aspects to the lifelong pursuit of knowledge. Part of knowledge is certainly the development of our talents.

My brother commented to a seminary class, "All of you have your agency. It is an absolute gift. The Lord has put no limitations upon your agency—but you have put limitations on it. For example, all of you are completely free to walk up to the front of this class and play a Bach prelude. You have the agency to do so and the piano is here. Most of you, however, are not able to do so. Your ability to exercise that agency will exist only when you have spent years studying, practicing, and learning to play."

When we understand the implications of that statement, we understand that our own lack of effort and knowledge inhibits our agency in many of the things we might wish to do.

Knowledge is gained in many ways: experience; experiments; careful observation; lessons, discussions and lectures; meditation and prayer; effort and practice. All of these are important skills to be used in gaining knowledge.

Books—the fruit of other people's learning—form the background of our own learning. In books and other writings can be gathered the total of all that is known upon this earth.

Books also contain the lovely creations of humankind, the epic poetry and other beautifully crafted thoughts. I will never forget the day in autumn when I walked across the sunlit campus at Brigham Young University toward the Quonset huts that ringed the campus in the fifties. It was late afternoon, and the sidewalk was deserted. My destination was a small graduate class in Greek literature taught by Dr. Hugh B. Nibley. Handsome, youthful, and brilliant, Dr. Nibley was already a legend on the campus.

Only four or five other students sat with me in the hot metal building. Ten minutes passed, and the young man next to me said, "Ten minutes past class time. We don't have to wait any longer. I'm outta here!" He started picking up his books, and the rest of us looked uncertain.

At that moment the back door banged open, and we heard footsteps running up the aisle. We turned to see Dr. Nibley. He was wearing an old army sweater, his pant cuff was wrapped in a bicycle clip, and his hair was blowing in the wind of his motion. In his arms he carried two huge leather volumes which he slammed onto the lecture table. He turned to greet us in his eager voice. Speaking at breathtaking speed, he walked back and forth in front of us, his eyes sparking with excitement.

"What would you do," he exclaimed delightedly, "if I told you that they have just discovered a machine that will allow you to live in the mind of a man who lived three thousand years ago?

"I mean," he went on, his voice so swift, intense, and exuberant that I felt breathless just listening, "I mean, not just look at his brain. No! Literally be in his mind! Hear what he hears! Think what he thinks! Smell what he smells! Feel what he feels!?"

He paused and looked at us intensely for a moment. Then he went over and picked up one of the heavy volumes, and he shook it in our faces.

"Well!" he said with a triumphant smile and a voice of great celebration. "Surprise, surprise! Here it is! Here it is!"

I looked up at the book looming over my head, and I felt the fire of his conviction.

Of course! Through the wonder of books for a time we can experience and think great thoughts, great events, great ideas. Through books, in one lifetime we can live a thousand lives!

One precious thing that reading will do for us besides increasing our knowledge is give us comfort in times of trial. Reading gives us the opportunity to escape briefly from the turmoil and challenge of our own lives and to return to them refreshed and wiser. Reading can amuse, enlighten, reassure, teach, and enlarge our understanding.

All true knowledge begins and ends in the study of the scriptures. If we are to have lives of celebration, we must build each day upon the words of the Lord. In each life the reading of the scriptures will take a different form. The important thing is that it be constant and real. My husband has read daily for more than twenty-five years without missing a single day. He reads a chapter of the Book of Mormon each morning and a chapter of one of the other books of scripture each evening. Each time he completes the Book of Mormon, he marks the date in the front of his book.

I am a student of the scriptures, too, but my reading tends to be lesson oriented—or manuscript oriented. Often when I am reading I will begin a train of thought and end up pursuing it through assorted scriptures. And some days I just plain miss reading altogether.

I was determined to follow my husband's disciplined example, and so, the last time he began reading the Book of Mormon, I began with him on the same day. "This way," I said optimistically, "we can discuss the chapter at the end of the day."

Shortly afterwards, Weston began an intensive period of traveling, and I was called to be Young Women president. Several weeks went by, and our joint reading project was not discussed.

One night, after returning home from a long business trip, Weston said sleepily, "I just read Alma 17. Where are you reading?"

I was still in Mosiah, but I did not want to admit it. I smiled. "If you keep reading at your present rate you'll catch up to me before you know it—the second time around!" We both went to sleep laughing. The next day I started reading at Alma 17. After all, knowledge is patient, and it doesn't have deadlines except in school.

As we study the scriptures it becomes very clear that Heavenly Father desires that we search for knowledge throughout out lives. When I say knowledge, I mean truth plus the Light of Christ—or in other words, wisdom or intelligence, not intellectualism. Intellectualism is referred to in the scriptures as "learning" or "learned," and it is depicted as a deterrent to spiritual growth.

It is important to understand the difference between knowledge, which creates joy and growth, and intellectualism, which destroys the spirit.

Here are some guidelines to help distinguish between intellectualism and knowledge:

Knowledge never builds barriers between us and others. It creates a deep understanding of others and asserts the common ties that bind all of mankind.

Intellectualism considers itself superior to others.

Knowledge gives us vision and supports and reinforces spiritual truth. It helps us to see the mark that we must not miss or see beyond. It teaches us the sublime simplicities.

Intellectualism deliberately obfuscates (and uses words like that!) and delights in obscure complication rather than clarification.

Knowledge ponders and is obedient. The knowledgeable mind does not fear wise direction and does not insist on its point of view.

Intellectualism defies direction and desires constant rethinking, believing nothing is constant.

Knowledge teaches how much we have yet to learn. It teaches us the value of the Spirit and the ideas of others regardless of their education. Knowledge makes us truly humble.

Intellectualism makes us proud and causes us to jealously guard what we know to use against others to convince, control, or win. It causes us to have faith in the learning of man rather than in the Spirit of the Lord.

Finally, true knowledge fills the countenance with truth and light and makes us more approachable, open, and understanding—more loving. Joseph Smith spent his life seeking knowledge and gained it, yet it only made him more loving and beloved.

The mark of godlike intelligence on the face of a man or a woman is truly the most appealing and moving expression that one can see. To wear such a face would be a celebration.
