Jaroldeen Edwards, Celebration! Ten Principles of More Joyous Living ( 1995)

7

Be There

I wish to spread the doctrine of the strenuous life. Theodore Roosevelt, 1859-1919

At the end of the movie Forrest Gump, the main character, a simple and ingenuous man, accompanies his young son to the bus stop. The little boy is going to his first day of school, and his father watches with concern, pride, and love as the child climbs onto the school bus. "I'll be here when you come home," Forrest calls to his son as the bus door closes. The bus drives away, and Forrest sits down on a stump.

Suddenly it dawns on the audience that the father will sit there all day. The first thing his son will see when he returns that afternoon will be his beloved father in the same spot, waiting for him. The camera pulls back, and a pure white feather, wafted on the tender breezes, slowly drifts toward Forrest, as he sits quietly and faithfully at his post. The feather brushes against him like some great beneficence, a blessing, a mark of approval drifting from heaven.

Celebration can be as humble as quiet, unadorned faithfulness. There is great celebration in the knowledge that we are where we should be when we should be there. Celebration exists in our determination to acknowledge the times when our attendance—just being there—is the measure of who and what we are and our willingness to put first things first in our lives.

My father taught me this principle of celebration. He taught me that we have an invitation from the Lord and we, His children, should answer it continually.

A parable describes a banquet planned by the Master. He invites his friends—noblemen, prominent and important people. When the time for the feast comes, not one invited guest is there. The invitation is then rescinded. It is now too late for those who were first invited, and others, who are humbler, more obedient and open to his voice, are asked to take their places at the table.

This parable is often overlooked, yet it contains an invaluable message for those of us who have been invited to the banquet—who have heard the invitation, have been baptized, and have become, by our own promises, friends of the Master who will be there, but then we begin to fail to appreciate the invitation unless we receive some special recognition or responsibility—just having been invited is no longer enough for us.

During the past two decades, I have noticed a dramatic change in attitudes toward attendance at meetings, activities, and a large array of events. "I'm too busy," or "I don't attend ward parties—they are never much fun," or "My children can't go to weekday Mutual activities because they have so much homework and other important things to do," or "Homemaking meeting is not my thing."

My father was a bishop for many years, and when he was released he was without a calling for a while. I know it was difficult for him to have been the leader of the ward and then suddenly be "without portfolio."

One Sunday morning, very early, I went down to the library in our home to practice the hymns I was going to accompany in Sunday School that day, and I found my father, dressed in his suit and fresh white shirt with his crisp pocket handkerchief, sitting in his chair, reading the Sunday School manual.

"Are you teaching Sunday School class today?" I asked.

"No," said my father, "but I am going to be a student in it."

"Do you always read the lesson, even when you are not teaching it?" I asked, dumbfounded. "When you don't even have a calling?"

"Jaroldeen," he said gravely, "I have a sacred calling. I am a member of The Church of Jesus Christ, and just being a member entails life-filling responsibilities. Like any other calling, I want to do this one well. My responsibility is to attend every meeting and listen and contribute to the best of my ability. I must be friendly and cordial to all who are there. I must study and read the scriptures so that I bring the Spirit of the Lord with me. I must do my home teaching, encourage the bishop and other officers, care for my family and set them an example of faithfulness, and search for opportunities to serve others."

He smiled and repeated, "Just being a member is a challenging job!"

One great lesson of celebration is recognizing the challenge and joy of membership in the human race. Our lives do not have to contain any more recognition than that we are for them to be full of great opportunities.

We soon discover that if we are not in the places where we should be, when we should be there, we have diminished our ability to feel joy. A vague sense of guilt will nag at us, and even the most brilliant rationalization will be unable to rid us of the feeling of knowing we are not in the place we should be.

It is easy and fun to fulfill responsibilities, to attend meetings and events when we are in charge, or have control, or are in a visible role, but it is equally essential that we fulfill our responsibilities when our role is nothing more or less than to be there.

Life gets a lot easier, and more fun, when we make this principle of supportive attendance a policy. We don't have to evaluate whether to go or not to go, and we don't have to try to decide what will be worthwhile to us and what won't be.

The truth is, we do not know beforehand what the valuable part of an experience will be. It may not be the speaker, it may not be the activity, but it may be the making of a new friend, the encouragement of a leader, a word said to a downcast acquaintance, or just the opportunity to feel the satisfaction of having supported those to whom we owe our support.

Sometimes genuine conflicts make attendance impossible. Especially when we have a number of children, or our husband has a time-consuming career, we find that travel, school engagements, and community responsibilities will be scheduled at the same time as Church events or family obligations. In such cases we must evaluate which is most essential. Such choices are inevitable and will be made on their own merits. Nevertheless, we must be sure our priorities are right.

The policy of the joyful, celebratory life is that if we belong, we, to the best of our ability, will be in attendance at the scheduled meetings of the Church, PTA, choir, and volunteer organizations, and at weddings, funerals, birthdays, children's programs and other family events, showers, elections, and all the other obligations our life entails. Being a faithful member is a wonderful experience.

Once we have adopted this policy, it is amazing the freedom and satisfaction it brings. No longer do we have to excuse our absences to ourselves or anyone else. No longer do we have to try to evaluate the importance of individual events. No longer do we have to be the self-appointed judge of what is worthy of our attendance and what is not. And the shadow of guilt is a thing of the past.

The concept of not enough time is not often applicable. Just think, if someone invited you to a Barbra Streisand concert, you would probably find the time. When you give up the hour or two a month it takes to attend Homemaking, you simply get up earlier that day, or work harder, or stay up later if you need to. In truth, most of us take off a night or so a month anyway.

Our teenagers can also find ways in their week's schedules to make time for the hour they spend at Mutual. It isn't what they do at Mutual that matters. Don't try to weigh the value of attendance by weighing the activity against other possible uses of the time. The purpose of their regular attendance is to develop the lifetime gift of being there where they should be, when they should be. Attendance becomes the measure of commitment and will be part of the iron rod of their life. They are also setting an example and making lifelong relationships.

If we say that our teenager finds it more important to do schoolwork than to attend his scheduled activity, we ignore the fact that all the youth have schoolwork to do! If everyone used that excuse, we would lose our youth program altogether. If we say the youth program is doing unimportant things—that it would be better for our teenager to spend time practicing a musical instrument or sport—we are doing three things:

The concept of being there means that we are promise-keepers and willing to be followers and supporters. It is the assurance that we will take a position and stay with it when others fall away. People such as this are those who, "while their companions slept, / Were toiling upward in the night" (Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, The Ladder of Saint Augustine). They are where they should be, first and last. They are the lamp-lit virgins at the midnight hour.

When my family and I were living in Connecticut, my husband was in a serious automobile accident. I ran to my neighbor, asked her to watch my little girl, and dashed to the hospital. I arrived at the hospital to find my neighbor's husband—a man I knew only slightly—in the waiting room. He worked for a large corporation and he was preparing for an international trip, but the minute his wife called, he walked out of his office and drove to the hospital. "I am here, Jaroldeen," he said. "Is there anything you need? Anything we can do?" He did not telephone. He was simply there.

Another time, I was proofreading a large manuscript of more than six hundred pages. My New York publisher had given me only one week to return the proofs because we were on a very tight production schedule. I was Young Women president and had a week of several activities. As I was cleaning up Wednesday night after a Laurel dinner, I mentioned to two of my friends who worked in the youth program with me that I was afraid I was going to be unable to meet the deadline on my manuscript.

The next morning my doorbell rang. My two precious friends were there. They did not just call and say "Can we help?" They were there.

The three of us worked side by side, and the manuscript was in the mail by evening.

Being there is a principle of celebration because it causes us to move away from the limited scope of what we see and what we wish and what we focus on. To be there we are compelled into the world of others' needs and of obedience and sacrifice.

We can get so caught up in the overwhelming wonder and responsibility of our own life that we forget that our life, to have real value, must be lost in the lives of others. I love the story of the Lady of Shalott as she weaves her beautiful fabric and spends her days staring in the mirror. How many of us, if we were not compelled by the knowledge of our obligation to be there (not just in the places we want to be but also in the places we have promised to be or that we should be), would live our lives like Alfred, Lord Tennyson's beautiful, aloof, and empty lady, weaving the fabric of our own lives, seeing only ourselves and our own needs, doing only the things we want to do.

A few months ago I discussed the principle of being there in the Saturday session of stake conference. I said, "Stop asking yourself, Should I go? Is it going to be worth my while? or telling yourself, No one will miss me this once. Just be there," I said, "and you will be amazed at how simple it is to do it and what wonderful things can happen."

Sunday afternoon, I received a phone call from a dear young woman whom I visit teach. Her husband is investigating the Church, and she has two lively boys. That morning, she told me, her husband had decided not to attend the meeting, and she found herself thinking, "No one will know if I'm there. It is such a hassle with the boys. It won't matter this once."

"Then," she recounted, "I remembered what you had said, so I repeated to myself, 'Be there,' and the boys and I went. We got seats at the very back of the cultural hall, and I was sitting there thinking this wasn't such a good idea after all when a man walked past me, and I gasped with recognition. "I reached out and touched the man's arm. 'Are you David Jones [not his real name]?' I asked. He said yes." He was the former husband of her aunt, her favorite uncle when she was a child. The last time she had seen him, she was eleven years old.

Her uncle had not been a member of the Church when she knew him, and his marriage had broken up years before. She had wondered for more than a decade what had happened to him. "What are you doing here?" my friend asked him in amazement. She was thrilled to learn that since the divorce her uncle had investigated the Church, had been baptized, had remarried, and lived not far away.

She concluded tearfully, "He was such a wonderful part of my childhood, and our family had completely lost track of him. I came home filled with wonder. It was as though the Lord had said to me, "Be there—you never know what wonders I will perform."

Have you ever wondered about the people who didn't accept King Benjamin's invitation to hear him speak? "It's going to be so crowded," "I hate spending time in a tent," "Someone else can tell us what he said," "I'll wait and read the conference issue." Think what they missed!

What must it have been like to stand in that mighty congregation in Zarahemla and have the joy of feeling your heart undergo the mighty change? To be given the name of Christ as your own—to be blessed by the king whose life had been given to service?

No one could have imagined beforehand all that was going to happen. Those who attended did not go because they had foreknowledge that it would be a life-changing experience. They attended because they were covenant-keepers and King Benjamin's address unexpectedly became the watershed experience of their lives.

We feel that same satisfaction whenever we are in the right place at the right time. I love those events that reaffirm that just being—and being where we should be—gives our life affirmation and joy. Being there is such a simple, abiding celebration of the shared needs of humankind.

Being there is our quiet celebration—the gentle feather of joy that will brush against us as we sit quietly, just being a member.
