Jaroldeen Edwards, Celebration! Ten Principles of More Joyous Living ( 1995)

8

The Just-Can't-Wait Principle

To business that we love we rise betime, And go to 't with delight. William Shakespeare, 1564-1616

A phrase in the scriptures that I love is "joy in the morning." When we lie down at night, before sleep invades our consciousness, often the cares, fears, and concerns of our life overwhelm us. It is as though, in the darkness, all the worries we have held at bay during the busy hours of the day suddenly come rushing over us.

What a blessing sleep is when it comes! Beneficial, sweet, and healing! Shakespeare says that sleep knits up the raveled sleeve of care (see Macbeth, 2.2.37). Sleep promises us the dawning of a new day—a new beginning, and fresh energy and purpose to meet the challenges of the coming day.

If we want to increase the feeling of celebration in our lives, we should not leave all the restorative work to sleep, however. As we open our eyes to the morning, it is a wonderful thing to create anticipation for the hours ahead and experience the feeling of pending joy.

Much of what our day holds will be prescribed by the obligations and circumstance of our life, but the way we feel as we rise from our bed affects the way we feel throughout the events of the day.

The Lord wants us to feel joy in the morning—and there are some ways in which we can help that to happen.

The first thing that will help us feel joy is to develop a sense of empowerment over our day. If we feel, as we rise, that the day is full of things that are required by others, then we will rise with feelings of reluctance and resistance and resentment. To feel empowered—to feel that the day is ours—we need to control the agenda.

"Well," you might say with real justification, "I have to get breakfast. I have to drive the children to school. I have to be to work on time. Or, I have to bathe and dress my preschoolers and be at the PTA meeting and prepare the dinner for my neighbor who has just had a baby and drive my mother to her doctor's appointment and get my husband's shirts to the laundry and . . . I have no control over what I have to do!!"

When you feel that way, you don't want to get out of bed. I've felt that way many a time and still do on occasion. But it is a feeling that often can be changed on almost any day, and it may not take much to do it.

We can begin by remembering that many of the responsibilities we regard as obligations put upon us by others are really just the extension of choices we made freely and eagerly on our own.

When we decided to marry, to have children, to take a certain job, we made vows, covenants, and commitments—but we made them of our own free will because we knew those decisions could be the source of joy.

When the promises and decisions we have made turn into work or repetitive chores, we sometimes forget that we chose to make those promises, and we blame those we love for the ramifications of our role.

When we make breakfast, for example, we are not being forced to do that by others; we are fulfilling an aspect of the choice that we made to be a mother and a wife. We made the choice, and we are not being forced to do these things; we are doing them from a conscious and loving choice made long ago.

Understanding that, we understand that the concept of caring for those we love and have chosen to take responsibility for was part of the original vision of what we were accepting when we chose those obligations and relationships.

If we analyze most tasks that await us, we find that many are extensions of decisions we made ourselves. Suddenly we recognize that we are living the life we have chosen.

With that attitude, we can feel less trapped and more in charge of our own daily experience. We remember why and how we are doing what we do.

Other things can be done to make an "I-just-can't-wait-for-the-day-to-begin" kind of a morning.

For example, if breakfast is at the head of the chore list and you are feeling bored, tired, and resentful of the task, plan your day with a variation of breakfast. Take control of it. Here are some ideas:

Â Have frozen waffles in the fridge and let the children fix their own with funny toppings.

Â Go to McDonald's.

Â Serve something totally outrageous, like hot fudge sundaes.

Â Skip breakfast, and give everyone a breakfast bar in the car.

Â Search recipe books and get up half an hour early to surprise the family with a splendid breakfast—and then let them have "do-it-yourself" breakfasts the rest of the week.

A simple change of attitude toward a burdensome task can turn it into something you anticipate rather than something you dread.

My daughter Julia, who is expecting her tenth child, makes seven school lunches every morning. It is a job she has disliked so much it was hard for her to get out of bed, because the chore of making sack lunches is the first chore she faces every day.

When I think of her making all those lunches, I remember my years of making lunches. I know just how she felt. I was always running out of bread and putting peanut butter on hamburger buns. Or else I ran out of peanut butter and had to boil eggs for egg salad (which I know not one of my children ever ate!) and by the end of the week I was scrounging for some treat to put in the sack. I'd look for something tucked in the back of the cupboard, usually those small boxes of raisins (also something my children would not eat). Some treat! I was often glad I did not have to be at school when my children opened their sacks because I knew the comments they made would be less than complimentary.

Lunches were a chore for Julia that made every morning less than joyful until the Sunday that her eight-year-old son came home from church and had the following conversation with his mother.

"What was your Primary lesson about today?" his mother asked.

"Oh, you know," young Weston said in an offhand way. "It was that story that everybody knows. You know. The one about the time Jesus was walking around the Sea of Galilee and all these thousands of people came walking after him, and they listened to him for most of the day, and then it got hot and late and they were all tired and hungry and there wasn't any food at all.

"Except, you know, for this one little boy, and his mother had remembered to pack his lunch, and so he had some loaves and fishes, and Jesus took them and fed all those people."

My daughter told me this incident, and there were tears in our eyes. "His mother had packed his lunch."

"So you see, Mother," Julia said, "I have learned to like making lunches now, because I realize that when I'm feeding my children, I am feeding the five thousand—and more. It makes me think of all the hundreds of people my children's lives will touch through the years, and I am making that possible by nourishing them as they grow up.

"Lunches are a whole new experience since I have thought of that unknown mother in Galilee who made a lunch for her little boy, and her son gave it to the Savior, and the Savior fed five thousand people with it."

That is the power of understanding the real nature of our covenants and relationships, the real nature of the chores and the humble labor we do.

Another way to feel the anticipation expressed in the phrase "I just can't wait!" is to cultivate the ability to see and celebrate the "good parts."

Good and bad are inextricably mixed together. That is the nature of mortality. The gift is to find the way to emphasize and rejoice in the good.

Sitting in the car next to a wonderful brother-in-law, I began a conversation about rearing children. He and his remarkable wife have reared a terrific family of four sons and one daughter. Their children have grown into wonderful adults, and I wanted to hear what he felt he had learned in the process.

"When I was working for a national corporation," he told me, "my company spent a great deal of money—and I spent three weeks of my time—on a course to make employees more productive. All that money and all that time were spent to teach me one thing. And it was a thing I already knew."

"What was it?" I asked eagerly.

"It's just this: if you wish to influence human behavior, the only way you can do it is by rewarding behavior that you desire to be repeated. Reward positive behavior consistently and extravagantly. All other behavior you simply ignore."

"That's it?" I exclaimed.

"The important thing," he went on, "is to know what is a true reward. It is something different for every person.

"For some, it is praise; for some, a gift; for some, companionship; for some, increased responsibility—you have to be sure it is a reward valued by the recipient and not just a standard thing which is given to everyone across the board."

To reward positive behavior, we have to train ourselves to observe and appreciate it.

How often do our children come home from school with papers or report cards and we are critical or stingy in our praise? How much more effective we would be in teaching our children to love school if we recognized in even the most faltering performance the aspects that are worthy of extravagant praise.

Without exception, praiseworthy aspects exist in every attempt our children make. We may be so busy focusing on the things we want improved, or the disappointments, or the failures, that we neglect to pour our time, thoughts, and efforts into the portion of each attempt that is successful. The attempt itself is a measure of success.

By training ourselves to see in others and in ourselves things that are lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy—we seek the best of all that is about us, and we change the color of our own life.

Many of us become very effective at rewarding, complimenting, praising, and delighting others—but it is important that we also learn to reward ourselves as well.

If we are to feel the eagerness in our days that makes us rise with the urgency that we cannot wait for the day to begin, then we must know what we need as a reward and in some way build that feeling of reward into our own day.

We should not require others to reward us but find ways to reaffirm our worth to ourselves. If we do not, we may become martyrs, suffering imagined slights and resentments.

I have often heard women say that their lives are difficult because no one tells them how well they are doing. They say that their husbands receive praise and gratification in their work but that there are few in a woman's life to give her that kind of feedback. If our lives are to be filled with celebration, then we need to recognize our own contributions and strengths. We need to build into our lives those satisfactions that are necessary to keep us joyful.

We need to know ourselves. If we have a nature that needs adult friendship, and our husband's career is extremely demanding, and our children are young, then we should make time each day for a few minutes of the friendship that is so necessary to us to reinforce our sense of self and our feelings of joy. We need to make friends. As we begin the day, we should allow a few moments to phone a friend, meet her and her children at a park, write a letter, or reach out to someone in need.

If our personality is such that we need to feel intellectually challenged, and we find ourselves feeling deprived because we are surrounded by young children, then it is necessary for our own joy that we create moments in our day to study. There may be times when our study will have to be done at home, but some of the wonderful courses of my life have been when I have chosen a subject and studied it on my own.

My whole day takes on a special glow when I know that a book I cannot wait to read is lying in my home and that when I have my work under control, I can look forward to a few precious minutes reading and thinking. I just can't wait to get started.

Other rewards might be jogging, shopping, sewing, journal-keeping, letter-writing, painting, crafts, cooking, gardening. These are the grace notes of our lives. Moments of reward do not need to consume our life, but they need to be mixed into it, like the chocolate chips in chocolate chip cookies.

When our day dawns and we open our eyes to face the list of things to be done, if we feel the list consists of things we have chosen and decided—if we change our attitude about the tasks before us—if we look for what is good, sweet, and of worth in our life and in those around us, and, finally, if we have crafted our day so that there are moments and experiences of personal reward to look forward to, then we will find ourselves greeting the morning with joy.

In celebration, we will sit up in bed and say, "I just can't wait!"
