Jaroldeen Edwards, Celebration! Ten Principles of More Joyous Living ( 1995)

9

The "Ode on a Grecian Urn" Mentality

Beauty is truth, truth beauty,—that is all Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know. John Keats, 1795-1821

My father was a rancher. He was a rancher by profession. He was a rancher by education. He was a rancher as an investor. And he was a rancher out of love. My father loved the glory and the beauty of the untried land and the limitless possibilities of the West. And as an agricultural scientist, my father believed he could harvest those possibilities and teach others to use them wisely, productively, and well. My mother always said, caught somewhere between admiration and exasperation, "Charles never saw a piece of land he didn't want to own." My mother was a woman of the city—she did not like ranch life.

We lived in the city. Father's ranches were run by ranch managers. Father's business offices were in the city, and he was bishop of our ward for many years, so free time—a rarity—almost always entailed a quick drive out to one of the ranches.

Those drives are some of the most precious memories of my childhood. We would speed along the stretch of seemingly endless road that led straight to the horizon where the Rocky Mountains stood like a smoky blue ruffle between the land and the great, turquoise bowl of the prairie sky. On either side of us the vast acreage of Alberta spread like a quilt that had just been shaken and was settling down onto its vast bed. The fallow fields of strip farming rolled like ribbons across the incomprehensible space. The huge fields of mustard, more golden than the buttercups, the seas of blue flax blowing in the constant breeze, and the oceans of wheat waving their heavy, grain-laden heads stretched on forever.

Sometimes my father, in his passion for the miracle of the productive land, would pull the car to the side of the narrow, dusty road. He'd walk down the barrow pit that separated the road from the fields and snap off a few heads of wheat. "I've never seen such full heads!" he would exclaim. "That's Ed Sorenson's field. I'll need to ask him what seed he used, when he planted, and how he prepared the soil. This will be a record-breaking yield!"

He knew the name of every tree, shrub, and wildflower—not just the common name but the Latin name and the botanical family. When we traveled as a family, he kept a record of any trees or plants he did not recognize, and when we got home (if he could not learn the answer by asking people on the way) he researched until he identified each one.

On every drive, at least once, my father would talk about the land. "Have you ever seen anything more beautiful?" he would ask. He would stop the car and wave his hand at the vista as though it were a great pageant and he was the impresario.

A brilliant sunset would bring him to silence. The car would roll to a halt, and my father would gaze at the dying sun staining the air with the colors of peonies and hollyhocks and nightshade—and he would stand transfixed by the beauty. The silhouette of a threshing machine, black against the vivid sky, the chaff spewing like a plume against the crimson and orange streaks, added mystery and motion.

He savored such moments as he would a symphony, and his reverence of that glory was transmitted to his children. We could not have felt closer to the Lord than we did in the fields and the mountains.

When my father died of a heart attack at a too-young age, he had not had time to secure his estate. All of his older children were in graduate schools in the States, and our mother was left with two teenagers plus three ranches and a herd of registered Herefords that she had neither the training, the interest, nor the emotional wherewithal to manage.

Years later, as I was driving home to New York with six of my children, my fourteen-year-old nephew, John, sat next to me in the front seat. I told John how his father, my brother Malcolm, had worked each summer on the ranches. In the midst of one of my stories, John looked at me earnestly. In his face was all the curiosity and intensity of a child who has seen the gleam of the past and wants to know exactly the truth of it all.

"Aunt Jerry," he said, peering at me with his intelligent, demanding eyes, "how come, if our family owned so much of Alberta, how come we don't own so much as an acre now? How come?"

How come, indeed! It was hard for me to think that all the things that I and my siblings had taken for granted as children were gone, slipped through tired, grieving, inattentive fingers, lost to dishonest, manipulative businessmen, sold for educations and new houses and lost forever to a family that now never really returned to Canada except to visit.

Mother, and Mother alone, remained in the Canadian city of our childhood. Through the years we children made pilgrimages to see her, and perhaps in our hearts all of us wondered, "What if the ranches were still ours? Where did the lost lands of our youth go?" We were a family that did not discuss such things.

This year my mother's dear heart, which had loved us with unswerving care through her ninety-two years, stopped beating, quietly, in her sleep. Our mother, who had taught us to love words, literature, music, art, flowers, friends, generosity, and one another; our mother, who had given us the gift of beauty as though it fell, by nature, from her hands; our dear mother was gone, and the family gathered. At last her long, long widowhood was over, and we felt in our own sadness her great rejoicing at being reunited with her beloved Charles.

It was a poignant farewell for all of us. We said good-bye to our mother in mortality, knowing we would see her again, but still, in this lifetime we were motherless. Such a strange, unprotected feeling, even in our mature years. We knew, however, that we were not just saying farewell to our beloved mother. We were also saying farewell to Canada, the land of our childhood. Nothing was left to draw us back to this land of our childhood again. It was a weight in our minds and hearts.

As I drove northward toward Calgary to catch my late evening plane home to California, the prolonged twilight of Canadian summer lay across the land like a blessing. That soft prairie twilight has a most unusual light—as sweet and clear as a hymn. Suddenly, as we drove down the coulee, across a familiar bridge on the Oldman River, and then up a curving turn onto the flat, golden prairies once more, I said to my brother, "Stop the car!"

There, spread before us, were the fields of flax and mustard, the sky stained with sunset, the glint of the faraway river, the smoky outline of the Rockies, and the endless horizon of our youth. We had seen it a hundred times. From this very spot. And here it was, just as it had been in our childhood when our father taught us to see and love it.

At that moment we were seeing this land in reality, but I suddenly realized these vistas, this wondrous presence of the land of my birth was always with me—in my heart, in my mind, and in my memory.

This land belonged to us, to my brothers and sister, just as the air, and the sun, and the great visual celebration of the magnificence of this earth belongs to all of us. We have only to open our heart to see it and to love it.

The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof, and he has given it to us for our joy, our memory, our teaching, to learn the truth of beauty and the beauty of truth.

My inheritance is real, untouchable, eternal—it is more real, lasting, and precious than the land itself. Alberta is ours in our hearts, in our ability to appreciate, remember, and express its beauty.

Our father and mother have given us the most lasting, endless, and profound inheritance that it is possible to give: they have given us the eyes, the heart, and the mind to see and appreciate beauty. They gave us the memories that cannot fade and that open up the understanding of loveliness that makes all things more precious. There are no lost acres in Alberta. I carry them with me in my heart. My father gave them to me at the roadside when I was a little girl as he waved his hand so that I would see.

The gift of daily celebration is bound up in our ability to see the hand of the Lord, the Creator, in all things—to see beauty in every manifestation of creation, in the talents of others as they are inspired by God, and in others themselves, because they, too, are creations of the Lord.

The appreciation of beauty is like all other talents. It increases when we study, practice, and labor to develop it. We can read books about art, nature, and music. We can attend art museums, listen to fine music, and read exquisite literature. We can walk in nature and look for both the large vistas and the small, lovely things.

We can train ourselves to see beauty and grace in everyone whose path crosses ours.

A wonderful short story by Philip Roth called "Pigeon Feathers" tells the thoughts of a teenage boy who questions if there could be any sense to the universe, whether there is any purpose, any God.

Angry and rebellious, he goes out to the barn and shoots some pigeons who have been stealing the chicken feed. Suddenly he is sickened by what he is doing, and he picks up the body of one of the birds. As he does so, he stares at the feathers, each feather so perfect, so delicately colored, so precisely fashioned, so finely wrought in every detail.

He feels a weight lift from his spirit. If God could take infinite care to create such beauty in a single feather of a single pigeon, then surely he must know and care about the heart of a boy.

Beauty is the celebration of our lives. It gives us comfort, hope, delight, motivation, and the knowledge that we are loved. It is our noble inheritance from the Lord.
