Jaroldeen Edwards, Celebration! Ten Principles of More Joyous Living ( 1995)

10

The As-You-Wish Heart

Love is, above all, the gift of oneself. Jean Anouilh, 1910-

In William Golding's The Princess Bride, Wesley, the poor farm boy, complies with the heroine's demands by saying, "As you wish." Finally she realizes that "as you wish" is his way of saying, "I love you." What a perfect translation!

Nothing creates a life of celebration more than the ability to love, to live in an atmosphere of our own loving feelings for others and of our desire to show that love. Love requires nothing of others. It is not a coin with which we barter. Love rejoices in service. Love sees with tender eyes. Love forgives and forgets. Love does not judge. Love searches for ways to grace and bless the lives of others. Love knows no barriers. Love builds bridges. Love has courage and does not fail. Love is its own reward.

None of us loves perfectly, but if we are to take upon ourselves the countenance of Christ, then it should be our goal to become more and more perfect in the love which we feel and in our means of expressing it. We are told that God is love.

Love heals wounds. Love shines brightness into dark corners. Love lifts selfish concerns. Love teaches us how to rejoice.

Love lets us see with another's eyes.

I was to meet my teenage son at the door of the school to drive him home. After waiting for a long time, I drove around the school to the back door. Not there either. There were no students left at the school, so I assumed he had gotten another ride home.

It was a bitterly cold Connecticut day, and I had left the other children at home engaged in homework—with supper preparations half begun. Annoyed, and a little worried, I drove home. He was not there. I returned to the school. Waited. Drove around to the other doors and went home a second time.

Still no William. Very worried, I sped back to the school, frantically thinking what to do next. As I drove down the road I saw our other car, with my oldest son driving, and William beside him. I honked, and William came over and climbed into my car. My other son continued home.

Totally out of control with relief, frustration, anger, and puzzlement, I began lecturing my William without giving him a chance to say a word.

I went on for ten minutes about how, when I made arrangements to meet him, I expected him to be there. I told him how much he had worried me. I expressed how desperately worried I had been, how totally inconsiderate his actions were, and how frustrating it had been to sit waiting at the door, to drive around looking for him, to drive home, to put all of my work on hold, and on and on.

Finally I calmed down enough to really look at his face. His cheeks were red with cold and, to my horror, I saw tears standing in his eyes.

"Oh, William," I exclaimed, "I'm not mad at you. It's just that I have been so worried and frustrated. I've been waiting for you for two hours!"

There was a moment of absolute silence, and then William said quietly, "I've been waiting for two hours, too, Mother."

Never has the message of loving come more swiftly or sharply to my heart. All I could see in my self-involvement—in my own emotions, my own inconvenience, and my own disrupted day—was how hard my day had been. In one quiet sentence my son taught me that the eyes of love would have looked to see what his day had been.

It turned out that he had been waiting the whole time outdoors in the cold for fear of missing me. He had waited at the back door, and then, after waiting for extended periods, would go to look at the other door. For two hours we had played round-robin around the school, apparently just missing one another.

The first lesson of the as-you-wish heart is that it sees the wishes and needs of others swiftly, carefully, and compassionately, and serves those needs to the best of its ability. We should train our heart to feel not what we want, not what we had hoped, but rather what the loved one is feeling and how we can help. We should see the situation from the other person's focus, not from our own.

My husband always answers the phone, "How can I help you?" In another person that might seem a meaningless social phrase, but when my husband says it, it is a promise.

One lesson I learned from the scriptures that is helpful to me in training my thoughts, my heart, and my spirit in feeling refreshed and tender love toward my children comes from the prophet Mormon. When he writes to his son, Moroni, or addresses him directly, he says, "Moroni, my beloved son . . ."

I have found that as I speak to my husband and my children, if I allow that phrase to run through my mind, my heart is instantly warmed. As I say the name I add (either silently or out loud) "my beloved child," "my beloved husband," "my beloved friend."

When I meet someone I find hard to feel genuine affection for, I try to imagine what he or she was like as a little child. Since I have never met a child I didn't like, this method works for me.

Sometimes I can see a proud and difficult man as a serious, lonely child. Sometimes I can see a cold and controlling woman as an intense and determined child afraid that if she did not always do her best something terrible would happen. Seeing the seeds of adult behavior helps make me more compassionate and to believe in the basic goodness of even the most difficult people.

When stress and pressure arise in my relationship with my husband, my technique reminds me of the river of love which is the mainstream of my existence. Sometimes that love becomes obscured in the moment, and, before I let myself say or do anything, I look at my husband and say in my mind, "This is the dearest person in the entire world to me. He is the kindest, most wonderful man I have ever known. I love him with all my heart." The moment it takes to think these thoughts makes all the difference. I think those thoughts every time I see him and it is a joyous and comforting reaffirmation.

The love of brothers and sister, nieces and nephews, in-laws, grandchildren, friends, neighbors, business associates, and even strangers is the explosion of celebration in the life of one who has learned how to live with love.

Here is a bouquet of ideas for celebrating love in your life:

Letter Writing

Keep on hand in your home a supply of unusual stationery, colored pens, a beautiful fountain pen, a roll of stamps, greeting cards, pretty stickers, rubber stamp and pad—and other things to make a note seem special and fun to write. How often have you thought of a line you want to drop to someone, and because you do not have a nice card on hand or the stamps, you neglect writing the note until it would no longer be timely. What a missed opportunity!

Write thank-you notes for everything—to a speaker who gave a good talk in sacrament meeting, to the Primary president when you have seen some wonderful evidence of the great work being done in Primary, to a teenager who has done something fine, to a faraway friend whose name just pops into your mind. Learn to look for chances to feel and express gratitude.

If you see a newspaper clipping about a friend, or if you read a magazine article that you think your friend would like, clip it and send it. What a nice way to say "thinking of you."

Decorate envelopes and notes. One of my grandchildren sent me a letter, and at the bottom he wrote, "When you answer my letter, please answer it fancy." I often draw little cartoons of my grandchildren and me at the bottom of their letters depicting a pretend conversation written in balloons coming out of our mouths. It is their favorite kind of "fancy."

Keep your special stationery, cards, stamps, and such in a place that the rest of the family cannot raid, and then you will always be able to respond to your impulse to write a letter. It only takes a moment to do it, but often the effect of a graceful letter will last a lifetime.

Love at Home

Have a supply of things in your home that will give you the opportunity to express love. We each have different resources depending on our interests, our financial and time constraints, and so on, but we can all have something we can use to express our love—if only a telephone.

Flowers are a wonderful way to express love. If you love gardening, be sure that some of what you grow will be things that can be shared. Try roses, pansies, tomatoes, zucchini (even better when made into bread), clusters of fresh herbs—whatever you find easy to grow.

Crafts and sewing are very satisfying talents to share. The spectrum is as wide as the interests of those who work with their hands. One young woman discovered a great-looking—and easy—pattern for a summer maternity dress. She knew another woman who was expecting a baby the same time as she was, and so, when she bought fabric, she bought a second length of a different fabric, and then carrying machine, fabric, and pattern, she went to visit her sister—and they spent the afternoon watching their children play and sewing two adorable dresses. That is the loving heart thinking as-you-wish.

Books and magazines can be a great outlet for love. When we read a book that gives us delight, it is a great act of loving celebration to share that book. I know of women who, as soon as they read a book, write in the front of it their name, the date they finished the book, and what they thought about it. Then they give the book to a friend and encourage her to do the same and then pass the book along. Such books become treasures both of literature and of love.

Games and music are other evidences of love in a home—and of the opportunity to show love to others. We have a nephew, who, when he visits, always comes with the latest game. We have the most glorious evenings with him!

Music is such a joy to share. I love to teach visiting children new songs, especially at Thanksgiving and Christmas. I love to discover new songs, new music, and share it with others, knowing how it will bless their lives. The most cherished books in my music library are books I have been introduced to by dear friends.

One Christmas we invited family and friends over, asking each family to bring a new and unusual Christmas song to teach to the group. We sang away in a room filled with love, and then, after eating, we walked in the dark to the top of a hill that overlooked the town of San Juan Capistrano, twinkling with lights in the velvet night. Children and adults stood and sang to the stars. It was a wonderful night of love.

In our homes we should always have a room or a place where a guest would be instantly welcome. Even if it is only a couch, the blankets and clean sheets should be at hand. Then, when love urges us to invite, we can do so without hesitation.

The humblest guest room can be filled with love with a thoughtfully chosen book, a fresh water glass, flowers or candy on the bedside table, and genuine joy and welcome in the heart of the hosts.

Food: The Gift of Love

Develop some food item that is easy for you to make or keep on hand, and keep on hand a supply of it or the ingredients to make it. For example:

Â Frozen or cooked jam.

Â Breads of every kind.

Â Applesauce.

Â Soup—my particular favorite because I have so many good soup recipes: chili soup (always a hit); German meatball soup; corn chowder; hamburger vegetable soup, etc.

Â Pies, cookies, and cakes—especially in today's world, homemade sweets have become a wonderful treat.

When I take food to someone, I take it in a disposable or nonreturnable container because returning dishes is a real pain. It's always nice to add a ribbon, or a flower, or a pretty dishcloth, or bright wrapping. Little touches make a celebration.

Sometimes just pizza and root beer show love best of all. Pizza says, "I don't have time to cook—we're in this boat together—but I want you to know I care." Sometimes such candor is a gift in and of itself.

Service

Service is really a privilege. It is very difficult for others to let us into their lives to actually care for them and their needs. We should treat such opportunities with the respect they deserve.

Sometimes the best service is to listen with love and concern.

Sometimes we serve by allowing others to serve us—which is, in many ways, one of the hardest forms of service of all.

Search for meaningful ways to serve, and be sure to apply the "as-you-wish" rule. We don't serve to make ourselves feel better but to look for what the real needs are and then serve those needs.

Find splendid ways to rejoice when others rejoice. Balloons, confetti, flowers, cookie bouquets, a red carpet, an unexpected treat—when a missionary comes home, when someone gets a promotion, when a baby is born or a child has graduated.

I once heard a child talking to an older relative at the airport as they were waiting for their returned missionary to step off the plane. "We have balloons all over the house!" the child exclaimed, her voice trembling with the thrill of it. "We have . . . oh . . . I don't know . . . probably more than three hundred balloons—just thousands and thousands of them!"

Parties, Hospitality, and Entertainment

The giving of parties can be a true celebration of love. Here are some of our parties that have grown from love:

Â A three-day house party, with our brothers and sisters and their spouses all sleeping under one roof. Each day was crammed with everything we love—walks on the beach, talks on family history, news of our children, visits to museums, meals at restaurants, singing around the piano, a visit to the San Diego Temple. The high point of the party was a dinner in which we went to a farmers market and everyone bought the makings for one dish of their own choosing. Each couple prepared their contribution to the meal. It was the most delicious meal ever—and we had such great fun crowded in the kitchen working around one another, preparing surprises—fresh fruit salad, tossed salad, special rolls, spaghetti, fried chicken, and a scrumptious berry pie.

Â A Christmas party, to which we invite a mix of guests—family, neighbors, friends, and ward members. We have a light buffet supper and then we sit in a circle and everyone recounts a precious Christmas memory. It sounds so simple, but some of the dearest moments of my life have been as friends or neighbors have shared something so tender and unexpected that we have seen into their heart.

Â A party for a visitor with a special interest or talent. We have an evening of learning or entertainment, and we are edified and entertained among friends. Travel reports, musical talents, scriptural discussions—those listening are blessed, and those who have an opportunity to share things dear to their heart feel loved and appreciated.

Â Our Advent calendar party, given the first week of December. We invite families with all their children for an informal supper, and then we scatter throughout the house to work at different tables and on different work spaces to make advent calendars from construction paper, Christmas stickers, old Christmas cards, and so on. It is great family fun!

My favorite calendar party was topped off by a group of teenage boys starting to sing "O Christmas Tree." They got through the first line, "O Christmas tree, O Christmas tree," and then they began to ad lib, still singing the tune, "Nobody knows the words to this song, And no one can sing it, except the guy who wrote it, and he is probably dead by now—O Christmas tree, O Christmas tree . . ."

Verbal Expressions of Love

Just say it. When you see someone looking lovely—say it. When someone has done a good job—say it. When you think a good thought—say it. When you recognize the hand of the Lord—say it.

Words of kindness and love could seed our lives with a harvest of celebration if we could just train ourselves to feel and say them.

Gratitude is the food of love—and it is the fruit of love as well. We should not only express our love but learn to live with grateful hearts. Appreciation and gratitude erase bitterness and disappointment.

Forgiveness is also an essential ingredient of celebration. If we carry past wrongs chained to our minds and spirits, we, like Marley's ghost, cannot be free or happy.

We have not truly forgiven until we truly forget. Just let it go. Do not yearn for justice, or suspend yourself on the dry-dock of "it's not fair"; do not nurse hard feelings and hurts and think that somehow in your suffering you punish the other. Believe that the Lord will make everything right and fair when we all come to the bar. I, for one, am hoping for mercy, and so I pray and struggle to give it to those who have injured me or my loved ones. When the Lord told us to love our enemies, he meant that we must find it in our hearts to love them. Perfect love casteth out fear and hate and envy and pain.

The real danger in being unforgiving is not so much that we fail to forgive our enemies as that we often fail to forgive our loved ones. We nurse hurts and slights from our parents, our spouses, and our children. We remember past wrongs and mistakes, and we will not let our love go past them. In moments of stress we dredge them up to hurt and punish and limit those whom we have promised to cherish.

In every relationship are acts, both intended and unintended, that hurt the other. If we are to live with joy and celebration, we must work those through, resolve them, forgive, and forget them. True love lets others grow beyond the past—and remembers it no more.

Unexpected Gestures of Love

[Celebration!, page 140 We lived in a ward with a child of six who seemed like love embodied. She was interested in everyone. She knew the names of the people in the ward—of every age. When she entered the building, her feet seemed to dance with eagerness. Her lovely little face was bright with joyful expectation, intelligence, and delight at everything she saw and heard. One Fast Sunday she walked up to the pulpit. Her feet were a little hesitant, and we could see she felt a little shy and overwhelmed by the long walk up the aisle, but she knew she wanted to bear her testimony. With a deep breath for courage, she stepped up onto the children's step and stood by the microphone. Her face was shining with its usual smile and she looked out at the congregation with such open-hearted joy and affection that we all felt our hearts leap out to her. After she had said the usual words of a child's testimony, she stood for another moment smiling at us. "I love everyone in this ward," she said. Her six-year-old voice was clear and strong. "I think of you every night, and I remember you in my prayers. I always pray that all of you will have sweet dreams—that nothing will trouble you."

[Celebration!, page 140 As long as we lived in that ward I felt the influence of that child's loving prayer upon my dreams. What a perfect expression of love. That is the talent of a loving heart—to give unexpected, perfect gifts.

[Celebration!, page 141 In that same ward I received another remarkable gift of love.

[Celebration!, page 141 I had been hit by a car as I was jogging and spent a year in difficult recovery. During that time I was called to be the ward music director. I loved the calling, and though I could stand only with the help of a walker—and eventually, a cane—for most of that year, still I rejoiced in teaching and singing the hymns of the Lord.

[Celebration!, page 141 One Sunday I challenged the ward to memorize the hymns in the new hymnbook. "We have memorized the hymns of our childhood because we have been singing them for so many years," I said, "but now, we do not have all of those years left to us—and there are so many beautiful new hymns. We must memorize them consciously—just like the Primary children memorize all those wonderful songs every year for their Sunday Primary program."

[Celebration!, page 141 Then I showed the congregation how easily they could memorize the hymn "How Great Thou Art" by having them sing the first verse without their hymnbooks.

[Celebration!, page 141 The next three weeks I was away from the city, so I turned my music responsibilities over to my dear friend Joyce Jacobson, who serves the Lord with a heart of pure love. When I returned, I stood to begin the music practice.

[Celebration!, page 141 As soon as I stood up, the organist began to play "How Great Thou Art." I signaled her that it was the wrong hymn, but she merely smiled and went on playing. The entire congregation stood, and then I noticed no one was holding a hymnbook. By memory the congregation began to sing that mighty hymn.

[Celebration!, page 141-142 Tears sprang to my eyes. I stood transfixed as I looked at their beloved faces and listened to the words of that glorious hymn. They sang the first verse, then the second, then the third, and finally the fourth. All memorized. From youngest children to the oldest members, from families to singles, every member of that congregation sang with one heart, with one voice. Never has music sounded more sweetly or faces been more beautiful.

[Celebration!, page 142 Joyce, I was told later, had passed out the words, and the slips had been placed on sinks and dashboards and dinner tables. The whole ward had united in love to create a moment of perfect love. I know the angels sang with them, too. In that chapel, that morning, I believe I experienced that emotion which is called "the perfect love of Christ." They who sang had received his image in their countenances.

[Celebration!, page 142 Such unexpected, perfect moments are the gift the Lord gives when our true hearts' desire is to feel and express love. In that process of living by love, our hearts become, miraculously, as-we-wish.

[Celebration!, page 142 Joy is the purpose for which we were made and framed by our Heavenly Father. As Shakespeare said, "What a piece of work [we are]! How noble in reason! How infinite in faculty! In form and moving how express and admirable! In action how like an angel! In apprehension how like a god! The beauty of the world!" (Hamlet, 2.2. 315-18). It is in love that we find ourselves, and everything that has meaning and worth.

[Celebration!, page 142-143 Years ago I attended a performance of Pippin on the New York stage. In the play the stagemaster tries to influence Pippin, the son of the powerful emperor Charlemagne. The young Pippin is full of ambition and immaturity, and the guileful stagemaster urges the young man to give his life meaning. First he urges Pippin to seek power. When that doesn't work to give meaning to Pippin's life, he convinces Pippin to seek fame and then to seek the pleasures of the world. When all has failed, Pippin, heartsick and weary, stumbles onto a farm, and there meets a sweet widow and her little son.

[Celebration!, page 143 Pippin becomes a farmer, marries the widow, and becomes a father to the young boy.

[Celebration!, page 143 The stagemaster is furious. He ridicules Pippin, and castigates him, and berates him. "How can you trade all the glamour and power and achievement of the world for this paltry farm, for this ordinary woman? If you listen to me, you can have every wonderful thing the world has to offer."

[Celebration!, page 143 Pippin refuses to listen to the enticements of the stagemaster. He and his wife and child stand in the center of the stage, holding hands, and they begin to sing.

[Celebration!, page 143 The stagemaster, driven to rage, shouts, "Well, let's see how well you can sing when I take away the farm," and the farm disappears from the stage. Pippin and his wife and child keep singing. Then, one by one, the stagemaster takes away the scenery, the huge lights, the backdrop, even their outer clothes. Finally the orchestra even ceases playing, until only one last note of the piano is heard, and then silence.

[Celebration!, page 143 Pippin stands on a bare stage, with nothing but the brick wall and stage ropes behind him. He is dressed in a homespun shirt and trousers. Just one bare little bulb hangs in the center of the stage. Silence is all around. Everything has been taken away.

[Celebration!, page 143 "Now," the stagemaster says, "now see if you can sing."

[Celebration!, page 143-144 Pippin holds his wife's hand tighter. Their little boy steps close to his mother and father, and the three of them stand, in their simple homespun clothes. Softly their song begins.

[Celebration!, page 144 Their voices grow stronger and stronger, and the theater is filled with the sound of joy. Love seems to shimmer in the air, and the stage, bare as it is, is the most beautiful stage I have ever seen. Nothing but a man, a woman, a child—and love. Paul said in his tender epistle to the Ephesians:

[Celebration!, page 144 "That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted and ground in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God . . . abundantly above all that we ask or think" (Ephesians 3:17-20).
