David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

PREFACE

With President McKay's approval and gracious co-operation, this book, Gospel Ideals, has been prepared for presentation to the unnumbered thousands who will read these words of counsel and advice and consolation and encouragement from a beloved President.

President McKay is an exceptional literary figure. He is familiar with the best, the most inspirational literature of the world. His oral and written discourses mark this literary quality. He uses the English language effectively. An educator at the time he was called into Church service as an Apostle of the Lord, he has prepared his utterances with care. He approaches important problems and attacks pertinent issues with precision and force. His speeches and writings are analytical. Their author has practised what he no doubt taught as a teacher of English: unity and clarity.

The eighty volumes of conference reports alone, from which part of these paragraphs were compiled, are indicative of the wealth of material from which selections were taken. A minimum of change has been made in bringing the material up-to-date and adapting it to book use. Every effort has been made to keep the compilation true to the author in form as well as in spirit.

The President was in Europe when this book was put on the press. Even before that, his arduous duties did not permit his giving this compilation detailed attention—and if errors and inaccuracies appear on these pages, the editors take full responsibility for them.

The mission and message of the Church of Jesus Christ (which transforms the lives of men and society by means of simple gospel principle) is basic to all of President McKay's utterances. Any section of Gospel Ideals will offer aid to all who seek to find light in a troubled world. There is comfort for those who need comfort, courage for those who need courage, guidance for those who need guidance, peace for those who need peace, and spiritual challenge for those who need challenge.

With a conviction that this book will aid in the building of a better world, the management and editorial staff of The Improvement Era present this volume to President David O. McKay on the eightieth anniversary of his birth.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Compiling and publishing a volume of this kind demands dedicated service from those who work with it. Many there are who never receive commendation beyond a passing thanks for the work they do. Their satisfaction lies in knowing that they have given their best and have aided in making a contribution to the countless readers whose lives are touched by the book. The work of others can be more readily recognized.

To Dr. John A. Widtsoe goes the credit for initiating this work. The line of communication between the President of the Church and the people was dear to his heart. Even though he passed away before publication was completed, Dr. Widtsoe guided the formative stages of this book and proposed and planned its final presentation to honor President David O. McKay on the occasion of his eightieth birthday anniversary.

Dr. G. Homer Durham ably and discriminatingly did the initial selecting, arranging, and titling. He devoted untold hours to reading, weighing, integrating, and compiling the great wealth of material from President McKay's addresses and written words.

The editorial staff of The Improvement Era further planned, selected, edited, designed, and checked and rechecked materials from manuscript to final form, and worked closely with artists, engravers, printers, and photographers, to all of whom appreciation is here expressed.

Doyle L. Green, Marba C. Josephson, Elizabeth J. Moffitt, Albert L. Zobell, Jr., and Iris Parker, particularly deserve highest commendation for their devotion and painstaking diligence in the long and demanding labor of giving attention to every detail.

Especial thanks is given Clare Middlemiss, secretary to President David O. McKay, for her wholehearted co-operation in making available materials for this work and checking much of its contents.

Much thanks and credit are also due Elbert R. Curtis, general superintendent of the Y.M.M.I.A. and general manager of The Improvement Era; Bertha S. Reeder, general president of the Y.W.M.I.A. and associate manager of the Era, and John D. Giles, the Era's business manager, for their continued interest, encouragement, and support.

But the real substance was provided by the President himself, in words that he has written and spoken during nearly five decades. One cannot read these pages without sensing that President McKay has had a long and providential preparation for the high office he holds. The constancy of his counsel and the conviction of his testimony of truth will give guidance and comfort, encouragement and conviction for this, his own day, and far into the future.

RICHARD L. EVANS
