David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

BOOK I

THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST

" 'What think ye of Christ?' ... To the Church, and to the world, I repeat this question as being the most vital, the most far-reaching query in this unsettled, distracted world."

—DAVID O. MCKAY

Conference Report,

April 1951, p. 92.

CHAPTER 1

THE POWER OF THE GOSPEL

THE GLAD TIDINGS

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPTHE GUIDE TO HIGHER THINGS. We declare that the gospel, the glad tidings of great joy, is the true guide to mankind; and that men and women are happiest and most content who live nearest to its teachings.

"... the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated.

"And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days." (D. & C. 1:2, 4.)

Gospela-McKay, David O.TPWhat the sun in the heavenly blue is to the earth struggling to get free from winter's grip, so the gospel is to sorrowing souls yearning for something higher and better than mankind has yet found.—CR, October 1947, p. 121.

Gospela-McKay, David O.TPTHE "GOOD NEWS". "Good tidings of great joy"—the gospel of Jesus Christ is that good tidings. The term gospel means, literally, "good news," and such is the news that emanates from above. There have been but few men in the world's history who have been so in tune with the heavens that they could receive directly from God the Father that good news; but there have always been, in every dispensation, opportunities for men to receive that good news, and these prophets who were in tune with the infinite and who heard first and directly that good news have had imposed upon them the responsibility to convey that good news to others of their fellow men, that they who are concerned with the things of the world might receive the glad message and be brought back into the environment of peace, harmony, and good will. In this dispensation, that same responsibility has been given to man.—CR, April 1910, p. 106.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TPTHE GOSPEL AND JOYOUS LIVING. The principles of the gospel are the surest, safest guide to mortal man. Christ is the light to humanity. In that light man sees his way clearly. When the light is rejected, the soul of man stumbles in darkness. No person, no group, no nation can achieve true success without following him who said:

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TP"I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." (John 8:12.)

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TPIt is a sad thing when individuals and nations extinguish that light—when Christ and his gospel are supplanted by the law of the jungle and the strength of the sword. The chief tragedy in the world at the present time is its disbelief in God's goodness and its lack of faith in the teachings and doctrines of the gospel.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TPTo all who believe in a living, personal God and his divine truth, life can be delightful and beautiful.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TPAs a matter of fact, it is glorious just to be alive. Joy, even ecstasy, can be experienced in the consciousness of existence. There is supreme satisfaction in sensing one's individual entity and in realizing that that entity is part of God's great creative plan. There are none so poor, none so rich, sick, or maimed who may not be conscious of this relationship.—CR, April 1940, p. 115.

THE POWER OF THE GOSPEL

Gospela-McKay, David O.TPTHE GREATEST FORCE IN LIFE. Religion is the most potent power in life. Spiritual development and moral integrity are fundamental in the lives not only of the Latter-day Saints but also of all who would build a community that will contribute to the safety and advancement of our republic or of any other nation. President Calvin Coolidge truly said that "the government of a country never gets ahead of the religion of a country. There is no way by which we can substitute the authority of law for the virtue of man. Of course, we can help to restrain the vicious and furnish a fair degree of security and protection by legislation and police control, but the real reforms which society in these days is seeking will come as a result of our religious convictions or they will not come at all. Peace, justice, humanity, charity—these cannot be legislated into being. They are the results of a divine grace."—CR, April 1934, p. 22.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TPPOWER TO SOLVE WORLD PROBLEMS. The responsibility of showing to the world that the gospel of Jesus Christ will solve its problems rests upon the men who make the claim, who believe that the declaration made by the Prophet Joseph is true. We heard from Brother Stephen L Richards that the Church is so constituted that every human need may be supplied. I believe in his statement. I believe, too, that every world problem may be solved by obedience to the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ.—CR, April 1920, p. 116.

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPThe solution of the great world problems is here in the Church of Jesus Christ. Ample provision is made not only for the needs of individuals, but also for the nation and groups of nations. I realize that it is a great claim. I grant that we may seem to be arrogating to ourselves superior wisdom, but we are not. It is simply the application of God's plan to the world problems. You who hold the priesthood have greater responsibility today, now that you live in this creative moment in the world's history, than ever the Church has had before. I repeat it. If we make the claim to hold the truth, it is obligatory upon every Latter-day Saint so to live, that when the people of the world come, in answer to the call, to test the fruit of the tree, they will find it wholesome and good.

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPThe Lord help us to be able to prove to the world that we possess just what the world today is longing for, and when they see it, may they know, as you know, as I know, that the everlasting gospel is a light to the world. May it ever be upon the hill a light to the nations, a savior to them, and a solution of all the world problems, I pray, in the name of Jesus Christ.—CR, April 1920, pp. 118-119.

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPPEACE BY CONFORMING TO THE GOSPEL. Though we are living in perilous times, you and I can rejoice because the gospel is among men. The Church is established in this free country, nevermore to be thrown down or given to another people. Nations may rise, and nations may destroy each other in strife, but this gospel is here to stay, and we must preach it and proclaim it, that peace may come, for it is only through obedience to the gospel of Jesus Christ that peace will come permanently upon the earth.—DNCS, January 2, 1952, p. 4.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TPTHE POWER OF GOD "UNTO SALVATION" AND ETERNAL LIFE. The gospel of Jesus Christ, as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, is in very deed, in every way, the power of God unto salvation. It is salvation here—here and now. It gives to every man the perfect life, here and now, as well as hereafter.

Life is the dearest thing to us in all the world. Nothing else do you cherish as you cherish your life. You who would give your life today for someone else would give it in order to save the life of one who is dearer to you than your own life. So life is the one thing we hold to. It is the one thing we desire here and hereafter.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TPWHAT IS ETERNAL LIFE? In that glorious prayer of intercession offered by Jesus, our Redeemer, just before he crossed the brook Cedron and received the traitor's kiss that betrayed him into the hands of the soldiers, we find these words, "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.) To know God and his Son is eternal life. There is the key. Life eternal is what I desire. I desire it more than I desire anything else in the world—life eternal for me and mine and all the world. And there in the words of the Redeemer I have the secret given to me in a simple sentence: "to know God and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent, is eternal life."

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TPBut how shall I know him? That is the next question. How may I know him? Has he, at any time, or on any occasion, answered that question? If so, I want the answer, because it is vital. In searching the record as it is given to us by men who associated daily with the Lord, I find upon one occasion that men out in his audience cried out against him. They opposed his works as men today opposed you, my fellow missionaries, when you were out in the field. And one voice cried out and said in effect, "How do we know that what you tell us is true? How do we know that your profession of being the Son of God is true?" And he answered in just a simple way; and note the test: "If ye will do the will of my Father, which is in heaven, ye shall know whether the doctrine is of God or whether I speak of myself." (See John 7:17.)

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPThat test is most sound. It is most philosophical. It is the most simple test to give knowledge to an individual of which the human mind can conceive. Doing a thing, introducing it into your very being will convince you whether it is good or whether it is bad. You may not be able to convince me of that which you know, but you know it because you have lived it. That is the test which the Savior gave to those men when they asked him how they should know whether the doctrine was of God or whether it was of man.

THE ESSENCE OF THE GOSPEL. But in considering his answer another question arises. If ye will do the will—what is the will? We can see what conditions will bring eternal life. We have the spoken statement that if we will do his will, we shall know; but now comes the question, what is the will? And therein, my brethren and sisters, is the whole essence of the gospel of Jesus Christ — just as plainly as Jesus stated and defined what is eternal life or how we should know it, just as plainly as he laid down that test, just as plainly has he expressed what his will is.

I am not going to take time—it would not be wise, even if I could—to narrate all the principles that constitute that will; but they are so simple that, as the scriptures say, a way-faring man, though a fool, need not err therein.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints bears testimony to the world that this will of God has been made manifest in this dispensation, that the principles of the gospel, the principles of life have been revealed. They are in harmony with the principles which Christ taught in the Meridian of Time. ...

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPSo we might go on with our principles. But then you can sum it up in this, my fellow workers, that after obeying the principles and the ordinances of the gospel the will of God is to serve your fellow men, benefiting them, making this world better for your being in it. Christ gave his all to teach us that principle. And he made the statement, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matt. 25:40.)

—CR, October 1915, pp. 70-72.

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPFAITH, GRACE, AND WORKS. The fallacy that Jesus has done all for us, and live as we may, if on our deathbed, we only believe, we shall be saved in his glorious presence, is most pernicious. Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world, has given us the means whereby man may obtain eternal happiness and peace in the kingdom of our Father, but man must work out his own salvation through obedience to the eternal principles and ordinances of the gospel.

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPFor centuries men have been blinded by the false teaching of "belief alone sufficient"; and today there is manifest on every hand the sorry plight into which this and other perverse doctrines have thrown the pseudo-Christian sects. The world is in sore need at the present time of the gospel of individual effort—the gospel of faith and works. He who will not grasp this means provided him, will sink beneath the waves of sin and falsehood.—MS, 85:762 (1923).

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPLove of God and of his righteousness is shown not in words but in works.

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPEternal life is God's greatest gift to man, and the Lord in turn is glorified in man's immortality. Eternal life is the result of knowledge, and knowledge is obtained by doing the will of God.—MS, 85:761-762 (1923).

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPIt is the height of folly for men to try to persuade themselves that Christ has done everything for them, that he has thrown a rope around them, as it were, and will pull them to safety in spite of themselves.—MS, 85:761 (1923).

THE GOSPEL CRUCIBLE. If America is the "melting pot," the gospel of Jesus Christ is the crucible in which hate, envy, and greed are consumed, and good will, kindness, and love remain as inner aspirations by which man truly lives and builds.—CR, October 1942, p. 70.

When things do not harmonize with the truths of the gospel, we can pass them by or at least hold them in abeyance until either their truth or falsity be established.—CR, October 1931, p. 10.

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPI love the gospel. It is truly the power of God unto salvation and to happiness here and now. I wish all men and women could accept it and cherish its ideals and apply them in their daily lives. What a happy world we might be living in if we only would be kind and considerate of one another, as the gospel teaches.—DNCS, September 6, 1952, p. 3.
