David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 2

PRINCIPLES OF SALVATION

FAITH

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TPTHE FIRST PRINCIPLE. What does it mean to keep the faith? It means, first, that we accept Jesus Christ, not merely as a great teacher, a powerful leader, but as the Savior, the Redeemer of the world. Now there is much associated with that, for I know that many students are reading comments from reputably great educators who say that in order to be a Christian it is not necessary to accept Christ as the literal Son of God, it is not necessary to believe in the miraculous conception, it is not necessary to believe in the literal resurrection from the grave. But he who keeps the faith will accept Jesus Christ as the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world. I would have all men keep that faith. I think it is fundamental to man's happiness, fundamental to his peace of mind. I think it is the cardinal principle of the Church of Jesus Christ.—CR, October 1928, pp. 36-37.

Faitha-McKay, David O.TPTHE WORLD'S GREAT NEED. The world's greatest need is an unwavering faith in a divine Providence.—DNCS, July 9, 1952, p. 2.

Faitha-McKay, David O.TPFaith is more potent in human endeavor even than judgment or experience.—IE, 50:507 (1947).

Communisma-McKay, David O.TP... so faith the great need of the world today, faith that there is a God in heaven, who is real, not just a force, but a Father who hears prayers and answers them, the Father of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, his beloved Son. While we stand here bearing witness to that, already we can hear in imagination the leaders of whole nations denouncing faith in God the Father. Communism is anti-Christ! That alone condemns it as idiotic.—DNCS, July 9, 1952, p. 2.

Gospela-McKay, David O.TPMAN MUST WALK BY FAITH. I am not unmindful of the scripture that declares, "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God." (Eph. 2:8.) That is absolutely true, for man in his taking upon himself mortality was impotent to save himself. When left to grope in a natural state, he would have become and did become "carnal, sensual, and devilish by nature." But the Lord through his grace appeared to man, gave him the gospel or eternal plan whereby he might rise above the carnal and selfish things of life and obtain spiritual perfection.

But he must rise by his own efforts, and he must walk by faith.—CR, April 1938, p. 18.

Faith and Worksa-McKay, David O.TPTHE APPLICATION OF FAITH. "What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him?" (James 2:14.)

Faith and Worksa-McKay, David O.TPIn this significant passage, James decries the impotency of faith as a merely intellectual perception and implies the importance of the application of truth to daily life and conduct. He teaches that "faith is dead and useless unless it expresses itself in a true life and true Christian activities." There has been, and is today, too much discrepancy between belief and practice, between the proclamation of high ideals and the application of these ideals to daily life and living.—CR, October 1937, p. 100.

A young man who was in the great battle of the Philippines told me that before that battle, the highest number that attended a religious service was forty-seven. After that three-day battle, however, the attendance jumped to 274. At one service there were five hundred present. It would seem that with most people it takes something out of the ordinary, a great calamity, or the realization of the nearness of death, to make them realize that their faith in God and in an hereafter must find expression in daily acts, but unless such expression springs from a sincere heart, it will have little or no avail.—IE, 48:69 (1945).

Faitha-McKay, David O.TPFAITH A PERSONAL MATTER. Faith in God cannot of course be other than personal. It must be yours; it must be mine; and, to be effective, must spring from the mind and heart. Every man will do well to pray with Emerson: "O God, make me willing to be willing to do thy will." The responsibility, therefore, of making the world better belongs to you, and to you, and to a million others professing his name.—IE, 47:13 (1944).

AN UNQUESTIONED PRINCIPLE. There are many people in the world who doubt that the ordinance of baptism is essential to salvation; but it is inconceivable to think that anyone can even question the essentiality of repentance. Every principle of the gospel when studied carefully reveals a harmony with truth that is simply sublime. Each seems to be all comprehensive, either leading into or embracing other principles. Thus, faith in a perfect being, inspiring one to live righteously, seems to include repentance. So forgiveness may encompass charity; charity, love; and so on. This harmony, or rather this oneness of all fundamental principles of the gospel is indicative of their being elements of eternal truth. Truth being "the sum of existence" is all comprehensive: faith, repentance, charity, forgiveness, and every other element of truth will of necessity show a close relationship not only to each other but also to the whole, of which they are a part.

It is difficult, therefore, to designate any one principle as being the most important. One student may name this, and another name that as being chief, the choice of each being determined by the amount of study and attention given to the favorite principle. When comparing eternal principles, it is more nearly correct to say that each is equal to any other.

This thought, however, does not lessen the significance of the great Thomas Carlyle's forceful remark about repentance. "Of all acts," he says, "is not, for man, repentance the most divine? The deadliest sin, I say, were that same supercilious consciousness of no sin; that is death; the heart so conscious is divorced from sincerity, humility, and in fact, is dead."

A PRINCIPLE OF PROGRESS. What progress can there be for a man unconscious of his faults? Such a man has lost the fundamental element of growth, which is the realization that there is something bigger, better, and more desirable than the condition in which he now finds himself. In the soil of self-satisfaction, true growth has poor nourishment. Its roots find greater succor in discontent.

"Our pleasures and our discontents Are rounds by which we may ascend."

Ignorancea-McKay, David O.TPHeaven pity the man who is unconscious of a fault! Pity him also who is ignorant of his ignorance! Neither is on the road to salvation. "The greatest of faults is to be conscious of none." (Thomas Carlyle.)

Repentancea-McKay, David O.TPThe first step to knowledge is a realization of the lack of it; and the first step towards spiritual growth is the belief in a higher and better life, or conversely, a realization of the meanness of one's present state. Repentance is the turning away from that which is low and the striving for that which is higher. As a principle of salvation, it involves not only a desire for that which is better, but also a sorrow—not merely remorse—but true sorrow for having become contaminated in any degree with things sinful, vile, or contemptible.

Repentancea-McKay, David O.TPIt is not uncommon for people to have remorse for mistakes made, for follies and sins committed, but to have no turning away from such frailties and evils. They may even feel penitent; but "penitence," we are told, "is transient, and may involve no change of character or conduct." Repentance, on the other hand, "is sorrow for sin with self-condemnation, and complete turning away from the sin." It is, therefore, more than mere remorse; "it comprehends a change of nature befitting heaven."

AN ESSENTIAL TO SALVATION. Every principle and ordinance of the gospel of Jesus Christ is significant and important in contributing to the progress, happiness, and eternal life of man, but there is none more essential to the salvation of the human family than the divine and eternally operative principle, repentance. Without it, no one can be saved. Without it, no one can even progress. Its sublimity and essentiality stirred the Prophet Alma's soul when he exclaimed:

"O that I were an angel, and could have the wish of mine heart, that I might go forth and speak with the trump of God, with a voice to shake the earth, and cry repentance unto every people!

"Yea, I would declare unto every soul, as with the voice of thunder, repentance and the plan of redemption, that they should repent and come unto our God, that there might not be more sorrow upon all the face of the earth." (Alma 29:1-2.)

Repentancea-McKay, David O.TPIgnorance and sin are man's worst enemies. They are barriers to salvation. Only through repentance and obedience to the gospel can these be eradicated. In the repentant man's soul these evils are supplanted by light and knowledge. From him who will not repent "shall be taken even the light which he has received; for the Spirit of the Lord will not always strive with man." (See D. & C. 1:33.)

It is the duty of the elders of the Church (1) to apply to their own lives this eternal principle, and then (2) to go forth and speak with the power of God, and cry repentance unto every people.—MS, 86:24-25 (1924).

Repentancea-McKay, David O.TPTHE CHANGE THAT IS REPENTANCE. To repent—this we should note carefully—is to feel regret, contrition, or compunction for what one has done or omitted to do. It means to change one's mind in regard to past or intended actions or conduct on account of regret or dissatisfaction. It means to conquer selfishness, greed, jealousy, faultfinding, and slander. It means to control one's temper. It means to rise above the sordid things, which carnal nature would prompt us to do to gratify our appetites and passions, and to enter into the higher or spiritual realm.—CR, September-October 1950, p. 110.

Repentancea-McKay, David O.TPTo repent is to change one's mind or one's heart with regard to past or intended action, conduct, etc., on account of regret or dissatisfaction.—CR,April 1948, p. 65.

THE ORDINANCE OF BAPTISM

A PRINCIPLE AS WELL. Baptism is one of the "first principles and ordinances of the gospel." As an established rite of the Church, it is classified clearly as an ordinance. Though in strict analysis it may not be considered a principle in the sense that faith and repentance and love are principles, yet it becomes such, inasmuch as it is law established by divine power. It is merely as an ordinance, however, that it is generally considered.

Even in this more obvious, and, we may say, superficial aspect, baptism always connotes fundamental principles of spiritual growth. Three of these are sincerity, simplicity, and purity:—sincerity, "the mother of a noble family of virtues"; simplicity and purity, "the two wings with which man soars above the earth and all temporary nature."

THE VIRTUE TEST. These three virtues everyone should possess who desires to have administered unto him this sacred rite. Sincerely should he go before his Maker, and with contrite and penitent heart, acknowledge his weakness and errors, and manifest a desire to live a new life. He should have no selfish ends to serve. He should sincerely "desire to come into the fold of God," to be numbered with his people, and "to bear others' burdens that they may be light." Only in this manner can the eternal principle of true repentance be made manifest.

Puritya-McKay, David O.TPPurity lies in the affection. It "unites with and enjoys God." It is the pure in heart that shall see God. No person of impure heart, though baptized a hundred times, can approach him.

Simplicity is manifest in the intent. Prompting the soul to obedience, it drives from it all desire for ostentation, publicity, personal honor, or earthly emoluments. In the worthy intent is manifest only the simple desire to comply with one of God's commandments.

SIMPLICITY OF THE ORDINANCE. Nor is it in the intent alone that the virtue of simplicity is associated but in the administration of the ordinance as well. Of this every account of baptism in sacred history bears evidence. Take, for example, the baptism of Jesus in the Jordan; the baptism of Queen Candace's servant by Philip; of the jailor by Paul and Silas; of Cornelius and his household by Peter; of Helam and others by Alma, etc. All these instances seem to have been characterized by simplicity and sacredness. There is no evidence of set periods of preparation, of pompous ceremony, and of irrelevant rites. Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance from sin, as shown in sincerity and purity of life, and a desire to become affiliated with God's people were the only preparatory requirements.

It is well for the elders of the Church to hold to the simplicity of this gospel ordinance. Avoid associating with it any ceremonies that will in the least degree rob it of this virtue. Already there are some who think a prayer, "dedicating the water," is an essential part of the ceremony; others, who think a preparatory service must be held; and still others who insist upon leading each applicant into the water, and then "leading" him out again, evidently a useless waste of time and energy, particularly when many applicants are present.

All such details are non-essentials, neither adding to nor taking from the efficacy of the ordinance. There is danger lurking, however, in the possibility of these excrescential ceremonies becoming so firmly attached to the principle itself that in time they may not be separated from it. Proper instructions to the applicant should always precede baptism, and the importance of the obligations he is about to assume impressed upon him; and, of course, prayer is appropriate and fitting on all sacred occasions.

PURPOSE AND SUBLIMITY OF BAPTISM. Jesus was baptized of John "in order to fulfil all righteousness"; but the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him.

Baptisma-McKay, David O.TPTo Nicodemus Jesus said, "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John 3:5.)

Baptisma-McKay, David O.TPTo the members of the Church, Paul and Peter wrote, "For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ." (Gal. 3:26-27.) "The like figure whereunto even baptism doth also now save us ... by the resurrection of Jesus Christ." (I Peter 3:21.)

Baptisma-McKay, David O.TPIn these three instances we have set forth clearly the threefold purpose of the ordinance of baptism, viz.:

Baptisma-McKay, David O.TP(1) A rite established by God himself and associated with the eternal principle of righteousness, compliance with the law, therefore, being established to man's salvation.

Baptisma-McKay, David O.TP(2) An initiatory ordinance—the gateway leading to membership in the fold of Christ.

Baptisma-McKay, David O.TP(3) A beautiful and sublime symbol typifying the burial of the "former" man with all his weaknesses and impurities, and the coming forth into a newness of life.

Baptisma-McKay, David O.TPThe ordinance of baptism is a law of God, obedience to which, in sincerity, in purity, in simplicity, brings inevitably the promised blessing of the Comforter, a divine Guide, whom they can never know, who "change the ordinance and transgress the law." Though men may scoff at it, ridicule it, and doubt its efficacy, baptism remains ever, even in its simplicity, not only one of the most beautiful symbols known, but also one of the most effective laws operating for the salvation of man. In baptism, then, as in all other things, all men should follow him who said: "I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." (John 8:12.)—MS, 85:328-330 (1923).

SALVATION FOR THE DEAD

Baptism for the Deada-McKay, David O.TPTHE SECTARIAN DILEMMA. Since repentance and baptism by water as well as by the Spirit are essential to salvation, how shall the millions who have never heard the gospel, who have never had an opportunity either to repent or to be baptized enter into the kingdom of God? Surely a God of love can never be satisfied if the majority of his children are outside his kingdom, dwelling eternally either in ignorance, misery, or hell. Such a thought is revolting to intelligent minds. On the other hand, if these millions who died without having heard the gospel can enter into the kingdom of God without obeying the principles and ordinances of the gospel, then Christ's words to Nicodemus were not the statement of a general and eternal truth, and Peter's words on the Day of Pentecost had not a universal application, even though he said plainly, "For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call." (Acts 2:39.)

Dead, Salvation ofa-McKay, David O.TPNow the gospel of Jesus Christ teaches that all mankind may be saved by obedience to the laws and ordinances thereof. Nor is the term "all" restricted in meaning to include only a chosen few; it means every child of a loving and divine Father. And yet, hundreds of millions have died without ever having heard that there is such a thing as a gospel plan.

Dead, Salvation ofa-McKay, David O.TPAll nations and races have a just claim upon God's mercies. Since there is only one plan of salvation, surely there must be some provision made whereby the "uncounted dead" may hear of it and have the privilege of either accepting or rejecting it. Such a plan is given in the principle of salvation for the dead.

Dead, Salvation ofa-McKay, David O.TPTHE APOSTOLIC TEACHINGS. Peter tells us that after the Savior was put to death in the flesh, "... he went and preached unto the spirits in prison,

Dead, Salvation ofa-McKay, David O.TP"Which sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, ..." (I Peter 3:19-20.) Thus did Christ preach the gospel "... also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit." (I Peter 4:6.)

Dead, Salvation ofa-McKay, David O.TPIt is evident that if Christ preached the gospel again to people who had rejected it, they who have never heard it should in justice have the privilege of hearing it.

Dead, Salvation ofa-McKay, David O.TPThis principle of salvation for the dead was not only understood in the days when the Savior taught among men, but also the necessity of the dead's being baptized, as Jesus said they must be in order to enter into the kingdom of God. Since this ordinance had not been administered to them when they were living on the earth, it seemed proper to administer it to them by proxy.

Baptism for the Deada-McKay, David O.TPPaul referred to this practice of baptism in his argument in favor of the resurrection. He said, "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all?" (I Cor. 15:29.) The psuedo-Christian world, unenlightened by revelation, has stumbled over the meaning of this simple text, and not a few commentators have tried to explain away its true applicability to all mankind of the Savior's teachings. Truly, "... there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:12.) All ordinances performed by the priesthood of the Most High are as eternal as love, as comprehensive and enduring as life, and through obedience to them, all mankind, living and dead, may enter into and abide eternally in the kingdom of God.—MS, 85:680-682 (1923).

Dead, Salvation ofa-McKay, David O.TPGENEALOGICAL RESEARCH. One of the most significant phases of this great work is the operation of the Spirit of the Lord upon the hearts of men and women who are not members of our Church, impelling them to use their time and means in gathering genealogical records, binding them in books, and thus making them accessible to those who have the authority to do the work for those who have passed beyond. Many are the interesting incidents that are related showing how these records fall into the hands of members of the Church. I think this phase is most significant and proves to us conclusively that this is the day in which the Lord expects his Church at least to inaugurate the great work of turning "... the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers. ..." (Malachi 4:6.)—GM, 25:59 (1934).
