David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 3

REVELATION AND COMMUNICATION WITH GOD

DIVINE REVELATION

a-McKay, David O.IdolatryTPWORSHIP OF THE TRUE GOD. You will remember that in the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord refers to the tendency of the world to have different gods. They set up unto themselves their gods which are after the fashion of the world. Has there ever been a time in the history of the world when men worshiped so many different gods after the fashion of the world—the god of wealth, the god of industrialism, the god of unionism, the god of greed, of selfishness, the god of sensuality? Why, it seems to me that every form of idol is now worshiped in preference to God the Eternal Father, and men sacrifice everything for their earthly deities.

GOD COMMUNICATES WITH MAN: I testify to you that God our heavenly Father lives, that he communicates with his servants, that he has established in this dispensation of the world his great work, the only plan of salvation whereby mankind may be saved, the only means by which peace may be established in the world. Peace can come only when men will acknowledge God as their Creator, as their Father, and when they will obey the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, when they will have in their souls individual righteousness, a desire to reverence God, a desire to serve their fellow men, a desire to bless the other man instead of bringing, at the expense of the other man, some benefit to themselves. The lines are being more sharply drawn, every day of our lives, as never before; and we can look over the world and know for a surety the distinction between the peace of the gospel of Jesus Christ and the conflict and envy so manifest in daily strife. We must preach repentance, as the Prophet Joseph through inspiration declares in so many of his revelations, and preach, too, the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-McKay, David O.TPREVELATION BASIC TO THE WORK OF THE CHURCH: AN EXAMPLE. I know that the Lord communicates with his servants. I have not doubted this as a fact since I was a boy and heard the testimony of my father regarding the revelation that came to him of the divinity of the mission of the Prophet Joseph. I feel impressed to relate that circumstance and add his testimony to the one that I am now giving. He accepted a call to a mission about 1880. When he began preaching in his native land and bore testimony of the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ, he noticed that the people turned away from him. They were bitter in their hearts against anything Mormon, and the name of Joseph Smith seemed to arouse antagonism in their hearts. One day he concluded that the best way to get these people would be to preach just the simple principles, the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ, the first principles of the gospel, and not bear testimony of the restoration of the gospel. It first came simply, as a passing thought, but yet it influenced his future work. In a month or so he became oppressed with a gloomy, downcast feeling, and he could not enter into the spirit of his work. He did not really know what was the matter, but his mind became obstructed; his spirit became clogged; he was oppressed and hampered; and that feeling of depression continued until it weighed him down with such heaviness that he went to the Lord and said: "Unless I can get this feeling removed, I shall have to go home. I cannot continue my work with this feeling."

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-McKay, David O.TPIt continued for some time after that, then, one morning, before daylight, following a sleepless night, he decided to retire to a cave, near the ocean, where he knew he would be shut off from the world entirely, and there pour out his soul to God and ask why he was oppressed with this feeling, what he had done, and what he could do to throw it off and continue his work. He started out in the dark towards the cave, and he became so eager to get to it that he started to run and was hailed by an officer who wanted to know what was the matter, as he was leaving the town. He gave some noncommittal but satisfying reply and was permitted to go on. Something seemed to drive him; he had to get relief.

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-McKay, David O.TPHe entered that place and said: "Oh, Father, what can I do to have this feeling removed? I must have it lifted or I cannot continue in this work"; and he heard a voice, as distinct as the tone I am now uttering, say: "Testify that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God."

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-McKay, David O.TPRemembering, then, what he tacitly had decided six weeks or more before and becoming overwhelmed with the thought, the whole thing came to him in a realization that he was there for a special mission, and that he had not given that special mission the attention which it deserved. Then he cried in his heart, "Lord, it is enough," and went out from the cave.

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-McKay, David O.TPAs a boy, I sat and heard that testimony from one whom I treasured and honored as you know I treasured no other man in the world, and that assurance was instilled in my youthful soul. The inspiration and testimony of God has come since, and today I testify to you that God lives, and that he is guiding this Church, that he has inspired those at the head, and that he will continue to inspire them and lead them through this turmoil and unrest in the world, caused by unrighteousness, wickedness, and lack of faith in God.

Brethren and sisters, let us thank our Heavenly Father today for the testimony that the Lord Jesus Christ has placed in our souls.—IE, 24:404-406 (1921).

THE PERSONALITY OF GOD. The Prophet Joseph Smith, but a youth, did not argue upon the personality of God; he did not speculate upon that eternal source of energy and intelligence from which all life gets its being; he merely stated the truth. Nearly a hundred years later Charles A. Dinsmore through thought and reason confirmed this truth as follows:

God, Attributes ofa-Dinsmore, Charles A.TP"Religion standing on the known experience of the race, makes one bold and glorious affirmation. She asserts that this power that makes for truth, for beauty, for goodness, is not less personal than we. This leap of faith is justified because God cannot be less than the greatest of his works; the cause must be adequate to the effect. When, therefore, we call God personal, we have interpreted him by the loftiest symbol we have. He may be infinitely more; he cannot be less. When we call God a spirit, we use the clearest lens we have to look at the everlasting. As Herbert Spencer has well said, 'The choice is not between a personal God and something lower, but between a personal God and something higher.' " [^1]

a-McKay, David O.God, Knowledge ofTPThus anchored in the faith, our young people have the foundation of spirituality, and the teachings of materialistic philosophy cannot dislodge them. Next to this belief in a supreme Being is the testimony they have that God is revealed through his Son Jesus Christ, the one perfect being who is the light and life of the world.—CR, April 1934, p. 23.

God, Knowledge ofa-Dinsmore, Charles A.TPTHE REALITY OF COMMUNICATION. The reality of God the Father, the reality of Jesus Christ, the risen Lord, is a truth which should possess every human soul. God is the center of the human mind as surely as the sun is the center of this universe, and once we feel his Fatherhood, once we feel his nearness, sense the divinity of the deity of the Savior, the truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ follow as naturally as the day the night, and as night the day.—CR, October 1925, pp. 106-107.

God, Knowledge ofa-McKay, David O.TPA fundamental truth is this, that direct communion between the Spirit of God and the spirit of men may be a reality. With all my soul I echo the appeal of my brother, Stephen L Richards, that we may lead the youth into that realm in which they will sense that communion. The promise of the Lord to his Apostles is a reality:

God, Knowledge ofa-McKay, David O.TP"And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever." (John 14:16.)

God, Knowledge ofa-McKay, David O.TP"But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me." (Ibid., 15:26.)—CR, October 1935, pp. 101-102.

God, Knowledge ofa-McKay, David O.TPAN ILLUSTRATIVE TESTIMONY. As surely as you can tune in on the radio and hear voices from afar, so sure am I that God our Father lives, and the soul of man can commune with him through the Holy Spirit. I give you that as my testimony; I know it.—CR, September-October 1950, p. 112.

God, Knowledge ofa-McKay, David O.TPALL PRIESTHOOD MEMBERS ENTITLED TO GUIDANCE. The most precious thing in the world is a testimony of the truth. I repeat, truth never grows old, and the truth is that God is the source of your priesthood and mine; that he lives, that Jesus Christ, the great high priest, stands at the head of this Church, and that every man who holds the priesthood, if he lives properly, soberly, industriously, humbly, and prayerfully, is entitled to the inspiration and guidance of the Holy Spirit. I know that is true.—CR, April 1948, p. 172.

Prayera-McKay, David O.TPASPIRATION AND INSPIRATION DEFINED. There is a difference between aspiration and the inspiration that comes from prayer. Both relate to desire; but aspiration is merely subjective, while inspiration includes divine help.—DNCS, November 14, 1936, p. 3.

MAN'S RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK

"As some tall cliff that lifts its awful form, Swells from the vale, and midway leaves the storm, Though round its breast the rolling clouds are spread, Eternal sunshine settles on its head."

Goldsmith, The Deserted Village.

a-McKay, David O.TPTHE PROPHET'S REVELATIONS AS FACT. Many years ago Joseph Smith, a mere boy between fourteen and fifteen years of age, declared that in answer to prayer, he received a revelation from God. His declaration was simple but positive, and he was surprised when men doubted the truth of his assertion. To him his claim was but the statement of a fact; to the Christian world, it was a lightning flash that shattered their religious structure from turret to foundation.

Two important elements in his first message were these: (1) that God is a personal Being and will communicate his will to men; and (2) that no creed in Christendom had the true plan of salvation. Indeed, all were an "abomination in the sight of God. The professors of them were corrupt, teaching for doctrine the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof." (See P. of G. P. Joseph Smith 2:19.)

For boldness of assertion, for rejection of prevailing orthodoxy, as a challenge to professed ministers, this claim of a fair-haired, blue-eyed youth stands without parallel since the days of Jesus of Nazareth. Not even Luther's defiance at Worms is excepted, for his inspired effort, at first, was only to purify the church of corrupt practices, while Joseph Smith rejected the creeds as unauthoritative and many of their doctrines as absolutely false.

GENERAL PRINCIPLES. The stand of the Church in regard to the first principles of the gospel, as given to Joseph the Prophet, is, from a biblical point of view, invulnerable, and his claim most reasonable, that divine authority to officiate in the ordinances is necessary. For many years professors of Christendom assailed the Church on its adherence to the essentiality of these principles and ordinances—particularly on its claim that baptism by immersion is necessary to salvation, but all attacks have proved futile. Of course, these principles, in one form or another, were taught by all the different sects, and yet, no one church taught all of them as being absolutely essential to salvation; and even had it done so, the Son of God, through Joseph Smith, denied its authority to administer them. Each succeeding year of the past century has tended only to vindicate the Prophet's teachings in regard to these two great questions—the harmony of the doctrines of the Church with the Bible; and the necessity of divine authority to officiate in things pertaining to God.

But the inspiration and the boldness of the Prophet's teachings, and their subsequent effect upon the religious and philosophic minds, may best be seen by reference to some of the more advanced, and, I may say, obscure principles, of the plan of salvation. Take, for example, predestination.

EFFECT ON THE DOCTRINE OF PREDESTINATION. At the time Joseph Smith received his revelation, some of the creeds of Christendom were teaching that,

"Election to eternal life is not founded on foresight of faith and obedience, but is a sovereign act of God's mercy, whereby according to the counsel of his own will some men and angels are predestined into everlasting life, and others foreordained to everlasting death"; and, "these angels and men thus predestined and foreordained are truly and unchangeably designed, and their number is so certain and definite that it cannot be either increased or diminished." (Westminster Confession.)

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPIn direct contradiction to this false doctrine, the boy-prophet declared that "all mankind may be saved by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel."

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPHe taught that,

Agencya-McKay, David O.TP"To every man is given an inherent power to do right or to do wrong. In this he has his free agency. He may choose the right and obtain salvation, or he may choose evil and merit abomination; but one man is not predestinated to do evil and another to do good."

Agencya-McKay, David O.TP"... whosoever will come may come and partake of the waters of life freely; and whosoever will not come the same is not compelled to come; but in the last day it shall be restored unto him according to his deeds." (Alma 42:27.)

CREEDS OF CHURCHES MODIFIED. Nearly half a century passed before the ministers of some of the churches became bold enough so to modify their creeds as to reject that paragraph on predestination; but they eventually did so. Here is one example:

The Presbyterians, in their General Assembly, May 22, 1902, adopted, by a vote of 600 to two, the unanimous report of a revision committee which had been at work on the subject for two years. The Outlook (May 1902), commenting upon the significance of this revision, summarizes as follows:

"The most important thing in this explanation is the definite declaration that the ordination vows of officers requires the adoption of the Confession of Faith only as containing the system of doctrine taught in the Holy Scriptures."

Thus any officer is left free to reject any part of the Confession of Faith which, in his judgment, is not taught in the Holy Scriptures. One of the particular parts rejected is named by the Outlook in these words:

"Following this broad statement are two overtures. The first disclaims any fatalistic inference from the doctrine of Predestination, and asserts clearly that God loves all mankind and desires not the death of any sinner, and that no man is condemned except on the ground of his sin."

If any plainer revision of the Presbyterians' creed on the pernicious doctrine of predestination is needed, it can be found in the statement of Reverend Henry Van Dyke:

"The Presbyterian Church, today 1902], does not believe that some men are created to be saved, and others to be damned; and to guard against misapprehension on the subject, it wishes to say clearly and unmistakably that God has not put any barrier between any human soul and salvation."

So Joseph Smith proclaimed before Henry Van Dyke was born, at the time, too, when every Presbyterian officer took a vow that God did predestine some to be saved and others to be damned.

INFANT BAPTISM. Closely allied with the doctrine of predestination was the equally false teaching that unbaptized infants were condemned to eternal punishment. Said the old school of Presbyterianism:

"Infants come into the world, not only destitute of knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness, but with a nature inclined to evil and only evil."

The Prophet Joseph said:

Baptisma-McKay, David O.TP"But little children are holy, being sanctified through the atonement of Jesus Christ; ..." (D. & C. 74:7.)

Baptisma-McKay, David O.TPLittle children need no repentance, neither baptism.

Baptisma-McKay, David O.TP"And he that saith that little children need baptism denieth the mercies of Christ, and setteth at naught the atonement of him and the power of his redemption." (Moroni 8:20.)

Three-quarters of a century later, creeds, the ministers of which had said the boy-prophet's revelations were from the devil, concluded that this doctrine, too, was right—devil or no devil.

The Westminster creed was modified by the assembly, referred to above, to deny what it had declared for centuries, and to confirm the view expressed by the Prophet Joseph. It now declared that,

"All who die in infancy are chosen of God and saved by Christ through the spirit." (Explanation of Westminster Confession, 1902.)

This is confirmed by Henry Van Dyke, who says:

"Presbyterians today believe that all who die in infancy are saved by Jesus Christ."

PRE-EXISTENCE. One hundred years ago, theologians seldom, if ever, referred to the doctrine of pre-existence of spirits, let alone accepting it as part of the solution of the eternal plan of redemption. When writers or philosophers mentioned it, it was designated the Platonic opinion; and those who favored it, as Platonists. This because Plato, with a spark of inspiration, taught that pre-existence and the closely associated doctrine of "reminiscence" are connected with the doctrine of immortality.

Even Wordsworth found it necessary to offer a half apology for referring to this doctrine in his inspired poem, "Intimations of Immortality." In the light of poetic revelation he wrote:

Premortal Lifea-Wordsworth,williamTP"Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting: The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting, And cometh from afar: Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home."

Subsequently, when in the shadowy realm of popular opinion, learning that his doctrine "had given pain to some good and pious persons," he protested that he "meant not to inculcate such a belief" (pre-existence). However, with a glimmer of the light still in his mind, he adds: "But let us bear in mind that, though the idea is not advanced in revelation, there is nothing there to contradict it, and the fall of man presents an analogy in its favor."

Premortal Lifea-McKay, David O.TPNow, undoubtedly, the boy-prophet had not even read Plato, and the presumption is that he had never read Wordsworth or any other advocate of this phase of the doctrine of immortality; and yet, when God revealed it to him, note how unqualifiedly he declared the truth:

Premortal Lifea-McKay, David O.TP"I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn;

Premortal Lifea-McKay, David O.TP"Ye were also in the beginning with the Father; ..." (D. & C. 93:21, 23.)

Premortal Lifea-McKay, David O.TPAnd again:

Premortal Lifea-McKay, David O.TP"Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones." (Abraham 3:22.)

Premortal Lifea-McKay, David O.TPThough God has taught it to his children from the days of Adam down, yet one hundred years ago this was a bold, strange doctrine. And even today ministers of religion, if not entirely rejecting it, rather shy at it. But the leaven is working, and great minds, accepting the doctrine, are now proclaiming it in their theories of the immortality of man.

In discussing "The Permanence of Personality," Lodge, in Science and Immortality, says:

"This doctrine—the theory of a larger and permanent personality of which the conscious self is only a fraction in process of individualization * * * as a working hypothesis, illuminates many obscure facts, and serves as a thread through an otherwise bewildering labyrinth. It removes a number of elementary stumbling blocks which otherwise obstruct an attempt to realize vividly the incipient stages of personal existence; it accounts for the extraordinary rapidity with which an individual proceeds; and it eases the theory of ordinary birth and death."

And then, after commenting upon the subject of "Dislocation of Memory," he continues:

"The analogy pointed to is that whereas we, living men and women, while associated with this mortal organism, are ignorant of whatever experience our larger selves may have gone through in the past—yet when we wake out of this present materialized condition, and enter the region of larger consciousness, we may gradually realize in what a curious though legitimate condition of ignorance we now are; and may become aware of our fuller possession, with all that has happened here and now fully remembered and incorporated as an additional experience into the wide range of knowledge which our larger entity must have accumulated since its intelligence and memory began. The transition called death may thus be an awakening rather than a sleeping; it may be that we, still, involved in mortal coil, are in the more dreamlike and unreal condition."

THE NOTION OF HELL. When Joseph Smith as a boy attended any of the churches in his neighborhood, he undoubtedly heard the furies of hell pictured in thrilling eloquence.

And to all this and much more must be added "dreadful shrieks issuing from dungeons and prisons into which special victims were thrown for special enormities."

To unspeakable horrors many men and women were predestined, there to burn and burn and never to be consumed forever and ever!

That is the doctrine of the damned which Joseph Smith heard from man.

This is what he heard from God:

a-McKay, David O.DamnationTP"... the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power;

a-McKay, David O.DamnationTP"Yea, verily, the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord * * * * those sons of perdition who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him.

a-McKay, David O.DamnationTP"Wherefore, he saves all except them— ..." (D. & C. 76:37-38, 43-44.)

Degrees of Glorya-McKay, David O.TPThe Lord revealed to him all the different degrees of glory in which men receive judgment in accordance with the deeds done in the body, and he

Degrees of Glorya-McKay, David O.TP"... saw the glory and the inhabitants of the telestial world, that they were as innumerable as the stars in the firmament of heaven, or as the sand upon the seashore;

Degrees of Glorya-McKay, David O.TP"And heard the voice of the Lord, saying: These all shall bow the knee, and every tongue shall confess to him who sits upon the throne forever and ever;

Degrees of Glorya-McKay, David O.TP"For they shall be judged according to their works, and every man shall receive according to his own works, his own dominion, in the mansions which are prepared." (Ibid., 76:109-111.)

Degrees of Glorya-McKay, David O.TP"He will judge them not according to what they have not, but according to what they have; those who have lived without law will be judged without law, and those who have a law will be judged by that law, we need not doubt the wisdom and intelligence of the Great Jehovah. He will award judgment or mercy to all nations according to their several deserts, their means of obtaining intelligence; the laws by which they are governed." (Times and Seasons, Vol. III, p. 759.)

Degrees of Glorya-Shimm, George W.TPMODERN VIEW OF CHRISTENDOM. The modified view of modern Christendom is probably best expressed in an article entitled, "What Has Become of Hell?" by Reverend George W. Shimm, and printed in the North American Review, 1900. After asserting that all churches had practically ceased to speak of hell as a place of eternal punishment, he concludes:

Degrees of Glorya-Shimm, George W.TP"It cannot be that all the redeemed in the future will be equally happy, and that all the lost will be equally wretched; for there are varying degrees of capacity. There must be infinite grades of happiness there, as there must be a vast difference between those who are driven into outer darkness.

Degrees of Glorya-Shimm, George W.TP"When men's eyes are opened, they may see that the loss of what they might have been and their degradation through sin, is indeed the visitation of penalty. Judgment consists quite largely in deprivation. Such a judgment has begun here, and it points to the awful issues of the future, when the days of earthly probation shall have ended.

Degrees of Glorya-Shimm, George W.TP"Men are condemned by themselves. They must recognize at some period that they prepared themselves for their own place and for their own condition."

And so we might refer to tithing, organization of the Church, the principles of co-operation, and even the United Order and show what a marked change of sentiment has taken place in regard to them during the last half century; but space will not permit.

The world will not admit, nor do we ask it to admit, that all these modified views regarding man's place in the universe have been brought about solely by the influence of the Prophet Joseph Smith. God's Spirit is ever ready to guide away from error the sincere seeker after truth; and undoubtedly, hundreds of honest men and women have rejected in their hearts the errors pointed to above without ever having known the truths as revealed to the Prophet. However, the marks of his influence upon religious thought are manifest upon every hand, and whether men acknowledge it or not, the light that came from heaven a century ago is dissipating the darkness that has enthralled the minds of men for ages.

a-McKay, David O.Joseph Smith, Prophecies ofTPAs we look through the vista of one hundred years and see the boy-prophet standing alone in the midst of a tempestuously religious world, declaring that God had spoken to him, and that there was not an authorized Church of Christ upon the earth; when we know that to make good his claim, he must give to the world something superior to that produced by the philosophy of the ages and the best wisdom of man; when we realize how impotent he was to do this, if dependent upon his own learning and wisdom—we cannot help concluding, since he has given to the world something which has stood the acid test of time and criticism, and which stands today in brilliancy and sublimity, superior to anything proclaimed by human wisdom—that surely he was indeed the chosen Prophet of the latter day.—IE, 23:506-513 (1919-1920).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Religious Certainty in an Age of Science." Quoted in Christianity and Modern Thought. New Haven: 1924.
