David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 5

THE CONQUEST OF DEATH

THE RESURRECTION AND FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF THE GOSPEL

The event we celebrate today connotes the fundamental principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. In general these are:

God, Fatherhood ofa-McKay, David O.TPTHE FATHERHOOD OF GOD. No man can accept the resurrection and be consistent in his belief without accepting also the existence of a personal God. Through the resurrection Christ conquered death and became an immortal soul. "My Lord and My God" was not merely an idle exclamation of Thomas when he beheld his risen Lord. The Being before him was his God. Once we accept Christ as divine, it is easy to visualize his Father as being just as personal as he; for, said Jesus, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father."

Jesus Christ As Creatora-McKay, David O.TPInseparable with the idea of a divine personal Being is the acceptance of him as the Creator of the world. True Christianity does not look upon the universe as the result of mere interaction of matter and motion, of law and force, but, on the contrary, it regards all creation as the product of a divine Intelligence "who made the world and all things therein." As one writer puts it: "This is what Christianity means by a personal God. It believes that all existence has its roots in a conscious and intelligent purpose and that this purpose is good."

Jesus Christ As Son of Goda-McKay, David O.TPSONSHIP OF JESUS CHRIST. The gospel teaches that Christ is the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world. No true follower is satisfied to accept him merely as a great Reformer, the ideal Teacher, or even as the one perfect Man. The Man of Galilee is, not figuratively, but literally, the Son of the living God.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPTHE IMMORTALITY OF THE HUMAN SOUL. Belief in the resurrection connotes also the immortality of man. Jesus passed through all the experiences of mortality just as you and I. He knew happiness; he experienced pain. He rejoiced as well as sorrowed with others. He knew friendship. He experienced also the sadness that comes through traitors and false accusers. He died a mortal death, even as every other mortal. Since his spirit lived after death, so shall yours and mine. So shall that of your soldier boy who gives his life on the battlefield.

Brotherhooda-McKay, David O.TPTHE BROTHERHOOD OF MAN. One of the two great, general principles to which all other principles are subsidiary is this: "Love your neighbour as yourself," (see Matt. 19:19) and correlated with it, the promise: "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Ibid., 25:40.)

Brotherhooda-McKay, David O.TPThe gospel "bids the strong bear the burdens of the weak, and to use the advantages given them by their larger opportunities in the interest of the common good, that the whole level of humanity may be lifted and the path of spiritual attainment be opened to the weakest and most ignorant," as well as to the strong and intelligent.

Jesus Christ As Exemplara-McKay, David O.TPTHE STANDARDS OF LIFE. Finally, since Jesus was the one perfect man who ever lived, as he, in rising from the dead, conquered death, and is now Lord of the earth, how utterly weak, how extremely foolish is he who would wilfully reject Christ's way of life, especially in the light of the fact that such rejection leads only to unhappiness, misery, and even to death.

Jesus Christ As Exemplara-McKay, David O.TPWhat a more delightful world this would be if, for example, man earnestly strove to apply Christ's advice that if he rememberest that his brother hath ought against him, go to him. (see ibid., 5:23-24.) Or, again his admonition to seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness (see ibid., 6:33), which means, simply, be not so anxious about worldly things as to make them of superior worth to spiritual attainment.

Jesus Christ As Exemplara-McKay, David O.TPThe Savior condemned hypocrisy and praised sincerity of purpose. Keep your heart pure, and your actions will be in accord therewith. Social sins—lying, stealing, dishonest dealing, fornication, and the like—are first committed in thought. Jesus taught that an unsullied character is the noblest aim of life.

Jesus Christ As Redeemera-McKay, David O.TPHerein, brethren, lies the true source of the testimony: "I know that my Redeemer lives." No man can sincerely resolve to apply in his daily life the teachings of Jesus of Nazareth without sensing a change in his nature. The phrase "born again" has a deeper significance than many people attach to it. This changed feeling may be indescribable, but it is real.

Jesus Christ As Redeemera-McKay, David O.TPHappy the person who has truly sensed the uplifting, transforming power that comes from this nearness to the Savior, this kinship to the living Christ. I am thankful that I know that Christ is my Redeemer.

Eastera-McKay, David O.TPEaster is a sacred day, a day of thanksgiving and divine worship. It is not a day just for rejoicing because of the opening of springtime, not merely an opportunity to display beautiful hats and fine clothing—it is an occasion for the expression of gratitude to God for having sent his only begotten Son into the world, to be "the way, the truth, the life," to declare the eternal truth that "... whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." (John 3:16.)

Peacea-McKay, David O.TPWhen Christians throughout the world have this faith coursing in their blood, when they feel a loyalty in their hearts to the resurrected Christ, and to the principles connoted thereby, mankind will have taken the first great step toward the perpetual peace for which we daily are praying. Reject him, and the world will be filled with hatred and drenched in blood by recurring wars. ...

Resurrectiona-McKay, David O.TPBrethren and sisters: As Christ lived after death so shall all men live, each taking his place in the next world for which he has best fitted himself. The message of the resurrection, therefore, is the most comforting, the most glorious ever given to man, for when death takes a loved one from us, our sorrowing hearts are assuaged by the hope and the divine assurance expressed in the words:

Resurrectiona-McKay, David O.TP"He is not here: he is risen." Because our Redeemer lives, so shall we. I bear you witness that he does live. I know it, as I hope you know that divine truth.

May all mankind some day have that faith, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ.—CR, April 1944, pp. 123-125.

THE QUESTION OF THE AGES

Resurrectiona-McKay, David O.TPLIMITATIONS OF THE SCIENTIFIC ANSWER. Death brings us face to face with the question of the ages—"If a man die, shall he live again?"

Resurrectiona-McKay, David O.TPThe answer given to that question by science is neither yes nor no because science is limited to a study of phenomena of experience. No one on earth, it claims, ever experienced immortality; but even science leans to the affirmative in the answer by demonstrating the most striking of scientific facts that nothing can be destroyed; that matter is indestructible, so also is energy. "One can change the form of both, but can annihilate neither of them."

Resurrectiona-McKay, David O.TPAmong the generalizations of science, evolution holds the foremost place. It claims: "Man is a creature of development; that he has come up through uncounted ages from an origin that is lowly." Why this vast expenditure of time and pain and blood? Why should he come so far if he is destined to go no farther? A creature which has traveled such distances and fought such battles and won such victories deserves, one is compelled to say, to conquer death and rob the grave of its victory.—FS, ms., May Anderson, June 14, 1946.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPIs there something within which is superior to this old house of clay? Or are we mere mechanisms that become lifeless clay when the heartbeats stop? Even my reason will not let me doubt the existence of something within which is superior, which controls, which lives in this body. Physically our sight, our hearing, our smell, our tasting are limited to certain distances. In the rainbow, for example, we see only the violet on one side, and the red on the other. We cannot see anything beyond, but you know and I know that there are vibrations beyond the red, and vibrations beyond the violet. The vibrations are either too rapid or too slow for us to interpret, and so we are limited in our vision. We can hear a sound just so far away. If we were up in the Arctic Circle, we could hear it twenty miles away. You know and I know that something within our intelligence can become cognizant of a thought or of a fact two hundred fifty miles away. You cannot hear it with your physical ear nor see it with your physical eye, but you get the knowledge of it. "But there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding." (Job 32:8.)

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPPhilosophy and science can lead us only to the probability of immortality, and there is a vast step from probability to certainty. "The starry heavens above, and the moral law within" may well have thrilled the great philosopher of the last century with ever-growing reverence and awe, but beyond the starry heavens, and behind the moral law lie the sublimer regions of faith which fill us with deepest reverence, and which alone can give us solid comfort in life and in death.—FS, ms., Mrs. William R. Calderwood, February 23, 1949.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPCONCEPTS OF DARWIN AND JAMES. Living in deeds, living in writings, living in monuments, living in the memory of friends is not immortality; neither living in the lives of our children and our grandchildren to the latest generation. There are those who say that is the only immortality that man will have. But the author of evolution, Charles Darwin, shrank from that thought as he contemplated the greatest descent or origin in his mind of the human family, his theory, as you know. He finally came to the point that there will come a time when the human family will end. If that theory is right, all sentient beings known as man cannot live. And so he wrote: "It is an intolerable thought that man and all other sentient beings are doomed to annihilation after such long, continued, slow progress."

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPI mention it now merely to say that to live through one's children, even though their characteristics and thoughts will go on forever and forever so far as the world is concerned, is not immortality, and it is not the immortality that Jesus had in mind when he said: "And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die." (John 11:26.) He had in mind something within which transcends the limits of this physical surrounding.

I remember when Brother George Q. Morris and I were in the university on Second West. Reading in James' Psychology, a reference dealing with the stream of consciousness, we came to a point where William James said that it is thought on thought that continues this stream. It is thought catching upon thought, and he added: "Coming to closest possible quarters with the facts, it is difficult for me to detect in the activity, any purely spiritual element at all."

I don't know whether George remembers it, but that gave me a shock. Here was a man for whom we had such respect and confidence, giving us psychology from the physiological standpoint, who couldn't find any evidence of the something else in there but the thought. But at the end of the chapter, William James said: "If thought itself is not the thinker, the only pathway that I can discover for bringing in a more transcendental thinker would be to deny that we have any direct knowledge of the thought as such. The latter's existence would then be reduced to a postulate, an assertion that there must be a knower correlative to all this known; and the problem who that knower is would have become a metaphysical problem."

A day or so after that we read in the literature class this encouraging thought from Dryden:

"Dim as the borrow'd beams of moon and stars To lonely, weary, wand'ring travellers, Is Reason to the soul: and as on high Those rolling fires discover but the sky, Not light us here; so Reason's glimmering ray Was lent, not to assure our doubtful way, But guide us upward to a better day."

Dryden, Religio Laici.

And that "day" is the faith which Christ gave to Martha or awakened in her soul when Lazarus slept as Nephi Morris] sleeps today. And he said, "Thy brother shall rise again." Martha said, "I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection ..." and Christ answered, "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live." (John 11:23-25.) And that same Jesus, after his voice was silenced by death, so-called, arose and appeared to his loved ones, to his associates, his disciples.

Resurrectiona-McKay, David O.TPThat was Nephi L. Morris' faith; shall I say it was his knowledge. I have here a quotation, in part, and I should like you to hear in imagination Nephi L. Morris' voice as he gave it once before, I think, on Easter: "And last of all, we are witnesses of these things. And in his humble name may I to this great congregation—bear the testimony of all Latter-day Saints that the Bible is the word of God; that Jesus Christ was resurrected from the grave, and that through obedience to him and a comprehension and intelligent observation of the plan of life and salvation, we too shall be resurrected from the grave, into which we shall sometime fall, by the matchless power by which he alone is able to change and fashion our bodies like unto his glorious being."

Well, we'll say to James, the psychologist, in the light of that testimony and the testimony of our own hearts, we know what that Knower is—the spirit within. "But there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding." (Job 32:8.)—FS, ms., Nephi L. Morris, April 7, 1943.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TP"DEATH IS NOT THE END." A few years ago, as a grave was being dug for a national hero who had practically given his life for his friend, an unknown person stepped into the grave, took the shovel, threw out a few shovels full of dirt, and, handing the shovel back to the gravedigger, said: "So this is the end!" He climbed out of the unfinished grave and left without making his identity known. An account of the incident was given wide publicity in the daily press of the United States.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPI think there is nothing which is more unexpressive of the truth than that expression when applied to death: "This is the end!" Accurately speaking, it applies only to one fact, and that is this: Death is the end only of one's mortal existence. It is true that—

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TP"The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power, And all that beauty, all that wealth e'er gave, Awaits alike the inevitable hour The paths of glory lead but to the grave."

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPThomas Gray, Elegy in a Country Churchyard.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPBut the grave receives only the earthly tenement of the intelligence, mind, and spirit, that the power of death cannot touch.—FS, ms., May Anderson, June 14, 1946.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPTHE UNIVERSAL YEARNING FOR IMMORTALITY. At some time or other every human being faces that thing which we call death. When I was but a boy, I sensed that deeply in the cry of a mother who sat by the side of the casket that contained her little boy. Several of us boys had been playing with firecrackers on Twenty-eighth Street in Ogden. We did not know then that one of our playmates had powder in his pocket. At that time we used to celebrate and show our loyalty by firing firecrackers and shooting off bombs. Unfortunately, in a moment of thoughtlessness, this young boy broke what we called a "lighter," and while it still had sparks in it, he put it in his pocket where the powder lay, and an explosion occurred. His clothes were set on fire which we, his associates, tried to extinguish as best we could; but he was very severely and fatally burned.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPTwo or three days later his playmates sat in the funeral services. I chanced to be near enough to the mother and to President Charles F. Middleton to hear President Middleton say: "Don't cry, Ann! Don't cry! You'll meet your boy again." And then—you will have to imagine, for I cannot express it—a cry came from that mother's soul in these words: "Oh, if I only knew!" That is all. I did not know its significance then. I could just respond to the cry. But since, I have read in that cry the answer to the longings of the human heart. No parent can lay aside a child without longing, without wishing, that the child might come again, or that the parent might speak with the child again. You cannot lay aside your darling wife without longing for a continuation of the association that has been so heavenly to you. The bereaved wife experiences the same yearning at the departure of a devoted husband. Isn't it so throughout life? Everybody to a greater or lesser degree longs for immortality.—DNCS, December 13, 1941, p. 5.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPNo husband can kneel at the side of a departed wife; no wife can kneel at the side of a departed husband; no child can part with a loving parent without being filled with an ardent desire to meet that loved one again somewhere in a better world where the pangs of parting are unknown.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TP"... Whence this pleasing hope, this fond desire, This longing after immortality? Or whence this secret dread, and inward horror, Of falling into naught? Why shrinks the soul Back on herself, and startles at destruction? 'Tis the divinity that stirs within us; 'Tis Heaven itself, that points out an hereafter, And intimates eternity to man."

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPAddison, Cato, Act 5, Sc. 1.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TP—FS, ms., Frank Evans, August 21, 1950.

THE MEANING OF IMMORTALITY

THE PERSISTENCE OF PERSONALITY AFTER DEATH. Living in posterity is not immortality. Some say there will come a time when not a grandchild can be found living on earth. It may be that we can see the time when even these virtues will not be perpetuated.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPIn what, then, does true immortality consist? It consists in the persistence of personality after death. The Savior's heartbeats were silenced, his body placed in the tomb; but his personality, the eternal part, lived and moved and had its being in the eternal beyond to which his persecutors were unresponsive and dead.—FS, ms., Rudger Clawson, June 25, 1943.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPI believe with all my soul in the persistence of personality after death. I cannot believe otherwise. Even reason and observation demonstrate that to me.

Some of you have heard me give experiences that illustrate this thought. As I have stood by the bedside of dying men, women, and children, these illustrations have been proved. Not a week has passed since I received what I thought was another illustration of that fact.

I spoke at the funeral service of a mother in Logan only recently. That good mother, before she died, as she lay on the bed of illness, was wont to inquire about her brother. Nearly every night she would say, "How is he getting along?" mentioning his name, but, suddenly, one day that brother left his mortal existence almost instantly. That afternoon as the sister awoke from sleep, she made no inquiry as to the condition of her brother, didn't ask about him, but stated, "I have seen William and Mother together. How happy they seem. They wanted me to go with them, but I was not ready. How happy they will be."

She knew he was gone. Nobody had said a word to her, but a consciousness had come to her that her brother William was with her mother, who had been dead for many years. The sister, however, was not quite ready. In two more days she, too, joined them. Her body was weakened by disease, suffering; her physical strength was wasted, but the spirit was responsive to another environment to which her loved ones, in the prime of physical life and health, were unresponsive.

I have seen one young man particularly responsive to that environment when he was dead to us who stood by ready to bless him, and his vocal chords could be used, for he spoke, his lips seemed to say, and distinctly I heard him say, "Yes, Father, I recognize you. May I come back?" and at the conclusion of these words his cousin, Sister Bertha Wright, said, "Administer to him, Brother McKay."

I said, "It is too late, he is gone," But yet his heart was beating, his vocal chords were expressing words, but I was as conscious and sure as that I am standing here, that he was unresponsive to us. He was responding to another environment to which we were unresponsive, to which we were dead. Not five minutes passed before his heartbeat stopped, and then we said he was dead. His spirit was free, even before the heartbeat stopped. His father had been dead for fifteen years.

I am not giving this as argument but merely as an illustration of the fact that the spirit when free from the body which is subject to disease, is whole, possessing the loving characteristics and beautiful virtues that were so well-known in the loved one here, and so this is my witness and testimony to you today.—FS, ms., Mrs. Bertha Harmon Lee, August 18, 1937.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPTHE SPIRIT OF MAN IS ETERNAL. Nearly two thousand years ago a man who took upon himself mortality was crucified on the cross, his heartbeats were stilled, his loved ones grieved, and his body was silently placed in the tomb. No matter how many critics try to explain it away, those things are facts! Eighteen hundred years later that Being appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith, personally—not just in a dream, not in imagination, but in reality. And if one Being who took upon himself mortality, born of mortal woman, can pass through those stages, so can each one of you. And while the Savior's body lay in the tomb, his personality, his spirit preached to the spirits in prison, who had been disobedient in the days of Noah hundreds of years before.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPPersonality is persistent, and that is the message of comfort, that is the real way in which death is conquered. Death cannot touch the spirit of man.—FS, ms., Robert S. Richards, October 1, 1951.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPThis old body is just a house, as physical as the house in which we are meeting today. We can analyze and find most of it is fluid; a few chemicals go to make up this old chemical house; but in a few years it begins to decay; the brain ceases to function. We can analyze that brain, with its gray matter, its white matter, and we know what it is, and we can see the explosion that takes place when thought is produced, and yet each of us knows that there is something within which is greater than the thought.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPIt is the spirit, the soul that is within us that bears witness to the immortality of the soul.—FS, ms., Mrs. Martha H. Rolapp, September 8, 1942.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPTHE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL. Life is full of partings. Parents are saying good-bye to boys drafted into the army. Missionary farewells are being held weekly. We say good-bye to our boys and girls who go back to college. Nearly every parting is associated with sadness. The suddenness of parting intensifies the sadness, but in all these temporary partings there is the hope of a reuniting, which, to an extent, alleviates sorrow caused by separation. The point I wish to make is that this parting, caused by death, though sudden and somewhat extended, is no less free from the realization of another meeting—the hope of a mother to meet her soldier boy on his return; the hope of a mother to meet her missionary son when he comes back with an honorable release; the hope of parents to meet their son after he has perhaps completed a college course—this hope is no more real than the hope we have of reuniting with husband, father, friend, and business associate.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPDeath may have power over the body, for we are, in this life, open to accident and disease; and death may take advantage of these conditions, but there his power ends. Death cannot touch the spirit. Our friend who lies silent here is just as whole in personality, possessing all his qualities of manliness as he lived pure and possessed those qualities here in life.

Immortalitya-McKay, David O.TPIf there is any truth that is taught through the gospel of Jesus Christ, it is the truth of the immortality of the soul.—FS, ms., James H. Riley, August 7, 1946.

I last saw Brother Andrew Jenson a few weeks ago as he was entering the office. On one side gently assisting him was his son; on the other, his daughter. It was evident that his body was becoming enfeebled; his mind and intellect were as alert as ever. As I continued to my office, I was reminded of ex-President John Quincy Adams' reference to his bodily enfeeblement and the expression of his faith in immortality. One day as Mr. Adams was walking down a street in Boston, a friend accosted him and said: "Mr. Adams, how are you?" Confident that he would live after his body had ceased to function in the physical world, the venerable man replied: "Thank you, sir! John Quincy Adams himself is well, sir, quite well. I thank you. But the house in which he lives at present is becoming dilapidated. It is tottering upon its foundations. Time and the seasons have nearly destroyed it. Its roof is pretty well wornout. Its walls are much shattered, and it trembles with every wind. The old tenement is becoming almost uninhabitable, and I think John Quincy Adams will have to move out of it soon; but he, himself, is quite well, sir, quite well."—FS, ms., Andrew Jenson, November 22, 1941.

CHARACTER ENDURES. "And all wept, and bewailed her: but he said, Weep not; she is not dead, but sleepeth.

"And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead.

"And he put them all out, and took her by the hand, and called, saying, Maid, arise.

"And her spirit came again, and she arose straightway: and he commanded to give her meat." (Luke 8:52-55.)

You recognize this as a quotation taken from Luke's account of the raising of the twelve-year-old daughter of Jairus, a ruler of the synagogue. I have quoted it today because it contains two elements appropriate to this sacred occasion:

The first is, that the little maiden through sickness had met what we must all meet some day. Either through sickness, accident, or old age, death eventually comes to all.

The second is reference to the fact of the dual nature of each individual: "... her spirit came again."

The important question with each of us today, as it should be always, is: How well prepared are we to meet that eventuality in life, that inescapable experience called death?

One man, contemplating this, tried to imagine what we could take with us when the end came:

Servicea-McKay, David O.TP"Supposing today were your last day on earth. The last mile of the journey you've trod; After all of your struggles, how much are you worth? How much can you take home to God? "Don't count as possessions your silver and gold, Tomorrow you leave these behind; And all that is yours to have and to hold, Is the service you've rendered mankind."

When I first read that, I could not agree with him nor do I today, unless he includes in that rendering of service, the development of spiritual gifts and attainments—the character that we have developed, the virtues which have been ours through righteous living in this mortal stage, and the credit of service to others.—FS, ms., Mrs. Adele Cannon Howells, April 17, 1951.

DEATHA DOORWAY TO LIFE. Truly, "He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down: ..." (Job 14:2) but "He that ... believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto life." (John 5:24.)

Death, Physicala-McKay, David O.TPThis stage of existence is progress towards death. That which we call death is the door into the life of living.—FS, ms., Henry A. Gardner, May 12, 1948.

A SLEEP. What we call death Jesus referred to as sleep. "Lazarus sleeps," he said to his disciples. "The damsel sleepeth," were his comforting words to the bereaved and sorrowing parents of a little girl. Indeed, to the Savior of the world there is no such thing as death—only life—eternal life. ...

Death, Spiritual, Firsta-McKay, David O.TPWith this assurance, obedience to eternal law should be a joy, not a burden, for life is joy, life is love. It is disobedience that brings death. Obedience to Christ and his laws brings life.—CR, April 1939, p. 115.

Funeralsa-McKay, David O.TPTHE PURPOSES OF RELIGIOUS FUNERAL SERVICES. The purpose of these services is to pay tribute to our departed brother, George Albert Smith], and, secondly to bring solace, and peace to the sorrowing hearts of the bereaved. We have listened to tributes as great, I think, as could be paid to any great leader.

Funeralsa-McKay, David O.TPMay I now say a word about the second purpose of a funeral service: to bring solace and comfort to sorrowing hearts. This is done by three principal means.

Funeralsa-McKay, David O.TPFirst, in contemplation of the fact that he, whose departure strains the heartstrings, has lived a useful, noble life. What consolation that will bring to any bereaved father, mother, or child.

Funeralsa-McKay, David O.TPSecond, comfort in the consciousness that loved ones were true and loyal, as his children and kinfolk, and that particularly during illness they did everything humanly possible to administer to his needs, to alleviate his pain, and to give him comfort.

Funeralsa-McKay, David O.TPAnd third, comfort in the assurance of the immortality of the human soul; the assurance that their father is just away.—CR, April 1951, pp. 181-182.

THE EVIDENCE FOR THE RESURRECTION

CHRIST'S APOSTLES WITNESSES OF THE RESURRECTION. Let us ask ourselves, and ask sincerely, is it a fact that the crucified Jesus did appear after his death as a resurrected being? Accept this as an actuality, and you have at least presumptive evidence of the truth of his teachings regarding the sacredness of the individual as a child of God.

That the literal resurrection from the grave was a reality to the disciples, who knew Christ intimately, is a certainty. In their minds there was absolutely no doubt. They were witnesses of the fact. They knew because their eyes beheld, their ears heard, their hands felt the corporeal presence of the risen Redeemer.—CR, April 1939, p. 112.

VALUE OF THE APOSTOLIC WITNESS. Nearness to the event gives increased value to the evidence given by the Apostles. A deeper value of their testimony lies in the fact that with Jesus' death the Apostles were stricken with discouragement and gloom. For two and a half years they had been upheld and inspired by Christ's presence. But now he was gone. They were left alone, and they seemed confused and helpless.

Only John stood by the cross. Not with timidity, not with feelings of doubt and gloom and discouragement is a skeptical world made to believe. Such wavering, despairing minds as the Apostles possessed on the day of the crucifixion could never have stirred people to accept an unpopular belief and to die martyrs to the cause.

I urge the youth of the Church, students particularly, carefully to consider the testimony of these eyewitnesses, whose honesty is not questioned even by skeptical criticism.—CR, April 1939, pp. 112-113.

MARK'S TESTIMONY. We have no evidence that Mark joined the Church while the Savior was on the earth. Undoubtedly the Savior was in Mark's home. Mark was probably the youth who rushed into the Garden of Gethsemane and warned Jesus that the soldiers were coming. At any rate we are justified in assuming that he was acquainted with the Master.

Mark does not himself recount any appearance of the risen Lord, but he testifies that the Lord would meet his disciples. From Mark we hear the glorious proclamation of the first empty tomb in all the world. For the first time in the history of man the words, "Here lies," were supplanted by the divine message, "He is risen." No one can doubt that Mark was not convinced in his soul of the reality of the empty tomb. To him the resurrection was not questionable—it was real; and the appearance of his Lord and Master among men was a fact established in his mind beyond the shadow of a doubt. To the proclaiming of this truth he devoted his life, and if tradition can be relied upon, he sealed his testimony with his blood.

LUKE'S TESTIMONY. Another who records the testimony of eyewitnesses was Luke, a Gentile, or, as some think, a proselyte of Antioch in Syria, where he followed the profession of physician. (See Col. 4:14.) Even some of his most severe modern critics have placed him in the first rank of an historian, and his personal contact with early Apostles makes his statements of inestimable value.

What he wrote was the result of personal inquiry and investigation and was drawn from all available sources. Particularly he interviewed and recorded the declarations of those "who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word." He avers that he "accurately traced all things from the very first," so that he might "write them in order." This means that Luke obtained the testimony of these "eyewitnesses" directly from themselves and not from previous narratives.

According to all trustworthy testimony, we have the gospel of Luke as it came from his hand. In Chapter 24, Luke testifies to the divine message: "Why seek ye the living among the dead?

"He is not here, but is risen: ..." (Luke 24:5-6.)

With equal assurance as to their accuracy we can accept his statements and witness in regard to Peter's and Paul's and other Apostles' testimony regarding the resurrection. "To whom also he shewed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God." (Acts 1:3.) Who can doubt Luke's absolute confidence in the reality of the resurrection?

It is true that neither Mark nor Luke testifies to having personally seen the risen Lord, and therefore, some urge that their recorded testimonies cannot be taken as firsthand evidence. That they do not so testify, and yet were convinced that others did see him, shows how incontrovertible was the evidence among the Apostles and other disciples that the resurrection was a reality.

PAUL'S TESTIMONY. Fortunately, however, there is a document which does give the personal testimony of an eyewitness to an appearance of Jesus after his death and burial. This personal witness also corroborates the testimony not only of the two men whom I have quoted but of others also. I refer to Saul, a Jew of Tarsus, educated at the feet of Gamaliel, a strict Pharisee, and before Saul's conversion a bitter persecutor of all who believed in Jesus of Nazareth as having risen from the dead.

And now in the oldest authentic document in existence relating or testifying to the resurrection of Christ, we find Paul saying this to the Corinthians:

"For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures;

"And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the scriptures:

"And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve:

"After that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep.

"After that, he was seen of James; then of all the apostles.

"And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time.

"For I am the least of the apostles, that am not meet to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God." (I Cor. 15:3-9.)

THE TESTIMONY OF MODERN REVELATION. In addition to the ancient Apostles, we have the testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith who gives in an unequivocal description the following stirring testimony in relation to his first vision:

"... When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, ... standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—'This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!' " (P. of G. P., Joseph Smith 2:17.)

Jesus Christ, Resurrection ofa-McKay, David O.TPTHE LATTER-DAY SAINT BELIEF. Thus the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints stands with Peter, with Paul, and with James, and with all the other Apostles in accepting the resurrection not only as being literally true but also as the consummation of Christ's divine mission on earth. Other great religious leaders among the nations of the world since history began have taught virtue and temperance, self-mastery and service, obedience to righteousness and duty; some have taught a belief in one supreme ruler and in an hereafter; but only Christ broke the seal of the grave and revealed death as the door to immortality and eternal life.—CR, April 1939, pp. 113-115.

THE GREAT CONFIRMATION. The latest and greatest confirmation that Jesus rose from the grave is the appearance of the Father and the Son to the Prophet Joseph Smith, eighteen hundred years after the event that today Christendom is celebrating. It is highly appropriate, therefore, that the Church should join in the annual festival commemorating the resurrection of Christ, the most significant, the most memorable event in the history of mankind.—CR, April 1944, p. 120.

Jesus Christ, Resurrection ofa-McKay, David O.TPTHE MESSAGE TO MAN. If Christ lived after death, so shall men, each one taking the place in the next world for which he is best fitted. Since love is as eternal as life, the message of the resurrection is the most comforting, the most glorifying ever given to man; for when death takes a loved one from us, we can look with assurance into the open grave and say, "He is not here," and "He will rise again."—CR, April 1939, p. 115.

A PERSONAL TESTIMONY. It is just as easy for me to accept as a divine truth the fact that Christ preached to the spirits in prison while his body lay in the tomb as it is for me to look at you from this pulpit. It is true. And it is just as easy for me to realize that one may so live that he may receive impressions and direct messages through the Holy Ghost. The veil is thin between those who hold the priesthood and divine messengers on the other side of the veil.—CR, April 1948, p. 172.

A PERSONAL HOPE. By the power of the priesthood, whatsoever is bound on earth is bound in heaven. This is an eternal promise. I refer to William McKay and Ellen Oman, my grandparents, also to my father and mother, my brothers and sisters over there now.

I hope to meet them and recognize them and love them as I recognized and loved them here. And I base that upon knowledge that is as real as my speaking to you. It has come through inspiration from on high, and I base it also upon the biblical scripture that as Christ's body lay in the tomb his spirit went to preach to the spirits in prison which were disobedient at one time, in the days of Noah.—DNCS, June 18, 1952, p. 3.

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF EASTER

"... Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the place where they laid him." (Mark 16:6.)

Those lines when written had no reference whatever to Easter. They were a simple statement concerning the resurrection of Jesus Christ—one of the two greatest events in the history of mankind.

Eastera-McKay, David O.TPEaster is a spring festival that has been adopted from the pagan celebration given in honor of Astarte or Eostro, a Saxon goddess corresponding to the Ashtaroth of Syria.

Eastera-McKay, David O.TPAll that men say of Eastertide as the season of new life and new hope may be appropriately connoted with this ancient pre-Christian festival. True, spring and resurrection are happily associated, not that there is anything in nature exactly analogous to the resurrection, but there is so much in springtime which suggests the awakening thought. Like the stillness of death, Old Winter has held in his grasp all vegetable life, but as spring approaches, the tender, life-giving power of heat and light compel him to relinquish his grip, and what seemed to have been dead, gradually awakens to a newness of life, revivified, refreshed, invigorated after a peaceful sleep.

Eastera-McKay, David O.TPBut the re-awakening of physical life or even the rehabilitation of spiritual ideals is not the real significance of Easter as celebrated by the early Christians when they adopted the pagan spring festival.

Eastera-McKay, David O.TPThey commemorated the coming forth from the tomb of their crucified Lord, the resurrected Christ.

Jesus Christ, Resurrection ofa-McKay, David O.TPTo sincere believers in Christianity, to all who accept Christ as their Savior, his resurrection is not a symbolism, but a reality.

Jesus Christ, Resurrection ofa-McKay, David O.TPAs Christ lived after death, so shall all men, each taking his place in the next world for which he has best fitted himself.

Jesus Christ, Resurrection ofa-McKay, David O.TPWith this assurance, obedience to eternal law should be a joy, not a burden, for compliance with the principles of the gospel brings happiness and peace.

To this truth, may each recurring Easter morning give new emphasis and fill our souls with divine assurance that Christ is truly risen and through him man's immortality assured.

Jesus Christ As Prince of Peacea-McKay, David O.TPMay the day soon dawn upon the world when reliance upon brute force and belief in the false ideal that might makes right will be supplanted by the higher ideals that radiate the charitable, peace-loving spirit of the risen Lord!—DNCS, April 16, 1952, pp. 2, 3.
