David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 6

SOME GOSPEL QUESTIONS

IS CHRISTIANITY COMING OR GOING?

Christianitya-McKay, David O.TPTRUE CHRISTIANITY. True Christianity—by which I mean the sublime truths of life as taught by the Savior of men, and his authorized Church—had not been upon the earth for many centuries. That organization men rejected by killing the servants whom Christ authorized to preach his gospel. Following their death, men substituted for the heaven-inspired Church an organization which gave glittering promises of truth and salvation, but which it could not fulfil. Pomp and ceremony in worship were substituted for simplicity. True Christianity promised love, service, peace, brotherhood. The spurious Christianity has spread hate, selfishness, discord, and international enmity. So when men say, "Christianity is going" or "Christianity has failed," it is well to understand that they refer to that which has paraded as Christianity for so many centuries and not Christ's Church itself, not to his doctrines, which are eternal truth itself. "For they have strayed from mine ordinances," says the Lord, "and have broken mine everlasting covenant.

"They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own God, whose image is in the likeness of the world, ..." (D. & C. 1:15-16.)

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TPTHE NEW CHRISTENDOMRESTORED IN THE WEST WITH A GLOBAL MESSAGE. But true Christianity, the plain, simple, but sublime doctrine of the Redeemer is "coming"; indeed, has already come. His Church is established among men in western civilization, "never more to be overthrown or given to another people." That Church was not established by man nor by legislative enactment; but by the Redeemer himself. It is, therefore, his Church—the Church of Jesus Christ, destined to transform the lives of men in all nations, and eventually to link together in the endless chain of salvation the whole human race. It is the science of living, of living completely, and the more men know about it, the more they introduce its doctrines into their everyday life, the more they love it, and the more eager they become to declare to their fellow men its Godlike virtues.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TPAnd this gospel shall be preached "... unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people,

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TP"Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come." (Rev. 14:6-7.)—MS, 85:536-538 (1923).

ISRAEL, THE JEWS, AND ZIONISM

JEWISH-CHRISTIAN RELATIONSHIPS. Twenty-three hundred years ago the prophet looking down through the vista of time saw this day. He saw Israel scattered among all nations. He saw them become a hiss and a byword, but added, "Nevertheless, when that day cometh, ... that they no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel, ..."—note he does not say when they accept him as their Redeemer, nor necessarily declare to the world that he was the Messiah to come to their people—the prophet words it most significantly; viz., "when ... they no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel, then will he remember the covenants which he made to their fathers." (I Nephi 19:15.)

Brethren, isn't it a significant thing that today there is a change in the hearts of the descendants of Israel in regard to the Holy One of Israel?

In 1918, while I was visiting the California Mission, President Joseph E. Robinson put in my hand a book entitled, Jesus, the Jew, written by a prominent Jew of Sacramento. In the first chapter of that book we get a picture of the enmity and bitterness of the Jews when the author was a boy. Their hearts were not turned, even at that late date, much toward the Holy One but most bitterly against him. He said in substance: "I remember, when a boy, that one of my classmates brought into the class a book containing the name of Jesus. I remember how wrought up and excited the rabbi became when he was made aware of its presence in the schoolroom. 'Sacrilege! Sacrilege!' he indignantly cried. Then the rabbi proceeded to denounce the Holy One. He said: 'How can any Jew who realizes what that name has brought upon his people even touch a book containing the name of Jesus?' He told how the Jews had been persecuted, how they had been made outcasts and wanderers, how they had been driven from pillar to post, over the face of the earth; how their beards had been torn from their roots, their teeth drawn from their jaws; how they had been whipped at the post, put upon the rack, and their bones drawn joint from joint; how they had been outraged, ravished, and killed, all on account of Jesus"—and by the Christians. That is one picture, when that man was but a boy—when you were boys, my fellow workers in the priesthood.

Jewsa-McKay, David O.TPTHE BOOK OF MORMON AND A CHANGE OF HEART. Here is another picture given by a prominent Jew, Isadore Singer, the editor of the Jewish Encyclopedia: "When I was a boy, had my father, who was a very pious man, heard the name of Jesus uttered from the pulpit of our synagogue, he and every other man in the congregation would have left the building, and the rabbi would have been dismissed at once." That is illustrative of the spirit among the descendants of Israel when the Book of Mormon came forth among the children of men. Even at that time no man, it seems to me, acting upon his ordinary judgment, would dare say that the time would come when they would accept that Holy One, but here, two thousand years before, a prophet of God said the day would come when they would no more turn their hearts aside from the Holy One, and that then he would remember the promises he made to their fathers.

Now the question is: Has that day come? That same man who heard his teacher say, "Sacrilege! Sacrilege!" because a boy happened to bring a book containing the name of Jesus, said:

Jewsa-McKay, David O.TP"I began to study his teachings. I found what his teachings were—purity, humility; 'Blessed are the poor in spirit.' 'Blessed are they that mourn.' 'Blessed are the pure in heart, for they should see God; blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth; blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.' " And then he proceeds to show how Israel today is indebted to Jesus, the Jew. In one chapter entitled, "Is the Messiah yet to come?" he says: "The enlightened Jew says no, but the Messianic age is what the Jews today are looking forward to."

Jewsa-McKay, David O.TPAnd here in that connection let me just read one verse from that same Mr. Singer: "I regard Jesus of Nazareth as a Jew of the Jews, one whom all Jewish people"—all Jewish people!—"are learning to love. His teaching has been an immense service to the world in bringing Israel's God to the knowledge of hundreds of millions of mankind. The great change in Jewish thoughts concerning Jesus of Nazareth I cannot better illustrate than by this fact—" and then he relates the instance of his childhood, as I have read it.

Jewsa-McKay, David O.TP"Now, it is not strange in many synagogues to hear sermons preached eulogistic of this Jesus, and nobody thinks of protesting. In fact, we are all glad to claim Jesus as one of our people."

Israel, Restoration ofa-McKay, David O.TPORIGINS OF THE MODERN STATE OF ISRAEL. Boys of latter-day Israel, does it not seem that the time has come when "their hearts no more turn against the Holy One?" It seems to me that it has. Then, if so, great events are to take place. God has said he will remember his promises. What are they? Turn to the tenth chapter of II Nephi , and there you will find that "When the day cometh that they shall believe in me, ... they shall be restored in the flesh, ..." unto their own land.

Israel, Restoration ofa-McKay, David O.TPIn the month of December 1917, General Allenby, of the British Army, took possession of the holy city, Jerusalem. Today the Holy Land is practically freed from the domination of the Turk, and it is under the rule of the Gentile. It was significant that during that very month one of the leaders of the British Parliament, announcing the taking of Jerusalem, also suggested that it should be made the home of the Jews. In the next paragraph in II Nephi the prophet also added this significant reference: "... and the nations of the Gentiles shall be great in the eyes of me ... in carrying them forth to the lands of their inheritance." As soon, practically, as the announcement was made by Mr. Arthur J. Balfour, I think, that Jerusalem should be held for the Jews, a prominent Jew in this country wrote an article in one of the magazines saying, "We don't want to go back to Jerusalem. The Holy Land is of such strategic value that should the Jews gather there and build a Jewish republic, and the nations go to war later, we shall be crushed as Belgium was crushed in this war"; but he was answered by the leaders of the Zionist movement, one of whom was Israel Zangwill, the author of that most patriotic American play, The Melting Pot, and they said this: "Place the Jewish republic under the protection of some such nations as Great Britain and the United States," and in harmony with that sentiment, June the 26 of this year , prominent Jews held a convention in Pittsburgh in which it was stated publicly and authoritatively that at that time fifty thousand Jews were with General Allenby working for the freedom of the Holy Land; and the Jews who stood up in that convention, said: "We dedicate the rest of our lives to the rebuilding of Jerusalem."

AN EVENT IN THE DRAMA OF HISTORY. It has been said by someone that we cannot see great events when we are close to them, and it may be that we are too close to the fulfilment of these prophecies to get their full significance. However, I am sure this morning that we get at least glimpses of their significance. This is one thought, then, which I desire to give to the boys and girls of Zion—that "The providence that watches over the affairs of men works out of their mistakes at times a healthier issue than could have been accomplished by their own wisest forethought."

I grant you that the Gentile nation, Great Britain, did not go over there to get Jerusalem free for the Jews. In this great war she wanted to protect her possessions and interests in the Far East. That was simply a strategic movement in this great war, but out of it what has come? I myself heard within the last month a prominent Jew of our own state express to an audience his appreciation of what is now dawning for his people. "Under the storm and the cloud today, and today the hard peril and pain, tomorrow the stone shall be rolled away for the sunshine shall follow the rain." God's providence will bring out of this great conflict blessings to humanity of which they scarcely dream.

Last Daysa-McKay, David O.TPBut in order that they might have them and acknowledge them, there is a responsibility upon the people of the earth. Liberty is offered them; and the perfect law of liberty, the gospel of Jesus Christ, is offered them. In this day, the greatest in the world's history, a day toward which prophets looked with longing hearts, you and I are witnesses of the fulfilment, at least in part, of God's promises. You and I, then, have the responsibility if there is anything at all in the testimony we bear, of giving to this people, not only the Jews, but also to the world, the gospel, the perfect law of liberty.—CR, October 1918, pp. 45-48.

THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORD'S SUPPER

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPA SACRED CHRISTIAN ORDINANCE. The partaking of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper is one of the most sacred ordinances of the Church of Jesus Christ. Associated with it are principles fundamental in character building and essential to man's advancement and exaltation in the kingdom of God. Too few communicants attach to this simple though sublime rite the importance and significance that it merits. Unfortunately, the form of worship is frequently an outward compliance without the true soul acknowledgment of its deep spiritual significance.

Hypocrisya-McKay, David O.TPOne reason why thinking men and women are rejecting the pseudo-Christian sects of the day is because of the discrepancy between the pretensions and the daily acts of so-called Christian believers. It is very easy to go to Church, to sing hallelujah, and to cry, "Lord, Lord!"; but it is not so easy to do that which the Lord requires.

Hypocrisya-McKay, David O.TPWhen churchmen's acts do not conform to their pretensions, non-churchmen accuse them of hypocrisy, one of the gross sins condemned most vehemently by the Savior.

Hypocrisya-McKay, David O.TPMembers of the Church of Jesus Christ should strive very earnestly to reflect in their daily conduct those ideals which on Sunday they profess to cherish.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPIn the partaking of the sacrament, there is danger of people's permitting formality to supersede spirituality. When such is the case, the ordinance may prove to be a curse instead of a blessing.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPThe blessing on the bread, which is offered in behalf of everyone who partakes of the sacrament, reveals clearly the relation that each one assumes to the Lord, and the obligations each one takes upon himself. Reverence and the sacredness of a promise are the first two principles therein emphasized.

REVERENCE ENJOINED. The address, "O God, the Eternal Father," is an acknowledgment on the part of the congregation that the Lord is present; at least that his Spirit is in possible communication with the spirit of each one who sincerely seeks him. Charles Lamb once said, "If Shakespeare were to come into this room, we should all rise up to meet him; but if Christ were to come into it, we should all fall upon our knees." This reverent attitude should be maintained during the administration of the sacrament. Though the congregation does not kneel, it should maintain perfect order.

Everybody present should think of the virtues of Christ's life, for the sacrament is "blessed and sanctified" that each may partake of it "in remembrance" of the Son of God.

PROMISES ATTESTED. There are few things in life more sacred than one's word of honor. Truthfulness, honesty are fundamental virtues, without which it is impossible to build a noble character. Charles E. Jefferson aptly says, "All virtues are important, but some are more essential than others. There are virtues whose absence leaves the character ragged and marred, and there are others whose absence leaves the soul a hollow shell." The man who disregards a promise, who treats lightly and with contempt his word of honor, has a soul that is but "a hollow shell."

All who partake of the sacrament, witness, that is, give evidence of, or attest before "God, the Eternal Father," that they are willing to do certain things. In England, when a man witnesses a signature to an important legal document, the barrister before whom the signature is attested may require the man to solemnize his word or oath by touching the Bible. Of course, that is mere folly, but it originally signified that a promise made in the presence of that which is holy would be more sacredly kept than a promise or oath not so made. However, a promise given man to man is sufficiently binding. Then surely that which is witnessed before God is of such a nature that it never should be broken.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPTHREE COVENANTS. In this solemn presence, therefore, every partaker of the sacrament gives evidence of his willingness to assume three very great obligations, the first of which, and to which he becomes bound in sacred honor, is: To take upon himself the name of the Son.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPTo be called worthily by his name is to become a son of God, to be numbered one in the brotherhood of Christ. "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TP"And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure." (I John 3:2-3.) The second is: That he will always remember him.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPRemembrance is the act of having what is known, consciously before the mind. The promise, then, is that at all times he will bear in mind with gratitude and reverence Him whose life was the epitome of purity, kindness, love. Under all conditions, he is to eschew evil, and to cherish virtue, and to supplant hatred with compassion and benevolence. The third obligation is: To keep his commandments.

Were we to particularize, the commandments of God might be designated as many. Indeed, they touch every phase of man's being. But Jesus, himself, summed them all up as follows:

"... love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength: ...

"And ... thy neighbour as thyself. ..." (Mark 12:30-31.)

This is what every man who partakes of the sacrament expresses a willingness to do!

Who can measure the responsibility of such a covenant? How far-reaching! How comprehensive! It excludes from man's life: profanity, vulgarity, idleness, enmity, jealousy, drunkenness, dishonesty, hatred, selfishness, and every form of vice. It obligates him to sobriety, to industry, to kindness, to the performance of every duty in church and state. He binds himself to respect his fellow men, to honor the priesthood, to pay his tithes and offerings, and to consecrate his life to the service of humanity.

RESULTANT BLESSING. The all-comprehending reward named as the result of compliance with the three obligations assumed is the guiding and inspirational companionship of God's Holy Spirit. This is to the spirit of man what the sunshine is to the material world. It is the light that leads to eternal life. The operation of the law of cause and effect is as constant in the spiritual realm as it is in the physical world, and the keeping of each promise made in relation to the sacrament brings its resultant blessing, as surely as the sun brings light.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPOrder, reverence, attestation in divine presence to enter the fold of Christ; to keep his virtues and his life ever in mind; to love the Lord wholeheartedly; and to labor even at the sacrifice of self for the brotherhood of the human family—these and all kindred virtues are associated with the partaking of the Lord's Supper.—MS, 85:776-778 (1923).

THE STATUS OF CHILDREN WHO DIE IN INFANCY

Children, Salvation ofa-McKay, David O.TPHEIRS OF THE CELESTIAL KINGDOM. The Church of Jesus Christ promulgates the doctrine that little children are redeemed and sanctified through the atonement of our Lord and Savior. If they die before reaching the age of accountability, they become heirs of the celestial kingdom of heaven. Such is the sublime teaching set forth by the Prophet Joseph Smith as early as the year 1832.

THE ERRONEOUS DOCTRINES OF DEPRAVITY AND INFANT BAPTISM. At that time, and even a number of years later, the old school of pseudo-Christianity taught the pernicious doctrine that, "Infants come into the world, not only destitute of knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness, but also with a nature inclined to evil and only evil." With minds poisoned by this false idea, ministers taught, and trusting but misguided parents believed that unchristened infants that died were condemned to eternal punishment. Such a doctrine is worse than pernicious; it is horrible!

Equally erroneous, and wholly unjustifiable by the Holy Scriptures, is the doctrine of infant baptism. The Savior refuted the false idea of eternal punishment for unchristened infants, also the necessity of infant baptism when in the love of his heart he said: "Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God." (Mark 10:14.)

Children, Salvation ofa-McKay, David O.TPIn harmony with this sublime and reasonable declaration, the Church of Jesus Christ today affirms that "All children are redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ," and that when they die, they "will be enthroned in the presence of God and the Lamb," where they will enjoy "the fulness of that light, glory, and intelligence, which is prepared in the celestial kingdom."

Resurrectiona-McKay, David O.TPCHILDREN IN THE RESURRECTION. The question frequently arises as to whether a child that died in infancy will remain a child in the hereafter, and whether in the resurrection the spirit will take up the same body that it tabernacled in the flesh.

Resurrectiona-McKay, David O.TPThe doctrine of the Church in this respect was very clearly set forth by the late President Joseph F. Smith in an editorial in The Improvement Era, June 1904, wherein he stated, "The body will come forth as it is laid to rest, for there is no growth or development in the grave. As it is laid down, so will it arise, and changes to perfection will come by the law of restitution. But the spirit will continue to expand and develop, to the full stature of man."

Children, Salvation ofa-McKay, David O.TPParents, therefore, who have been parted from their children by death may rest assured that, if worthy through obedience to the principles of the gospel, they will not only meet their children in the spirit world, but will also recognize them and know them as they knew them in this life. Parents, too, have even a greater comfort in the fact that their little ones whose lives on earth were cut short will continue to grow and develop, and receive every blessing to which their inheritance and faithfulness will entitle them.—MS, 86:616-617 (1924).
