David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

BOOK II

THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS

"The greatest event of the nineteenth century was the appearing of two heavenly Beings to the boy Prophet Joseph Smith, revealing the personal identity respectively of God the Eternal Father and of his Son Jesus Christ."

—DAVID O. MCKAY

Millennial Star

Volume 85:408

CHAPTER 7

THE MISSION OF THE PROPHET JOSEPH SMITH

THE RESTORATION OF THE GOSPEL

THE GREATEST EVENT OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY. Nearness to an event tends to minimize its full significance and importance. Though the world is still near the great events that made the nineteenth an epoch-making century, yet so far-reaching and significant were the wonderful discoveries and inventions of the latter half of that century that they overwhelm us even in their nearness.

In this first quarter of the twentieth century we are looking at these momentous realities only as observers, who, standing at the foot of a high mountain, see it only in part. Its majestic slopes, towering peaks, and relative position to surrounding ranges are hidden from view. Yet even our limited vision fills us with astonishment. What mighty things have been accomplished! What mightier possibilities of the future! Who, for example, can measure the material benefits to society of the steam engine, the cotton gin, the automobile, the telegraph, the telephone; or who can even imagine the ultimate effect upon the human race of William Harvey's discovery, or that of Louis Pasteur? Space prevents even the mentioning of other events of equal significance and far-reaching benefits.

But none of them has answered man's greatest need and man's most yearning desire. Not one has yet revealed that for which man has sought for ages. That need—that everpresent yearning in man's heart—is to know God, and man's relation to him. The microscope has not revealed him; the telescope has not discovered him; even radio has not yet penetrated his abiding place—only one event of the nineteenth century claims to give to the human soul this answer. If in that event man finds the truth for which the human race has ever sought, then it truly merits the distinguishing tribute of the greatest event of the nineteenth century!

That event was the appearing of two heavenly Beings to the boy Prophet Joseph Smith, revealing the personal identity respectively of God the Eternal Father and of his Son Jesus Christ.—MS, 85:408 (1923).

PRAYER—THE KEY. About 1820, religious excitement led Joseph Smith to seek the right church, the proper mode of worship, the right way to live. The desire to know impelled the youth to seek the Lord in earnest prayer. One result of the answer to his prayer was the organization of the Church in Peter Whitmer's home on Tuesday, April 6, 1830. In that organization may be found the comprehension of the whole plan of man's salvation.

Now I wish to consider that organization as one evidence of his inspiration. Joseph Smith had neither support nor encouragement of any prominent men. He had no wealth. He had around him no influential legislators nor men who were styled the wisest thinkers of the time—elements surrounding these others that would be contributing factors in achieving success.—IE, 45:13, 54 (1942).

JOSEPH SMITH—HIS SOURCE OF KNOWLEDGE. Many years ago Joseph Smith, a mere boy between fourteen and fifteen years of age, declared that, in answer to prayer, he received a revelation from God. His declaration was simple but positive; and he was surprised when men doubted its truth. To him his claim was but the statement of a simple fact; to the Christian world it proved to be a lightning flash that, striking, weakened their religious structure from turret to foundation.

Two important elements in his first message were these: first, that God is a personal Being, who communicates his will to man; and second, that no creed in Christendom had the true plan of salvation.

The result of this declaration was his immediate ostracism from the religious world. In a very short time he found himself standing alone.

Alone—and unacquainted with the learning and philosophy of his day!

Alone—and unschooled in the arts and sciences!

Alone—with no philosopher to instruct him, no minister to guide him! In simplicity and kindness he had hastened to them with his glorious message; in scorn and derision they had turned from him saying it was all of the devil; that there were no such things as visions or revelations in these days; that all such things had ceased with the Apostles; and that there would never be any more of them.

Thus he was left alone to embark upon the ocean of religious thought, having rejected every known vessel with which to sail and never having built one or even having seen one built himself. Surely if an impostor, the bark he could build would be indeed a crude one.

On the other hand, if that which he built possesses an excellence and superiority over that which the learned professors and philosophers had given to the world during the preceding hundreds of years, men will be forced, at least, to say in surprise, whence hath this man his wisdom!

It would appear, then, that though he seemed alone, he was alone only as was Moses on Sinai; as Jesus on the Mount of Olives. As with the Master, so with the prophet, his instructions came not through man-made channels but direct from God, the source of all intelligence. He says: "I am a rough stone. The sound of the hammer and chisel were never heard on me until the Lord took me in hand. I desire the learning and wisdom of heaven alone."

The result of this divine guidance was an assurance of the righteousness of what he taught and a fearlessness in proclaiming it. When Joseph Smith taught a doctrine, he taught it authoritatively. His was not the question whether it agreed with man's thoughts or not, whether it was in harmony with the teachings of the orthodox churches or whether it was in direct opposition. What was given to him he gave to the world irrespective of its agreement or disagreement, of its harmony or its discord with the belief of the churches, or the prevailing standards of mankind; and today, as we look through the vista of over one hundred years, we have a good opportunity of judging of the virtue of his teachings, and of concluding as to the source of his instruction.

It is interesting as well as profitable, too, to know how the advanced thought of today harmonizes with what he taught so authoritatively three-quarters of a century ago. The guiding spirit of his life was manifest right in the beginning and harmonizes with his wonderful declaration that God had spoken to him. In his own words it is this: "Whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may not see the reason thereof until long after the events transpire."

His claim to revelation from God, if established, leaves no doubt as to his authority to organize the Church of Jesus Christ upon earth, and to administer authoritatively the principles and ordinances thereof. Thus at the very inception of this great latter-day work was laid the immovable cornerstone of Christ's Church in this dispensation, viz., the authority to officiate in the name of Jesus Christ in things pertaining to his Church.

Each succeeding year of the past century has tended to vindicate, and the contending creeds of Christendom today confirm, the Prophet's teachings in regard to the necessity of divine authority to officiate in the things pertaining to God.

Not only did he receive guidance and instruction from the divine Head, but, once received, defended it with invincible resolution, and his "reliance on truth, on virtue and in God were most unfaltering."—MS, 85:88-90 (1923).

"WHENCE HATH THIS MAN HIS WISDOM?" When Joseph Smith received his first revelation, 1820, he was a mere youth. He was unschooled, untrained. Ten years later he organized the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He was not yet thirty-nine years of age when he was martyred.

The harmony of his teachings with those taught by the Savior and his Apostles; the reasonableness of his assertion that men must be called of God to officiate in things pertaining to God; the complete organization of the Church; its government, laws, and wonderful adaptation to the needs and to the advancement of the human family—these and many other phases of this great latter-day work, when even only partly understood, lead thinking persons to ponder upon the source of the Prophet's wisdom.

The boldness of his assertions was remarkable. Many of these were in direct opposition to the belief of the orthodoxy of his day. He contradicted doctrines advocated by learned divines—a rash thing for an unlearned youth to do unless he had an assurance that he was right. If he had this assurance, whence did it come? Have time and intelligent thought vindicated him or condemned him?—MS, 85:104-105 (1923).

Other men with noble aspirations, with power and popularity, failed utterly in attempting to establish their ideals. Joseph Smith was favored intellectually by inspiration. Brother Joseph knew he was chosen of Almighty God to establish in this dispensation the Church of Jesus Christ which he, as Paul, declared to be the power of God unto salvation—social salvation, moral salvation, spiritual salvation.

You, the youth of Israel, bear the responsibility first of comprehending the significance and magnitude of this, the Lord's work; and, secondly, the responsibility of carrying it to a world now war-torn, but in which there are millions of honest hearts, yearning for better conditions than those under which they live.

If the people of today were to ask, as men did in the Savior's time, "Whence has this man wisdom?" we unhesitatingly declare: "He received it from on high."

"Praise to the man who communed with Jehovah! Jesus anointed that Prophet and Seer. Blessed to open the last dispensation, Kings shall extol him, and nations revere."

—IE, 45:55-56 (1942).

HARMONY OF THE PROPHET'S TEACHINGS WITH THOSE OF JESUS. Nobody can study critically and intelligently the restored gospel of Jesus Christ without being deeply impressed with the harmony of the teachings with those given by the Lord and Savior himself when he was on the earth with his disciples. Consider, for example, the Prophet's revelation concerning the Creator—God as an intelligent Being, one who is, as Jesus taught, "Our Father in heaven. ..."

Joseph Smith's doctrine that Jesus Christ is the Only Begotten of the Father, the Savior of the world, is identical with the teachings of Jesus himself and his Apostles.

So also is his doctrine of the persistence of personality after death.

On these three fundamentals of religion, there can be little or no doubt about the harmony of the teachings of the restored Church with those of the Savior—the doctrine of God; his doctrine of sin and salvation; and the doctrine of immortality.

The same harmony is found in the teachings of other principles of the gospel such as faith, repentance, baptism, laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, ordination to the priesthood, his teachings on "knowledge, temperance, godliness, brotherly kindness, charity," etc.—IE, 48:14-15 (1945).

THE SACRED GROVE. Meeting in these lovely surroundings I have been reminded of the quotation that "groves were God's first temples." I have felt that in this grove, we are in one of these temples. I cannot imagine any man's irreverently defacing one of these trees—pillars of that temple—any more than I can imagine a man's entering a house dedicated to God and desecrating the hardwood finish or other decorations of the Church. Truly, he is a vandal who would do such a thing. I mention this merely to emphasize the sacredness of these surroundings, the sacredness of this hallowed place.

Of all groves in the world, this, I think, may be designated as the most sacred, for it was here that the Father appeared in person and introduced his Beloved Son to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and you have witnessed that you know that event to be true. That knowledge is the greatest possession that can come to you.—DNCS, September 12, 1951, p. 2.

A PERSONAL TESTIMONY. I know that the gospel was restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith, by the Father and the Son, who are as real today in connection with the other world as my loved ones and yours.—CR, April 1949, p. 182.

THE PROPHET'S WORK IN ESTABLISHING THE CHURCH

PATTERNED AFTER CHRIST'S TEACHINGS. Charles A. Ellwood, author of Man's Social Destiny, declared that the religions of the future cannot be based upon historical Christianity, but must, in order to avoid misunderstanding, "go back to the teachings of Christ as recorded in the gospel."

Is it not significant that a man as young as was Joseph Smith, unlearned in regard to the social systems of his age or of any age in the United States, should have understood what leading thinkers realize today as the great need in religious government and instruction?

"The Church of Jesus Christ was organized in accordance with the order of the Church as recorded in the New Testament," said Joseph Smith. The practical and beneficent workings of this organization prove its divine authenticity.

REVELATIONTHE BASIS. One outstandingly distinguishing feature of this Church is divine authority by direct revelation. The appearing of the Father and the Son to Joseph Smith is the foundation of this Church. Therein lies the secret of its strength and vitality. This is true, and I bear witness to it. That one revelation answers all the queries of science regarding God and his divine personality. Don't you see what that means? What God is, is answered. His relation to his children is clear. His interest in humanity through authority delegated to man is apparent. The future of the work is assured. These and other glorious truths are clarified by that glorious first vision.

MAN'S SOCIAL AND SPIRITUAL NEEDS SUPPLIED. Following such a declaration of divine guidance, the world may justifiably expect to find in the organization of the Church superior opportunities to supply the social and spiritual needs of man.

Now, you can prove that such is the case—that fraternity, education, judicial procedure, social and economic advantages are superior to those found in any other organization. We do not say that ourselves. Economists and sociologists so declare.

THE DIVINE AUTHENTICITY OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

FIVE TESTS. I was interested—and I will just present this briefly—in applying to this book, the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, a test that was given many, many years ago by a philosopher to a ruler who asked for direct evidence of the divinity of the Bible. This man said, "If an alleged fact will bear five marks, you can pretty well conclude that it is right, that its authenticity is established."

Let us apply these five marks to the Book of Mormon. They are: first, that the claim should be a sensible fact. By that he means that it is something that should appeal to one or more of the five senses. Second, there should be witnesses to the fact. Third, those witnesses should be reputable men or women, so that their testimonies would be unquestioned. Fourth, there should be monuments or memorials to that place; and fifth, those monuments or memorials should date back to the time of the incident.

First, a sensible fact: The Prophet Joseph claimed that the Book of Mormon was translated from plates on which were engravings placed there fourteen hundred years before that event. Plates are tangible things. They could be felt. Therefore the first claim is established, so far as the first test is concerned.

Second, there should be witnesses to it. In the Book of Mormon, we can read the testimony of Oliver Cowdery, of David Whitmer, and of Martin Harris, who said they saw those plates and signed this declaration.

The second mark—and they signed their names, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, Martin Harris. Not only those three, but later eight others saw the plates.

Now the third mark is whether those men were reputable. Did they tell the truth? Or were they conniving with somebody to create a hoax upon humanity?

No person can with accuracy accuse any of those witnesses of unreliability, and each was true to his testimony to his death.

The next mark: monuments or memorials: The Book of Mormon itself is the memorial. The date when the plates were brought forth, the date when the manuscripts were taken to the printer may be verified, and when a few years ago, the monument to Moroni was erected there at Palmyra, I heard one of the justices in New York state bear testimony to the witness that he as a boy heard his father tell about when these men, Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris, particularly Oliver Cowdery, carried the manuscript to the printing office which stands today there on the streets of Palmyra, where nearby stands the monument to Moroni, and we participated in its dedication a few years ago. That those monuments (or the fifth mark) date back to the event is evidenced by the testimony of this justice, and others, who remember, through their parents and their grandfathers, and the events themselves.

It is a physical fact, a sensible fact, there were witnesses to it, the reliability of those witnesses is established, there are monuments and memorials to it, and those monuments and memorials date back to the event itself.—DNCS, July 9, 1952, p. 2.

THE THREE WITNESSES

OLIVER COWDERY. Oliver Cowdery was a young school-teacher. He signed his name to his testimony under oath, for God commanded him to do it. That is more sacred than putting your hand on your Bible and swearing to tell the truth. In the course of events, Oliver Cowdery did not sustain the Prophet in certain Church procedures, and fell out of harmony with his leader, the details of which we cannot take time to consider here. He was excommunicated from the Church. Had there been collusion, then would have been the time to confess and proclaim it and by so doing expose any chicanery or fraud. This he did not do.

Following his excommunication Oliver Cowdery practised law. During the ten years he was away from the Church he maintained that his testimony was true; for example, on one occasion an opposing lawyer accused him of having signed his name to a document stating that an angel appeared to him and showed him the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. Oliver Cowdery replied:

"May it please your honor and gentlemen of the jury, this I say, I saw the angel and heard his voice—how can I deny it? It happened in the daytime when the sun was shining bright in the firmament; not in the night when I was asleep. That glorious messenger from heaven, dressed in white, standing above the ground, in a glory I have never seen anything to compare with—the sun insignificant in comparison—and this Personage told us if we denied that testimony there is no forgiveness in this life nor in the world to come. Now how can I deny it—I dare not; I will not!"

To the end of his earthly life, Oliver Cowdery was true to the testimony of the visit of the angel, to his having seen the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated.

THE TESTIMONY OF DAVID WHITMER TO JAMES H. MOYLE. David Whitmer, too, was excommunicated because he was out of harmony. Did he ever deny his testimony? There is one encyclopedia which falsely states that he did. There is ample evidence that he maintained the truth to the last. I am going to give you the evidence of one whom I knew personally—Elder James H. Moyle, father of Henry D. Moyle.

Several months before Elder Moyle's death, Sister McKay and I were guests at a party given by Brother Henry D. Moyle whose father, during the evening, addressed the company and gave us directly his experience with David Whitmer. The following in substance is the testimony we heard Elder Moyle give on that occasion:

"From my boyhood I had read the Book of Mormon, and during my study of the same, found in it nothing but that which is virtuous, pure, and ennobling—a great and wonderful history of a people who lived on this continent in former ages. I was always interested in utilizing such opportunities as were given me to demonstrate its divinity, to know whether or not I might be deceived, and whether my parents, grandparents, and friends were likewise deceived. Therefore on my way home from school in 1885, I took advantage of the opportunity to visit David Whitmer, another of the Three Witnesses, then an old gray-haired man, bowed in years and expecting almost any time the summons to call him thence to his eternal reward.

"As I left the train in the little village of Richmond, Missouri, I inquired of those whom I met: What kind of man is David Whitmer? From all I received the same response, that he was a good citizen, an honest man, and that he was highly respected in the community. I went to his humble home, and I told him of my origin, my belief, and as a young man starting out in life I wanted to know from him, older than my grandfather, what he knew about the Book of Mormon, and what about the testimony he had published to the world concerning it.

"He told me in all the solemnity of his advanced years, that the testimony he had given to the world, and which was published in the Book of Mormon, was true, every word of it, and that he had never deviated or departed in any particular from that testimony, and that nothing in the world could separate him from the sacred message that was delivered to him.

"I still wondered if it was not possible that he could have been deceived. I wondered if there was not something in the psychological operation which some offer as the cause of these miraculous declarations and by which he could have been deceived—although there were three witnesses present besides the Prophet Joseph Smith, who saw and heard the same mighty and solemn truths; so I induced him to relate to me, under such cross examination as I was able to interpose, every detail of what took place.

"He described minutely the spot in the woods, the large log that separated him from the angel, and that he saw the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated, that he handled them, and that he did hear the voice of God declare that the plates were correctly translated. I asked him if there was any possibility for him to have been deceived, and that it was all a mistake, but he said: 'No.' I asked him, then, why he had left the Church. He said he had not, but the Church had left him.

"He said that his faith in the fundamental principles of the gospel, which had been revealed prior to the year 1835, had never been changed; that he was still devoted to them and believed in them just as much as he ever did, and was trying to live those principles and exemplify them in his life. He said he knew Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, and that through him had been restored the gospel of Jesus Christ in these latter days. To me this was a wonderful testimony." (Elder James H. Moyle.)

MARTIN HARRIS. After many years' absence from the Church, Martin Harris went west and in one of the general conferences of the Church bore his testimony in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. In my early childhood and youth I heard my mother testify that she and Father heard Martin Harris bear testimony to the divinity of the Book of Mormon.

The last five years of his life were spent at Clarkston near Cache Junction, Utah. His body is buried at that place, and a granite tombstone is erected on which he is designated as one of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon. Many of you, as I, have visited the farm, part of which he mortgaged for three thousand dollars in order to pay for the printing of the Book of Mormon.

There you have your witnesses and their reputability.—DNCS, September 12, 1951, p. 4.
