David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 8

THE NATURE AND MISSION OF THE CHURCH

WHAT IS THE CHURCH?

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TPAN INSTITUTION FOR SERVICE. The Church is a means of rendering in order and wisdom mutual service. Jesus Christ is its author and the divine head. He himself, while in mortality, was the personification and exemplification of brotherhood and spirituality, and it is he who says to you and to all the world, "Learn of me, and listen to my words; walk in the meekness of my Spirit, and you shall have peace in me." (D. & C. 19:23.)—CR, October 1936, p. 105.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TPMORE THAN A PROTESTANT BODY. At one time it grieved me to know that this Church was not numbered among Protestant churches. But now I realize that the Church of Jesus Christ is more than a protest against the errors and evils of Catholicism. This Church was established in the only way in which the Church of Jesus Christ can be established—by direct authority from God. Thus founded, it invites the whole world to come to a Church recognized by God himself, and which offers every advantage that the human mind, the emotions, and desires may contemplate in the fulfilling of the individual mission on this earth. "It is an ever-broadening wave of direct personal influence, destined ultimately to touch and transform all men, so that they, like Jesus, shall become Godlike." "Mormonism," as true Christianity, "subdues selfishness, regulates the passions, subordinates the appetites, quickens the intellect, exalts the affections. It promotes industry, honesty, truth, purity, kindness. It humbles the proud, exalts the lowly, upholds the law, favors liberty, is essential to it, and would unite men in one great brotherhood."—CR, April 1927, p. 105.

Progressa-McKay, David O.TPMORE THAN AN OFFSHOOT OF SOCIAL FERMENT. Suppose that the Son of Man said to mankind in the present age, "What seek ye?" What would be the answer? Many would say: We seek pleasure; some, wealth; others, fame and power; but the

Progressa-McKay, David O.TPmost thoughtful would answer, We are seeking the light of the ages, as mankind has ever sought. We are seeking a social Utopia. We want a society in which we may be re-relieved of some of the ills of mankind, free from the troubles and toils of life.

Progressa-McKay, David O.TPWith every progressive age of the world, intellectual, noble-minded leaders have sought for a better way of living than that which was current. The good life, a social Utopia, has been the quest of the ages. To sense the need of reform has been easy; to achieve it has been difficult and often wellnigh impossible. Ideas and suggestions proposed by the wisest of men have seldom been practical, often fantastical; yet in most cases the world in general has been made better by the disseminating of new ideas, even though the experiments proved failures at the time. In this respect the century just past has been no exception.

The first half of the nineteenth century was marked by a general feeling of social unrest. Observant people became dissatisfied with social and economic conditions, and thinking men sought for remedial changes. In France, early in the century, the fanciful theories of Charles Fourier were circulated. He attempted to outline the future history of our globe and of the human race for eighty thousand years. Today his books aren't even read. Robert Owen founded a commercial society at New Harmony, Indiana. Although supported by a fortune he had amassed by intelligent and frugal efforts, and although he was encouraged by the Duke of Kent, who became his patron, his scheme for the betterment of mankind came to naught in 1827. He returned to England where he tried several similar experiments with the same result.

George Ripley, a Unitarian minister, conceived a plan of "plain living and high thinking." He had as his associates such able men as Nathaniel Hawthorne, Charles A. Dana, afterward Assistant Secretary of War in the United States, and John S. Dwight. Ripley's impulse was really religious rather than economic, and "was due to a kind of monastic desire for withdrawal from a sordid world rather than a desire for a new society." He and his associates became the founders of what was known as the Brook Farm, a "Great Experiment" as it was called, to make the world an agreeable place to live in. It came to an end in 1846.

"Some of these Colonies" writes Phillip Russell, "were religious in purpose, others educational, and still others economic; but all, including Brook Farm, were social symptoms—rashes and growths indicating a sick and strained America."

It has been charged by a cynical writer that the Mormon Church was but one more excrescence of the fermenting body politic of this religious-social reaction. But in considering the Church as a social organization having as one object, at least, the amelioration of social ills, and the advancement of mankind, it is well to keep in mind at the outset these other facts:

First: That Joseph Smith undoubtedly had never heard of Fourier's phalanxes, the Owen experiment, nor any other scheme, religious or economic, for the bettering of social conditions;

Second: That the six original members were practically unknown, were financially poor, and had no political or social standing; and

Third: That Joseph Smith did not organize the Church by man's wisdom but by divine direction, "in accordance with the order of the Church as recorded in the New Testament."

This organization has survived financial panics, social upheavals, and religious turmoil, and today conforms to the best concepts of sociologists as a means of supplying the highest needs of mankind.—CR, April 1930, pp. 78-80.

A COMPLETE SOCIAL UNIT. Do you tell me that that young boy comprehended out of his own wisdom such a complete social unit?

One day a man, standing on the deck of a ship sailing from the north of Africa to Singapore, addressed a Mormon elder and said: "You say your Church is divine. Then there must be found in it the answer to every human need."

"Yes," said the young man, "you are right. It should be found."

In the conversation that followed they named as essential needs the following:

In the Church the priesthood quorums and auxiliary organizations offer fellowship, brotherhood, and religious instruction to men, women, and children.

What about education? Turn to one of those early revelations and find that that boy—may I keep calling him so?—later said: "We are saved only as fast as we gain knowledge and wisdom." And again: "No man can be saved in ignorance." Then glimpse the opportunities for education in our schools, in the quorums, in the auxiliaries, for the education of the young, the middle-aged, and the old.

Another was the judicial features. Included in this are the ward teachers, whose duty it is to visit the members of the Church to see that no iniquity exists, no backbiting or evil speaking; it is their duty, furthermore, to see that people are not in want of food or clothing, and to report to the bishopric and the Relief Society, and have that want, if found, supplied. That is really their first duty; but they are also arbitrators. What did Joseph Smith know about arbitration? You and I now hear a great deal about it. Woodrow Wilson tried to establish a court of arbitration for the purpose of preventing war.

Over a hundred years ago that principle was placed in the Church, and you will find it in the Doctrine and Covenants, written a few years after that boy was ridiculed.

The next step in the judicial system is the bishopric's trial, the high council, the traveling high council Council of the Twelve Apostles], the final appeal to the First Presidency—a perfect judicial unit.

The last mentioned by this traveler was the need of economic and social advantages. In this matter tithing and fast offerings might be named as means to supply the financial needs. Then picture the division of the Church into wards and stakes, a ward a church in miniature, a stake a church in miniature. An organization established not by Joseph Smith, but by God the Father; for I cannot, friends, believe that that young obscure boy, uneducated, with the meagre advantages for learning such as then existed in his community, could of his own wisdom establish an organization which has stood the test of over a century, when these other wise attempts by honest and sincere men failed! To it all I have but one answer, and that is that that boy, who will be associated with this countryside for all time, did receive inspiration from on high.—DNCS, August 31, 1935, p. 6.

A MODEL OF GOVERNMENT. Considered politically the world is upset at the present time in its opinion as to the best form of government. We are just witnessing the downfall of monarchies. Rising from these monarchial ruins have come democracy as exemplified chiefly in Great Britain in her dominions and in the United States and the dictatorship of the proletariat as in Soviet Russia. It is apparent that men are seeking for a better form of government than most nations now have. Will they find it in the government by a dictator or in the government by the people, or in a combination of both?

Governments, Civila-McKay, David O.TPOne clear writer, Mr. Kirkpatrick, the sociologist, says that "Efficiency and progress are favored when the government is such that the local community has a great deal of responsibility of its own affairs and the central government has final authority to introduce those institutions and rules of procedure that have been shown to be permanently useful."

Governments, Civila-McKay, David O.TPNow, my fellow workers and thinking honest men of the world, take that fundamental definition of government and see how admirably the Church of Jesus Christ conforms to it. A careful analysis of the organization of the Church reveals the fact that it embodies all the strength of a strong central government and every virtue and necessary safeguard of a democracy.

Governments, Civila-McKay, David O.TPFirst, it has the authority of priesthood without the vice of priestcraft, every worthy man being entitled to a place and a voice in the governing quorums.

Governments, Civila-McKay, David O.TPSecond, it offers a system of education, universal and free in its application—the safety valve, the very heart and strength of a true democracy.

Governments, Civila-McKay, David O.TPThird, it offers a judicial system that extends justice and equal privileges to all alike applicable to the poor and to the millionaire.

Governments, Civila-McKay, David O.TPFourth, in its ecclesiastical groupings of stakes and wards and branches and districts, efficiency and progress are enhanced inasmuch as every local group attends to its own affairs, and yet each is so closely united with the central government that every mode of procedure proved useful and beneficial to the people can be adopted without delay for the good of the entire group.

Governments, Civila-McKay, David O.TPTruly, from the standpoint of enhancing efficiency and progress, the Church of Jesus Christ has that form of government which the nations today are seeking.

Governments, Civila-McKay, David O.TPThis is because it is patterned after that order which Christ himself established. On the sixth day of April 1830, the Prophet Joseph stated that the Church was organized after that order given in the New Testament.—CR, April 1930, pp. 80-81.

THE CHURCH AND THE SOCIAL ORDER. Brethren, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has in it all that the world would require. I am not associating political government with our religious government; I am merely pointing out that system of organization established by the revelations of God to man.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TPThe Church, established by divine inspiration to an unlearned youth, offers to the world the solution of all its social problems. It has stood the test of the first century successfully. In the midst of brilliant concepts of men in this twentieth century, who seek conscientiously for social reforms and who peer blindly into the future to read the destiny of man, the Church shines forth as the sun in the heavens around which other luminaries revolve as satellites of minor importance. Truly, it is the creator and preserver of man's highest values; its real task, the redemption of our human world. "It is the light of truth radiating everywhere in the world, and this light cannot fail to reveal to man, sooner or later, the divine ideals by which man should live."

God help us and qualify us for the mission of carrying to the world this light. May we labor even more zealously than heretofore for the establishment of a social order in which God's will shall be done on earth as it is in heaven—a kingdom of God which shall foster the brotherhood of man and acknowledge the Fatherhood of God.—CR, April 1930, pp. 82-83.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TPThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, accepting Christ as the revelation of God to man, believes that Jesus in his life and teachings reveals a standard of personal living and of social relations, which, if fully embodied in individual lives and in human institutions, would not only ameliorate the present ills of society but also bring happiness and peace to mankind.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TPIf it be urged that during the past two thousand years so-called Christian nations have failed to achieve such a goal, we answer that all failure to do so may be found in the fact that they have failed to apply the principles and teaching of true Christianity.—CR, October 1937, p. 100.

Church in the Worlda-McKay, David O.TPTHE CHURCH FOSTERS THE PRACTICAL THINGS OF LIFE. The Latter-day Saints are truly a people who aid one another in the productive life, a life that tends towards the salvation of the human being. By that salvation I do not mean just a place in the hereafter where all our cares and worries may cease, but a salvation that applies to the individual, to the family, and to society here and now. Through the gospel of Jesus Christ, and the perfect organization of the Church as revealed in this dispensation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, we are aiding one another spiritually by taking advantage of the many opportunities for service in the Church. We are fostering brotherhood by activity and association in priesthood quorums, in auxiliary associations, and in our social gatherings and ward reunions. We are aiding the young people in securing wholesome pleasures, by giving them sweet and wholesome enjoyment under the direction of the priesthood, as it serves particularly in the Mutual Improvement Associations of the Church as well as in other organizations and in the amusements under the direction of the authorities of the ward. The Church is aiding in temporal matters, and a practical benefit is resulting to the people today through the united efforts of the membership of the Church. In such ways, and many others, the Church fosters the practical things of life.—CR, April 1915, p. 103.

Church in the Worlda-McKay, David O.TPTHE CHURCH FITS MEN FOR THE STRUGGLES OF LIFE. I am grateful for membership in a church whose religion fits men for the struggle with the forces of the world and which enables them to survive in this struggle.—CR, April 1914, p. 87.

Revelationa-McKay, David O.TPTHE MOST DISTINGUISHING FEATURE. If at this moment each one of you were asked to state in one sentence or phrase the most distinguishing feature of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, what would be your answer? It occurs to me now that my answer would be this:

Revelationa-McKay, David O.TPDivine authority by direct revelation.

There are those who claim authority through historical descent, others from the scriptures, but this Church stands out as making the distinctive claim that the authority of the priesthood has come directly from God the Father and the Son, by revelation to Joseph Smith.

Founded upon that principle, accepting it as absolute gospel, we have clearly defined in our minds some fundamental principles:

First, that God is a personal Being; that he has a spirit-personality.

The acceptance of divine authority by direct revelation also reveals to us the fact that Jesus Christ is the only begotten Son in the flesh, for the Father in appearing to Joseph Smith stated in definite words, "This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!"

Correlated with that revelation is another fundamental fact, that the Lord is interested in his people, that the whole human family is related as his children, and he loves them, and that he has authorized men to officiate among the children of the world, to bring them back into his presence.

The Father and the Son appeared to Joseph Smith and restored authority to establish the kingdom of God on earth, and this is my testimony.

I also testify that divine authority rests in rich abundance upon him whom the Lord has chosen to stand at the head of this work at the present time. I am deeply grateful for the opportunity I have had to sit in council with President Grant and President Clark. I wish every person in this Church might have had the same opportunity to look into President Grant's noble spirit as I have; to know him as I have had the privilege to know him; to glimpse his unbounded generosity, his love for mankind, and particularly for those who are true and loyal to the Church; to realize how fearlessly he stands for right. If you realized these virtues more fully, I am sure that when you kneel down to pray there would be a note of thanksgiving in your heart and in your words which perhaps there has not been heretofore.

I would like to pay a tribute to President Clark, a man of sterling integrity, who loves his work above everything else in this world. He is loyal and true, sound and clear in judgment, a valiant servant of the Lord.

Councilsa-McKay, David O.TPI should like you to know that there is a spirit of unity and oneness in the council of the First Presidency, the spirit for which Christ prayed just before he went into the Garden of Gethsemane: "That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: ..." (John 17:21.) And as he prayed on that occasion, so I pray now that that spirit of oneness may characterize the leading councils of the Church; nay, may I say, continue to characterize the leading councils of the Church, for I believe that there has not been a time in the history of our Church when there was more unity among these councils than at the present time. I pray that that spirit of oneness may spread throughout all the Church, that it may be characteristic of presidencies of stakes and high councils, bishoprics, ward teachers, and particularly of the quorums and auxiliaries of the Church, that they may all be one, to quote the Savior, as he and his Father are one. God help us to achieve this principle, that our faith in God and in his work may be unwavering, and our loyalty never doubted.—CR, April 1937, pp. 121-122.

THE SOURCE OF CHURCH VITALITY

Church Growtha-McKay, David O.TPTHE SECRET OF GROWTHINDIVIDUAL TESTIMONY. People today wonder wherein lies the secret of the growth, stability, and vitality of the Church of Jesus Christ. Those who are prejudiced when they come in our midst are convinced that there is something within the Church which those not of us do not comprehend. Recently a young lady from the East spent a few weeks among us, visiting friends. Evidently her mind was previously filled with prejudice against the people of Utah, particularly against the Church. But she went around with some of her friends who were actively engaged in Religion Class work, some who were actively engaged in Primary and others in Sunday School. One day when they returned from some of this regular work, she made this remark: "Well, there must be something in this Church or so many intelligent men and women would not be so actively engaged in it. Why, I almost feel that I want to enter in the work myself."

Church Growtha-McKay, David O.TPYou, no doubt, have met people who, seeing perhaps some such demonstration as this of the strength of Israel, wonder how it is that this Church manifests such vitality and growth. The secret is this, that every true Latter-day Saint possesses individually the assurance that this is the work of God, the same power that gave Peter and John strength to stand before their accusers and declare openly and boldly in the Sanhedrin that "Jesus whom ye crucified is the power by which this man was made whole," that his name is the only name given among men by which they can be saved.

Church Growtha-McKay, David O.TPThe secret lies in the testimony possessed by each individual who is faithful in the membership of the Church of Jesus Christ, that the gospel consists of correct principles.—CR, October 1912, p. 120.

Testimonya-McKay, David O.TPTHE NATURE OF INDIVIDUAL TESTIMONY. This testimony has been revealed to every sincere man and woman who has conformed to the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, obeyed the ordinances, and become entitled to and has received the Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost, to guide him. Every individual stands independent in his sphere in that testimony, just as these thousands of incandescent lamps which have made Salt Lake City in recent years so brilliant at night, each one of which stands and shines in its own sphere, yet the light in it is produced by the same power, the same energy, from which all the other lights receive their energy. So each individual in the Church stands independently in his sphere, independently in the knowledge that God lives, that the Savior is the Redeemer of the world, and that the gospel of Jesus Christ has been restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Testimonya-McKay, David O.TPNow it is given unto some, says the Lord in the Doctrine and Covenants, to know by the Holy Ghost that Jesus is the Son of God and Savior of the world. It is to these I refer who stand firm upon the rock of revelation in the testimony that they bear to the world. But the Lord says further there are others to whom it is given to believe upon the testimony of others' words, that they may also receive salvation if they continue faithful. To all these, however, there comes the testimony also of daily experience. The Latter-day Saints throughout the world find confirmation of their testimony in every performance of duty. They know that the gospel teaches them to be better individuals, that obedience to the principles of the gospel makes them stronger men and truer women. Every day such knowledge comes to them, and they cannot gainsay it; they know that obedience to the gospel of Jesus Christ makes them better and truer husbands, true and honored wives, obedient children. They know that obedience to the principles of the gospel makes them in every respect ideal home builders; the ideal is there; they sense it in their minds; they cannot gainsay it; they know it; and they know that transgression of these principles will have the opposite effect upon their individual lives and upon their home life. They know that obedience to the gospel fosters true brotherhood and fellowship among mankind; they know that they are better citizens by virtue of obedience unto the laws and ordinances. So, as they go through their daily acts and apply religion in their vocation, the truth of the gospel becomes exemplified in their lives. Thus, with the testimony of the Spirit, the testimony of reason, and the testimony of daily experience, the Latter-day Saints throughout the world must stand impregnable.—CR, October 1912, pp. 120-121.

THE MISSION OF THE CHURCH

Mission of the Churcha-McKay, David O.TPTO ESTABLISH THE KINGDOM OF GOD. Let us here and now express gratitude for the Church of Jesus Christ with quorums and auxiliaries specially organized to combat evil. It was established by divine revelation of God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ. Its glorious mission is to proclaim the truth of the restored gospel; to uplift society that people may mingle more amicably one with another; to create in our communities a wholesome environment in which our children may find strength to resist temptation and encouragement to strive for cultural and spiritual attainment; to make ineffective the influence of designing men who would make profit out of their fellows who are fallen so low as to be slaves to their appetites and passions—and who would fill their purses through the weaknesses of addicts to gambling, and the pitiable courtesan outcasts. The gospel is a rational philosophy that teaches men how to get happiness in this life and exaltation in the life to come.

Mission of the Churcha-McKay, David O.TPThe mission of the Church is to establish the kingdom of God upon the earth, which, in the words of Thomas Nixon Carver, "is not a mythical but a real kingdom. It is a body of people dominated by ideals of productivity, which is mutual service. We do not strive for the things which satisfy but for the moment and then leave a bad taste. We strive for the things which build us up and enable us and our children to be strong, to flourish, and to conquer. We strive to make ourselves worthy to receive the world by fitting ourselves to use the world more productively than others. We believe that obedience to God means obedience to the laws of nature, which are but the manifestations of his will; and we try by painstaking study to acquire the most complete and exact knowledge of that will, in order that we may conform ourselves to it."—CR, October 1948, p. 122.

Church Growtha-McKay, David O.TPGOD IS AT THE HELM. My brethren and sisters, as I contemplate the growth of the mission of the Church of Jesus Christ, I fell to exclaim with Browning: "God's in his heaven—all's right with the world!" Men and nations make errors and will be punished therefor, but ultimately the Lord will overrule the acts of men for the triumph of truth.—CR, October 1938, p. 130.

Jesus Christ As Head of Churcha-McKay, David O.TPThe Lord is not just an absent, faraway influence. He is a kind Father, solicitous of the welfare of his children, and ready and willing to hear and answer their call. The answer may be negative, as sometimes a wise parent gives a negative answer to the pleadings of a child, but he is ever ready to hear and to answer.

Jesus Christ As Head of Churcha-McKay, David O.TPHis Beloved Son stands at the head of this Church. It is his Church. Oh, may the world realize that in the very near future, open their minds to study the needs of the war-torn world, and see that those needs may be supplied by obedience to the principles of the revealed word of God.

Jesus Christ As Head of Churcha-McKay, David O.TPThis is Christ's Church. God help us all that we may be faithful members therein, and so live that others, seeing our good deeds, may be led to glorify our Father in heaven.—CR, October 1952, p. 129.

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-McKay, David O.TPTHE KINGDOM OF GOD A REALITY. What was the burden of Christ's teaching when he came among men? The first great proclamation was the announcement that the kingdom of God is at hand. "Repent for the kingdom of God is at hand." The forerunner, John the Baptist, preached that. He preached the coming of the Lord. He showed the position which the Lord would hold in that kingdom, and the Savior bore witness to it and preached the same. And what was the kingdom? Not a mythical, but a real kingdom; not only a feeling within, but also an outward expression of righteousness! It was divine government among men. That was what the Savior had in mind, the establishing of a divine government among men.—CR, October 1919, p. 76.

Mission of the ChurchChurch of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TPTO TRANSFORM SOCIETY. There are those in the world who say that jealousy, enmity, selfishness in men's hearts will always preclude the establishing of the ideal society known as the kingdom of God. No matter what doubters and scoffers say, the mission of the Church of Jesus Christ is to eliminate sin and wickedness from the hearts of men, and so to transform society that peace and good will will prevail on this earth.—CR, April 1941, p. 109.

SEEK FIRST THE KINGDOM. From among the sublime teachings of the Savior in the Sermon on the Mount, I quote the following:

"But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you." (Matt. 6:33.)

This admonition and promise I have chosen for my theme at this time because it seems so aptly to epitomize generally the timely instructions given at this conference. Then, too, it expresses the ideal to which every man who holds the priesthood has subscribed. Again, if heeded, it will be the greatest and best safeguard to our sons who are called to serve their country. And, finally, I firmly believe that if rulers of nations followed that admonition, contention and war would be banished from among men.

What the kingdom of God is, is answered by the Prophet Joseph Smith as follows:

a-Smith, Joseph, Jr.Kingdom of God, on EarthTP"...Whenever there has been a righteous man on earth unto whom God revealed his word and gave power and authority to administer in his name, and where there is a priest of God—a minister who has power and authority from God to administer in the ordinances of the gospel and officiate in the priesthood of God, there is the kingdom of God; ..." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 271.)

Seeking first the kingdom means subordinating to the principles of the gospel all other aims and pursuits.

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-McKay, David O.TPWHAT THE KINGDOM OF GOD IMPLIES. The term implies divine rule in the hearts and wills of men and in society. Man acknowledges a power and authority superior to his own. "It is not the arbitrary rule of a despotic Deity, but is based upon man's voluntary submission of his will to that of God's." On one occasion Jesus said, "The kingdom of God is within you." That is true, for it is in the heart of man that membership in the outward kingdom has its origin. Devotion and loyalty that spring thus from the heart "for the common Father of all mankind is the strongest and only universal bond that can bind all men together." Only such a group looking as one mind to heaven for guidance can eventually transform human society.

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-McKay, David O.TPThe kingdom of God implies also a universal brotherhood in which all men acknowledge God as their supreme Ruler and cherish the desire to obey his divine will.

Mission of the Churcha-McKay, David O.TPTHE PURPOSE OF THE CHURCH. The mission of the Church is to prepare the way for the final establishment of the kingdom of God on earth. Its purpose is, first, to develop in men's lives Christlike attributes; and, second, to transform society so that the world may be a better and more peaceful place in which to live.—CR, April 1941, p. 106.

Mission of the Churcha-McKay, David O.TPSPECIFIC OBJECTIVES. The consummation of God's purposes is put in these words: "...this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) This divine purpose may be achieved by using the Church as a means of accomplishing the following specific objectives in the achievement of which lies a sufficient challenge for the brightest minds in the world:

Mission of the Churcha-McKay, David O.TPFirst, physical strength, virility, cleanliness. When therefore you hear harping critics say that the Church Authorities overemphasize the Word of Wisdom, you may know that they have not studied very deeply the significance of the Word of Wisdom. Fundamentally, physical strength and virility are essential factors in the progress of humanity.

Mission of the Churcha-McKay, David O.TPSecond, economic security. When you hear a young man say we lay too much stress on tithing, you may know he does not realize the relation of tithing and fast offerings to the economic security of every man, woman, and child in the Church.

Mission of the Churcha-McKay, David O.TPThird, social justice. Go into any quorum and see who are meeting there—your lawyers, your doctors, your farmers, all meeting on a social plane. In the Church of God every man and woman has equal privileges to every other man and woman.

Mission of the Churcha-McKay, David O.TPFourth, spiritual enlightenment. Cultivating the fruits of the Spirit which are love, joy, peace, kindness, longsuffering, and gentleness.

Mission of the Churcha-McKay, David O.TPNow, if ever, is the time to make practical the gospel of Jesus Christ and to strive to live up to the principles of true Christianity.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TPThe anchor of the young people is in the realization that the Church is established as a means of consummating God's purposes; and they realize, too, even if they have not thought it out as they will some day, that there is nothing in the world to compare with the Church of Jesus Christ as an effective organization in alleviating the ills of mankind.

And now, young people, thus anchored in the faith, and thus organized, we ask you to join the organizations in your wards, to heed the advice of the President of the Church, to affiliate with your quorums, with your auxiliary organizations, in your fast meetings, and there in these local groups express your thoughts, express your doubts, seek after the truth, apply measures that will appeal to those of your associates, and when you prove those measures to be effective and satisfying to the soul, then can the central organizations take those measures and adapt them to the whole as a universal benefit. In that way, and in that way only, will progress and efficiency be fostered. Don't stand out on the sidelines, and say, "This quorum is not doing its work," but get into the quorum and help it do its work. That is the way which God intends people to work in this Church, and it offers to you one of the best opportunities in the world.—CR, April 1934, pp. 23-24.

Mission of the Churcha-McKay, David O.TPTHE IDEAL OF MORMONISM. The first duty of the citizens of the kingdom is to live exemplary lives.

Mission of the Churcha-McKay, David O.TPBut as I have said, the betterment of the individual is only one aim of the Church. The complete ideal of Mormonism is to make upright citizens in an ideal society.—CR, April 1941, p. 107.
