David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 9

THE CHURCH: A WORLD-WIDE INSTITUTION

TO ALL NATIONS

THE DIVINE COMMISSION. On a momentous occasion two thousand years ago eleven men assembled near a mountain in Galilee—eleven humble, obscure men who had been chosen and ordained Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ. According to appointment these men met the resurrected Christ who made what to them must have been a startling declaration. They had been with their Master not yet three years and had been expressly enjoined by him to go not in the way of the Gentiles, to enter no city of the Samaritans, but to go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. (See Matt. 10:5-6.) At this meeting, however, as his final parting instructions, he opened their eyes to the universality of the gospel by giving them this divine commission:

"Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:

"Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world." (Matt. 28:19-20.)

In the restricted experience of these eleven disciples, the idea of preaching Christ and his saving doctrine to any but members of their own race germinated very slowly. Indeed, the Savior of men found it necessary to give another direct revelation to Peter, the chief Apostle, before even he fully realized that the Gentiles "should hear the word of the gospel, and believe."

THE SPREAD OF CHRISTIANITY. However, as the light of truth dawned in their hearts, these earnest followers set about to give the gospel to the world—"...simple men, with only the wind to bear them over the seas, with only a few pence in their pockets, and a shining faith in their hearts. They fell far short of their ideal; their words were twisted and mocked; and false temples were built over their bones, in praise of a Christ they would have rejected. And yet, by the light of their inspiration many of the world's loveliest things were created, and many of the world's finest minds inspired."

APOSTASY AND THE PROTEST. Three hundred years passed, and Christianity became the dominant religion of the most powerful nation in the world, and the persecuted became the persecutors. Pride and worldliness supplanted humility and faith. The church became corrupt. Doctrines of men supplanted the commandments of God; spiritual darkness enshrouded the nations of the world.

Later, courageous, God-fearing men began to protest against the evil practices of a corrupt clergy. The dawn of a spiritual awakening appeared, but none either claimed or received divine authority to reestablish the Church. Roger Williams, pastor of the oldest Baptist Church in America, resigned his position, because, said he, "There is no regularly constituted church on earth, nor any person authorized to administer church ordinances, nor can there be until new apostles are sent by the Great Head of the church for whose coming I am seeking."

RESTORATION. That authority came early in the nineteenth century by the personal appearance of the risen Lord. Again was given the divine injunction for authorized servants to be "...sent forth to the east and to the west, to the north and to the south," (D. & C. 42:63) that "every man might speak in the name of God the Lord, even the Savior of the world;

"That faith also might increase in the earth;

"That mine everlasting covenant might be established;

"That the fulness of my gospel might be proclaimed by the weak and the simple unto the ends of the world, and before kings and rulers." (Ibid., 1:20-23.)

THE WORLD-WIDE DESTINY UNFOLDS. Though the Church is still young and has had to struggle through persecution, mobocracy, drivings, poverty, misrepresentation by egotists, uninformed preachers, apostates, and by a prejudiced public sentiment, it is moving steadily forward toward its world-wide destiny. Almost immediately after the organization of the Church, the proclamation of the restored gospel began.

The land of China has been dedicated for the proclaiming of the gospel to her 450,000,000 people. Letters of appeal are coming from India. There are those who are praying that the way will soon be cleared for missions in Hungary, Italy, and Russia. Besides the three missions already established in South America, other countries in that land are beckoning for the gospel as Macedonia beckoned Paul and his companions.

As the Savior said to the eleven in Galilee and to all whom they appointed, so he says to his authorized servants today: Go ye therefore and make disciples of all nations, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded. (See Matt. 28:19-20.)

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPWhere, however, each missionary of old could speak to one person, the representatives of Christ today can speak to millions. A sentence uttered in an ordinary tone of voice can encircle the globe in less than a minute. The marvels and inventions of science today make it possible to spread the gospel as never before in the history of the world.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPAnd what a message the Church has for this distracted world! "Its appeal," as Kent says of true Christianity, "is universal—to the rich and the poor, the strong and the weak, the learned and the ignorant. It proclaims God to be not only the one supreme Ruler of the universe, but the Father of each individual, a God of justice, yet a God of love, constantly watching over and guiding even the humblest of his children."

Church in the Worlda-McKay, David O.TPThe Church, with its complete organization, offers service and inspiration to all. It is "pre-eminently a social religion." In quorums and auxiliaries it "aims by training the individual conscience and will, to establish a closely knit, world-wide fraternity." It is in no sense ascetic. Instead of taking men out of the world, it seeks to develop perfect, Godlike men in the midst of society, and through them to solve the problems of society."—DNCS, December 20, 1947, p. 4.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TPIt matters not in what part of the globe the meeting is held, whether in the islands of the sea, in Japan, in Syria, in the Scandinavian countries, in England, Germany, France, Holland—wherever one meets a group of Latter-day Saints whose faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ is unwavering, there one finds the spirit of oneness, the spirit of love, the spirit of willing sacrifice for the good of humanity. God bless the Latter-day Saints all over the world that they may continue in that same spirit.—CR, April 1925, p. 11.

AN ENSIGN TO THE NATIONS

A LIGHT UNTO THE WORLD. "And even so I have sent mine everlasting covenant into the world, to be a light to the world, and to be a standard for my people, and for the Gentiles to seek to it, and to be a messenger before my face to prepare the way before me." (D. & C. 45:9.)

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was scarcely one year old when that declaration was made through inspiration by the Prophet Joseph. He himself was but twenty-six years of age. It is a marvelous declaration, great in its pretension, comprehensive in its scope: "...mine everlasting covenant" (the gospel), is sent "into the world, to be a light to the world, and to be a standard for my people, and for the Gentiles to seek to it, ..." (D. & C. 45:9.)

United States of Americaa-McKay, David O.TPOn Bedloe Island, at the entrance of New York harbor, there stands the Statue of Liberty, a light to the nations. What it has meant to thousands and hundreds of thousands of the downtrodden of Europe has been most graphically expressed by Israel Zangwill in that impressive production, The Melting Pot. I shall give a few words. David the emigrant, the little Russian Jew, is speaking:

United States of Americaa-McKay, David O.TP"All my life America was waiting, beckoning, shining, the place where God would wipe away tears from off all faces. To think that the same great torch of Liberty which threw its light across all the seas and lands into my little garret in Russia is shining also for all those other weeping millions of Europe, shining wherever men hunger and are oppressed, shining over the starving villages of Italy and Ireland, over the swarming, starving cities of Poland and Galicia, over the ruined farms of Romania, over the shambles of Russia. When I look at our Statue of Liberty, I just seem to hear the voice of America crying: Come unto me, all ye who are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest, rest."

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TPWhat that Statue of Liberty symbolizes to the oppressed and downtrodden of Europe, the gospel of Jesus Christ is to the world. Mormonism, so-called, has reared an ensign to the nations and, with words as comprehensive as those I have read in the revelation, invites the world to peace, to rest, to contentment.

"High on the mountain top A banner is unfurled; Ye nations, now look up; It waves to all the world; In Deseret's sweet, peaceful land— On Zion's mount behold it stand! "Then hail to Deseret! A refuge for the good, And safety for the great, If they but understood That God with plagues will shake the world Till all its thrones shall down be hurled."

And to whom does that ensign now wave? To what sort of world does the beacon light of the everlasting gospel extend its invitation? A new world, or rather a world struggling to make itself new! The terrible war that has just passed was but the birth pangs—and now the world is ready to be reborn. "We stand at a creative moment in human history," says Sherwood Eddy. "Never before has the whole world had the chance to make all things new, old customs and contentions, old rules and ruts, old traditions and enslavements have been broken forever. We are living in the birth pangs of a world struggling to be reborn, and the issues of our time will reach into eternity."—CR, April 1920, pp. 114-115.

Mission of the Churcha-McKay, David O.TPNOTHING TO CONCEAL. The Church of Jesus Christ has nothing to conceal. It neither teaches nor practises anything of which it is ashamed. It stoops to no secretive methods to obtain converts. Carrying the responsibility of proclaiming the fact that the gospel of the Redeemer in all its simplicity and power is restored to man, the Church seeks by every legitimate means to declare this message to the whole world.—MS, 85:728 (1923).

Christianitya-McKay, David O.TPA WORLD-WIDE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. A more important question for us today is this: "Are the so-called Mormons true Christians and does the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints contain the elements of a world-wide Christian religion?" It is my sincere belief and testimony that the Latter-day Saints commonly called Mormons are Christians in the truest and fullest sense of the term, and that this Church is world-wide in its comprehensiveness, in organization, and in its blessing and salvation of the human family. As true Christianity should and as it did in the days of the Savior, Mormonism combines the essential elements in the teachings of Israel's prophets, priests, and sages; and in accepting the Jehovah of the Old Testament as the Savior of mankind, it fulfils the noblest aspirations of the Hebrew race, thereby indicating a world-wide scope so far as Israel's people and Israel's God are concerned.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TPAll that is "virtuous, lovely, or of good report, or praise-worthy" in the teachings of all the great religious teachers of mankind, teachings that today are influencing hundreds of millions of God's children, are comprehended in the ethical teachings of the Church of Jesus Christ.

Church in the Worlda-McKay, David O.TPMormonism is an authoritative religion, yet at the same time the most thoroughly democratic Church on earth—a combination that is well worthy of serious thought. It emphasizes the universal bonds of human brotherhood. It seeks by training the individual conscience and will to establish a closely knit, world-wide fraternity. It glorifies humanity and all normal human relations. It is a spiritual force emanating from God himself.—CR, April 1927, pp. 104-105.

Church in the Worlda-McKay, David O.TPTHE RESPONSIBILITIES OF WORLD-WIDE ACTIVITY. Most earnestly do I hope that we shall never lose the great conviction that the world is our field of activity. Can you think of anything more potent in moving a people to action?

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPBut what a responsibility this entails of leading good men and good women all over this world to know God, and to know what their mission is on earth! Fathers and mothers, fellow workers, do you fully realize today what it means to assume the responsibility of carrying the message of peace and good will to all men? The base of our operations must be here at home. Neglect your duty here, and all you undertake abroad will be compromised because people can rightfully ask: What do you do at home? What life are you living at home? Every elder who goes abroad to preach this gospel must first live the gospel to the best of his ability and have a conviction in his heart that he is preaching the truth. True, at first this testimony may be somewhat indefinite; but all our children have it to some extent. They breathe it as they breathe the mountain air, but they often neglect to define it, to express it in the plane of consciousness. It is the duty of presidents of stakes, bishops of wards, to make definite in the minds of missionaries this testimony of the truth. Through study, service, humility, and prayer, this testimony will increase.—CR, April 1927, p. 106.

THE FUTURE OF THE CHURCH. What of the future? "Come and see." "Life abundant, beauteous, laughing life," more brotherhood, securer peace, better social relations are some of the fruits of Mormonism as seen by the eye of faith.

"Th' increasing prospect tires our wand'ring eyes,

Hills peep o'er hills, and Alps on Alps arise!"

—Pope, Essay on Criticism.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPCan you not see many nations yet to hear the truth—Jew as well as Gentile! India and China both awakening, Russia but in the throes of the birth of a new nation, a new religious freedom it must be. God will overrule it, for that people must hear the truth, and the truth in simplicity. Truly there is much for the Church to do in the coming century!—CR, April 1930, p. 82.

We are grateful for the blessings of the Lord to his Church in all the world, and for the assurance of his divine guidance and inspiration.—CR, April 1952, p. 11.

THE UNITING OF CHRISTIAN CREEDS

THE NECESSITY OF UNITING. There is permeating Protestant Christendom today, a keen realization of the necessity of uniting all creeds into one great Christian church. The petty differences and distinctions now existing among the various creeds professing the name of Christ are recognized as barriers to the fulfilment of the hope that Christianity shall become the world-wide religion.

But the question of how to break down these differentiating barriers is yet unanswered, and the difficulties encountered in trying to accomplish the desired unity seem insurmountable.

"The conviction," says The Christian Century, "that our denominational system is fundamentally defective is well known. The sincere desire of its editors and many of its contributors is to help in finding a remedy for these defects, and to assist communities on which the futility of their denominational organizations has forced the issue of finding a remedy, is also well known. It is not surprising that the mail brings many letters to this office from eager and more or less distressed spirits whose bewilderments and perturbations we would fain dispel. We sometimes long for ready formulas by which these seekers might be shown the way. But evils so serious do not yield to light and easy remedies."

One such letter containing a sincere appeal for help is as follows:

"I have been reading with profit in your paper what you say concerning community churches. We are about ready to unite here; but we technically do not know how to do it. We are bothered: how to break away from our denomination at large; or how to remain tied loosely to it; what to do with benevolent monies, etc., etc. Can you direct me how to find out, or have you any suggestions for us? We must build singly if not together; but I am anxious to unite our two churches. I would be willing to lose my job if necessary in order to bring this about. However, the spirit is ripe; but how shall we begin? Would it be best to continue some denominational attachment? We would be most grateful for any help you can furnish in this great work.—A Subscriber,"

To these questions The Christian Century says: "We don't know." Neither does it offer a solution of the problems of the contribution and the disbursing of funds; of the securing of ministers; of the sort of church the community proposes to form, etc., etc. Nor will these problems be solved until the cause that produced so many conflicting sects shall have been recognized and removed.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day SaintsChristianitya-McKay, David O.TPMARKS OF THE GREAT UNITED CHURCH. Once this reason for the existing disunion throughout Christendom is recognized, and with it the acceptance of the fact that Jesus Christ, the author of our salvation, is the only one who has the authority and right to establish his Church among men—once the ministers of the sectarian churches of so-called Christianity are absolutely honest with themselves and mankind, and will acknowledge the fact that they have not been divinely authorized to officiate in the name of Jesus Christ nor to administer any ordinances in his Church—once they accept the dictates of reason, and the teaching of the scriptures, both of which give the conviction that a man must be called of God to officiate in the ordinances of the gospel—then, and not till then, will the great difficulty be overcome of establishing one great united Christian church upon the earth.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day SaintsChristianitya-McKay, David O.TPSuch a church will be called the Church of Jesus Christ.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day SaintsChristianitya-McKay, David O.TPSuch a church will be the same in all essential principles and ordinances as that which Christ established when he was upon the earth.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day SaintsChristianitya-McKay, David O.TPSuch a church will have apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, deacons, and other necessary helps in government.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day SaintsChristianitya-McKay, David O.TPIn that church there will be never a question as to the source of the finances necessary for its temporal needs; never a question as to who shall receive the funds nor as to how and by whom they shall be dispersed. All this will be in accordance with the law of God.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day SaintsChristianitya-McKay, David O.TPIn that church there will never be a question as to the relation of one official to another, no matter how great its numbers nor how unlimited its subdivisions; perfect order and harmony will always exist because the organization is of divine origin.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day SaintsChristianitya-McKay, David O.TPIn that church men will not preach for money nor divine for hire; but every worthy man will be a priest, a servant of the people, a preacher and teacher of righteousness; every worthy woman will have an opportunity to render service in a perfectly organized capacity.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day SaintsChristianitya-McKay, David O.TPIn that church the millionaire and the man of humble earnings, the professional man, the artisan, and the laborer will all meet on common ground, and study, in equality and brotherhood, the divine principles of happiness, progress, and eternal life.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day SaintsChristianitya-McKay, David O.TPIn that church the poor need not and should not suffer from a lack of sufficient food, clothing, and shelter, because ample provision will be made for the physical, the temporal, as well as the spiritual salvation of every human being.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day SaintsChristianitya-McKay, David O.TPIn short, the Church of Jesus Christ, the universal church, will acknowledge the fatherhood of God and make not only possible but practical the universal brotherhood of man.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day SaintsChristianitya-McKay, David O.TPThat church is already upon the earth, established by God the Eternal Father and his Son Jesus Christ, by whose divine authority men are now commissioned to officiate in all the ordinances of the gospel. The necessity of its having been so established by direct revelation was shown to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the words of the Savior who declared that the contending "creeds were an abomination in his sight."

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day SaintsChristianitya-McKay, David O.TPUntil the authority of the Redeemer is acknowledged, in vain will so-called Christian sects seek for unity; and in vain will they strive to regain the power they once held over the minds and hearts of the children of men. In vain, also, will they fight against the Church of Jesus Christ, which is destined to grow until it fills the whole earth, until every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ.—MS, 85:248-250 (1923).

THE ROAD TO UNION. Another difficulty, and one frequently entertained by unprejudiced minds, is the idea that "one church is as good as another. They are all trying to do the will of God, and will eventually lead to his kingdom." The thought is summarized in the timeworn phrase, "All roads lead to Rome."

On one occasion, when Paul was about to be scourged, he said to the centurion, "Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and uncondemned?"

Hesitating before administering his first blow, the scourger called the chief captain, who asked:

"...art thou a Roman?"

"Yea."

"With a great sum obtained I this freedom."

"But," answered Paul, "I was free born." (See Acts 22:25-28.)

This incident shows two means of obtaining Roman citizenship. There were many in Rome, who, not entitled to citizenship by birth, could neither purchase it nor obtain it by any other means.

By traveling any of the many roads leading to that great medieval city, they could reach it, enter it, and even participate in some of its advantages and far-famed glory; but before they could become citizens, they had to comply with the prescribed conditions.

BaptismChurch of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TPSo it is with the church and kingdom of God. All churches and all creeds contain some good which lead toward the kingdom of our Father; but to become a citizen of that kingdom everyone must conform to the requirements made by the King. Indeed, there is only one way in which entrance into the Church of Jesus Christ may be obtained, and that is the way, marked out by Jesus Christ, the Lord. "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." (John 14:6.)

BaptismChurch of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TPThe means of obtaining citizenship in the Church of Jesus Christ are very explicit; so clear, indeed, that it is surprising that so many seemingly intelligent and well-read people will arrogate to themselves the thought that they can gain entrance by other and various means.

BaptismChurch of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TPThere is only one who has the right to prescribe the means of human salvation. Surely he spoke not meaninglessly when he said what is necessary to citizenship in his kingdom.

BaptismChurch of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TPNote how explicit are his words: "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." (Ibid. 3:3.) In explanation of this seemingly enigmatical saying to Nicodemus, the Master continued:

BaptismChurch of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TP"Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (Ibid. 3:5.)

Evidently Peter, the chief Apostle, attached significance to this requirement as an essential means of gaining not only citizenship in the Church, but also salvation in the kingdom of God, for, when the multitude pricked in their hearts cried out, "Men and brethren, what shall we do?" he answered and said:

"Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2:38.) Thus are given the four requirements, the four essential principles and ordinances, obedience to which are essential to membership in Christ's Church: viz., faith, repentance, baptism, and the reception of the Holy Ghost. ...

Kingdom of Goda-McKay, David O.TPThere are many roads being pointed out as leading to the kingdom of God, but there is only one gate through which entrance and citizenship therein may be obtained. Christ plainly pointed this out when he was among men; and he has again revealed it through the Prophet Joseph Smith. The way is simple and easy to find, and as infinitely sublime as it is eternal.

Kingdom of Goda-McKay, David O.TPThere are many roads in so-called heathen and Christian lands leading sincere people toward the church and kingdom of God, but those who would participate in the privileges and blessings of citizenship therein must obey the principles and ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Kingdom of Goda-McKay, David O.TP"...wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat:

Kingdom of Goda-McKay, David O.TP"Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it."—(Matt. 7:13-14.)—MS, 85:168-170 (1923).
