David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 10

MISSIONARY WORK

THE CALL TO MISSIONARY SERVICE

Church in the Worlda-McKay, David O.TPA WORLD-WIDE COMMISSION. We are living in what may be the most epoch-making period of all time. Scientific discoveries and inventions, the breaking down of heretofore approved social and moral standards, the uprooting of old religious moorings, all give evidence that we are witnessing one of those tidal waves of human thought which periodically sweep over the world and change the destiny of the human race. I call attention to world conditions because the mission of the Church of Jesus Christ is world-wide.—CR, October 1947, p. 116.

Church in the Worlda-McKay, David O.TPThe world is full of honorable men and women who, as those men who accosted Peter on the day of Pentecost, desire to know what to do—what to believe.—CR, October 1937, p. 115.

PHILOSOPHY OF THE MISSIONARY SYSTEM. Nearly every member of the Church understands that there are two general ecclesiastical divisions of the Church of Jesus Christ; one made up of the organized stakes and wards; the other, of the missionary work.

It is of this second division I wish to speak.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPMany of us fail to realize the value and potent possibilities of this great branch of Church activity.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TP1.—As an example of voluntary service in the cause of the Master, it is unexcelled.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TP2.—As an incentive to clean living among youth, as a contributing factor to character building, its influence is immeasurable.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TP3.—As an educative force and uplifting influence upon our communities, its effect is clearly manifest.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TP4.—As a contributing factor to a better understanding among nations and to the establishing of international friendship, it wields a significant influence.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TP5.—As it is the purpose of the Almighty to save the individual, not to make him a mere cog in the machinery of the state, the missionary service works most harmoniously in the consummation of this eternal plan!

"Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God;

"And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!

"And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me!" (D. & C. 18:10, 15-16.)—CR, Sept.-Oct. 1949, p. 117.

THE CHRISTIAN MESSAGE FOR ALL NATIONS. Springing out of this sense of responsibility to bear witness to all people, is the desire to Christianize the world. Some Protestant ministers do not like to consider Mormons Christians. Be that as it may, the fact remains that the paramount desire in every Latter-day Saint's heart is to make all people Christians, and that is a conviction second only in power and urgency to the testimony that God has spoken in this dispensation. "Go ye...and teach all nations,..." said the Savior to his disciples. (Matt. 28:19.) "For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call." This Peter said on the day of Pentecost. (Acts 2:39.) "...proclaim these things unto the world,..." said the Prophet Joseph (D. & C. 1:18) through inspiration in this age, "That faith also might increase in the earth;" (ibid. 1:21) "That mine everlasting covenant might be established." (Ibid. 1:22.)

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPI know of no other religious conviction that has affected the daily life of a people more potently than this desire to have every nation hear the message of this latter-day gospel of peace. Very few indeed are the homes in the Church that have not been influenced by it.—CR, April 1927, pp. 102-103.

IS THE MISSIONARY PROJECT REALISTIC? But does the world need Christianizing? Our Protestant brethren say, "Why don't you send your elders out to the heathen, why go to Christian nations?" As I have said, our mission is to the whole world. We believe so-called Christian nations need the message as well as the so-called heathen lands, and Christian ministers by their own statements confirm this belief; for example: In an issue of The Literary Digest under a glaring heading, "Tolling the Knell of Protestantism," one Reverend Herbert Parrish wrote that it is his conviction that "the sooner Protestantism disappears from American life the better. Its narrow sectarian spirit, fostering division, incapable of a large synthesis of values, of unity, unfits it to represent our national religious life....As a moral guide it is superficial, depending on the exterior force of state legislation to effect the redemption of the race. As a mystical experience it is sentimental, without intelligence, and with narrow vision. As a teaching force it is vague, negative and uncertain. As an organization it is illogical and chaotic." (The Literary Digest, April 12, 1927, p. 34.) That I consider a very severe arraignment of Protestantism by a Protestant pastor. I do not know him nor do I know by what authority he speaks.

Probably a more trustworthy and authentic authority is Harry Emerson Fosdick, one of the leading thinkers in our nation today, who, commenting on the need of modern religious leadership, writes:

"No society ever has been healthy whose religious life was unhealthy. Even those who are impatient of contemporary formulations of faith, those who are outside the churches, and alienated from their denominational loyalty, should still be deeply concerned about the fortunes of religion. A society which, providing for the future, builds great factories, immense railroad systems, and even innumerable schools, but does not care whether the future has a wholesome religious life, is playing a fatally short-sighted game.

"In view of this fact the situation which we face is serious. Much of our contemporary Christianity is not making people better, but worse. It accentuates bitterness, brings out meanness, sanctions ignorance and bigotry, divides those who might otherwise be brotherly, and lapses from its high possibilities into a force for spiritual deterioration and decay."

Are not these statements and others that might be given, sufficient answer regarding the need of working for the Christianizing of the world?—CR, April 1927, p. 104.

PERSONAL DEVELOPMENT NOT THE END. At the dinner table today friends commented upon the number of our missionaries in different parts of the world. What a culture they bring into our community! One guest had two sons in Germany. He mentioned another in France, and another in one of the missions in the United States. Another guest mentioned two in Norway, one in France, one in Argentina, and so they are in different parts of the world.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPWhat a wonderful thing it is; but, brethren, missionaries are called not for individual blessings. They are called to preach the gospel, to represent the Church. The blessings come inevitably as they do their duty, and it is most unfortunate if a young man leave your ward to represent the Church who does so unworthily. It injures him, breaks his parents' hearts, reflects upon the ward, and it might blight some souls who otherwise would come into the Church.—CR, October 1948, p. 175.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPHOW TO PREACH CHRISTIANITY. The best way to preach, my dear fellow workers, is by example. Are you following Christ's admonition to pray to the Father and teach your children to pray, that godliness, reverence for God and his work, every day may be impressed upon the hearts of your children? That should be in every home. Pray not only for yourselves, but also for your enemies. Are you charitable in your homes and your organizations for those who are not of the same opinion as you? We talk about service to others. Too often when service is mentioned, we think of some physical aid that we might render. I tell you a better service can sometimes be given to others by speaking well of them, or, if you cannot speak well of them, by refraining from speaking of them at all.—CR, October 1919, pp. 78-79.

A PERSONAL VISTA. A short time ago, I stood in a little room in Wales, in which my mother was born 102 years before, the room so small that the six-foot bed covers the entire width, and its length is barely two feet longer than it is wide, and the old rafters just two feet above my head, so about eight feet high. But my thoughts on that occasion have been sacred to me. I share one or two with you.

I thought, as Sister McKay and I stood in that small bedroom, how different life would be now if two humble elders had not knocked at that door a hundred years ago! And how different life would be if my mother's father and mother had not accepted that message! I looked around the village and found descendants of others who heard it at that time, descendants of some who ridiculed my grandfather and grandmother for having accepted the truth; and they made light of their religion, scoffed at them and ostracized them for having accepted Mormonism. I realized how unenlightened those neighbors were when they condemned my grandparents.

God, Purposes ofa-McKay, David O.TPI recalled, as we stood there, what my grandmother said to me in Ogden, when she told me as a student in my teens, about the experience she had when she left Cefn Coed. My mother's sister, Aunt Lizzie, the youngest of the children, had just been born, when the eldest son was called away by death. My grandmother there in Ogden said, "I condemned the Lord in my heart for having taken our one main help on the journey ahead of us, and I said in my heart, 'Lord, if you had to take any of my children, why didn't you take this little helpless baby and leave us the oldest son to help us on the journey across the ocean and across the plains?' " When she told me that, she said, "I was wrong in my judgment. God knew best, and I should have trusted him. You see today how blessed I am, living here with the comfort I have of Lizzie, my youngest child, now the mother of three boys, and my comfort in my old age. God looked farther into the future than I could."

I remember that statement, as I fancied I could hear the cry of my mother, born two years before. Incidentally, acceptance of that gospel meant much to me. Father's folk were way up in the north of Scotland. It was only through the gospel that Father and Mother met. So I expressed gratitude, as I sensed it probably never so keenly before, as we stood in that little room, six by eight.—DNCS, September 6, 1952, p. 4.

COSTS AND BENEFITS. A young man was called from this city to go on a mission to the Pacific Islands. He responded and gave his message to the world as best he could. A few weeks ago he came into my office and said: "I have been home a year, and I have succeeded during that year in paying all but $100.00 of the $600.00 debt I had when I returned. In another two months I will have it all paid, and my tithing in full besides."

"Well, was it worth it?" said I.

"Twice as much," he promptly replied. "I would not have missed that experience for anything."—CR, April 1927, p. 103.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPI met a young man when I was coming home from the Eastern States Mission who had spent all his earnings in that mission, and also several hundred dollars beside, which a banker in his home town had furnished him, merely upon the young man's promissory note. He has paid his note since coming home, and although he has been in ill health part of the time, he rejoices in his missionary service. I met a mother on the train whose son was then in the mission field. She said she was having a difficult time to pay the taxes and other expenses and to keep her son in the field, and sympathetically I suggested that perhaps he might better be released. She turned in her seat suddenly and said: "Brother McKay, I would rather work these fingers to the bone than to have my boy come home before his duty is performed."—CR, April 1927, p. 103.

QUALIFICATIONS AND CALLING OF MISSIONARIES

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPTRUE CHRISTIAN BEHAVIOUR. Every elder should be a Christian gentleman always. A gentleman—who is he? "Whoever is open"—nothing to hide, no downcast look because of the consciousness of guilt; "whoever is loyal"—loyal to the truth, to virtue, to the Word of Wisdom—"true, of humane and affable demeanor, honorable himself and in his judgment of others, faithful to his word as to law, and faithful alike to God and to man—such a man is a true gentleman," and such a man the elder of this Church should be who goes out to Christianize the world.—CR, April 1927, p. 106.

INSTRUCTIONS TO BISHOPS AND PRESIDENTS OF STAKES. I plead with you bishops and presidents of the stakes to be more careful in your inquiries unto the worthiness of the missionaries whom you recommend. Will you, before calling them or interviewing them, just look over the missionary recommendation which you are going to sign? Do not just put it in the hand of the missionary and let him fill the blanks, but you note the significance of these questions. If he is married, please inquire into the condition of his family. Is he divorced or is she divorced? Please state why and see whether or not he or she is worthy to go out and preach the sacredness of the marriage covenant and the ideals of the Church in regard to home building.

Under morality, answer sincerely before you put this in the hands of the member of the Council of the Twelve. Are you satisfied, after thorough investigation, that he or she conforms to Church standards, aye, in chastity. The world has difficulty in believing that young men in our Church grow to manhood as chaste and pure as virgins. I have had them say they did not believe it; they did not believe that any young men could do that. But I tell them such is the fact, and that it is the standard of the Church for young men as well as for young women, to keep themselves unspotted from the world. In the Church there is but the single standard of morality and that applies to young men as well as to young women. See to it that prospective missionaries realize what this means, no matter what false teaching they have had in psychology or in other classes about "inhibitions," and so on. The standard of the Church is right; it is divine; it contributes to manhood and virtuous womanhood, happy homes, perpetuity of the nation.

Are you satisfied through investigation that he or she conforms to the Church in the observance of the Word of Wisdom? And note this, in integrity. Is there anybody in the ward who will say: "Well, he has cheated me. He is not worthy. If that is the kind of men they have to send out, well then, I am done with the Church."

These pointed questions are put in the recommend purposely, and they mean something, because those who go out to represent the Church are chosen. They are set apart. They are leaders. They are teachers. They are ambassadors of truth. Please, when you bring these young men and young women to the members of the Council of the Twelve and place in the hands of the Council of the Twelve this written recommendation with your signature, be sure that you have made a thorough investigation, because it is embarrassing, very embarrassing, to the young man to be rejected as a representative.—CR, October 1948, pp. 175-176.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPSTANDARDS FOR CALLING MISSIONARIES. There are certain standards by which we should be guided in calling our missionaries. First, call no young man or young woman for the purpose of saving him or her. The young man is getting wayward, and you think a mission would do him good. It would. But that is not why you are sending him out. Choose the young men and young women who are worthy to represent the Church, see that they are sufficiently mature, and, above all, that they have good character.

THE PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED. Again there is the problem of the physically handicapped; of course you would like them to go, but think how they will interfere with their companions. Elders should go two by two, and so should sisters, and no one of them should be hampered in his or her activity with somebody who is not equal to the responsibility of missionary work.

IMPORTANCE OF CHARACTER. But the most important standard is character. Let each one whom you interview sense the fact that he is going out as a representative. Some of the brethren have urged that each ward should have in the mission field a certain percentage of the ward membership. That is not an ideal. If you have no one who is worthy and financially able to represent the Church, do not send anybody out, but sit down with these young men and young women and say, "If you accept this call willingly, you go out as a trusted representative of the Church and of the Lord Jesus Christ." And to be trusted, young men, is a greater compliment than to be loved, and you cannot violate that trust. You are obligated to keep that trust between now and the time you go to the missionary home. Maintain the Church standards with your companions who will want to give you a farewell party. We have heard of some missionaries who have been called who have joined in with their fraternity friends in action that reflected discredit upon themselves and upon the missionary cause.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPTell the young man, "From now on, from this very moment, you are a trusted representative of this ward, of your parents, and of the Lord Jesus Christ."—CR, April 1950, pp. 176-178.

PHYSICAL STRENGTH A REQUISITE. Missionary work is strenuous, the change of climate, often the worry that takes possession of some of our young men at first, sometimes home-sickness, discouragement set in. Unless they are physically strong, they break under it. ... That, too, hinders the work in the mission field. That applies also to those who are past middle age, to elderly couples that would like to go out. They seem strong, capable to do work here at home, but when they get out in the field under different circumstances, not a small number of them fail to meet the vicissitudes and the responsibilities of the mission. So now, before your elderly couple will be sent out to the field the mission president will be communicated with; and if he can use them, all right; if not, we shall ask that they remain in the home fields, in the organized stakes.

Now we recognize, bishops, that you are going to have difficulty in satisfying some of these young men who may be physically handicapped. Physicians may declare a weakness in the eyes, probably in the heart. The young men will say, "Well, we can work hard, and we should like to go," and sympathetically you say, "All right." They feel as though they will be deprived of a privilege, and no doubt they will in a sense, but let us emphasize the importance of the work here at home. It is just as important, the home missionary work, and they can be here under their normal surroundings, and be near any help, medically, which they might need. So let us try to impress them with the fact that they can serve the Lord here at home to the extent of their physical, intellectual, and spiritual ability, and probably better than going out into the world under conditions that might be too strenuous for them.—CR, April 1949, pp. 177-178.

Because of the call to military duty the number of missionaries in the field is not so large as one year ago. The missionaries are returning and reporting for military duty by the scores every month. Reports of uprightness in the lives of these returned missionaries indicate that by example they will still continue to be good missionaries while serving their country.

I think I shall take time to give you just an extract from one of these reports. A letter dated September 4, 1951 from a major says this:

"This is quite a group we have. With the exception of two fellows it is made up entirely of returned missionaries. This morning we all ate together in the enlisted men's mess hall, and not a single one of them had coffee, even though boiling pitchers full were set at each table. I noticed a peculiar look on the mess sergeant's face as he scratched his head in bewilderment when thirty-two soldiers all took milk."

It is only a little incident, but it speaks volumes for the loyalty of our missionaries who are entering the service in their determination to maintain the standards of the Church. God bless them!—CR, October 1951, pp. 4-5.

WOMEN AND MISSIONARY SERVICE. It is surprising how eagerly the young women and some married women seek calls to go on missions. We commend them for it, but the responsibility of proclaiming the gospel of Jesus Christ rests primarily upon the priesthood of the Church.

In this connection, we advise that mothers who have dependent children, that means children who are in their teens or unmarried, should not be called on missions even though the grandparents are willing to take care of the children. No nobler work in this world can be performed by any mother than to rear and love the children with whom God has blessed her. That is her duty, and that is far greater than going out into the world to proclaim the gospel because somebody else can do that who does not bear the responsibility of rearing and loving the children who call her mother.—CR, April 1951, p. 81.

THE MISSIONS AT MID-CENTURY (1949)

THE MISSION PRESIDENTS. The men who preside over our missions are chosen generally from the rank and file of the Church. They are businessmen, contractors, ranchers, college professors, lawyers, physicians and surgeons, dentists, and members of other professions. When the call comes to any such, no matter what his responsibilities or circumstances, seldom if ever does he offer an excuse but, as Samuel of old, replies: "Speak; for thy servant heareth," (I Samuel 3:10) even though such acceptance means a financial sacrifice and sometimes the loss of political preferment.

THE MISSIONARIES.. The missionaries, generally, are young men and women, ranging in age from twenty to thirty years, with a sprinkling among them of more experienced men and women.

It is well to say here that the direct responsibility of preaching the gospel rests upon the priesthood of the Church—not upon the women, though the efficiency of the latter in cottage meetings, in Primaries, and Sunday Schools, and in other phases of missionary work, is of the highest order, and their willingness, even eagerness, to labor is not excelled by that of the young men.

Who are these youths chosen to represent the Church? They, too, as their mission presidents, come from the rank and file. They are farmers, artisans, factory workers, bank clerks, secretaries in business firms, and followers of other vocations. Some who are married leave their wives and their children who help to support them in their work. All of them look forward to the time after their return when they, with congenial loving companions, may build happy homes.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPAs already, stated, each pays his or her own expenses, in most cases, of course, with the assistance of parents. True Christianity is love in action. There is no better way to manifest love for God than to show an unselfish love for your fellow men. This is the spirit of missionary work. Our hearts respond to the cry of the poet:

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TP"O brother man! fold to thy heart thy brother. Where pity dwells, the peace of God is there; To worship rightly is to love each other, Each smile a hymn, each kindly deed a prayer." —John Greenleaf Whittier, "Brotherhood."

These men go out in the spirit of love, seeking nothing from any nation to which they are sent: no personal acclaim, no monetary acquisition. Two or three years ago, many of these missionaries were honorably discharged from military duty. Not a few had saved their government allowance to pay their expenses in the mission field if and when they should be called.

INFLUENCE OF MISSIONARY SYSTEM UPON YOUTH. I once read one of the most impressive letters of a mother to a son that I think has ever been written. It contained only three words, except the signature: "Quinn, keep clean," and was signed, "Lovingly, Mother."

Young men in the army, therefore, who looked forward to serving as missionaries and saved their money for that purpose, cherished higher ideals than their "buddies" who sometimes prodigally spent their earnings in saloons, gambling dens, and brothels.

In more than one instance, Latter-day Saint soldiers sent home their earnings to their parents to be deposited in the savings bank to bear their missionary costs after the war. And we know of two or three young men each of whom added in effect: "If I do not come home, use the money to pay the expenses of some other young man to go out as a missionary."

These young men are instructed that they go out as representatives of the Church, and that a representative of any organization—economic or religious—must possess at least one outstanding quality, and that is: trustworthiness. ...

These ambassadors ... carry ... one of the greatest responsibilities of their lives.

THE MISSIONARY MESSAGE. Now, what is the outstanding message that they have to give to Christian, as well as to non-Christian countries? There must surely be something distinctive to justify their presence in all parts of the world.

First, their message is that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Redeemer and Savior of mankind. To these missionaries—"Jesus is not a legendary figure in history," to paraphrase a question asked by Hall Caine to the Christian world:

"... he is not merely a saint to be painted in the stained glass of church windows, a sort of sacred fairy not to be approached and hardly to be mentioned by name. But he is still what he was in the flesh, a reality, a man of like passions with ourselves, a guide, a counselor, a comforter, a great voice calling to us to live nobly, to die bravely, and to keep up our courage to the last."

The second distinctive message is this: Every missionary should clearly understand, and so declare in unmistakable words, the relationship of this Church to other Christian organizations—that it is neither an outgrowth nor a division of any of them. True, the Church is generally classed with the Protestants; but Protestantism began with the great dissenters—Martin Luther, Philip Melanchthon, Ulrich Zwingli, John Knox, and others. These great reformers denounced corrupt practices in the Roman church, particularly the selling of indulgences wherein delinquents could make satisfaction by money contributions, a practice carried on under one pretext and another until it became a regular financial expedient for increasing papal revenue.

It was extended even to souls in purgatory.

The great men whom I have named rebelled against this evil and others, and organized churches in protest.

Accordingly, when the second Diet of Spires in 1529 passed a resolution

"... disallowing further religious innovations in the Lutheran states, whilst prohibiting the profession of the Zwinglian and Anabaptist forms of the reformed faith, the Lutheran minority protested, and this protestation was signed by fourteen cities as well as by the elector of Saxony, the land-grave of Hesse and four other provinces. Hence the name Protestant as a designation of the evangelical party."

Protestantism under many different names, spread over Europe and later among the American colonies, and freedom to worship as one sincerely wished became more and more the prescribed right of the individual, but in the hearts of many a true believer in Jesus of Nazareth, there remained an abiding belief, a feeling that the authority to represent him had been taken from the earth, and that there

Gospel, Restoration ofa-McKay, David O.TP"... can be no recovery out of that apostasy till Christ shall send forth new apostles to plant churches anew."

Gospel, Restoration ofa-McKay, David O.TPThis in effect is what the Lord told the Prophet Joseph Smith when as a fourteen-year-old lad he inquired which of all sects was right and which he should join. Joseph was told to join none of them. ...

Gospel, Restoration ofa-McKay, David O.TPA few years later, specifically, April 6, 1830, Joseph Smith received by the spirit of prophecy and revelation instructions from the Savior "to organize his Church once more here upon the earth."

Gospel, Restoration ofa-McKay, David O.TPThus was established by direct revelation and divine authority from the Eternal Father and Jesus Christ who founded the Church in the Meridian of Time, the Church of Latter-day Saints, which is set up as a forerunner, if you please, to the establishing of the kingdom of God upon the earth. In the words of President John Taylor,

Gospel, Restoration ofa-McKay, David O.TP"... with such an organization there is a chance for the Lord God to be revealed. There is an opportunity for the law of life to be made manifest, a chance for God to introduce the principles of heaven upon the earth and for the will of God to be done in heaven." (J. D. 18:140, October 10, 1875.)

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPWith these two great fundamental truths as the heart of their message, namely, (1) the divinity of the mission of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world, and (2) the restoration of his gospel in this age, the missionaries are to the best of their ability, fulfilling the injunction to preach the gospel to every creature, baptizing him in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, teaching him to observe all things whatsoever the Lord has commanded.

This, then, brethren, is a world-wide Church organized preparatory to the establishing of the kingdom of God on earth by means of which "... the Lord God may be revealed, and an opportunity for the laws of life to be made manifest."

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPAMBASSADORS OF GOOD WILL. These thousands of missionaries and men who hold the priesthood everywhere are ambassadors of good will, the ultimate purpose of whose service is to change the hearts of men everywhere from selfishness and greed to tolerance, compassion, and brotherhood.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPMay the heart of every missionary be inspired by the Spirit of his Lord, whose authorized servant he is, to the end that selfishness and violence now so powerful in the world will be replaced by loyal service, truth, and brotherhood!—CR, Sept.-Oct. 1949, pp. 118-123.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPTHE NOBLEST CALLING IN LIFE. It is difficult, if not quite impossible, for one to say of anything with absolute certainty: "This is the best," or "This is the worst." If one so expresses one's self, another with greater intelligence and more experience may say with much more accuracy that something else is best or some other thing the worst. It is, therefore, the better part of wisdom not to dogmatize, nor to speak with too much assurance of things about which there may be a divergence of opinion, and upon which one person's judgment will be as weighty as another's. It is somewhat presumptuous, therefore, to point out specifically the noblest calling in life; for as soon as it is named, someone may prove conclusively that we have used the superlative degree inadvisedly.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPHowever, whatever its name, it is evident that man's noblest work must be impregnated with the greatest of all forces, love. Furthermore, this power must be directed not for selfish purposes nor to achieve personal ends. Though self-preservation is the first law of nature, a calling that has in view only the preservation of self cannot be called noble, a term that excludes all sordidness, and includes greatness of mind and generosity of soul.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPThe noblest calling in life, then, must be one in which the attribute of love will manifest itself not for self, but for others. It must be that calling which most nearly emulates true motherhood, the mightiest of all forces in human society. Indeed, if motherhood were not a "distinct and individual creation," we could pause here and have all true men agree that it is the noblest, purest calling in life; and that which makes motherhood is the Christlike element of giving her life for another. "A father may turn his back on his child; brothers and sisters may become inveterate enemies; husbands may desert their wives, wives their husbands; but a mother's love endures through all."

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPThe element, then, that makes true motherhood divine must also permeate that call or vocation which may be distinguished by the term noblest. The most worthy calling in life, therefore, is that in which man can serve best his fellow man. It isn't preaching; it isn't teaching; it isn't medicine; it isn't engineering nor any other vocation common among men. Each of these, though offering opportunities for service, may be followed by men actuated by the most selfish and sordid of motives.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPThe noblest aim in life is to strive to live to make other lives better and happier. Browning sounds the keynote in Paracelsus, when he says: "There is an answer to the passionate longings of the heart for fulness, and I knew it. And the answer is this: Live in all things outside yourself by love and you will have joy. That is the life of God; it ought to be our life. In him it is accomplished and perfect; but in all created things, it is a lesson learned slowly against difficulty."

Such is the divine message given to the Prophet Joseph in the words: "Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God." (D. & C. 18:10.) Such is the philosophy expressed by Redeemer in the seemingly paradoxical statement, "... he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it." (Matt. 10:39.) The meaning of this becomes clear in the light of another passage which says, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. (Ibid. 25:40.)

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPTo no other group of men in all the world is given a better opportunity to engage in the noblest calling in life than that which is afforded the elders in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. To establish salvation and peace to the extent of their individual efforts, their lives are dedicated; to make the world a better and a fitter place for man, their talents and means are consecrated.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPJust to be associated with men striving toward such an aim is a joy; and to assist them in their quest, an inspiration. Unselfishly, they are trying to serve their fellow men in love. Thus far, at least, they are true followers of the Master; for "at the very heart of the Christian faith, the most sublime of its teachings, and to him who penetrates its deepest sense, the most human is this: To save lost humanity the invisible God came to dwell among us, in the form of man, and willed to make himself known by this single sign: Love."

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPGod bless the elders, and women as well, who, if not with perfect love, at least with a desire to bring joy and peace to others, are engaged in the noblest calling in life!

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPWorthy servants of Christ, you are! Teachers! Followers of the true Teacher, the great Exemplar of all! On with your noble work! There is none greater; none more righteous! Yours is the joy promised by the Savior.—MS, 86:216-217 (1924).
