David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 11

OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERS

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF ENTRY INTO THE CHURCH

SEEKING TRUTH AND RESISTING EVIL. One expression in the document Address ... to the World of 1907] remains in my mind, and I feel to touch upon it, because I believe that it contains much food for thought, as does every sentence in that declaration. It is implied therein that the Latter-day Saints are members of the Church "for the fostering of spiritual life, and the achievement of moral and charitable ends"; in other words, for the developing of the religious sentiment, the true religious spirit. This may be done in two ways: first, by seeking the truth and living in harmony with it; and second, by resisting every influence, every power, that tends to destroy or to dwarf in any way the religious sentiment.

Baptisma-McKay, David O.TPWhen the Latter-day Saint stood at the water's edge, before being buried with Christ in baptism, he had within him an implicit faith that the Church of Jesus Christ is established upon the earth, and that this organization is the best in the world today for the fostering of spiritual life, for the attaining of true religious development, for the salvation of his soul. I repeat that this implicit faith was within him; and with that, there was a true repentance, and that repentance carried with it a desire to leave off everything in the past life that was contrary to the teachings of the gospel or the Church he was about to join. His old life, and the sins, if there were any connected with it, he truly repented of. He looked forward to the time when he would be born anew in the kingdom of God. ...

Baptisma-McKay, David O.TPThat is where we all stood at one time. Those were our feelings, our faith, our hope. We stood that day forgiven of past evils and follies. Now, the whole mission—the life, if you please, of soul development—was before us, and we had thus bestowed upon us the light that emanates from the Father, to lead us that our feet might not stumble, that the truths of his holy gospel might sink into our hearts—the truths that will give us knowledge, that our souls might be saved in intelligence. The Holy Ghost was to bring all things to our remembrance, to show us things to come, to testify of the Father; and as we seek that light, and live in accordance with the duties that are placed upon us by that obligation, we are seeking the true religious development; we are fostering the true religious growth.

But what is the other element which we must consider? Along with this new life, with this seeking for truth, there should be a strong power of resistance. Someone has said that when God makes the prophet, he does not unmake the man. I believe that, though being born anew, and being entitled to new life, new vigor, new blessings, yet the old weaknesses still remained with us. The evil one was eager and ready to attack and strike us at our weakest point, and he has been striking on it ever since. Why? That he might thwart the very purpose for which we entered the Church of Jesus Christ. That is his mission.

Temptationa-McKay, David O.TPOur temptation may have come in the form of the old appetite which we had satisfied for years. It may have been, and I doubt not that it was, in the form of some bodily temptation—some longing. It may have been the love of the old pipe which we determined—if we were sincere—to put aside when going into the waters of baptism. O when that longing came, after we were in the Church or kingdom, who was it that said: "Though you pretend to throw that aside, take it only once more; this once will not hurt." There was the necessary moment of resistance. How many of us stood as Christ our leader and said: "Get thee behind me!" This element of resistance in regard to our bodily longings—satisfying the passions, applies to every member of the Church of Jesus Christ. In some way the evil one will attack us; in some way he can weaken us; in some way he will bring before us that which will weaken our souls and will tend to thwart that true development of the spirit within, the strengthening of the inner man, the strengthening and growth of the spirit, that time cannot kill, but which is enduring and lasting as the eternal Father of that spirit. And the things which will tend to dwarf this spirit or to hinder its growth are things which the Latter-day Saints are called upon to resist.—CR, April 1907, pp. 10-12.

RESPONSIBILITIES OF CHURCH MEMBERSHIP

LEARNING AND ACTING. What is this responsibility which rests upon every member of the Church? I turn to the 107th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, and there find enumerated the duties of the various organizations of the priesthood, and I read in the ninety-ninth verse the following:

"Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence."

Church Membershipa-McKay, David O.TPTwo principles in that admonition stand out as the duty of the officers to whom this revelation was given: first, the learning, the knowing what one's duty is; second, to act in all diligence in the performance of duty. To know one's duty, to learn the truth, is the duty of every Latter-day Saint, of every man and woman in the world, including those outside of this Church.

Trutha-McKay, David O.TPAll mankind, I believe, are being impelled, lifted upward by that Spirit which makes them desire the truth. In the political world even, you find great men who have been searching for political truth, for truths that would relieve political situations. In the world of morality you find great reformers reaching out for truths that will alleviate harmful social conditions. The same sentiment is found in the financial world. Scientific men are among the foremost searchers after truth.

Trutha-McKay, David O.TPWe are told about the Power which impelled Columbus to go out into the ocean. In response to that feeling inspired within him to demonstrate a truth of which he felt confident, he could not content himself; he had to give expression to it. There is a natural feeling which urges men and women towards truth; it is a responsibility placed upon mankind. That responsibility rests upon Latter-day Saints in a greater degree than upon their fellow men.

If you turn to the 88th section, you will find the following admonition:

"And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning"—how? "even by study," but not alone by study, as the world searches for it, "and also by faith." (D. & C. 88:118.)

Gospela-McKay, David O.TPWHAT HAVE WE LEARNED? The Latter-day Saints have learned the truth that the everlasting gospel has been restored. And what does this knowledge bring to them? It brings to all who have honestly and sincerely obeyed the principles of repentance and baptism the gift of the Holy Ghost, which enlightens their minds, quickens their understanding, and imparts unto them a knowledge of Christ.

Faitha-McKay, David O.TPThe Latter-day Saints have a guide, a help, a means to assist in their acquisition of truth, in their desire to know what their duty is, that the world does not possess. And this guide is necessary; man cannot find out truth—he cannot find out God by intellect alone. It has been said that no man can find out God by a microscope. Reason alone is not a sufficient guide in searching for truth. There is another, higher, more sure guide than reason.

Faitha-McKay, David O.TPThat guide is faith—that principle which draws our spirit into communion with the higher Spirit which will bring all things to our remembrance, show us things to come, and teach us all things. To acquire that Spirit is the responsibility of the Latter-day Saint who would know truth.

MERE KNOWLEDGE INSUFFICIENT. But knowing a thing or merely feeling an assurance of the truth is not sufficient. "... to him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin." (James 4:17.) Now, where are we? Think of the instructions that have been given during this conference. You and I know now, as probably we have never realized before, what the duty of the individual Latter-day Saint is, and what the duty of the various organizations is.

Faith and Worksa-McKay, David O.TPTHE NECESSITY OF PERFORMANCE. This thought brings us to consider the second duty mentioned in this revelation by the Prophet Joseph Smith: "Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence." (D. & C. 107:99.) The man who knows what his duty is and fails to perform it, is not true to himself; he is not true to his brethren; he is not living in the light which God and conscience provides. That is where we stand, and it comes right home to you; it means me. When my conscience tells me that it is right to go along in a specified line, I am not true to myself if I do not follow that.

Faith and Worksa-McKay, David O.TPOh, I know we are swayed by our weaknesses, and by influences from without; but it is our duty to walk in the straight and narrow path in the performance of every duty! And mark this: Every time we have opportunity and fail to live up to that truth which is within us, every time we fail to express a good thought, every time we fail to perform a good act, we weaken ourselves, and make it more difficult to express that thought or perform that act in the future. Every time we perform a good act, every time we express a noble feeling, we make it more easy to perform that act or express that feeling another time.—CR, October 1906, pp. 112-113.

Teaching, Gospela-McKay, David O.TPTHE OBLIGATION OF TEACHING. Luther once said: "Count it one of the highest virtues upon earth to educate faithfully the children of others, which so few, and scarcely any, do their own." The obligation of teaching is placed by the Church first upon the parents. Fathers and mothers are accepted absolutely as teachers, and the responsibility thereof has been placed upon them by divine command. But beside these there is an army of men and women, and boys and girls, who have accepted the responsibility of teaching. In the priesthood quorums alone the number runs into the thousands. Among these there are selected not a few thousand to act as instructors of the youth.—CR, April 1914, p. 87.

Church Membershipa-McKay, David O.TP"EVERY MAN, EVERY WOMAN, MUST BEAR ... RESPONSIBILITY." I do not know whether I have succeeded in expressing the feelings of my heart so that you understand them; but I wish to leave this thought: that every man, every woman, must bear a part of the responsibility of this Church. Feeling that does not necessarily make him imagine that it is resting upon him only. There is no man so unimportant that he can sink without making even a bubble or a ripple in the great ocean of life. At the same time his importance is so great that his actions go a long way towards establishing the power, the dignity, the advancement of God's kingdom on earth.

Then, no matter where we are, if we are in the hills one week from today or tomorrow, wherever circumstances or business affairs may call us, be it in the canyon or elsewhere, and we are tempted, on a cold morning, to break the Word of Wisdom by drinking two or three cups of tea or coffee, let us feel then the responsibility of right. Let each one say to himself, "The responsibility of membership in the Church is upon me; I will not yield. What though nobody sees me, I know and God knows when I yield, and every time I yield to a weakness I become weaker myself and do not respect myself."

If you are in business, and your companions say, "Come, let us go in and have a drink on this bargain, or this sale," let your answer be, "No, no!" What though your thirsty appetite makes you long for it, be men, be Latter-day Saints, and say, "No; the responsibility of membership in the Church rests upon me."

Church Membershipa-McKay, David O.TPWhen you are tempted to stay away from that seventies' meeting, from that elders' meeting, from that deacons' quorum and you shrink from going there, because you feel you will not be interested, say, "I will go; the duty of a Latter-day Saint is upon me; the responsibility of membership in that quorum is upon me, and I must go and help make that meeting interesting."

And so, if you carry that feeling in all the duties of a Latter-day Saint, you will come to the conclusion that every time you stand by the truth, you are more of a man, you are more in harmony with God's Spirit. He loves to dwell in such tabernacles; he will guide you into all truth; he will make your soul to rejoice; and you will know this gospel is true. "He that heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them" is the one that is likened unto the wise man. "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 7:21.)

"But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, ..." (James 1:22.)—CR, October 1906, p. 115.

COURAGE TO ENTER NEW REALMS. The first time that it was my privilege to stand on the brink of the Grand Canyon of the Colorado, I was overwhelmed with a sense that I was not comprehending the magnitude of that great gorge. I had learned that it was over a mile down to what appeared to be a little winding stream, the mighty Colorado, and that the opposite wall was said to be thirteen miles away, but I could not comprehend the majesty and sublimity of that mighty chasm.

I think I had a similar feeling this morning when I tried to visualize the potential audience that listened over the Church of the Air to your congregational singing, for there were probably ten million people in that potential audience. I am sure I cannot comprehend the significance of that great service. One thing though is clearly defined in my mind, and that is this: That we have greater responsibility than ever to learn and to live the gospel of Jesus Christ. We have greater tasks before us. The final work is not all done yet. You and I have the responsibility of taking advantage of these new and great opportunities to preach the gospel, of making real new visions, and of bringing into the lives of Latter-day Saints and members of the world more blessed opportunities to know the way of truth.

We need courage to enter into those new realms; we need courage to meet our present situations and conditions, and that is why I have chosen the text, "Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord." (Psalm 31:24.)—CR, April 1936, pp. 57-58.

BUILD, DON'T MURMUR. Now, my brethren and sisters, as in the world so in the Church, we have two classes; we have the builders, and we have the murmurers. Let each ask himself in which class shall I be placed? We are called upon to perform duties. High councilors with presidents of stakes are asked to build up their stakes and do other work in the Church. They introduce some plan of action, and many times the majority will say: Yes, we will do that; let us perform the duties that the presidency of the stake and the high councilors call us to do.

But somewhere we shall hear a murmurer, a faultfinder, who will say, No, you cannot do that. They scoff as Laman and Lemuel did and say you cannot do it. Misjudging motives, some soon find themselves with Laman and Lemuel, instead of with Nephi who expresses the voice of God. It may be in an auxiliary board. Instructions go out from the general board or from the stake board, requiring for the success of the movement the united energy of all. Most of the people interested in that association will join hands to build; they will join hands to be with the benefactors that the children might receive the light of the Holy Spirit, that they might get the knowledge that is revealed in this Church; but somewhere there will be murmurers; there will be faultfinders. Look out for them.

Faultfindinga-McKay, David O.TPLet us watch ourselves and be true to the examples set by the Church and the brethren and sisters who have sacrificed their lives, their all, to build the Church and to advance the principles taught therein. This warning is sometimes expressed in this way: "Speak not against the authorities." What does it mean? Be not a murmurer; that is what it means. It is one of the most poisonous things that can be introduced into the home of a Latter-day Saint—this murmuring against presidents of stakes, high councilors, Sunday School superintendents, presidents of high priests' quorums, seventies, elders, priests, teachers, and deacons. They are called unto their position, what for? To benefit themselves? No, not once can you point to an instance in this Church where a man was called for his personal benefit. He was admonished, before he was called to the position, whatever it was, that he should serve somewhere and serve somebody in this Church or in the world; it was to bless somebody, some class, humanity at large.

Faultfindinga-McKay, David O.TPThat is the mission of every man, from the President of the Church down to the latest convert in the Church. Every officer holds his position to build up, to bless; and, as President Joseph F. Smith has said, to establish righteousness, purity, and virtue among mankind. That is the motive, and yet because of his weakness, because, perhaps, of some little fault that we see in an officer, we begin to murmur and find fault.

Faultfindinga-McKay, David O.TPBetter stop murmuring and build. Remember that one of the worst means of tearing down an individual is slander. It is one of the most poisonous weapons that the evil one uses. Backbiting and evil speaking throw us into the class of malefactors rather than the class of benefactors.—CR, April 1909, pp. 66-67.

Speaking of the Church as a whole, I have often thought that we have chosen the wiser part in answering a faction that left the Church in early days, inasmuch as we did not choose to tear them down or to attack them in public or private. They call themselves the Reorganized Church. As I listened to one who has come out here presumably to teach the truth and heard him revile and ridicule President Brigham Young and other leading brethren of the Church, I felt to say, what good does it do to tear down? Why not build up? Tell us about what you have, and let the people then judge which is the better; it is much the wiser course. When a man begins to tear down, revile, and persecute, he is doing that which injures instead of building up. Our mission should be to build.

But you ask, would you not condemn evil? Yes, by obeying and building up the laws of right. The question in building is this: Is it right? Is that thing necessary to be done? If so, then let us do it.—CR, April 1909, pp. 67-68.

In the Church of Jesus Christ, there are no masters and no servants, but all working for everyone and each one for all.—AA, p. 60.

THE COVENANTS OF "THE LORD'S SUPPER"

THE SACRAMENT MEETINGS OF THE CHURCH. "It is expedient that the church meet together often. ..." (D. & C. 20:75.) We meet in the house of God not as mere acquaintances, suspicious of one another, but as brethren in the brotherhood of Christ. We meet in the presence of him who has said, "Love one another." I look forward to the time when the membership of our quorums will approach their quorum meetings in anticipation of that brotherhood and experience that fraternal feeling which strengthens the soul and which inspires all to render greater service to their fellow men.

Sacrament Meetingsa-McKay, David O.TPI believe in meetings. I feel impressed to emphasize what the Lord has designated as the most important meeting in the Church and that is the sacrament meeting. In this very text which I have read, given to Joseph Smith by revelation, the Lord refers to that special meeting. "It is expedient that the church meet together often," not for these general purpose to which I have made brief reference, but for the specific purpose of partaking of the sacrament. He has prescribed for us only a few set prayers, two of which are the blessing on the bread and water.

Sacrament Meetingsa-McKay, David O.TPNow, what does it signify? You will find first that the sacrament is a memorial of Christ's life and death.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPA second significance or a second principle associated with the administering of the sacrament is the bond of brotherhood.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPWe meet in the brotherhood of Christ, all on the same level, each expressing confidence in the other and all in one another. Oh, the strength of brotherhood! Sin divides us. Righteousness unites. The partaking of the sacrament indicates also how communion with Christ may be secured. It cannot be obtained by Sunday righteousness and weekday indulgence. It implies that we will remember Christ always. If we show the Lord's death in the sacrament, we must show the Lord's life in the world.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPAnd the third great significance is the promise that it is a means of receiving divine guidance. "If a friend is one who summons us to our best, then is not Jesus Christ our best friend and should we not think of the sacrament as one of the chief appeals to us to be our best? The Lord's Supper looks not back to our past with a critical eye, but to our future with a helpful one."

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPMay I call attention to the great obligation which every member of the Church assumes when he first partakes of the sacrament on the Lord's day. Think of the prayer revealed in this dispensation: "O God, the Eternal Father." What an invocation! An acknowledgment of God as our Creator; the giver of all good; the bestower of all blessings; in whom is all power and all glory; and yet, our Father, and we his children! The Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man! "We ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ," who is interceding for us, through whom all blessings are obtained—"to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it."

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPBless the bread! It is only bread. There may be a mystery about the sacrament, but that mystery does not consist in the changing of the bread to the actual body of the Christ. As President Brigham Young has said, the thought is a repulsive one. But it is a symbol, and we ask God to bless it to the souls of all those who partake of it, who witness—oh, there is the point!—CR, October 1929, pp. 10-13.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPOBLIGATIONS AND BLESSINGS IN PARTAKING OF THE SACRAMENT. My brethren and sisters, do we always stop to think, on that sacred Sabbath day when we meet together to partake of the sacrament, that we witness, promise, obligate ourselves, in the presence of one another, and in the presence of God, that we will do certain things? Note them.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPThe first: We are willing to take upon ourselves the name of the Son. In so doing we choose him as our leader and our ideal; and he is the one perfect character in all the world.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPThe second: That we will always remember him. Not just on Sunday, but on Monday, in our daily acts, in our self-control. When our brother hurts us, we are going to try to master our feelings and not retaliate in the same spirit of anger. When a brother treats us with contempt, we are going to try to return kindness. That's the spirit of the Christ, and that's what we have promised—that we will do our best to achieve these high standards of Christianity, true Christian principles.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPThe third: We promise to "... keep his commandments which he has given..."—tithing, fast offerings, the Word of Wisdom, kindness, forgiveness, love. The obligation of a member of the Church of Jesus Christ is great, but it is as glorious as it is great, because obedience to these principles gives life, eternal life. On the other hand, the man who seeks to live by violating the principles is deceived by the adversary and goes the way to death.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPTo partake of the sacrament unworthily is to take a step toward spiritual death. No man can be dishonest within himself without deadening the susceptibility of his spirit. Sin can stun the conscience as a blow on the head can stun the physical senses. He who promises one thing and deliberately fails to keep his word adds sin to sin. On natural principles such a man "eats and drinks condemnation to his soul."

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPWe die in this world before our hearts stop beating, as we live and partake of eternal life before we pass into the other world; for this is part of life eternal, and true life consists in obedience to the principles of the gospel. We promise every Sabbath day to keep those principles.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPAnd what is the blessing? "... that they may always have his Spirit to be with them." What a divine guidance! And I testify to you that divine inspiration is a reality. Men and women who obey the principles of life and salvation, sincerely repent of their sins, and as sincerely strive to live in accordance with the principles of the gospel, are guided and inspired by the Holy Ghost, and are shown things to come. I testify that that guidance is with this Church and has been since the Prophet Joseph Smith established it. I bear you witness, too, that this Church is the power of God unto salvation, the gospel of Jesus Christ. (See D. & C. 20:77.)

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPTo sum up then, the operation of the law of cause and effect is as constant in the spiritual realm as it is in the material world. You obey the principle, and you receive the blessing, and the keeping of each promise made in relation to the sacrament brings the results and the blessings as surely as the sun brings light.

Sacramenta-McKay, David O.TPOrder, reverence, attention to divine promises—the promise to enter into the fold of Christ, to cherish virtues mentioned in the gospel of Christ, to keep them ever in mind, to love the Lord wholeheartedly, and to labor, even at the sacrifice of self, for the brotherhood of man—these and all kindred virtues are associated with the partaking of the sacrament. It is good to meet together and especially to renew our covenants with God in that holy sacrament.

"Help us, O God, to realize The great atoning sacrifice, The gift of thy Beloved Son, The Prince of Life, the Holy One."

—CR, October 1929, pp. 14-15.

Sacrament Meetingsa-McKay, David O.TPOne of the greatest benefits derived from meeting together is the experiencing of new and uplifting thoughts and feelings. These thoughts and feelings are not always those expressed by the speaker. Words do not convey thought—they only call up thought; but those who, while listening, experience new thoughts or noble feelings always derive one of the greatest blessings that come to those who meet together.—CR, April 1908, p. 93.

QUALITIES TO BE CULTIVATED BY LATTER-DAY SAINTS

THE LIFE OF THE INTELLECT AND OF THE SPIRIT. Let us seek to live intellectually. I welcome with all my heart the hundreds and the thousands of boys and girls who are participating in the realm of education in the auxiliary associations and in the Church schools. What are they learning to do but to live—to live completely and abundantly; and in the living to serve—serve their fellow men! He lives most who sees or hears,

"... tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, Sermons in stones and good in every thing."

Shakespeare, As You Like It. Act. ii, sc. 1, 1. 15.

He lives most who sees beyond these trees, these stones, these running brooks, and sees God and goodness in it all, who sees an overruling Providence in all this world and recognizes God's children as brothers and sisters, in every one of whom there is something good, ever striving, to lift the man up out of the sensual world into the realm of true religion.

I believe that there is in every human soul a something good calling for something better, very much as that something in life mentioned by Lowell when he said, referring to spring,

"Every clod feels a stir of might, An instinct within it that reaches and towers, And groping blindly above it for light, Climbs to a soul in grass and flowers."

James Russell Lowell, The Vision of Sir Launfal: Prelude.

So there is in the human soul that divine element which is calling, striving, urging the person up to a higher, to a better life.

Boys and girls should do right because it is right. The day is past when you can threaten them with punishment hereafter. The world has passed by the fears of a fire and eternal torment. They can be appealed to, however, upon the sound principles of true religious living. It is the best because it works best. It is the best because it makes us happy and better here and now. We are better citizens; we are better friends; we are better football players; we are better students; we are better sons; we are better daughters; we are better everything; and the world should know it.

When we take the opposite view, as many of our boys unfortunately are doing, and seek life in immediate pleasures, transitory pleasures, indeed, we find only disappointment and eventually death, for to be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is life and peace.

"Live while you live, the epicure would say, And seize the pleasures of the present day;" is one view.] "Live while you live, the sacred preacher cries, And give to God each moment as it flies." other.] "Lord, in my view let both united be; I live in pleasure when I live to Thee."

Dr. Philip Doddridge, Epigram on His Family Arms.—CR, October 1920, pp. 42-43.

Church Historya-McKay, David O.TPSTUDY THE HISTORY OF THE CHURCH. There are many people in the world who condemn us because they are ignorant of the real facts concerning the Church. The great comfort to us, however, is that we know the purpose of the Church; we know its history—a little of it; not, however, so much as we should know, we younger people. We ought to study it more. There is inspiration in the history of this Church. There is inspiration and truth in reading the sayings of the Prophet Joseph and those associated with him in the early days. Read it; study it; do not censure because of ignorance.

Church Historya-McKay, David O.TPWhen we read the history of the Church, we are forced to acknowledge the fact that it has blessed humanity. When we study the principles, we find that they are the saving principles, as revealed by the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. What more do we want? There is nothing done, there is nothing taught, under the guidance and inspiration of the Lord but tends to the upbuilding and advancement of the human race, and that tends to the amelioration of the evils that afflict humanity.—CR, April 1909, p. 66.

STUDY MODERN REVELATION. If we were to pay more attention to such advice and devote more study to the modern revelations as contained in the Doctrine and Covenants, we should grow in appreciation of the magnitude of the great work that has been established in this dispensation. It is often said that the Church is the greatest thing in the world—it is—but the more we give attention to it, and realize how well adapted it is to our individual life, to our home life, to our social life; when we study it from the standpoint of our environment, from the standpoint of scientific discoveries, our hearts are made to rejoice for God's goodness unto us in having given to us the privilege of knowing the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Nearly every passage in the Doctrine and Covenants is replete with admonitions, full of inspiration and wonderful revelations to men. Sometimes those revelations are couched in but few words, but by careful study one sees how closely related they are to all truth. Take, for example, the wonderful revelation, simply expressed, in regard to government by the priesthood: "No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned." (D. & C. 121:41.)

Just think of that use of the word unfeigned. Love pretended has no influence. Love unfeigned always has the power to reach the heart.

To continue: "Reproving betimes with sharpness, ... and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy." (Ibid. 121:43.)

Why, it is a wonderful admonition and lesson in regard to the government, not only in quorums of priesthood in the Church offices but also in our home life and in all phases of association in society!

Consider, again, the suggestion in regard to the worth of souls, "Remember the worth of souls is great." Also the revelation in regard to the true riches, "Seek not for riches but for wisdom," and so on, and the riches of the world will be added also.

Such things are the real things in the world. And so we might continue; revelation after revelation as given in the Doctrine and Covenants, if studied and paid attention to by the Latter-day Saints, will establish faith in their hearts and make them rejoice at this great and wonderful organization placed among men for their salvation.—CR, October 1913, p. 104.

THE ABUNDANT LIFE. The Church accepts as literally true the saying of Jesus:

"... I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly." (John 10:10.)

We believe, however, that this abundant life is obtained not only from spiritual exultation, but also by the application to daily life of the principles that Jesus taught.

These principles are few and simple and may, if desired, be applied by every normal person. The first of these, and the foundation upon which a true Christian society is built, is:

Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, mind, and strength. (See Mark 12:30.)

A belief in a supreme Being who lives, and loves his children—a belief that gives power and vigor to the soul—an assurance that he can be approached for guidance, and that he will manifest himself to those who seek him.

Another is: The acceptance of the truth that life is a gift of God, and therefore divine. The proper use of this gift impels man to become the master, not the slave, of nature. His appetites are to be controlled and used for the benefit of his health and the prolongation of life. His passions mastered and controlled for the happiness and blessing of others and the perpetuity of the race.

A third principle is: Personal integrity. By this I mean, plain, everyday honesty, sobriety, and respect for others' rights, such as will win the confidence of one's fellows. This recognition applies to nations as well as to individuals. It is as wrong for a nation, because it is powerful, to steal from another and oppress it, as it is for an individual to rob and kill his neighbor.

A fourth essential is: Social consciousness that awakens in each individual the realization that it is his duty to make the world better for his having been in it. The very heart and spirit of this standard is expressed in the statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith—"If my life is of no value to my friends, it is of no value to me."—CR, October 1937, pp. 102-103.

Kindnessa-McKay, David O.TPLITTLE ACTS OF KINDNESS. There is no one great thing which we can do to obtain eternal life, and it seems to me that the great lesson to be learned in the world today is to apply in the little acts and duties of life the glorious principles of the gospel. Let us not think that because some of the things named this afternoon may seem small and trivial that they are unimportant. Life, after all, is made up of little things. Our life, our being, physically, is made up here of little heartbeats. Let that little heart stop beating, and life in this world ceases. The great sun is a mighty force in the universe, but we receive the blessings of its rays because they come to us as little beams, which, taken in the aggregate, fill the whole world with sunlight. The dark night is made pleasant by the glimmer of what seem to be little stars; and so the true Christian life is made up of little Christlike acts performed this hour, this minute, in the home, in the quorum, in the organization, in the town, wherever our life and acts may be cast.—CR, October 1914, pp. 87-88.

Convictiona-McKay, David O.TPCONVICTIONS OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS. The Latter-day Saints are a people of strong convictions; and convictions—convictions of the truth—are the strongest, most potent factors in the world. It has been truly said that no historic event is so important as the advent of a conviction of a new truth. "The power of such conviction in the human soul is to build up institutions, to change the course of events, and to alter the tendencies of human affairs; and among all convictions there are none so strong, permanent, and unconquerable as religious convictions. Ideas," says Paxton, "go booming through the world louder than cannon. Thoughts are mightier than armies."

Convictiona-McKay, David O.TPIf I were to couch in definite terms two of the most potent convictions in the hearts of the Latter-day Saints, I would name: First, an abiding assurance that the gospel as taught by the Redeemer when he lived among men and which was later modified, changed, and corrupted by men, has been restored by the Redeemer in its purity and fulness; and second, following naturally the first, a conviction in the heart of every member of this Church that the responsibility rests upon the membership of the Church to preach the restored gospel to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people.—CR, April 1927, p. 102.

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPTHE GOSPEL IS OUR ANCHOR. The gospel is our anchor. We know what it stands for. If we live it, feel it, and speak well of the gospel, of the priesthood, of the authorities in it, speak well even of our enemies, we shall feel happier ourselves, and we shall be preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ. Everybody can do this. It is possible. God has not asked us to do it and then deprived us of the power of performing it.—CR, April 1910, p. 110.

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPPURITY OF CHARACTER. Wordsworth once wrote of Milton, "Thy soul was like a star and dwelt apart." It seems to me, after listening to the brethren testify to the principles of the gospel and the high standard of living among the Latter-day Saints, that this people "dwells apart," that they should be in reality "a peculiar people."

I do not mean that we are not to mingle with our friends who do not believe as we, neither do I believe that we ought to be exclusive; but as the Church of God we must "dwell apart."

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPNow, in what way? James says that "Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world." (James 1:27.) It is in the sense of keeping ourselves unspotted from the world that I take it the Church of God should be distinct, in this sense, that the children of the Church be as a star—pure.—CR, October 1911, pp. 56-57.

Now, what do we mean by the world? It is sometimes used as an indefinite term. I take it that the world refers to the inhabitants who are alienated from the Saints of God. They are aliens to the Church, and it is the spirit of this alienation that we should keep ourselves free from. We are told by Paul not to conform to the fashions of the world. Titus was warned not to partake of those things, the evils of the world, and to "Flee also youthful lusts: but follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart." (II Tim. 2:22.) Purity of heart—Zion is the pure in heart, we have been told, and the strength of this Church lies in the purity of the thoughts and lives of its members, then the testimony of Jesus abides in the soul, and strength comes to each individual to withstand the evils of the world.—CR, October 1911, p. 58.

These evils present themselves insidiously in our daily association. They come in the shape of temptations, as they came to the Savior after his baptism. What were those temptations? When Satan said, "... command that these stones be made bread," (Matt. 4:3) he was appealing to the appetite. He knew that Jesus was hungry, that he was physically weak and thought that by pointing to those little limestones which resemble somewhat a Jewish loaf of bread, he could awaken a desire to eat. Failing in that, he received the divine word, "... Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." (Ibid., 4:4.) Satan then tried him in another way. He dared him—an appeal to his pride, to his vanity, quoted scripture to support his temptation, for remember,

"The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose. An evil soul, producing holy witness, Is like a villain with a smiling cheek, A goodly apple rotten at the heart: O what a goodly outside falsehood hath!"

Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice. Act i, sc. 3, 1. 99.

But the Savior answered him in terms of scripture, "It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." (Matt. 4:7.) What was the third? An appeal to his love of power, domain, wealth, "All these things kingdoms of the world and the glory thereof] will I give thee," said the tempter, "if thou wilt fall down and worship me." (Ibid., 4:9.) "Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." (Ibid., 4:10.) Now, nearly every temptation that comes to you and me comes in one of those forms. Classify them, and you will find that under one of those three nearly every given temptation that makes you and me spotted, ever so little maybe, comes to us as (1) a temptation of the appetite or passion; (2) a yielding to the pride and fashion or vanity of those alienated from the things of God; or (3) a desire for the riches of the world, or power among men.

Now, when do temptations come? Why, they come to us in our social gatherings; they come to us at our weddings; they come to us in our politics; they come to us in our business relations, on the farm, in the mercantile establishment, in the dealings in the affairs of life; we find these insidious influences working; and it is when they manifest themselves to the consciousness of each individual that the defense of truth ought to exert itself. There may never come a great opportunity to defend this Church.

"It may not be on the mountain height Or over the stormy sea; It may not be at the battle's front My Lord will have need of me; But if, by a still, small voice he calls To paths that I do not know, I'll answer, dear Lord, with my hand in thine: I'll go where you want me to go."

Mary Brown

Temptationa-McKay, David O.TPWhen that still, small voice calls to the performance of duty, insignificant though it seem, and its performance unknown to anyone save the individual and God, he who responds gains corresponding strength. Temptation often comes in the same quiet way. Perhaps the yielding to it may not be known by anyone save the individual and his God, but if he does yield to it, he becomes to that extent weakened and spotted with the evil of the world.—CR, October 1911, pp. 58-59.

DEFENSE OF THE CHURCH A DAILY MATTER. I have never met a member of the Church who would not express himself, and, if occasion arose, who did not so express himself as being willing to defend his membership if this Church were attacked. I have seen boys, apparently indifferent to Church interests, on occasions stand out in expressive defiance of the attack upon the Church.

Weaknessesa-McKay, David O.TPWe frequently arrogate to ourselves the thought that if there were any encroachment upon this Church, we should be ready to stand out and defend it en masse. That feeling, that spirit of defense, is always looking for some exceptional manifestation of opposition, something great that is coming. When such comes, we think we shall be ready to defend the Church, when, perhaps this very day, there has been an encroachment upon our souls which has weakened our power to defend the truth. Trees that can stand in the midst of the hurricane often yield to the destroying pests that you can scarcely see with a microscope, and the greatest foes of humanity today are those unseen microscopical microbes that attack the body.

Weaknessesa-McKay, David O.TPIt is the unseen influences at work in society that are undermining the manhood and womanhood of today. It is these unseen influences that come from the world that get us when we are least prepared to defend ourselves. When we do not withstand the encroachments of these evil influences, we weaken the possibility of defending the Church of Jesus Christ. This is an individual work, and what the individuals are, that the aggregate is.—CR, October 1911, p. 57.

Church MembersStrengtha-McKay, David O.TPTHE TESTAN INDIVIDUAL ONE. I was with a party of friends driving through a beautiful valley, not far from Salt Lake City. We passed a beautiful wheat field. It was an impressive sight really, to see that dry farm of wheat, and one of the party expressed his admiration of the luxuriant growth in the field and looked at it in general. There it stood apart from the sagebrush and barren surroundings. But he was not satisfied with looking at it in the aggregate; the conveyance was stopped; and he looked at individual heads of wheat and exclaimed, "Look what large heads." Just one; it was the individual stalk that gave him that impression. That was not enough. He broke the head, shuffled it in his hand, blew the chaff away, and examined each kernel. "The kernels," continued he, "are plump and solid."

Church Membersa-McKay, David O.TPAfter all, the test of that wheat field was the individual kernel of wheat, and so it is in a community, so it is in the Church. The test, after all, of the efficiency of God's people is an individual one.—CR, October 1911, pp. 57-58.

I admire that counselor in the presidency of a stake who, at a political party last fall, when asked to drink the health and success of that party, left his champagne untouched. When the chairman came, he said, "You did not respond to the toast for the success of the party. Aren't you one with us?"

He said, "Yes, I did."

The chairman said, "There is your champagne untouched."

"But," replied the counselor, "you see the glass of water is empty. I do not drink champagne nor intoxicants, but I am with you in wishing the success of the party."

The man grasped his hand and said, "I admire your strength in living up to your principles." They always do.—CR, October 1911, p. 60.

Honestya-McKay, David O.TPTHE POWER OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. Men have called Jesus Christ an enthusiast; they have accused him of being a dreamer, an ascetic, a recluse, and other such epithets have they hurled at him, but they are loath ever to say that Christ, the Redeemer, was dishonest or untrue. His life is a life of honesty, honor, uprightness. He was drawn to men who were honest themselves, whose hearts were pure and guileless.

Witness how quickly he saw purity and guilelessness in Nathanael. "Behold," said he, "an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!" (John 1:47.) As a negative pole is drawn by the positive, the mutual attraction seemed to be here. Their souls attracted each other, as the dewdrop trickling down the flower in the morning, falls into its brother dewdrop on the flower, absorbed in one whole. So the purity of Christ seemed to absorb, attract, draw to the purity of Nathanael.

Honestya-McKay, David O.TPNathanael was honest, upright, pure as a follower of Christ should be. No guileless man can be dishonest. No guileless man can stoop to chicanery and fraud, deceiving a brother.

I say Christ's life and his teachings always bore testimony to the truth. In our day, God has said, through the Prophet Joseph Smith: "God does not walk in crooked paths, neither does he vary to the right hand or to the left. His words are true always, never varying from the straight path, and his words have one eternal round." To the Latter-day Saints, as God's people, he has declared that one of the fundamental principles of their belief is honesty and truthfulness. I rejoice in repeating our thirteenth Article of Faith:

"We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men; indeed, we may say that we follow the admonition of Paul—We believe all things, we hope all things, we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things."

Let your light so shine among men that they seeing your good works may be led to glorify our Father which is in heaven. In probably no more effective way can the truth be witnessed before men than for every Latter-day Saint to maintain and foster the confidence of our outside friends in a faithful member of the Church of Jesus Christ.

Now, in order to do that, we must be honest in all things. If we are contractors and agree to put in such and such material in a building, let us put that material in. If we agree to the stipulations of a contract, to put in one hundred and fifty feet of radiation in the building, let us put in one hundred and fifty feet. Those are details, aren't they, but those are the details by which the men with whom you deal will judge your actions. If you are taking to market potatoes of a particular grade, and you so describe that grade, then be sure that an investigation will prove your statements true. I was grieved when I heard a wholesale dealer say that he has opened sacks of produce brought in from the farm and found foreign material, such as rocks and dirt, placed in them to make up weight. I did not ask him for the religion of those men; I asked for no name; but such things are dishonorable; no true member of the Church of Jesus Christ can stoop to such trickery. Let your light shine before men. In this world today there needs to be an ensign, a people standing out in bold relief as an example to the world in honesty and fair-dealing.—CR, Oct. 1910, pp. 48-49.

COURAGE AND FAITH. "Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord." (Psalm 31:24.)

Couragea-McKay, David O.TPIn this promise are two principles that should be cherished by every truly religious man—faith and courage. What is implied in this text? We know with assurance that the Lord is keeping faith with his people; therefore, let none despair but take courage, and their hope shall not be in vain. Faith in God, trust, confidence in our fellow men, the courage of our convictions will enable us eventually to achieve any righteous cause.

Couragea-McKay, David O.TPCourage is that quality of the mind which meets danger or opposition with calmness and firmness, which enables a man to face difficulties that lie in his pathway to righteous achievement. It is different from fortitude. Fortitude enables us to bear, endure; fortitude is more of a feminine quality. Courage implies facing difficulties and overcoming them.

Couragea-McKay, David O.TPHe who is or should be the guide of our lives was the most courageous of all men. "In Jesus we find bravery at its best; courage at its loftiest; heroism at its climax." True heroism defends the right and faces disaster without cringing. In this regard the Savior was the personification of true courage and heroism. Illustrative of this I need only mention the cleansing of the temple; or his fearlessly speaking the truth when his home folk turned him from Nazareth; or when the five thousand in Capernaum were reduced to only twelve to whom he turned and said, "Will ye also go away?" Never once, however, did the Master despair or turn from his destined course. This is the kind of courage we need in the world today.—CR, April 1936, p. 58.

DAILY CONDUCT. One reason why thinking men and women are rejecting the pseudo-Christian sects of the day is because of the daily acts of so-called Christian believers. It is very easy to go to church, to sing hallelujah, and to cry, "Lord, Lord!" but it is not so easy to do that which the Lord requires.

When churchmen's acts do not conform to their pretensions, non-churchmen accuse them of hypocrisy, one of the gross sins condemned most vehemently by the Savior.

Members of the Church of Jesus Christ should strive very earnestly to reflect in their daily conduct those ideals which on Sunday they profess to cherish.—I, 78:570 (1943).

The boys of our Church who uphold the standards are the ones who are respected and who receive honor from the men of the world as well as from those of the Church.—CR, April 1948, p. 173.

AVOID PROFANITY. Profanity is a vice all too prevalent in America, and though we say it with embarrassment, all too frequently used in the Church.—CR, October 1948, p. 120.

UNITY AND CONCORD. "Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are.

"Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word;

"That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe. ..." (John 17:11, 20-21.)

As nearly all of you readily recognize, I have quoted from one of the most sublime prayers over offered among men. It is an intercessory prayer. The occasion makes the things prayed for most significant. In it Jesus makes unity preeminent among his followers.

Unity and its synonyms, harmony, good will, peace, concord, mutual understanding, express a condition for which the human heart constantly yearns. Its opposites are discord, contention, strife, confusion.—CR, October 1939, pp. 101-102.

"LET US RESOLVE. ..." As we depart now, let us make real the good feelings that have been aroused in our souls. Let us not permit to evaporate from our minds and feelings the good resolutions we have formed. First, let us resolve that from now on we are going to be men of higher and more sterling character, more conscious of our own weaknesses, more kind and charitable toward others' feelings.

Let us resolve that we shall practise more self-control in our homes, control our tempers and our tongues, and control our feelings, that they may not wander beyond the bounds of right and purity, more seeking the presence of God, realizing how dependent we are upon him for success in the positions we hold in the Church.

As we leave this conference, let us resolve to be not only more loyal to our quorums but also more devoted to the duties assigned us, one of which is attendance at our quorum meetings, in order to strengthen that group and increase the power of fellowship and brotherhood, more loyal to our country. This is an election year. Upon you devolves the responsibility of choosing our servants in government, for whoever is elected to preside over this country as President, as Senators, members of the House of Representatives are your servants, not your rulers. And do not be slothful on the day of election but come out and exercise your right and privilege as a citizen of this great republic. What doth it profit though a man say he hath faith and not works? Here we should prove ourselves loyal citizens.

As we depart, let us be more determined to make beautiful homes, to be kinder husbands, more thoughtful wives, more exemplary parents to our children, determined that in our homes we are going to have just a little taste of heaven here on this earth.

With these resolves in mind, with all my heart I say, fellow workers, God bless you. Cherish in your hearts the testimony of truth, make it as solid and as firm and unwavering as the fixed stars in the heavens. May there come into everyone's heart and in all our homes the true spirit of Christ our Redeemer, whose reality, whose inspiring guidance I know to be real.

God bless you, keep you, and magnify you in the eyes of your associates! May he make more powerful than ever before in the history of this Church the influence of this divine organization, that its potency may be felt throughout the world, and men's hearts turned to serve him as they have never before been influenced, that we may avert the terrible threatening war, and peace be established among the nations of the world, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ.—CR, April 1952, pp. 128-129.
