David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

BOOK III

PRIESTHOOD AND CHURCH PRACTICES

"As long as members of the priesthood merit the guidance of Christ by honest and conscientious dealing with their fellow men, by resisting evil in any of its forms, by the faithful performance of duty, there is no opposing power in this world which can stay the progress of the Church of Jesus Christ."

—DAVID O. MCKAY

The Improvement Era Volume 48:696.

CHAPTER 12

PRIESTHOOD AND ITS WORK

PRIESTHOOD

RESTORATION OF THE PRIESTHOOD. May 15 marks the anniversary of the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood. On that day in the year 1829, John the Baptist came to earth as a heavenly messenger and conferred this authority upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, saying:

"Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness." (D. & C. 13.)

John, the son of Zacharias, was probably the last among the Jews to hold the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, which continued among the children of Israel from the time that Moses and the Higher Priesthood were taken from their midst until the coming of Christ in the Meridian of Time. From the standpoint of direct authority, therefore, it is highly fitting that he should be the messenger to restore this authority in this dispensation. He held it not only by right of lineage but also by special ordination when he was eight days old.

a-McKay, David O.PriesthoodTPPRIESTHOOD DISTINGUISHES THE CHURCH. This question of divine authority is one of the important factors which distinguish the Church of Jesus Christ from the Protestant creeds of Christendom. In plain, unmistakable terms the Church declares that "a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands, by those who are in authority to preach the gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof." (Articles of Faith, No. 5.) In this declaration the Church but reiterates the words of one who bore Christ's authority in the Meridian of Time, and who, in writing upon this very question, said, "And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." (Heb. 5:4.)

a-McKay, David O.PriesthoodTPHerein lies one secret of the strength of this great latterday work. Its origin consists not in the whims, the desires, or the aspirations of men, but in the order and the will of Christ himself, the author of our eternal salvation. If one man could assume the right to speak in the name of the Lord, other men would have the same privilege. These many men, all presuming to say, "Thus saith the Lord," yet not seeing "eye to eye" on important elements of God's kingdom, the inevitable result would be confusion, and sincere men and women would be driven from, not attracted to Christ's Church, yet eventually would be made to suffer for not having obeyed the principles of life and salvation.

a-McKay, David O.PriesthoodTPYet the real cause of their failure to accept these eternal principles would be the fact that unauthorized men arrogated to themselves the right to officiate in things pertaining to God. Herein lies the explanation of the discordant condition existing among jarring creeds in the so-called Christian world today. Men who have no right so to do are officiating in the name of Christ. The result, of course, is confusion. Whatever else may be said of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the strength of his position in regard to divine authority must be recognized.

Priesthood, History ofa-McKay, David O.TPTHE MANNER OF THE RESTORATION. The manner of restoring the priesthood in 1829 is strikingly in keeping with Christ's recognition of authority in the early Church. When, for example, the stricken Paul cried, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" the Savior, though he could easily have told him what to do, recognized the authority he had given to man by saying, "Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do." (See Acts 9:6.) In the city of Damascus was one Ananias, who had been commissioned to act in the name of Christ, and from him was Paul directed to receive instruction and guidance. So it was when Christ appeared to the Prophet Joseph. He did not confer authority direct but recognized John the Baptist, by whose authority Jesus himself had been baptized, and in the case of the Melchizedek Priesthood, Peter, James, and John, unto whom he had given authority when he established his Church at Jerusalem.

Priesthood Authoritya-McKay, David O.TPThus men were made priests by him who alone has the right to say who shall officiate in his name. Literally, a priest is a mediator between God and man, and priesthood is power and authority to administer in the name of the Lord. There is no more justification in a man's arrogating to himself this authority than in his presuming to take upon himself the right to represent, at a foreign court, the British government. Every document such a one would sign in the name of His Majesty the King, Parliament would repudiate as a forgery and would take steps immediately to have the usurper properly punished. Yet in the matters pertaining to the eternal life and happiness of the human family, men usurp the office of priest and mislead with impunity millions of innocent people.

Priesthood, Aaronica-McKay, David O.TPIf the world could but realize the full significance of the angel John's coming again to earth, May 15, 1829, multitudes who are praying for the kingdom of God to be established among men would gratefully join in the commemoration of that heavenly manifestation. Their souls would respond to the ecstatic joy that Oliver Cowdery expresses in his description of the event, as follows:

Priesthood, Aaronica-McKay, David O.TP"On a sudden, as from the midst of eternity, the voice of the Redeemer spake peace to us, while the veil was parted, and the angel of God came clothed with glory, and delivered the anxiously looked-for message, and the keys of the gospel of repentance. What joy! what wonder! what amazement! While the world was racked and distracted—while millions were groping as the blind for the wall, and while all men were resting upon uncertainty, as a general mass, our eyes beheld, our ears heard, as in the 'blaze of day'; yes, more—above the glitter of the May sunbeam, which then shed its brilliancy over the face of nature! Then his voice, though mild, pierced to the center, and his words, 'I am thy fellow servant,' dispelled all fear. We listened, we gazed, we admired! 'Twas the voice of an angel from glory, 'twas a message from the Most High! And as we heard we rejoiced, while his love enkindled upon our souls, and we were wrapped in the vision of the Almighty! Where was room for doubt? Nowhere; the uncertainty had fled, doubt had sunk no more to rise, while fiction and deception had fled forever!" (D.H.C. 1:43)—MS, 85:312-314 (1923).

Priesthood Powera-McKay, David O.TPTHE SOURCE OF PRIESTHOOD POWER. Jesus the Christ is the source of the power of the priesthood. As long as members of the priesthood merit the guidance of Christ by honest and conscientious dealing with their fellow men, by resisting evil in any of its forms, by the faithful performance of duty, there is no opposing power in this world which can stay the progress of the Church of Jesus Christ.—IE, 48:696 (1945).

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPNo man can face an audience of the priesthood of God without a sense of humility and a prayer in his heart for guidance from our Heavenly Father.—CR, April 1948, p. 170.

WHAT PRIESTHOOD IS

Priesthood Powera-McKay, David O.TPPriesthood is power and authority inherent in the Godhead. In man it is always delegated authority—it cannot be assumed with efficacy.

PURPOSES OF PRIESTHOOD

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPPRIESTHOOD MEANS SERVICE. This is true even in its divine source; as we may infer from the sublime declaration of the Lord himself: "This is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) Emanating from Deity is the service that leads to the redemption of God's children.

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPWhenever the priesthood is delegated to man, it is conferred upon him not as a personal distinction, although it becomes such as he honors it, but as authority to represent Deity and an obligation to assist the Lord in bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

Priesthood Quorumsa-McKay, David O.TPIf priesthood meant only personal honor, blessing, or individual elevation, there would be no need of groups or quorums. The very existence of such groups established by divine authorization proclaims our dependence upon one another, the indispensable need of mutual help and assistance. We are, by divine right, social beings.—DNCS, April 20, 1935, p. 3.

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPOur lives are wrapped up with the lives of others. We are happiest as we contribute to the lives of others. I say that because the priesthood you hold means that you are to serve others. You represent God in the field to which you are assigned.—CR, Sept.-Oct. 1950, p. 112.

A FUNDAMENTAL PROGRAM FOR THE PRIESTHOOD. As the honest people of the world wonder in vain and cry out in uncertainty, "What shall we do?" members of the Church of Jesus Christ who feel secure in the knowledge of the restored gospel should say, "Men and brethren, what can we do?"

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPSome specific things which the priesthood and their families can and should do are these:

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPFirst—we can set an example of uprightness; be honest in all our dealings; avoid vulgarity and profanity; demonstrate to our neighbors and to all whom we meet that we live clean, honorable lives.

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TP"Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 5:16.)

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPSecond—let us strive for peace and harmony in the home. If we cannot keep quarreling, bickering, and selfishness out of our home, how can we even hope to banish these evils from society?

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPA true Mormon home is one in which if Christ should chance to enter, he would be pleased to linger and to rest.

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPThird—having at least striven for a good character, having a home environment that is creditable, we may then consistently discharge our duty as authorized representatives of the Lord Jesus Christ to declare to the world that the conditions that will bring peace and comfort to the individual, to the family, and to the nation, are found in the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. These can be named and understood and as easily practised with resultant contentment and peace as are the evils and vices that bring tribulation.

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPSummarized, these fundamentals are: An acceptance of Christ as Savior and Redeemer; a moving, soul-consciousness of the existence of God, and that he is our Father in heaven; a daily life consistent with such a knowledge; a love for one's fellow men.

In other words, as the Savior summarized the law and the prophets:

"And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and ... thy neighbour as thyself." (Mark 12:30-31.)—CR, October 1947, pp. 119-120.

There is a responsibility resting upon each for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, and that work is to continue until we all come in the unity of the faith unto the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, even unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.

I am inclined to think, however, that much of this work, both of quorums and auxiliary organizations, is confined largely among the better and more earnest members of the Church.

We are prone to do our duty, as many men and women do their work, along the lines of least resistance. Our influence is felt most strongly among those who need it least. I may be overstating this. If I am, I am doing so, simply to make a point; and yet my observation leads me to believe that what I say is very nearly a fact. Quorum officers, for example, are wielding their influence, and the need of their quorums is felt among the most active members of the quorum. Officers of the auxiliary associations are centering their efforts individually, and as organizations, upon those men and women, boys and girls, who attend most earnestly and regularly to their religious duties; and little effort is given to the indifferent, and the least attention, to those not of us.

I was led to think most earnestly upon this matter when I heard only a few days ago of a young man not a member of the Church who has been in Utah for nearly twenty years, and who had just met a young high councilman of my acquaintance. Although he was with the high councilman only a short time, he said he had learned more about the Mormon religion than he had heard during his whole former stay in Utah.

"Why is it," he asked, "that we do not hear more of this from you men with whom we associate in daily vocation?"

"Well," said the high councilman, "our meetinghouses are open, always free; we invite everybody to come to our meetings; and why have you not availed yourself of this opportunity?"

Said he, "I have attended my own church and consequently did not know you men believed in the doctrines you have explained to me."

The high councilman who spoke to that nonmember is a natural missionary. He does not bore his hearers with his religion; but he proposes it, invites attention to it, and never does he fail to take advantage of the opportunity to tell his companions what the Church offers to humanity, by way of temporal salvation here, and eternal salvation as well.

I was delighted, later, to learn that this nonmember had asked for several more interviews, with a view to joining the Church.

How many such men might be reached, if we, as elders, on whom responsibility to preach the truth rests, would but sense that responsibility? It is ours to teach the truth in plainness, in season and out of season, bearing testimony, not only by words but by our actions.

I would ask, too, if we reach, as well, another set of men and women who come halfway between the regular meeting goers, who are honest and faithful in the Church, and the nonmember. I refer now to that indifferent boy and girl in the Church—and there are all too many of them today, towards whom no gentle hand is outstretched to lead them into ways more fruitful to happiness than the paths in which they now tread. I know of no class of workers in the Church who reach these boys and girls so effectively and so directly as the men and boys to whom has been assigned the duty of ward teacher.

We urge in auxiliary associations that the teachers reach out for the indifferent boy and the indifferent girl. The Mutual Improvement workers are striving to enroll the unenrolled, likewise are the Sunday School, Primary, and religion class workers; but there is not much individual work being done, because it is natural when we see a boy indifferent, one who will answer our inquiry with indifference, to let him alone and say, "Well, you go your own way, if you will not listen to me."

One day I entered a wagon shop and said to a brother who had just taken a cigar out of his mouth,

"I have noticed, lately, that you are getting very fond of cigars."

"Yes, sir," said he, "and I pay for them with my own money."

He became quite haughty and rather resented my suggestion. We frequently will meet that attitude, and we may think it seems all right to say, "You go your way, and I will go mine," but is it? A Mutual Improvement worker may speak to an indifferent girl about her weakness, and the young girl will toss her head and walk away rather resentfully to think the Mutual workers should approach her in any such way whatever. But the very fact that interest was taken, the fact that the attention of the indifferent was called to her weakness will leave seed which in the future will bear good fruit. It is better for her to feel that you are interested than to have her think you have no interest in her.

I shall never forget an answer which a man made at the organization of one of our wards. A branch had been made a ward; the new bishopric had announced in the afternoon meeting that following the sacrament service a special meeting would be called for the purpose of considering ways and means of erecting a house of worship. The meeting was held; committees were appointed; and the next morning the new bishop, meeting a man who had been absent from the business meeting, greeted him and said:

"We held a meeting yesterday, appointed committees with a view of erecting a meetinghouse. I am sorry you weren't there; we missed you."

The man turned to the bishop and said: "That is the first time I have been missed in fifteen years."

He became a member of the building committee and was one of the best workers.

It is not a good thing to let these people feel that they are not missed. They are missed; too many of them, today, are missed from our places of meeting and are found in organizations the influence of which is not conducive to the instilling of the testimony of the truths of the everlasting gospel.

Never before in the history of the Church were there so many insidious influences at work among our people as today. Never before have dangers been so threatening to our youth. I am not a pessimist, neither am I one of those who say our young people are worse now than they used to be; I don't believe they are. I have as much confidence in our boys and girls today as you fathers and mothers had in your sons twenty years ago. Most of the boys of today are just as earnest, they think just as much of their religion in general, and just as much of the truth, as boys did twenty years ago. But there are conditions that are worse than they were twenty years ago. There are more threatening influences enticing our boys and girls from paths of duty, than there were twenty years ago; all of which is evident, without further explanation. It is true some of the boys think that the standard of morality has changed. A young man of seventeen said the other day to his mother who had cautioned him about his company:

"Well, Mother, the standards of morals have changed; they are different from what they were ten years ago."

Standards, Churcha-McKay, David O.TPThe standard of morals of the Latter-day Saint boy and girl will never change, must never change. Standards of the outside may change, may be lowered, and that influence may penetrate our social organizations, but our standards must be maintained; our boys and girls should be made acquainted with our standards. On whom rests this responsibility, my brethren and sisters? Upon us all.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPLet each one constitute himself, today, a missionary, and sometime during the next week reach out that influence to some boy who is indifferent: go beyond that, say one good word by way of testimony to some man, some nonmember who does not know the truth, who does not know this people, someone who, perchance, has been residing here for many years; and good fruit will result from it.

Applications are made for baptism by those who are already residing here, and I think they are better in many ways than applications of those made ten thousand miles away, to reach whom we spend hundreds and thousands of dollars annually.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPThe gospel is to be preached to all the world as a witness. Let us not forget our own, those who are in our midst. Let us preach, by voice, as well as by act and example, and if we can reach them all, well and good; and if we are not permitted to do it, we can at least approach the purpose by our acts. The time has come when the Latter-day Saints must cling to the Church organization as the best and safest organization in all the world. No other group of men, no other organizations, in the world, can offer you the safety, the happiness, and security that are offered to you in your quorums and auxiliary associations. Let us stand united, remembering that God has placed his organizations here for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and that ministry includes everybody.

You ward teachers should not pass a house simply because therein is a nonmember of the Church. You can, at least, ask permission to visit him or leave a tract there. You are not teaching and should not teach or visit only to make a hundred percent report to your bishop, but you should teach with a view to reaching the souls of men, our boys and girls, as well as those who are older, and nonmembers.

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPLove the work, do your best, then leave the conversion to the workings of the Spirit of the Lord; and know this, that when you have done your duty, the peace and satisfaction that come will more than compensate for any rebuff, resentment, or opposition, that might be manifest. You young teachers may come home and feel that your labor has been in vain. A young teacher said not long ago, "Do we need to go back to the house where the man uses tobacco and says he is going to continue to use it, and his wife favors his using it?" Yes; go back again and again, you do your duty, and leave the rest to the Lord.

In conclusion, brethren and sisters, may I quote these lines which seem to be pertinent:

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TP"Who does his task from day to day And meets whatever comes his way, Believing God has willed it so, Has found true greatness here below; Who guards his post no matter where, Believing God must need him there, Although but lowly toil it be Has risen to nobility. For great and low there's but one test. 'Tis that each one shall do his best, Who works with all the strength he can, Shall never die in debt to man."

—IE, 23:18-22 (1919).

Teacher, Aaronic Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPIt is said in Ephesians that Christ gave some apostles and some prophets, some evangelists and some pastors and teachers "For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ." (Eph. 4:12.) The teachers in the Church, holding the Holy Priesthood, have devolving upon them the great responsibility of perfecting the Saints, and of edifying the body of Christ; therefore, I think it is not too much to say that it is their duty, their duty, to carry into every home a divine spirit. No greater responsibility can rest upon any man than to be a teacher of God's children.

When Paul said good-bye to the churches in Asia, knowing that he would never again come back to those branches among which he had labored so incessantly and diligently for several years, he called the elders of Ephesus to him one day, over to Miletus. He did not go over to the church where he had recently spent nearly three years because he wanted to hasten to Jerusalem; but he could not pass them without saying good-bye to them. He sent word to them to meet him at the town of Miletus, where he gave them instructions. Among other things he said: "Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood.

"For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock." (Acts 20:28-29.) The admonition to these men—and among them were bishops, for the word that is interpreted there "over-seers" is used in another place as bishops—was to take heed unto themselves first and then to the people over whom they presided. Associated with those bishops were elders, just as we have them in the Church.

That same admonition is applicable to the elders today, who are presiding over the Church as ward teachers. Some of them feel that their calling is of little importance, that there is not much dignity attached to it, when the fact is, that there is no more important work in the Church. We cannot say of any one calling in the Church, that it is of more importance than another because all are devoted to the development, to the instruction, to the salvation of God's children. So it is with the calling of teacher; but if there be any preference given, because of superior advantages in winning these people to salvation, it will go to those men holding the priesthood of God, who come in direct contact with the individual members of the Church. The duty, however, of each man who has accepted this calling is to first take heed unto himself.—CR, October 1916, pp. 57-58.

PEACETHE MESSAGE. The future and permanency of the work is assured so long as the priesthood will keep in mind the great mission of the Church. It is truly a messenger of peace. When Christ came to the earth, his advent was heralded by an angelic chorus singing: "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men." (Luke 2:14.) This message has been repeated so often it seems trite; and, yet, if peace and brotherhood could even be approximated, it would prove the greatest boon that could come to humanity. —CR, October 1938, p. 133.

Priesthood Quorumsa-McKay, David O.TPTHE DUTY TO BUILD QUORUMS. Members in the Aaronic Priesthood, and members of the quorums in the Melchizedek Priesthood, we have a duty to build up our quorums; let us not tear them down by being absent from priesthood meeting, or by nonpreparation, or by negligence of duty. Let us feel, every one of us, that it is our duty to do something to build up the Church, as the Church's duty is to build on truth and redeem mankind from sin. Men of the priesthood, let us be one in the upbuilding; let us belong to the class of benefactors; and let no man, from the high priest to the deacon, in this great priesthood movement fall into the class of malefactors or murmurers.—CR, April 1909, p. 68.

Priesthood Quorumsa-McKay, David O.TPThe body of the Church is composed of many members, yet all one body; and it is healthy, vigorous, strong, and influential when all the members of that body are working harmoniously together. You deacons, think of your quorum; you are members of the body. If you injure your finger, the whole body suffers; and if a little deacons' quorum, away off in some remote ward, is inactive, to that extent the body of this Church is suffering. You who preside over teachers' quorums, see that the body is in healthy condition. You elders throughout the Church, and you presidents of elders' quorums, how is the spirituality of your quorum?

You have the outward form; you have your meetings and your courses of study; but are the members of the body all in good condition? If so, happy are you, and you are promoting the welfare of the Church. You seventies, you are called upon now to make a special effort each Sunday morning to put that body of men in proper condition. If any members of these quorums be not in condition for service, the body will suffer to that extent. We want all the members of the Church to be in true working order. If we are true within, we shall grow, and the whole Church then is strong. What matters it though the world turn against us? If we are one, if we are pure, if we are sincere, God is our stay and our inspirer.—CR, October 1907, p. 64.

THE QUORUM AND THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT. In social environment may be included all our Church influences. As I look at the organization given through the Prophet Joseph Smith to the world in this dispensation, as I occasionally catch a glimpse of the possibilities of the quorums and organizations in this Church, I feel to exclaim, O Lord, my God, how marvelous are thy works! Great is thy wisdom, marvelous are thy ways, and the extent of thy doings none can find out. (See D. & C. 76:2.)

Callingsa-McKay, David O.TPThe organization of the Church is so perfect that every man, woman, and child within the Church can find something to do; and therein depends the advancement of the person's spiritual welfare. He has a chance to work in the Church of Jesus Christ, no matter how young a boy or how old a man. Now, think what that means.

Priesthood Quorumsa-McKay, David O.TPYou go over, in your minds, the organizations as revealed to us in this dispensation. Go first from the First Presidency, down through the Twelve, the high priests, the seventy, elders, priests, teachers, and deacons, all that line of priesthood! See that mighty army of men, ready to do—what? Called upon to do what? To work for the Lord.

We have heard that not one of those men has been called to the position to honor him, but he has been called into the service of the Lord. What does it mean? It means work; work means knowledge; knowledge means eternal life. Shall we not, as parents, put our boys and girls into that environment? If we do not, are we not unmindful of the call of Christ to suffer the children to come back to him? Are we negligent, as parents, and fail to see that our daughters get to their auxiliary meetings? Think of it. The note has been sounded; are we going to move?—CR, October 1909, pp. 91-92.

Church Growtha-McKay, David O.TPMOMENTUM AND PROGRESS. When I see the Tabernacle crowded to capacity with our brethren, I have a re-affirmation of the strength of the priesthood. It is a fact, as you know, that if you have a moving body, and you increase the speed, the greater is the momentum. Add weight to that body and increase speed, and the momentum is still greater. That is what is occurring in this Church, a great body of priesthood, moving with an acceleration never before known to the Church. There is nothing that can stop the progress of truth, excepting only our weaknesses or failure to do our duty.

What I have said about the momentum of the body of priesthood is applicable to our great missionary force. Never before have we had so many representatives in the field preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ, and never before in the history of the world was that message more needed.—CR, April 1950, pp. 173-174.

FELLOWSHIP IN THE PRIESTHOOD. One of the most pleasing experiences of this great conference was meeting a bishop who came to the stand and said, "I am here with some of my deacons, whom I should like to have the privilege of meeting you." A true leader accompanying his quorum boys to conference!

Fellowship in the priesthood! If we can get the bishops to fellowship the priests in every ward, and in some way, at opportunities favorable, meet those young men and young women of corresponding age in some social or groups or meetings and win their admiration and confidence, we can avoid some unpleasant things which are occurring in our towns. For those priests and girls determine largely the moral atmosphere of your town. You bishops are the leaders. Your counselors can aid you in associating with the teachers and the deacons.

This companionship applies also to elders.

There are many ways in which we can get these indifferent elders together without inviting them to do things which are difficult. Some of them do not like to pray. They hesitate about standing in public to preach, and some of them would rather go fishing or play golf on Sunday than attend meeting. But, not one of those indifferent elders will refuse an invitation, for example, to come to a funeral of one of the townsfolk, or one of their members, or of one of their members' wives, and if you will come as a quorum and sit together as a quorum, there is one means of fellowship. Our high priests are doing it more than seventies or elders.

I have attended a number of funerals where I have seen reserved seats for high priests, in paying respect to a departed brother. There is group fellowship.

Again, these indifferent men will come to your quorum socials. Make those socials of a high order, and thus you will come in personal contact with them.

We must be mutually helpful. This world would not exist if it were not for the mutual aid we give one another from the time we are born until we are laid away.—CR, October 1951, p. 179.

Indifference manifest in the world generally towards the Church should tend only to spur men of the priesthood and teachers in the auxiliaries in the Church of Jesus Christ to more earnest and diligent activity.—IE, 49:740 (1946).
