David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 13

THE QUORUMS OF THE PRIESTHOOD

THE QUORUMS OF THE MELCHIZEDEK PRIESTHOOD

OBLIGATIONS OF THE INDIVIDUAL. Priesthood is authority to represent God. A man who is given the priesthood is an authorized representative of the Lord in any particular field to which the individual is assigned. It is the duty of a representative of any individual group or organization to strive to represent that individual group or organization in honor. The best way to be worthy representatives is so to live that each may be susceptible to the promptings of the Lord whom he represents. Now think what that means as to a virtuous life.

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TP"... my Spirit shall not always strive with man," (D. & C. 1:33) says the Lord. Everyone, then, who holds this priesthood should live such a life as will entitle him to the inspiration of the Lord. And let me say in this regard that communion with the Holy Spirit is just as real as your connection through the radio with the unheard voices and music that fill the air. The vibrations are there.

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPIt is so with God's Spirit. He is ever ready to guide and instruct those who tune in by upright living and who sincerely seek him. I repeat, it is the duty of every man authorized to represent him so to live as to be responsive to that Spirit.

Priesthood Quorumsa-McKay, David O.TPTHE NECESSITY FOR QUORUM ORGANIZATION. Now, I ask you, why did not the Lord leave this great endowment and blessing just as it is? One reason is that he realized that these men need companionship, fellowship, the strength of the group; and so he organized quorums and designated the number in each from the deacon to the seventy.

These groups meet together, first, to instruct and to edify, to improve in knowledge generally, and particularly to instruct in moral and religious knowledge, in faith, in holiness, but also to obtain mutual strength, to act uprightly. These groups supply a need that is felt among mankind generally. In the world that need is satisfied by secret orders. These we do not need. In their place, we have priesthood quorums which will supply every yearning for fellowship, fraternity, and service if men will but do their duty.

THE NATURE OF THE QUORUMINDEPENDENT IN ITS SPHERE. These quorums are independent, each one having its assigned sphere. It is the duty of the presidency of each quorum to sit in council and to teach the members their duty. It is their duty to disfellowship, even to withdraw the hand of fellowship from those who may be unworthy of that fellowship. They may teach one another and see that each member does his duty, for example, in the payment of fast offerings and the payment of tithing: The amount is not the presidency's interest but that each one should pay his tithing, that each one is honest in his dealings, that each one is performing his duty in ecclesiastical assignments. ... Quorums, I repeat, are independent in their sphere, but they are in the Church for service, and it is to that service and the relationship of that service to the ward welfare that I wish now to call your attention.

THE MELCHIZEDEK QUORUM AND THE WARD WELFARE COMMITTEE. The relation of these quorums to the welfare work can best be understood if we have in mind the ward welfare committee. On that committee, as you know, there are eight members, three of whom represent Melchizedek Priesthood quorums. The president of the high priests' quorum, who is also chairman of the personal welfare committee, if he is a member of the ward, is, upon the invitation of the bishop, a member of that ward welfare committee. However, usually, in each ward, there is only a group of high priests. In such cases, not the president of the quorum, but the chairman of that group is, upon the invitation of the bishop, a member of the ward welfare committee. That is true, also, in regard to the seventies and also the elders. If there be an elders' quorum in a ward, the president is a member of the personal welfare committee, and as such, a member of the ward welfare committee.

Now the question is, what right has the bishop to direct these men, who, as quorum officers, are independent, so to speak, in their sphere? The bishop would not presume to preside in any of these quorums, but these quorums are subject to the direction of the bishopric in all welfare work. There are needs of the quorum, we will say. Some members are in financial distress, and they need help. True, it is the duty of the quorum to assist these members; not only the duty, it should be a privilege and pleasure. But that help should not be rendered to quorum members without reporting to the ward welfare committee. You can see at once how by so reporting, duplication of assistance will be avoided.

It is necessary for this ward welfare committee to meet every week to consider reports from the presidency of the Relief Society, from the members of the bishopric itself, from each quorum; for example, the high priest may say: "We have five who are in need of help"; the seventy reporting: "We have a brother whose house has burned down; we desire to rebuild it for him"; the elder may add, "We have an elder who was suddenly taken ill right in the midst of the harvesting of beets; we are going out as a group to help him." That is part of welfare work. All in the ward know what is going on, and the bishop will make such assignments to the elder, to the seventy, to the high priest, or to the deacon, as may be needed to carry on this work within the ward.

Furthermore, the bishop has the right to ask the elders' quorum, for example, "Will you put forth a special effort to increase the payment of fast offerings this month?" Or, "We should like each quorum to put forth special effort, that members of each quorum will have one hundred percent in tithing, in fast offerings, in keeping the Word of Wisdom." Such requests, if and when made, do not interfere in any way with the independence of the quorum, but all are working together in harmony; no group saying, "We have no need of thee; we are going off alone," but all working as the head, the hand, the feet, every organ of the body working in its position, and thus producing life and health and vigor.—DNCS, December 7, 1946, pp. 1, 8.

STRENGTH LIES IN THE AUTHORITY OF EACH INDIVIDUAL. The strength of Zion rests in the authority of each individual who holds the priesthood. Each man is responsible for that authority he holds, responsible to magnify it.

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPYou who hold the priesthood and sense that divine authority and are partakers of the divine authority—if you live true to it and magnify that priesthood—I say to you that the gates of hell cannot prevail against you.

No power of communism or atheism can move you from that testimony if you are a partaker of that divine nature.—DNCS, August 13, 1952.

PROJECTS FOR THE CHURCH SERVICE COMMITTEE OF EACH QUORUM. For years we have said: Get your inactive member, who will not come to your meetings, but who drives an automobile, to take his auto and get that crippled brother who is now well enough to come to meeting but not able to walk nor to pay his own transportation. Say, "Jim, take your auto and fetch William next Sunday. Will you do it?" I do not know of a man, even if he is not in the Church, to say nothing of one holding the priesthood, who would not respond to such a request. And he will stay at the meeting to help William home.—DNCS, April 20, 1935, p. 7.

THE ELDERS' QUORUMS: VISITING QUORUM MEMBERS. A number of years ago in one of the elders' quorums in this city, three young men were called to preside. At their first meeting there were only six men present in the elders' quorum. "Well," they said, "this will not do; let us institute systematic visiting." And so they did.

Those men, as presidents, carrying the responsibility, went out to visit the elders of that quorum. They went into one house and asked the man to take up elders' work, but he said, "No, I will not go to elders' meeting." "May we have a meeting here tonight?" he was asked.

"Yes."

They sang, prayed, spent an hour or so with the man and his wife. At the conclusion of it, the man promised that he would attend elders' meeting. The wife, who was unconverted, and who knew little or nothing of the workings of the Church, who lacked a knowledge of it, because of inactivity, began to cry because her husband's going to meeting would take him away from home. "A mission will be next," she said.

However, that young man promised to go to meeting on this condition: that he would not be asked to take part. "All right," said the brethren. But it was not long before he was willing to take part on the program. They assigned him a subject, and the brother who told me of this incident said it was painful to see what that poor man suffered the first time he stood up before his brethren. Those in the meeting deeply sympathized with the man who was making his first effort in public.

At the conclusion of it the brother said, "You did well."

"No," said the man, "I want another chance; I believe I can do better." He did do better, and he became a strong power in influencing other elders to come out to their meetings.

They went into another home and met a similar spirit of indifference. They asked permission to pray and were told, "No."

They talked to the man a little while, and finally he said, "Well, you may kneel down and pray, if you want to."

"Will you kneel with us?"

"No."

After a little kind persuasion, he knelt down. At the conclusion of the meeting in that home, this second elder, following the brethren to the door, broke down and cried, confessed that he had been away from the influence of the Church, had been in another environment, and said, "Keep with me, work with me, and help me to get back into Church environment."

The president of that elders' quorum is now sitting on this stand, a member of the Presiding Bishopric. He and his fellow workers increased the attendance of the quorum from six to over one hundred during that year.

There is a practical example of doing. What was accomplished in this elders' quorum in this city can be done throughout the entire Church.—CR, October 1909, p. 93.

QUORUM INACTIVITY. I remember visiting the sugar factory in Sugar City, Idaho. Brother Mark Austin took me through it when every wheel was still; the engine was cold; the chimneys stood like specters; the wheels were unoiled; the sparrows were building their nests in wheels that a few months before had hummed with industry. Men had to be hired to keep the dust off the machinery, to make repairs, to keep the factory from going into decay.

I thought, that is always the result of inactivity. No sugar was manufactured in that inactivity. There were no laborers employed, except those hired to keep the factory from going into decay. But when the power was turned on, then raw products were changed to useful articles, which were carried into the homes, throughout the world.

Sometimes part of the machinery is shut up, closed down, and only one part—that of refining—used. I sometimes think that in our Church we are using just part of the machinery that God has placed in our hands. So many of these quorums are lying in inactivity; dust is accumulating. Shall we not work and bring them into operation? As presidents of quorums, let us meet in council; let us think over what men in our quorums are neglecting their duty.—CR, October 1909, pp. 92-93.

THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF PRIESTHOOD OFFICE INCLUDING QUORUM PRESIDENTS

OFFICIAL CAPACITY CARRIES OFFICIAL DUTIES. When a citizen of the United States is called to represent his government in a foreign nation either as consul, minister, or ambassador, he goes to his post not only cognizant of his responsibility as a representative of a whole nation, but also aware of certain duties incumbent upon him as they pertain to the office to which he has been appointed.

So it is with any man called to a position in the Church of Jesus Christ. He should be cognizant of the power that goes with a representative of one so chosen, but he also should see clearly what duties he has to perform in order to discharge the trust imposed upon him when he received his call to serve.

THE STAKE PRESIDENCY. The stake presidency, for example, are set apart to perform certain specific duties. The very fact that they are so chosen implies service to the group over which they are called to preside, and the activities of whose members they have the responsibility of directing.

THE BISHOP MUST KNOW THE DUTIES OF HIS OFFICE. So it is with the office of bishop. One of the first desires, indeed the most paramount desire of one chosen to this office, is to know what the duties of the office are, and it is the bounden duty of each so to inform himself that he may discharge those duties intelligently and effectively.

PRESIDENCY IN THE HIGH PRIESTS' QUORUM. This responsibility of service is equally great and important in the calling of one to preside over the high priests' quorum. His duties also are specific and his responsibilities no less important. Indeed, this thought of service applies to every man who is ordained to the High Priesthood, and everyone so ordained has as his first and foremost obligation the duty of informing himself upon the requirements of his office.

Seventy, First Quorum ofa-McKay, David O.TPTHE OFFICE OF SEVENTY AND THE ELEMENT OF SERVICE. Perhaps the office of seventy more clearly than any other in the Church emphasizes the element of service associated with the priesthood. When a man is ordained to the office of a seventy, he enters the field of missionary service, which is his special calling—a witness to the world of the divinity of Jesus Christ and of the restoration of the gospel in this age. Every seventy should remember that an exemplary life is the most impressive sermon that he can preach. His actions, his words, his very thoughts are either leading men to consider favorably his message or driving them away from it.—DNCS, April 20, 1935, pp. 3 and 7.

THE SPECIAL DUTY OF PRESIDENTS. The quorum is an essential part of the Lord's plan for rendering mutual aid. No other organization in the world is so effectively organized into working groups as the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. What a mighty force for good these quorums would be if the spiritual welfare of each member and his obligation to the Church were considered the special duty of each presiding officer! That is a possibility of achievement.—CR, October 1951, p. 9.

Priesthood, Aaronica-McKay, David O.TPTHE QUORUMS OF THE AARONIC PRIESTHOOD. I wonder how many parents have stopped to realize how potent these quorums are in the lives of boys! In the first place, quorum membership awakens in the boy the pride of fellowship and membership. Entrance into that group means that the boy has attained to certain standards of excellence of character, and the more distinctive we can make these entrance requirements, the greater will be the pride in the young boy's heart.

Priesthood, Aaronica-McKay, David O.TPSecond, the quorum influence arouses or satisfies the call of the boy for the inspiration of the group. Have you heard of the gang spirit? Have you seen the boys out on the ditch bank gathering in groups in answer to the call of their souls for companionship? Then can you see the wisdom of God in gratifying this natural inclination by grouping the boys under an influence that is educative in the highest sense of the term?

Priesthood, Aaronica-McKay, David O.TPThird, that group throws upon the youth responsibility. Tell a young boy that you trust him, and you have one of the greatest means of guiding him uprightly that can come into your hands. Young boy, I trust you! To be trusted is a greater compliment than to be loved. Boys are few indeed who will not hold inviolate an implicit trust.

Priesthood, Aaronica-McKay, David O.TPFourth, grouping in a quorum offers service. The Presiding Bishopric, holding a presidency over these young men, have outlined as they have hitherto done, a plan of service into which these young men are invited, not just on Sunday, but on every day of the week.

Priesthood, Aaronica-McKay, David O.TPFinally, into that group is introduced faith in God the Father, in his Son Jesus Christ as the Redeemer of the world, and their service and acts are all done under the cognizance and realization that God is approving their acts. It is sublime. It is divine. Fathers and mothers, let us unite with the priesthood in extending the influence of these groups.

I have mentioned only the Aaronic Priesthood, but our fathers are grouped in like manner. I tell you, this grouping in priesthood quorums has the mark of divinity. It is divine. And Joseph Smith, a young man not twenty-five years of age when he gave that revelation, gave it by the inspiration of God for the salvation of the youth of Zion.—CR, April 1928, pp. 104-105.

Priesthood, Aaronica-McKay, David O.TPWHAT IT MEANS FOR A BOY TO RECEIVE THE AARONIC PRIESTHOOD. I pray that we may so sense the value of the priesthood, that every deacon in this Church will realize that when he is given the Aaronic Priesthood he is set apart among his fellows, that he is different from others. He cannot with impunity swear as other boys may swear; he cannot participate in pranks in the neighborhood as other boys may participate; he stands apart. That is what it means to a twelve-year-old boy, and, bishops, that is just what you should explain to them when you choose them to be deacons. Do not just call them up and ordain them, but have a talk with them and let them realize what it means to be given the Aaronic Priesthood. In the boyhood area these boys so chosen and instructed should exert an influence for good.—CR, October 1948, p. 174.

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPIt is our obligation when we accept the priesthood to set an example worthy of imitation by our fellow men. It is not what we say that will influence them. It is what we do. It is what we are.—CR, October 1948, p. 174.

TWO GREAT MESSAGES

TO BUILD AN IDEAL HOME; MORE QUORUM ACTIVITY. Among the many great messages that we have received, I should just like to emphasize two. One, of course, is the home. Thirteen thousand men of the priesthood were here last night. Everyone should go back to his home and look around and see wherein he can make it more ideally a Latter-day Saint home.

The other great message is for the priesthood quorums to be more active, to reach out and get the indifferent, approaching them personally, and, as has already been said, "Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy." (D. & C. 121:43.)—CR, October 1951, pp. 160-161.
