David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 14

WARD TEACHING

THE WORK OF THE WARD TEACHER

GETTING THE VISION OF THE WORK. The other day it was my privilege to drive through the fields in my old home town. I passed through two farms up near the mountain canal. I saw one that had yielded an exceptionally good crop of oats. Notwithstanding the drought, the cold in the spring, and other disadvantages, the farmer had threshed an excellent yield. Just over the fence was another oat field, but a failure, comparatively speaking. I said to the man: "Why, what is the matter? You must have planted poor seed."

"No, it is the same seed that my neighbor has."

"Well, then it was planted too late, and you did not have enough moisture in the ground to bring it up."

"It was sown the same afternoon that he sowed his."

Upon further inquiry, I learned that the first man had plowed his in the fall; then he had disked it carefully in the spring, making a mulch on the surface, and by such tilling had conserved the moisture of the winter. His neighbor, on the other hand, had plowed his late in the spring and had left the furrows unharrowed; the moisture had evaporated. Following the sowing of the seed came four weeks or six weeks of drought, and there was not sufficient moisture to germinate the seed.

The first man had made preparation, the proper kind of preparation, and nature yielded the increase. The second man labored hard, but his preparation was poor; indeed he had made inadequate preparation.

I now can picture in my mind twelve thousand divisions that may be compared in a way to these two fields. In each one are found—not oats, not wheat, not grasses, not things that perish—but living beings as eternal as the Father himself. Over each of these divisions in God's great garden have been placed overseers called teachers, and they are asked to nourish and to inspire God's children. I venture the thought that the great Gardener in looking over his fields can see some that are thriving in righteous activity and others are starving because of the drought of neglected duty, of the chilling atmosphere of vanity, or the blight of intemperance. Why? Perhaps because the gardeners, the overseers, had not made necessary preparations or performed their duty well.

Teaching with the Spirita-McKay, David O.TPThe first thing to do, my brethren, is to look to yourselves, to see whether or not you are prepared to teach. No man can teach that which he himself does not know. It is your duty to teach that Jesus Christ is the Redeemer of the world, that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God, and that to him in this last dispensation there appeared God the Father and his Son in person. Do you believe it? Do you feel it? Does that testimony radiate from your being when you enter into the home? If so, that radiation will give life to the people whom you go to teach. If not, there will be a dearth, a drought, a lack of that spiritual environment in which the Saints grow.

Teaching with the Spirita-McKay, David O.TPSecond, is your heart free from backbiting, from faultfinding, from hard feelings one to another? It is your duty to see that there is no backbiting, that there is no iniquity existing in the Church. You can teach effectively only that which you yourselves feel. Part of the preparation of a teacher consists in freeing his own heart from those things. In doing so follow the advice of one good writer who says: "In the very depths of your soul dig a grave; let it be as some forgotten spot to which no path leads; and there, in the eternal silence bury the wrongs which you have suffered. Your heart will feel as if a load had fallen from it and a divine peace come to abide with you." With that divine peace in your soul go into the homes and teach the people.

Teaching with the Spirita-McKay, David O.TPBut that condition is but the beginning. Three other things should be kept in mind for thorough preparation. The first is a knowledge of those whom you are to teach; the second, a knowledge of what you are to teach; and third, a knowledge, as much as may be obtained at least by thoughtful consideration and prayer, of how you are going to teach.—CR, October 1916, pp. 58-59.

WE MUST KNOW THOSE WE TEACH. A visit is not teaching. Reading the outline as prepared by the bishop or the high council or the Church is not teaching. Just repeating some passages of scripture, or merely the telling of something to the members of the family in a home is not teaching.

Teaching is the awakening of thought in the minds of those whom we visit and the convincing of their souls of the truth of the message that we bring to them. There must be giving and receiving, a reciprocal condition. How necessary it is, then, to know those whom we teach! No two families in any district are alike.

I call to mind one group of six families, one member of which is a patriarch in the Church, living in the sunset of a faithful life with his daughter, a teacher in the public schools, and a granddaughter, a student in the high school. On the same block next to him, reside a young couple who have but recently joined the Church. The girl had grown up in our communities, but she had not joined the Church until recently. Two of their little children are also baptized. Across the street reside a widow and her daughter, the daughter a typist in one of the business offices of the city, and the other three families present conditions just as varying.

The message, and particularly the manner of presenting that message, might not be the same when given to one who had spent his life in faithful labor in the Church, as when given to those who are newly converted. As each family is different from another, so each individual in the family differs from others, so our messages and our methods, particularly our methods of presentation, might vary. I cite this just to impress us with this thought, that it is our duty to know those whom we are going to teach. That is the reason, I think, why the Lord says: "The teacher's duty is to watch over the church always, ..." (D. & C. 20:53.) Not just once a month but always a teacher; no hour in the day when you are free from that responsibility! There is no day in the week when you are free and when you should not feel it your duty to do something, if possible, to make that group of members in the Church better and happier.

What you are to teach is the gospel of Jesus Christ. When the bishop gives you any special message—tithing, for example, study that principle, first by "taking heed unto yourself" to see if you can teach it consistently. If it be prayer, "take heed unto yourself" in regard to prayer. Do you get down on your knees before you go out to teach that message? Do you study some boy who is a little questionable in his life to know just what attitude he will take towards prayer? Do you pray for God to inspire you to say something to lead such a one to see the necessity of prayer?

Teaching, Gospela-McKay, David O.TPO teachers, yours is an important calling! God help you to be true to it, to feel that part of the responsibility of carrying on God's work, in this the last dispensation, rests upon you.—CR, October 1916, pp. 59-60.

You carry the responsibility, teachers, of seeing to it that members of the Church attend sacrament meeting. How can you teach that duty effectively unless you yourself be present, that you may be able intelligently to commend those in your district who are in attendance and to teach those who are absent?—CR, October 1916, p. 60.

WARD TEACHING AND INDIVIDUAL WELFARE. In the Church of Jesus Christ every child should be more or less safeguarded; first, by the ward teacher, whose duty it is to "... watch over the church always "church" meaning members], and be with and strengthen them." (D. & C. 20:53.) Today the perfunctory obligations of the ward teachers are fairly well performed, but the looking after of individuals is woefully neglected. If every teacher, as an appointed representative of the bishopric of his ward, were properly and fully to perform his duty, he would be aware of the activity or inactivity of every child and of every youth in the Church, each teacher watching over the assigned families.—IE, 49:740 (1946).

These representatives of the bishop—the ward teachers—are the men who reach the individual, the men upon whom the responsibility rests to convert, to comfort, and to teach. Ward teachers are on the firing line.—IE, 41:200 (1938).

TEACHERS TO BE ASSIGNED TWO BY TWO. There is a growing tendency for ward teachers to go singly. We decry this practice. We commend those men who, when they fail to have a partner, are willing to assume the responsibility of visiting the Saints without a companion, but for seventy-five years, and probably longer, it has been the practice of the Church that teachers should go two by two. It is not sufficient for a teacher to say, "I cannot get anybody to go with me." There are too many young men in the Aaronic Priesthood who hold the office of teacher or priest, and who will accept an appointment as ward teacher to justify any teacher's going alone. Call a young man to go with you. Kneel down with him, as we have been instructed, and then go two by two.

Do this for three reasons: First, because we are instructed so to do. Second, because it's for your own protection. You think about that. And third, because you need mutual strength, mutual guidance in giving correction, where it is necessary, and in teaching the doctrines of the Church.—IE, 48:696 (1945).

Teacher, Aaronic Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPDUTIES AND QUALIFICATIONS. The Lord has said what the teacher's duty is:

Teacher, Aaronic Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TP"The teacher's duty is to watch over the church always, and be with and strengthen them;

Teacher, Aaronic Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TP"And see that there is no iniquity in the church, neither hardness with each other, neither lying, backbiting, nor evil speaking;

Teacher, Aaronic Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TP"And see that the church meet together often, and also see that all the members do their duty.

Teacher, Aaronic Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TP"And he is to take the lead of meetings in the absence of the elder or priest." (D. & C. 20:53-56.)

Teacher, Aaronic Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPA careful analysis of these duties discloses the fact that the ward teacher possesses six leading qualifications; viz., those of watchman, strengthener, arbitrator, guide, exemplar, and leader.

Teacher, Aaronic Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPThe responsibility of seeing that there is no "hardness with each other, neither lying, backbiting, nor evil speaking," is particularly significant. In the performance of this duty there is manifest the principle of arbitration, expounded by the Prophet Joseph Smith over a century ago; yet today civilized nations are just beginning to apply it to the settling of international difficulties and disputes, and that seemingly with little success.—IE, 41:200 (1938).

THE ADMINISTRATION OF WARD TEACHING

CONCERNING REPORTS. If you will turn to your reports, you will find that the statistics relate more to the labors of the teacher than to conditions or duties or well-being of those visited. On a typical report card appear these items:

Husband's name.

Wife's name, etc.

Times attended sacrament meeting.

Number of persons in family.

Number of those present at the visit.

Number of families visited.

Number called on and not at home.

Number not accessible.

Number not called on.

These are statistics which do not cover, excepting in two instances, the specific points that the teacher is required to teach. All this is very good, but is it not possible for us to change our attitude and include some of the fundamentals given by revelation?

FIVE FAMILIES TO A DISTRICT. Let us see: Divide the ward, as it is now, so that each group will contain, let us say, no more than five families. Assign to each group of five families one member of the Melchizedek Priesthood and one member of the teachers' quorum.

THE ORDAINED TEACHER'S ROLE. Let that ordained teacher whose duty it is, take care of the statistics, assist in reporting removals, arrivals, new appointments in quorums, auxiliaries, wards, and missions. He will be glad to do it, and he is capable of doing it.

THE ADULT TEACHER'S ROLE. But the duty of the adult member is to watch over the Church always. For what purpose? To perform the six specific duties God has given him; viz., to guard, to strengthen, to arbitrate, to be exemplary, to admonish, and to lead. When he enters the home, he enters it authoritatively, and the father, or the mother, if the father be absent, respectfully turns over the household to him. The adult teacher will take the lead in ascertaining by such authoritative visits the standing and attitude of each member of every family. Do not say that this is difficult or is making your duties more arduous. It is a necessary service and a privilege.

EACH FAMILY AN INDIVIDUAL CASE. Some families do not need so much attention. You may already know of their circumstances and spiritual condition. You can casually call and find out how they feel and how harmoniously they are living with their neighbors and with the Church. But here is a young man in your district who is indolent, neglectful, sour, spiritually sick. Be with him to comfort him, to strengthen him, not on a formal visit alone, but at every opportunity you can make.

POSSIBLE USE FOR ORDAINED PRIESTS. So much for the teacher. Now what about the priest? It is the duty of the priest "to preach, teach, expound, exhort ..." (D. & C. 20:46) all to come to Christ. He can hold cottage meetings as some are doing now. Those young priests will come to the house of Brother Brown and say: "We should like to hold a cottage meeting in your house for this district." Having obtained Brother Brown's permission, those young men will invite the non-members and members alike to come to their meeting to be conducted under their direction. They are teaching; that is the duty of the priest, to preach, to exhort, and invite all to come to Christ.

But the adult member of the priesthood and that ordained teacher will act independently of the priest. They will be in sacrament meeting next Sunday and note those who are present at the meeting. They know all of the members in their district, will not the presence or absence of any one of their charges, and when they meet any, they will commend or exhort as occasion merits or demands. A casual remark, such as, "We missed you at sacrament meeting last Sunday evening," may inspire to action more than a fifteen minute lecture. The ward teacher's duty is to see that all members do their duty.—IE, 41:200-201 (1938.)

Bishopsa-McKay, David O.TPBISHOPS TO BE SPECIFIC. Just a word to the bishops. I believe that teaching will be more effective in the Church if you will call your priesthood to you and point out to them in meeting, after prayer, in humility, what it means for them to go out from house to house as your representatives. Don't just call them somewhat indifferently from the pulpit and make an assignment in an indefinite way; but rather there in your bishop's meeting tell them individually what it means to be a teacher, ask them if they will stand by you in your efforts to uphold the standard of the Church. When you have occasion to release them, do it in a dignified and honorable manner, by telling them how you appreciate what they have done, and why they are at present released.—CR, October 1916, pp. 60-61.

THE OPPORTUNITY IN WARD TEACHING. I believe that in ward teaching there is one of the greatest opportunities in all the world to awaken in those who are negligent, discouraged, downhearted, and sad, renewed life and a desire to re-enter into activity in the Church of Jesus Christ. By such activity they will be led back into the spiritual atmosphere which will lift their souls and give them power to overcome weaknesses which are now shackling them.

To give help, encouragement, and inspiration to every individual is the great responsibility and privilege of ward teachers.—IE, 41:201 (1938.)
