David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 15

TITHING AND WELFARE PRACTICES

TITHING

Tithes and Offeringsa-McKay, David O.TPLAW OF GOD. The law of tithing as now understood and practised by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was given by revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith in response to a prayer in which the Prophet sought the Lord to know "how much he required of the properties of the people for a tithing." The Lord answered saying, the "beginning" of tithing consisted first of "all the surplus property," and named the specific purposes for which this "surplus property" should be used. "After that" tithing consists "of one-tenth of all the interest annually; and this," he continued, "shall be a standing law unto them forever." (See D. & C. 119.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-McKay, David O.TPTo members of the Church of Jesus Christ, therefore, tithing is as much a law of God as is baptism. No one is compelled to obey the one any more than the other; and no one receives the blessing of either without obedience thereto. They who reject the law of tithing put themselves in the same class as the "Pharisees and lawyers" who in the days of John the Baptist, "rejected the counsel of God against themselves." To those who accept the system of tithing as a law of God, nothing more need be said to convince them of the virtue of paying one-tenth of their annual interest, for if sincere, they certainly acquiesce in what is God's will; but even to those who do not so regard it, tithing makes most worthy appeal.

MEANS OF REVENUE. Man is a social being. God designed him to be such. From infancy to old age, he is dependent upon others for his development, education, and happiness. In the right kind of social groups, the more a man gives, the more he receives; the more he teaches, the more he learns; the more happiness he bestows, the happier he becomes. Every group has its laws and standards of conduct, human society especially.

Tithes and Offeringsa-McKay, David O.TPNow wherever there is an organization of human beings for any purpose whatsoever, there must be provision made for the accomplishing of that purpose, and its achievement implies some kind of contribution from members of the group. Everybody should share in this contribution. Some can give it in one way, some in another. Tithing is one means of sharing social responsibility. It is a just means as well, for every person gives proportionally as much as another. It is God's plan of raising revenue for the Church. "There is no such thing," said the late President Joseph F. Smith, "as an organization of men for any purpose of importance without provisions for carrying out its designs. The law of tithing is the law of revenue for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Without it, it would be impossible to carry on the purposes of the Lord." (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 226.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-McKay, David O.TPAN AVENUE OF SERVICE. In every family, every town, every city, every state, every nation, there are members of the social group who need the assistance of others. There are children who are either fatherless or motherless or both; there are widows in distress; there are the sick, the aged, the infirm. Hospitals are to be built, properly equipped, and maintained; schools to be supported, temples and churches to be erected, and social service of every description to be carried on. Tithing is an adequate and proper method of raising funds for the conducting of this essential and praise-worthy social service. It is well to remember, also, that the Savior of men, who gave his life for the service of humanity, said, " ... whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water ... verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward." (Matt. 10:42.)

Tithes and Offeringsa-McKay, David O.TPA SOURCE OF PROTECTION. Tithing should not be given with a selfish end in view. A man who pays tithing just to keep his name on the record will receive his reward, of course; he will have his name on the record. "Verily, he hath his reward," as the man who prayed to be seen and heard of men. But he who gives because he loves to help others and to further the cause of righteousness, who gives cheerfully and with thanksgiving in his heart, also has his reward; for in giving he is really obtaining. In losing his life for Christ's sake, he finds it. If all would thus lose themselves unselfishly in the law of tithing, there would be sufficient in the Lord's storehouse to insure the comfort and education of every person in need in the Church. The Church would thus become the best, the safest insurance society in the world. The time will come when tithing as a sufficient means of protection will come to be more fully understood than it is today. There should be no need of members of the Church of Jesus Christ's joining secret societies either for fellowship, fraternity, or financial aid for their wives and children. The law of tithing properly lived means adequate protection for all.

Tithes and Offeringsa-McKay, David O.TPTITHING IS A SOURCE OF SPIRITUAL POWER. But aside from these social and temporal benefits resulting from a compliance to this law as a social factor, tithing makes its greatest appeal to the sincere mind because of its spiritual significance. It is an unfailing source of spiritual power. True and constant obedience to this law will give as much spiritual development as will obedience to any other principle of the gospel. Inasmuch as one may not infrequently be compelled to practise self-restraint and self-denial in personal desires and perhaps personal needs, the paying of tithing develops self-mastery. Selfishness and self-love are thus supplanted by unselfishness and a love for others. "A man who loves only himself and his pleasures is vain, presumptuous, and wicked even from principle"; but, "he who reigns within himself, and rules passions, desires, and fears, is more than a king."

Tithes and Offeringsa-McKay, David O.TPIt is surprising how frequently the struggle between sordidness and generosity centers around one's pocketbook. Thus tithing teaches those fundamental elements upon which strength of character rests: viz., self-control, self-denial, generosity, love for fellow men, and love for God. It is impossible for a selfish soul to enter the kingdom of heaven. Paying an honest tithe is one of the very best means of overcoming these barriers to eternal happiness.

Faith in the Church of Jesus Christ is best manifested in little things performed in daily life. "Flights of heavenly fancy and longings to see the invisible" have their place in the world, no doubt; but the world is made better and happier by the practical deeds performed each day in that obedience to the laws of God which makes the wheels of society run smoothly, which comforts the fatherless and the widows in their affliction, which gives a secure heritage to our loved ones, and which gives one sufficient strength of character to keep oneself unspotted from the world. Such a faith is ex-emplified by the man who is honest with the Lord.—MS, 86:584-586 (1924).

THE CHURCH WELFARE PLAN

Church Welfare Plana-McKay, David O.TPTHREE UNDERLYING PURPOSES. The underlying purpose of the Church welfare plan is threefold, viz.:

Church Welfare Plana-McKay, David O.TP1. To supply, in a helpful and dignified manner, food, clothing, and shelter to every person so in need.

Church Welfare Plana-McKay, David O.TP2. To assist men and women who, through misfortune, ill luck, or disaster, find themselves without gainful employment, to become once again self-supporting.

Church Welfare Plana-McKay, David O.TP3. To increase among the members of the Church the true spirit of the brotherhood of Christ, having in mind in all their service the divine saying, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matt. 25:40.)

THE PLAN BASIC TO THE PROGRAM OF THE CHURCH. The plan is not something new but rather a means of uniting along well-established lines quorum, auxiliary, and ecclesiastical groups in their efforts to serve one another and the Church. Presidencies of stakes, bishoprics of wards, quorum officials, Relief Society officers, now work unitedly instead of independently in giving relief and helpfulness to those who merit assistance. The only modification or addition in the ecclesiastical organizations of the Church is the uniting of several stakes into what is called a region.—CR, October 1941, p. 54.

Church Welfare Plana-McKay, David O.TP A STATEMENT WHEN THE PLAN WAS INAUGURATED, APRIL 1936. During the last few years practically all the world has been passing through a critical period of depression. People in this intermountain region have been hit, in some respects, more severely than others. Mining, farming, and stock raising are our principal industries. When the mines closed, many men were thrown out of employment. When the springs and rivers dried, products of farms shriveled and died. The price of cattle dropped below the cost of raising them. As a result many people are worried and disheartened. They have lost not only their farms or business interests, but also their homes. Day by day men have vainly searched for honest work. After fruitless searching and inquiry, they return home almost with bitterness in their hearts. Wives with a fortitude sublime encourage their husbands even though it is more difficult for wives to struggle continually to keep up appearances and to supply food and nourishment for their children. It is embarrassing to such men and women, accustomed to independence, comfortable living, and even opulence, to accept help either from the government or the Church.

Church Welfare Plana-McKay, David O.TPWhat, then, shall we do?

Church Welfare Plana-McKay, David O.TPWith resolute hearts, with courage to meet disaster with a smile, let us accept conditions as they are, rebuild, and with united effort regain financial and economic independence. —CR, April 1936, pp. 58-59.

THE IMPORTANCE OF AGRICULTURAL PROSPERITY. Dr. John A. Widtsoe expressed a profound truth when he said, "No country can prosper unless the men who till the soil succeed." I do not know of anything else that we can do. We haven't sufficient factories to employ people who are out of work; the mines are not running to capacity. We can go back and with help buy a few cattle and some horses and retill our farms.

Here in this intermountain country we have a great obligation. The eyes of the world are turned toward us, not only because of the message we have, but also because there are scenic wonders here which attract men from far and near. When they drive past our farms and our houses, they should see the houses painted, the farms properly tilled, and the weeds along the road cut. In this we have a bounden duty that travelers might see evidence of neatness, thrift, and industry, fundamental principles of the Latter-day Saints.

In these efforts toward rehabilitation, all must co-operate. Let the money that is being given as a dole apply on the purchase of a team, chickens, or implements, and thus enable men and women to get back to a life of independence. Here is one field of endeavor in which I think our hearts need strengthening and in which we can manifest that courage and quality of mind which will enable us to meet difficulties that are ahead.—CR, April 1936, p. 59.

THE SPIRITUAL VALUE. Frequent reference has been made, and appropriately so, to the plan inaugurated by the General Authorities of the Church for the relief of those who are unemployed. It is at present one of our greatest and one of the most important concerns of the Church. I desire to call attention to the spiritual value of this important and far-reaching undertaking.

In the 29th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, we are told that " ... all things unto me Lord] are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal; neither any man, nor the children of men; neither Adam, your father, whom I created.

"Behold, I gave unto him that he should be an agent unto himself; and I gave unto him commandment, but no temporal commandment gave I unto him, for my commandments are spiritual; they are not natural nor temporal, neither carnal nor sensual." (D. & C. 29:34-35.)

The development of our spiritual nature should concern us most. Spirituality is the highest acquisition of the soul, the divine in man; "the supreme, crowning gift that makes him king of all created things." It is the consciousness of victory over self and communion with the Infinite. It is spirituality alone which really gives one the best in life.

Church Welfare Plana-McKay, David O.TPIt is something to supply clothing to the scantily clad, to furnish ample food to those whose table is thinly spread, to give activity to those who are fighting desperately the despair that comes from enforced idleness, but after all is said and done, the greatest blessings that will accrue from the Church welfare plan are spiritual. Outwardly, every act seems to be directed toward the physical: remaking of dresses and suits of clothes, canning fruits and vegetables, storing foodstuffs, choosing of fertile fields for settlement—all seem strictly temporal, but permeating all these acts, inspiring and sanctifying them, is the element of spirituality.—CR, October 1936, p. 103.

Church Welfare Plana-McKay, David O.TPTHE QUORUM TO IMPROVE HOME AND COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT THROUGH THE WELFARE PLAN. [^1] The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is seeking, through its welfare plan, through increased quorum consciousness and responsibility, to make both home and community environment better and brighter.—CR, April 1941, p. 108.

THE DYNAMICS OF THE PLAN

THE NECESSITY OF INDIVIDUAL ENTERPRISE. I believe in individualism as opposed to paternalism. In saying this I recognize the fact that a man's duties to himself and to his fellow men are indissolubly connected. Jesus taught that if a man is true to his own highest interests he cannot fail to discharge his obligations to his neighbors. Conversely, he taught that if a man is faithful to the interests of his fellow men, he cannot be faithless to his own. And as a man thinks, so he acts.

Within my experience there has never been a time when the doctrine of individual initiative and individual effort should be more generally taught and more earnestly put into effect than at the present day.

Too many men are claiming that the world owes them a living and are sitting effortlessly by, expecting the world to throw its luxuries into their passive laps. Too late they will learn that the earth rewards richly only the strenuous strugglers. Emerson quotes someone as saying that "the world is in a state of bankruptcy; that the world owes the world more than the world can pay, and ought to go into chancery and be sold." Such reputed insolvency involves all the population, and he who does not get out and rustle for himself is a contributor to the alleged bankruptcy.—CR, April 1938, p. 18.

Idlenessa-McKay, David O.TPNO JUSTIFICATION FOR IDLENESS. Thousands, through no fault of theirs, are out of jobs and are vainly seeking a means of an independent livelihood. However, failure to find it is no justification for idleness. There are fences to rebuild, barns to repair, yards to clean up, houses to remodel and to paint, vicious and destructive weeds to destroy as they deface the highway and ravage crops. Instead of waiting expectantly for the government to find work for us, let us look around and see if there is not work near at hand. Such work will be a benefit not only to the individual but also to the community and the public generally.—CR, April 1938, p. 19.

Work of the Lorda-McKay, David O.TPWORK AND INDIVIDUAL SALVATION. I desire to say a word about work as a means of salvation to the individual. Work! O how often do we read in the scriptures about the blessings that come from doing! Eternal life rests upon the knowledge of God and his Son Jesus Christ. Now, note it, "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.) How do you get that knowledge? In another place he says, "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (Ibid., 7:17.) There you have the doing, the work, associated with the knowledge, and knowledge bringing eternal life—"To know thee is eternal life." To do is to know.

Work of the Lorda-McKay, David O.TPIn our physical being there is no development; there is no growth without activity; in the intellectual world there is no advancement without effort, work; and in the spiritual world, in the development of our spirits, there is no growth without effort. There is no salvation without work.

Work of the Lorda-McKay, David O.TPI do not mean redemption from death—Christ has done that; he has given us all that we need to obtain salvation. The doctrine of work does not rob him of any of his glory. "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God." (Eph. 2:8.) But aside from that, the individual growth and advancement, the individual knowledge, the advancement in God's truth, depends upon the doing of God's will. Let us teach ourselves that; let us teach our children and give them something to do; let them know the sin of idleness.—CR, October 1909, p. 90.

Joseph Smith, the Prophet, has repeatedly given us the assurance that God will not support the idler, that the idler has no place in this Church. The children should know it—O these young men, some of whom belong to us, who are looking forward to a life of ease, to clean clothes, soft white hands—the result, they think of leisure or of wealth! These young men should be warned of the danger of that kind of life.—CR, October 1909, p. 90.

Work brings happiness, and that happiness is doubled to him who initiates the work.—CR, April 1938, p. 20.

Idlenessa-McKay, David O.TPOPPORTUNITIES ARE ALWAYS AT HAND. Too many of us fail to take advantage of opportunities near at hand. We justify inactivity by nursing the impotent thought that success cannot be obtained without influence, money, social or political "pull."—CR, April 1938, p. 20.

THE NEED AND VALUE OF CO-OPERATION. In emphasizing individual effort, I am not unmindful of the necessity of co-operation —

Brotherhooda-McKay, David O.TP"There is a destiny that makes us brothers; None goes his way alone: All that we send into the lives of others Comes back into our own."

Brotherhooda-McKay, David O.TPEdwin Markham, "A Creed."

Brotherhooda-McKay, David O.TPA single, struggling individual may be stalled with his heavy load even as he begins to climb the hill before him. To reach the top unaided is an impossibility. With a little help from fellow travelers, quorums, or wards, he makes the grade and goes on his way in gratitude and rejoicing.

This, I think, is in harmony with the teachings of Jesus, who "sought to perfect society, not by popular agitation or by reorganization, but by perfecting the individual. He recognized the fatal fallacy in the dream of those who hoped to made a perfect state out of imperfect individuals. The ideal social state, which he described as the kingdom of God, is a commonwealth in which all men are united and governed by a commanding love both for God and for their neighbors."

The present-day turmoil and bitter strivings threaten to undermine basic foundations of Christian relationship. Liberty, freedom of speech, self-government, faith in God, and particularly faith in the efficacy of the gospel of Jesus Christ are facing a bombardment from the ranks of error such as the world has seldom if ever witnessed. — CR, April 1938, pp. 20-21.

WHAT ONE WARD ACCOMPLISHED. The admonition to work out your own salvation applies not only to persons but also to the individual quorum, to the individual ward, to the individual stake. Look around you, and you will find that there is work for you in your own community. These suggestions are not impractical effusions of a dreamer, as Bishop Lawrence B. Johnson of Randolph, Utah (Woodruff Stake), has demonstrated. In that little village, ten or twelve more houses are needed to meet the bare necessities of natural increase in population. People have not the money with which to pay for these houses. But there are certain resources which they do possess — health, brawn and muscle, and initiative and foresight on the part of leaders. Twelve miles from this town are groves of timber; trees that can be hewn into house logs.

Bishop Johnson presented his plan and called for volunteers from the ranks of the unemployed. He anticipated meeting five or six men with teams and axes. At the appointed hour one Monday morning twenty men responded.

With a little help a sawmill was obtained; and with the co-operation of the Forestry Service, 200 trees, the forest life of which was about ended, had been transformed into excellent housing material — 25,000 scale feet of logs made ready for use, and the work still continues. For their labor the men were given work receipts, which are accepted at the regional storehouse in exchange for clothing, shoes, groceries, and other necessities. — CR, April 1938, pp. 19-20.

ANOTHER GROUP ENTERPRISE. An apt illustration of how the Church, through the welfare plan, may stimulate and enable the community, as well as individuals, to self-effort is shown by a little assistance rendered the people of Woodruff Ward about June 1936.

The depression had left this community practically without funds. They had no money with which to purchase even seed potatoes for spring planting. They were given a loan of $360.10 with which they bought the necessary amount of seed potatoes. In the fall the planters repaid this loan in full, had sufficient potatoes on hand for their families throughout the year, and an ample supply of seed for replanting.

The bishop of the ward reports that the cash income from sales of the surplus of the 1937 crop amounted to twenty-eight hundred dollars, notwithstanding the fact that each grower contributed to the ward security committee one-third of what he raised. Bishop LeRoy D. Tingey also added this significant statement: "Not one of our people has been on relief."

A spirit of confidence has been awakened, which will be of lasting benefit to the community, for prior to 1936 not a few of the families in Woodruff purchased their potatoes from Bear Lake. It is an interesting observation that recently a man from Bear Lake purchased his potatoes from Woodruff.—IE, 41:39 (1938).

Church Welfare Plana-McKay, David O.TPBUILDING THE CENTRAL STOREHOUSES. An important and most commendable enterprise undertaken by the Church is its welfare program. Of its value and significance much has been said during the conference. I desire to commend, in the presence of this large audience, the able and unselfish work of the eleven members of the general committee chosen to assist the General Authorities. These men are leaders in their chosen occupations and professions. They, as you, give their very best to the advancement of this great undertaking, contributing their time and ability without a cent of compensation. The reward of their effort lies in their love for the work.

Under the direction of this committee and the management of experienced and dependable contractors, the central storehouse building project is being carried on at 751 West Seventh South, (Salt Lake City), one of the pivotal centers around which this entire plan revolves.

In your mind's eye, come with me momentarily and stand outside those unfinished buildings. Here we see a worthy example of co-operation. The steel lying there, being used to reinforce the cement, has been furnished at cost by firms not associated with the Church; so have the cement and the lumber; so have the materials purchased from merchants in this city; also the electric poles and the wire. The spirit of co-operation is manifested by members and nonmembers. Here are from forty to sixty men working daily—men otherwise unemployed, each recommended by his bishop. Each receives for his labor small amounts in cash; the balance in orders on the storehouses.

UNION MEN COMMENDED. One of the most pleasing things which you observe is the fact that union men work side by side with non-union men. I wish to commend the brick-layers' union particularly for their attitude toward this great welfare movement in permitting their men to work side by side with others in the spirit of true brotherhood.—CR, October 1938, p. 132.

THE "MORMON HANDICRAFT" PROJECT. I would ask you, too, to contemplate the Mormon handicraft project carried on by the Relief Society, a most commendable enterprise, in which 650 women have found employment while they remained at home with their families.—CR, October 1938, p. 132.

THE SPIRIT OF THE PLAN. Too many men quail under the impending onslaught and cry vainly, "What can we do?"

This we can do:

First: by self-effort attempt to initiate work around the home and in the neighborhood; quorums and groups rendering necessary aid whenever possible; and practise honesty; speak well of your neighbors; and if you cannot do this say nothing. Seek the best in life and thus give to your own soul and to your own environment a touch of the beautiful.

Second: by proclaiming, and, what is even more effective, by exemplifying in life the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ as the only permanent panacea for the ills of mankind.—CR, April 1938, p. 21.

The willingness to serve others is ready for expression in the hearts of millions, if only nations or groups in nations will but point the way. Here is one illustration: September 19, 1937, the Salt Lake region of the Church welfare plan, finding itself in need of a new storehouse, held a special fast day for the purpose of raising funds with which to make the first payment. The committee asked the people to go without two meals on that day and contribute the equivalent in cash for the project. The leaders anticipated raising about four thousand dollars. The people contributed over fifteen thousand dollars—realization exceeding anticipation nearly four times!—CR, October 1937, p. 102.

FAST DAY OBSERVANCE

Fastinga-McKay, David O.TPORIGIN AND MEANING. The word fast is used to signify a self-imposed restraint with respect to the eating of food. Historians tell us that the custom of fasting dates back to the early history of the human race. They surmise that it was first practised because of the salutary influence that it has on the health and also because of the increased power such voluntary abstinence gives the spirit in holding under subjection the purely physical appetites of the body. It may be nearer the truth, however, to say that fasting originated when the Lord first revealed to man the gospel plan, thus antedating even the law of Moses, when an annual fast day was prescribed. (See Lev. 23:27-29.)

Fastinga-McKay, David O.TPWhatever its origin, it is significant to note that several virtues are attached to the observance of the custom. Two of these are mentioned by those who seek to find a natural reason for its adoption; and of course it follows inevitably that these and other virtues are in it if the assumption be right that God prescribed it in the beginning as a rite to be observed by mankind. All the principles associated with fasting seem to point to the fact that it produces (1) physical benefits; (2) intellectual activity; and (3) spiritual strength.

Fastinga-McKay, David O.TPIt is generally conceded that most people usually consume more food than the body requires. Overeating clogs the system with deleterious waste products. When such a condition exists, a short fast is undoubtedly useful as a means of restoring the body to its normal, active state.

A clogged digestive system is but the inevitable forerunner of a clogged brain. Mr. Upton Sinclair, who has written a symposium on fasting, advocating particularly the "fasting cure," suggests that poets would write greater poetry if they but understood the merits of fasting and then adds, "The great thing about the fast is that it sets you a new standard of health." Of course, that eminent writer has in mind a longer period of abstinence from food than that prescribed by the Church, to be observed at regular intervals, but, as an eminent Scotch physician says, "Fasting for a longer or a shorter period is often a beneficial practice, especially in the case of those who have been living too freely."

Fastinga-McKay, David O.TPBut the struggle for existence is so keen with most of mankind that the majority find it necessary to live not too freely but too meagerly. This being true, what virtue in fasting is there for them? We answer: the greatest of all benefits—the spiritual strength derived by the subjection of physical appetite to the will of the individual. "He who reigns within himself, and rules passions, desires, and fears, is more than a king." As in eternal life, so in self-mastery, there is no one great thing which a man may do to obtain it; but there are many little things by observing which self-control may be achieved; and a subjecting of the appetite to the will, and a refusal to satisfy desire are two of these little things. It was with the thought in mind of gaining spiritual strength that James, the psychologist, made this suggestion: "To do each day something which you do not like to do." If there were no other virtue in fasting but gaining strength of character, that alone would be sufficient justification for its universal acceptance.

Fast Daya-McKay, David O.TPMODERN CHURCH PRACTICE. But associated with this practice in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the giving of a fast offering, the underlying purpose and far-reaching benefits of which make the monthly observance of fast day one of the most significant features of this latter-day work. There are in it, besides the benefits mentioned above, (1) all the spiritual uplift that comes from a Christlike desire to serve one's fellow man, and (2) an economic means, which, when carried out by a perfect and active organization, will supply the needs of every worthy poor person within the confines of the organized branches of the Church.

Fast Daya-McKay, David O.TPThe regularly constituted fast consists of abstinence from food once each month, from the evening meal of Saturday to the evening meal on the following Sunday; that is, it means missing two meals on the first Sunday of each month. The value of those two meals given as a voluntary donation for the relief of those who are hungry or otherwise in distress constitutes the fast offering. Think what the sincere observance of this rule would mean spiritually if every man, woman, and child were to observe the fast and contribute the resultant offering, with the sincere desire of blessing the less fortunate brother or sister or sorrowing child! The great Tolstoy, sensing the need of this bond of sympathetic brotherhood in Christ, once wrote that he had no right to eat his crust of bread if his brother had none. Can you not see associated with this simple act the divine principle of service as expressed in the Master's words: "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me"? (Matt. 25:40.)—MS, 85:424-425 (1923).

THE ECONOMICS OF THE FAST OFFERINGS

Fast Offeringa-McKay, David O.TPA VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTION BASED ON PRINCIPLE. We are asked, as a Church, to fast once a month—to refrain from Saturday evening meal until Sunday evening meal. The requirement is that all members of the Church fast that day, attend to their meetings, particularly sacrament meeting, and in accordance with the revelation of God, give their oblations, render their sacraments, and offer their prayers to God. We are asked, further, to contribute in effect the amount of those two meals for the benefit of the worthy poor in the ward. No stated amount is given; each one is left to give voluntarily that which he believes he ought to give, so that the bishop may have in his hands sufficient funds to aid those who may be in need.

Now, it is a little, simple thing, and at first thought it does not seem to have much of the power of salvation in it, but like all other principles and ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ, it is associated with the fundamental principles of life and salvation. That is why I desire to call the attention of the presiding authorities as well as of all the Saints in Israel, to the importance of living up to this requirement more closely in the future than they have done in the past. Let us see what it means.

Fast Offeringa-McKay, David O.TPIf we contribute to the bishop the value of two meals once a month, we are certainly no poorer financially than we would be if we had consumed those meals as we regularly do. There cannot be any loss to our own family in a financial way, and we have given at least a mite towards alleviation of hunger, perhaps distress, in some home that is less fortunate, less blessed than we. There is no loss to us financially, no man is poorer, no man is deprived of one blessing, no child is deprived of anything that he would have had if he refrained from giving that small contribution. Financially then, nobody who gives it is any the poorer.

Fastinga-McKay, David O.TPPHYSICAL BENEFITS. Physically, we are better off by refraining from eating at least once a month than we are when we eat regularly three meals a day. I am reminded of having read the opinion of one of our leading athletes who in his training watched the effect of eating three regular meals, then of eating two regular meals and finally of eating one meal daily, regularly, and he concludes so far as he is concerned that when he ate three meals a day he had been eating too much, and when so doing found it necessary to fast at regular periods in order to maintain his vitality to the standard possessed when he ate more sparingly. Physiology books will give us the same lesson. So, generally speaking—each individual must take this for his own good—but generally speaking no person is injured in any way by his depriving himself of those two meals on fast day, but, on the contrary he is benefited physically.

Fastinga-McKay, David O.TPSPIRITUAL STRENGTH AND SELF-MASTERY. There is still another blessing, and here I believe is the most potent factor, the most saving power in this fast-day requirement. What our young people need, what every man and every woman in this world needs in order to keep himself or herself free and unspotted from the sins of the world, is the power of self-mastery. Each individual should studiously practise self-control. It does not come all at once. Nature never makes cash payments as a whole, says William George Jordan. Her payments are always made in small instalments. Those who desire to win self-mastery must do it by constant application. About the only definite command, to fast as given in the Law, refers to this principle as an "affliction of the soul." It is associated with spiritual uplift, and therein is one of the greatest blessings that come to those who will fast as God has asked them to.

Fastinga-McKay, David O.TPSome may say, "Well, that isn't much, I cannot see how the refraining from partaking of food once a month regularly is going to give me any self-control." It does, however; it is one of the best lessons that adults as well as children can practise. Appetite is calling; there is a yearning, and the natural tendency is to yield.

Fastinga-McKay, David O.TPTeach the child to master appetite. Teach him, not harshly, but kindly, with the Spirit of the Lord, with the spirit in which the revelation was given, and you will find that in childhood these little lessons in abstinence coming daily to your boy, unconsciously are placing into his little spirit power that may save him from falling in disgrace sometime when he is driven on by the fire of youth to the very verge of the precipice of destruction. Then is the time that he will need mastery of self, and he will have it. Men who have studied this principle suggest that we need to take some such lesson as this not only weekly or monthly, but daily.—CR, April 1915, pp. 103-105.

Fastinga-McKay, David O.TPA MEANS OF RELIGIOUS PRACTICE AND SOCIAL ADVANCEMENT. Do not think that there is not a spiritual significance in the little principle of fasting. Do not think, parents, that you are favoring your child when, out of compassion, you say, "Oh, give him his breakfast; oh, let us have breakfast; let us have dinner; I have a headache; the little boy is too young to go without his meal," and so on. You do not know what you are doing by such teaching as that. I want to tell you that the children of our Church can be so taught this principle of self-denial that they will set worthy examples to their parents in the observance of it. Your deacons particularly—there is a magnificent opportunity for teaching them one way of honoring the priesthood.

Fastinga-McKay, David O.TPNow, what does obedience to this requirement mean in aiding those who might be in need? It means that money need not be taken from the tithing fund because some of us did not comply with the principle of fast offering! Think what it means, and particularly when we are aiding ourselves by doing it. We are losing nothing financially; we are blessing ourselves physically; and we are gaining greater spiritual power to withstand the temptations that we meet in life; and, best of all, we are practising the very essence of our religion; the true Christ spirit is manifest in that little offering.—CR, April 1915, pp. 105-106.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See also, chapter on "Education," for materials in religious education work and calling of teachers, etc.
