David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 16

SUNDAY SCHOOLS AND THE SPIRIT OF WORSHIP

THE SUNDAY SCHOOL MOVEMENT

A SACRED OBLIGATION. The proper training of childhood is man's most sacred obligation. Children at birth are the most dependent and helpless of all creatures, yet they are the sweetest and the greatest of all things in the world. They come from the Father pure and undefiled, their souls like stainless white paper on which is to be written the aspirations and achievements of a lifetime. Whether that scroll shall become the biography of a noble Christlike life, or a series of blots and blurs, depends largely, if not entirely, upon the guiding influence of parents, playmates, and teachers. "A creature undefiled by the taint of the world, unvexed by its injustice, unwearied by its hollow pleasures; a being fresh from the source of light, with something of its universal lustre in it—if childhood be this, how holy the duty to see that in its onward growth it shall be no other."

In the formation of character and guidance of childhood, parental influence is greatest; next comes the teacher's. Of the former, I cannot comment in this article; and of the latter, I must confine my reference only to a few of those who have sought to establish an environment in which children might be fired with an ambition to be useful and infused with a desire to be obedient, that thereby they might enjoy the first and foremost right of childhood; viz., to be happy. "There is true nobility in the soul of that man or woman who sincerely desires and strives to lead children out of contaminating influences into an environment of high ideals and lofty endeavor."

Sunday Schoola-McKay, David O.TPROBERT RAIKES AND MODERN SUNDAY SCHOOLS. It was just such yearnings and strivings of honest minds and hearts that gave birth to our modern Sunday Schools. The first of these was established at Gloucester, England, over one hundred fifty years ago.

Sunday Schoola-McKay, David O.TPRobert Raikes, proprietor of the Gloucester Journal, a man noted for his deeds of philanthropy, saw from his window one day, "neglected, ragged children, playing, quarreling, cursing, and fighting and using language too coarse to repeat." These unfortunate children, neglected by their parents, were gathered in a private home, the charge of four women, "who were employed at a shilling a day."

Sunday Schoola-McKay, David O.TPThe forenoon session was held from ten to twelve o'clock. Every Sunday afternoon the children were conducted to the parish church where they participated in worship and recited from the catechism.

Judging from the description given of this Sunday School in the Gloucester Journal, the public became interested, and the movement became popular, though some ecclesiastical authorities and "timid religionists" opposed it as a very dangerous innovation. Volunteer teachers supplanted those who were paid a shilling a day. It is true there are authentic records extant which prove that Sunday Schools existed before 1783, but Robert Raikes' Sunday School is generally considered the beginning of the modern Sunday School movement.

Sunday Schoola-McKay, David O.TPFIRST SUNDAY SCHOOL IN THE UNITED STATES. It is difficult to determine who merits the credit of organizing the first Sunday School in the United States. One such school was organized under the direction of Bishop Asbury at the house of the Cranshaws in Hanover City, Virginia, 1786. In December 1790, a meeting was called to consider the importance of this work, and in January 1791, a Sunday School Society was organized for the purpose of securing religious instruction for poor children on Sundays. The teachers, as those of Robert Raikes, were paid a small salary. Other schools followed and became the nucleus of the American Sunday School Union, a national organization formed in 1824.

Sunday Schoola-McKay, David O.TPSUNDAY SCHOOLS IN THE RESTORED CHURCHAT KIRTLAND. The first Sunday Schools in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints were organized in Kirtland, Ohio. Unfortunately, we have very little record concerning their organization and conduct. In Helen Mar Whitney's memoirs we find the following:

Sunday Schoola-McKay, David O.TP"Among other pleasing recollections were our Sunday Schools, where I used to love to go and recite verses and whole chapters from the New Testament, and we received rewards in primers, etc., which I think were more highly appreciated in those days than they are at the present time. At ten o'clock we would form in line and march with our teachers up to the temple. The thought that I could never see or enjoy them again would make me sad, as a child, when we were driven away from Kirtland to Missouri, and sometimes I would cry bitterly."

IN THE EUROPEAN MISSION, 1840. I am indebted to Sister Susa Young Gates for the following regarding Sunday Schools organized in the European Mission as early as 1840:

"When Brigham Young was presiding over the European Mission in 1840 and Parley P. Pratt was editor of the Star, a number of questions propounded by Elder Joseph Fielding were answered in the Star. Doubtless Brigham Young scrutinized both questions and answers before they came into print."

Among these questions was this:

"'10. Would it be well to establish Sunday Schools in the Church?'

"Ans. Certainly; let the elders gather the people together, old and young, every Sabbath day, in the streets, if no more convenient place offers, and teach them the first principles of the gospel of Christ, viz., faith, repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins, for the first lesson; eating and drinking at the table of the Lord, laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost, the resurrection of the dead and eternal judgment for the second lesson; and for the third lesson, let parents teach their children obedience, and train them in the way they should go; and finally let the elders, brothers, and sisters, all with one accord, teach their friends and neighbors, and make them wise unto salvation; and practise what they preach on the Sabbath and six other days in each week, even unto the end. They will find it a very profitable school, and receive a glorious reward for their labors."

AT NAUVOO AND WINTER QUARTERS. Sister Annie Wells Cannon informs me that she has heard her mother, Emmeline B. Wells,

" ... many times speak of holding a Sunday School in Nauvoo and also at Winter Quarters. I have thought it was officially organized by the priesthood, though I think it was held in the home of Presiding Bishop Newel K. Whitney, and must have been with his approval."

Sunday Schoola-McKay, David O.TPFIRST SUNDAY SCHOOL IN THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS. The credit and honor of organizing the first Sunday School in the Rocky Mountains is due Elder Richard Ballantyne, who was both teacher and superintendent of the first session held in the West. This was in a room of Brother Ballantyne's log house located on the corner of First West and Third South Streets, Salt Lake City.

The following are some of the original members of the thirty who first assembled to receive instructions from the noble soul who strove to keep the children of Zion under up-building influences: Richard Ballantyne, Lydia Phelps Thorpe, Sophronia E. Carter, Margaret O. Best, Angus M. Cannon, Leonora Cannon Gardner, Martha Van Cott Price, Samuel H. B. Smith, S. A. Whitney, Joseph S. Horne, George J. Taylor, Robert Frank Turnbow, David H. Cannon, John G. Turnbow, Henry I. Horne, Jacob Peart, Sarah J. Cannon, and Olive Peck.

Sunday Schoola-McKay, David O.TPIn stating his reason for organizing this school, Elder Ballantyne said, "I felt that the gospel was too precious to myself to be withheld from the children; they ought to have the privilege of gospel teaching and that was the main purpose—to teach them the gospel."—IE, 33:480-481 (1930).

SUNDAY SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION [^1]

CONTROLLING PRINCIPLES. In the best conducted Sunday Schools of the Church, self-government is manifest in every procedure, and fundamental principles of good conduct, worship, and devotion are exemplified in every exercise. That school approaches nearest the ideal, in which the superintendent finds it unnecessary even to say a word by way of direction from the moment when the bishop makes his announcements for the day until the classes march to their respective classrooms. Each participant in the opening exercises knows his duty and is prepared to perform it properly without either announcement or direction. This may be said also of the school as a body. Thus is the fundamental principle of self-government encouraged. So in each succeeding exercise are emphasized, in one way and another, punctuality, courtesy, order, reverence, worship, respect for authority, consideration of the rights of others, responsiveness, self-control, obedience, etc.

In these and other ways does the Sunday School aid in the discharging of the most important and sacred obligations of man; viz., the proper training and instruction of childhood. In the most efficient schools every child and every adult senses the fact that he is an instructor as well as a learner, and to a certain extent, carries the responsibility of following the divine injunctions—"Suffer little children, ... to come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven." (Matt. 19:14.)—IE, 33:481 (1930).

TEACHER-TRAINING CLASSES. It is the bishop's duty to call the heads of all the auxiliary associations—at least the president of the Relief Society, the superintendent of the Sunday School, and Mutual Improvement, Primary, and Religion Class presidents, in council meeting—the express purpose being to choose by unanimous approval, by prayer, and under the inspiration of the Lord to which they are entitled, some man or woman in that ward who will stand as a leader, as a teacher trainer of the young men and young women who are going to take the course. It is the bishop's right, of course, to name him, but he will ask the others for suggestions.

THE TEACHER TRAINERHIS QUALIFICATIONS AND DUTIES. In that connection, may I merely suggest that the teacher trainer be chosen from the ranks of those who remain more or less permanently in the ward. You may have some man who stands pre-eminently, perhaps, as an educator; but as soon as the school year closes, he may go to some other place. Then you are left; the result is that there may be a feeling that there is nobody else to succeed him, and your teacher training movement receives a setback which it may be difficult to overcome. Better have one even less experienced in the science of pedagogy and psychology, and who is permanently residing with you, and, above all, whose heart is in the work of the Lord and in the teacher-training organization established for the instruction and development of those who have to teach the youth of Israel.

After all, the technical learning is secondary, if we keep in mind the ultimate aim of the work. We must never lose sight of that. It is the Spirit which teaches the spirit. What you are is what will influence your children—not what you say. The Spirit of the Lord is what is going to reach those teachers and teach your children—and the world must come to it. So do not say you haven't somebody in your ward who can take the leadership of the class. You have some man who stands pre-eminently as a preacher, as a teacher of righteousness.

However, the teacher trainer should not be a preacher. The teacher-training organization is in every sense of the word a class. If you members depend upon the teacher trainer for giving the lesson, expounding it as he would expound a principle of the gospel from the pulpit, you will find that there will be little development on the part of the teachers. Expect preparation from all the officers and teachers from all auxiliary organizations, and all that the teacher trainer is to do is to guide in this and that elucidation of the lesson and topics of the lesson assigned. You may have preachers in these teacher trainers, but you will not have the development of the class. It is a class in every sense of the word.—IE, 22:901-903 (1919).

Joya-McKay, David O.TPEMPHASIZE JOY. I commend the Deseret Sunday School Union Board for emphasizing joy in the life of Sunday School officers, teachers, and children. Joy is sweeter than pleasure. Joy is an emotion excited with the acquisition or expectation of good. Pleasure is a state of gratification of the senses or mind and may be sensuous. It may be self-indulgence. It is nearly always transitory. Joy and happiness are permanent. Joy is pleasure not to be repented of.

Joya-McKay, David O.TPChildren are entitled to joy.—I, 80:560-561 (1945).

PERSONAL INFLUENCE. As I look in restrospect upon three-score-and-ten years' association with Sunday School work, I am inclined to believe that that which is most potent in shaping a boy's life is personal influence.—I, 84:105 (1949).

THE SUNDAY SCHOOL LOOKS FORWARD

"Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these?" Simon answered. "Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee." Jesus said unto him. "Feed my lambs." (See John 21:15.)

Such was the divine injunction given by the risen Lord to Peter, his chief Apostle, emphasizing the fact that the proper training of childhood is man's most important and sacred duty.

There is true nobility in the soul of that man or woman who sincerely desires and strives to lead children out of contaminating influences into an environment of high ideals and lofty endeavors.

Sunday Schoola-McKay, David O.TPNext to eternal life, the most precious gift that our Father in heaven can bestow upon man is his children. Ideals that relate to God and to little children are indispensable elements to happiness and eternal life. An institution, therefore, that makes heaven its aim, and childhood its obligation, is one with which every loyal heart should desire to be associated. Such an organization is the Deseret Sunday School Union.

My topic is "Toward What the Sunday School is looking in the Future."

First: The Sunday School looks forward to the time when every girl and boy, every man and woman will be enrolled as a member.

The Sunday School in the West began in 1849 with one superintendent and teacher and thirty pupils. It required forty-seven years—from 1849 to 1896—for the Sunday School membership to reach the first one hundred thousand. The impetus of that one-hundred-thousand group added another one hundred thousand in eighteen years. With this multiple force of two hundred thousand, only seventeen years were required—1914 to 1931—to top the three-hundred thousand mark. Think what gains are possible in the future.

If every student, every pupil, will make it his or her obligation to bring in one new member, you will have, with the application of just this one means, nearly a million membership. Further than that, no teacher must be satisfied until she makes an effort to have every boy and girl enrolled who in age and ability belong to her class. The Sunday School looks forward to your accomplishing that duty. In handling these seemingly indifferent ones, fellow teachers, will you please keep in mind these three parables: The Lost Sheep, The Lost Coin, The Prodigal Son. The first was lost in his eagerness to seek daily sustenance and wandered too far from the flock. The coin was lost through carelessness of the housewife. The prodigal son became lost because he desired his portion and spent it in profligacy. He did not get back until he came to himself and said, "I will rise and go to my father." Through study and prayer to the best of your ability counter-act those three enticing elements as you seek to bring back the lost ones.

Second: The Sunday School looks forward to the time when in every class in the Sunday School the principles of punctuality, courtesy, self-control, respect for authority, studiousness, responsiveness, and, particularly, reverence and worship, will so impregnate the atmosphere that even the dullard by absorption will be benefited. This is not dreaming; I am not being visionary. The Sunday Schools of the future may realize just that ideal atmosphere.

Third: The Sunday School looks forward to the time when every teacher will possess the qualities mentioned by these Sunday School children. [^2] You say, "Well, that will be perfection." Granted, then, let us do our best to approach it, fellow teachers, for they named some practical qualities and attributes which impress childhood. In that connection, every Sunday School teacher should come prepared to give his lesson. The Deseret Sunday School Union looks forward to the time when no teacher will come unprepared to his or her class. That means that every teacher will have within his or her mind a sincere and prayerful desire to awaken within at least one heart every Sunday (and we hope in many hearts) the desire to achieve mastery over weak and selfish indulgences; to awaken even in childhood a hope in the boys to become noble characters; in the girls, to become modest, beautiful women. To awaken in their hearts the desire to become friends; also to look forward to the time when they will be worthy companions in loving homes, and, later in life, to be worthy of fatherhood and pure motherhood. These are true ideals of the gospel, but they are practical ones. Finally, the teacher will have in her heart the desire to awaken a love of the gospel of Jesus Christ, obedience to which brings happiness in this life and salvation throughout eternity.

Teacher Developmenta-McKay, David O.TPFourth: The great Sunday School of the future will have a teacher-training class in which not only the active teachers, but also prospective teachers may receive practical instructions in the preparation and presentation of lessons. That is an important factor. To reach the ideals I have mentioned, or even to approach them, the prepared teacher must see clearly the message she is to impart. You cannot give what you do not possess. You cannot awaken in the hearts of children a nobility which is not yours. She must know the details associated with the incidents of her lesson; must through keen observation, and further research and study, gather illustrative material; must organize logically the accumulated material that it may be presented impressively; must exercise discrimination and eliminate that which is irrelevant. This requires not only study, but also intelligent guidance which may be given in these teacher-training classes.

Teacher Developmenta-McKay, David O.TPIf a lesson thus prepared be developed in an atmosphere of cheerfulness, the child cannot help being interested and inspired, and the teacher is doubly blessed. To give a lesson well prepared is like mercy—it blesses him that gives and him that receives. It is true in teaching as in life—"Give to the world the best you have, and the best will come back to you."

Fifth: The Sunday School of this century—the beginning of this new century—looks forward to the time when, as a principal part of preparation, every teacher will pray sincerely and earnestly for God's guidance on the day she meets the children placed under her care.

There is a story told of General Charles George Gordon—that "each morning, during his journey in the Sudan country, for one-half hour there lay outside his tent a white handkerchief. The whole camp well knew what it meant, and looked upon the little signal with the utmost respect; no foot dared to pass the threshold of that tent while the little guard lay there. No message, however pressing, was to be delivered. Matters of life and death must wait until the little signal was taken away. Everyone knew that God and Gordon were communing together."

Teaching with the Spirita-McKay, David O.TPPrayer is just as important in times of peace as in war. Teachers, begin the preparation of your lessons in prayer. Teach your lessons with a prayerful heart. Then pray that God will enrich your message in the souls of your children through the influence of his holy Spirit.

Sunday Schoola-McKay, David O.TPFinally, the Deseret Sunday School Union looks forward to the time, and we hope it is beginning today, when nobility of character will be recognized as being greater than intellect; when faith in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, when loyalty to the standards and principles of his restored gospel will be the motivating ideals in the life of every child and youth in the Church. May God's nearness and his guidance, to which all pupils and teachers are entitled, hasten that day.—IE, 52:804, 805, 863 (1949).

REVERENCE

Reverencea-McKay, David O.TPTHE PRINCIPLE. A principle to which I wish to refer is reverence. I look upon reverence as one of the highest qualities of the soul. An irreverent man is not a believing man. I think a man cannot testify of his knowledge of the existence of God and take God's name in vain. He can do it by words, but as the king in Hamlet, his words will fly up, but his thoughts remain below.

I was deeply impressed with the lesson that Elder George Q. Morris taught his missionaries in the Sacred Grove. They have an entrance there now, a sort of fence and a gate leading into the sacred spot, where they hold the service.

There as you enter the gate is a sign, "Quiet, please." I wish everybody in the Church could experience that quiet attitude of several hundred missionaries in that Sacred Grove, and as soon as the amen of the benediction was given, these elders retired without consultation, without shaking hands, to the outside part of the grove.

APPLICATION IN SUNDAY SCHOOL WORK. In our meeting-houses today we have reverence just as soon as the hour comes for worship, but in Sunday Schools particularly, at the change of classes there is a hubbub. That is not educative to our children. They have done away with the marching we used to have when I was in the Sunday School work in Weber. They now think it undignified for older persons to march.

Well, superintendents, you may do this, at least—when you separate for classwork, let a class rise and pass out to the room, and then another class follow, without this careless, sometimes boisterous attitude of everybody's mingling and talking as he goes to his class.

Reverence indicates high culture and true faith in Deity and in his righteousness.—CR, October 1951, pp. 179-180.

Teaching, Gospela-McKay, David O.TPOur classrooms are sometimes places of boisterousness. Here is where we need good teachers. A teacher who can present a lesson interestingly will have good order, and when he or she finds students who are rebellious, flipping papers, paying no attention, stumbling, kicking one another, he or she may know that the lesson is not being properly presented. Perhaps it was not even properly prepared.

One of our mothers recently went to a Sunday School class to try to find out why her son was losing interest. There was so much boisterousness, so much confusion, so much noise, that she felt heartsick; and as she arose to leave, she said to the teacher: "I thought this was a Sunday School class, not bedlam!"—CR, Sept.-Oct. 1950, p. 164.

Teaching, Gospela-McKay, David O.TPIn the classrooms children should be taught, should be free to discuss, free to speak, free to participate in classwork, but no member of the class has the right to distract another student by jostling or making light and frivolous remarks. And I think in this Church, in the priesthood quorums and classes and in auxiliaries, teachers and superintendents ought not to permit it. Disorder injures the child who makes it. He should learn that when he is in society there are certain things which he cannot do with impunity. He cannot trespass upon the rights of his associates.

Let children learn this lesson in youth because when they get out in society and try to trespass against the law, they will feel the restraining hand and probably suffer punishment.

Good order in the classroom is essential to instil into the hearts and lives of young men and young women the principle of self-control. They want to talk, and they want to whisper, but they cannot do it, because it will disturb somebody else. Learn the power and lesson of self-mastery.

Reverence should be particularly manifest in sacrament meetings, in quorum meetings, in Sunday School, in M.I.A., in Primary, yes, and in Relief Society. This is a missionary Church. People come here for light and knowledge, for instruction, and they have a right to find it when they come.—CR, Sept.-Oct. 1950, pp. 165-166.

Reverencea-McKay, David O.TPREVERENCE AND RESPECT FOR LAW. Akin to the respect for law and a contributing factor toward it is reverence for sacred things. It has been truly said that reverence is the noblest state in which a man can live in the world. If that is true, then irreverent man has a crudeness about him that is repellent. He is cynical, often sneering, and nearly always iconoclastic.

Reverencea-McKay, David O.TPReverence and obedience to law should begin at home. Indeed, too much emphasis cannot be laid upon the responsibility of parents to teach their children reverence for God in all things sacred, and to honor and uphold the law.

The true expression of reverence is found in the Savior's admonition to love the Lord thy God with all thy might, mind, and, strength, and thy neighbor as thyself. (See Matt. 22:37-39.)

Reverencea-McKay, David O.TPAs a Church in our worshiping assemblies, we have much room for improvement in this regard. Stake officers, bishops, quorum presidents, auxiliary leaders should make a special effort to maintain more reverence during hours of worship. Children should be impressed with the inappropriateness of confusion and disorder in a worshiping assembly and should be made to realize that it is the height of rudeness to leave service before dismissal. Young people who ignore such proprieties are two hundred and fifty years behind the times. They should have lived in colonial days when just to make sure they stayed out the service, young men were locked in their pews by their superiors.—CR, April 1937, pp. 29-30.

Reverencea-McKay, David O.TPREVERENCE AND CHARACTER. The principle of self-control lies at the basis of reverence and good order in classrooms. I do not know how to define reverence, but I do know how to classify or to place it as one of the objectives of nobility, indeed, one of the attributes of deity.

Love is the divinest attribute of the human soul. I am not so sure but sympathy is next to it—sympathy for the afflicted, for suffering animals, for our brethren and sisters. That is a Godlike virtue.

Kindness is also a sublime virtue. The first sentence in what is now known as the Psalm of Love is this: "Love suffereth long and is kind."

Reverencea-McKay, David O.TPHowever, I am prompted to place reverence next to love. Jesus mentioned it first in the Lord's prayer: "Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name." (Matt. 6:9.) Hallow—to make holy—to hold in reverence!

When Jesus cleansed the temple, he was filled with reverent indignation because men were desecrating his Father's house, selling doves and lambs to be offered as sacrifice. Money-changers were there for the convenience of those who came from other countries, so they could give in local currency their temple contributions. Seemingly, in their own eyes, they were justified, but they were doing these things in the house of God. We are told that he overturned the money-changers' tables and said to the sellers of doves, "Take these things hence; make not my Father's house an house of merchandise." (John 2:16.)

Reverencea-McKay, David O.TP"Reverence," wrote Ruskin, "is the noblest state in which a man can live in the world. Reverence is one of the signs of strength; irreverence one of the surest indications of weakness. No man will rise high who jeers at sacred things. The fine loyalties of life must be reverenced or they will be foresworn in the day of trial."

Reverencea-McKay, David O.TPCharles Jefferson, the author of The Character of Jesus, writes: "Men in many circles are clever, interesting, brilliant, but they lack one of the three dimensions of life. They have no reach upward. Their conversation sparkles, but it is frivolous and often flippant. Their talk is witty, but the wit is often at the expense of high and sacred things."—CR, Sept.-Oct. 1950, pp. 163-164.

Reverencea-McKay, David O.TPSOCIAL SIGNIFICANCE. A great man is reverent. He reverences Deity; he reverences all things associated with Deity; and the great problem that is facing the world today is the attitude toward God, his Son, and the gospel of Jesus Christ.—DNCS, September 6, 1952, p. 15.

Not long ago we stood close to the iron curtain. You could feel the shadow hanging over great Berlin. Read the latest news from old China, and you will see how the effort is being put forth to crush Christianity and belief in Christ.

Irreverence and disbelief are pervading the minds of too many people in nations now conquered by the communists; and you need no further proof of the error of that ideology. Reverence in the home, reverence for God's name should be dominant in every home. It is wrong, it is irreverent, to take his name in vain. There is no provocation that will justify it. Let us apply that quality and that virtue here in this beautiful house. Even loud speaking should be avoided.—DNCS, September 6, 1952, p. 15.

Reverencea-McKay, David O.TPAN APPEAL FOR LEADERSHIP. I am going to make one appeal for this vast audience of leaders. I believe there is one great need in the Church which you presidencies of stakes, bishoprics of wards, presidencies of quorums, and officers in auxiliaries, can supply. I have in mind the need of more reverence in our houses of worship, better order and discipline in our classrooms, in quorum meetings, and in auxiliary groups.—CR, Sept.-Oct. 1950, p. 162.

PREPARATION TO ENTER THE HOUSE OF WORSHIPA LESSON IN ATTITUDES. If you were going to meet the queen of England today you would make great preparation in anticipation of going into her presence. When Helen Keller and her teacher were invited to meet the king of Belgium, Miss Keller, who I think in many respects is the most distinguished woman in all modern history, seemed somewhat agitated as she stood in the waiting room. Though she had stood before dignitaries before, she sensed a responsibility in meeting His Royal Highness.

Reverence#%%#a-McKay, David O.TPWhat I am saying is that whenever you go into the presence of a dignitary, an earthly dignitary, you make preparation. You know that that is one fundamental reason why we put on our Sunday best to come here to the house of God, to come into his presence. Such preparation is in and of itself a virtue. It has a psychological effect, and that father who, in his eagerness to make money, will take his son out in the field to work on Sunday without giving that son an opportunity to take a rest, change his clothes, and come in cleanliness of body and of mind into the presence of his heavenly Father, deprives his son of a blessing, whether he is in the Church or out of it./

Reverencea-McKay, David O.TPThere is a fundamental virtue in coming to the house of worship. One of the fundamental conditions contributing to a person's right thinking and acting is a reverence for God. A growing disbelief among the masses of mankind in a Supreme Being is a principal cause of crime.—DNCS, April 30, 1952, p. 2.

Footnotes

THE APOSTLESHIP IN THE ANCIENT CHURCH

THE ANCIENT CHURCH

Apostleshipa-McKay, David O.TPMEANING OF APOSTLE. The word apostle means an "envoy" or "one who is sent." An Apostle is a "special witness of the name of Christ in all the world."

In all the accounts given of this important event, Peter's name is mentioned first, indicating that he was chosen as the chief Apostle and was undoubtedly appointed and set apart as the President of the Council of Twelve. The names of the Twelve whom Jesus ordained at that time were:

(1) Simon Peter, and his brother (2) Andrew; (3) James and (4) John, the two sons of Zebedee; (5) Philip of Bethsaida, and (6) Nathanael, also called Bartholomew; (7) Thomas, also called "Didymus," a name which means "a twin"; (8) Matthew, the publican, or tax gatherer; (9) James, the son of Alphaeus, called "James the Less"; (10) Lebbeus, who was also called Thaddeus, and also Judas, but not Judas Iscariot; (11) Simon, the "Canaanite," or "Simon the Zelotes," and (12) Judas Iscariot, who became the traitor.

These twelve men were, for the most part, Galilean fishermen, who labored at their trade on the shores of Galilee. Matthew, however, was a publican, and therefore despised by the Jews; and Judas was a Judean. Some of the leaders of the Jews thought that they were unlearned and ignorant men. (See Acts 4:13.) "Unlearned they were; but not ignorant; for by their wisdom and preaching, they overthrew the whole edifice of human wisdom, and led the world to the light of truth."—AA, pp. 25-26.

SIMON PETER—THE CHIEF APOSTLE

Petera-McKay, David O.TPDESIRABLE CHARACTERISTICS OF AN APOSTLE. When Jesus called Simon Peter or "The Rock," he undoubtedly expressed in that name one characteristic which he desired to see in the faith of his disciples, and particularly in each of his Apostles. He desired them to possess a faith that was unwavering—a faith that would make them steadfast in the truth regardless of miracles or the acts of men—a faith that would trust the Lord at all times and under all circumstances, let those times and circumstances be what they may.

Jesus knew that the Jews were easily influenced; that a miracle performed today might awaken a feeling in them that he was the king for whom they had been waiting, and that a truth taught tomorrow might arouse in them a feeling that he was an impostor. He wanted to lead them to God and to his gospel. He longed to have them comprehend the truths of life so they would live them after he was gone from their midst.—AA, p. 34.

Petera-McKay, David O.TPTESTIMONY AND REVELATION. At last Jesus discovers the assurance in Peter for which he has been laboring many months to develop. He now knows that Peter's spirit has received divine assurance that all these miracles and mighty manifestations have been wrought by the power of God through his only Begotten Son. He knows that the testimony borne by Peter comes not from men but from God, and no matter what men may think or do, Peter will stand firm as a rock on this testimony.

"And I say also unto thee," continued Jesus, "That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." (Matt. 16:18.)

By that he meant that as Simon's name Peter means rock, so this testimony that comes by revelation shall be the rock upon which Christ's church shall be built because when one receives such divine assurance in his soul that the gospel is true, no views of men, nor waves of temptation, nor "the power of hell" can deprive him of it. You remember when Jesus first met Simon, he said he should be called "the Rock." Ever since then it would seem that Jesus has been waiting for the time when Peter's testimony would be like his character—expressive and firm. That time has come; and Peter is now prepared to receive a greater responsibility.

"And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (Ibid., 16:19.)

One key was to open the door of the gospel to the Gentiles, but it took quite a while before Peter knew how to use it.

It is one thing to know that the gospel is true; it is quite another thing to comprehend its purpose and significance.—AA, pp. 42-43.

LESSONS FOR YOUTH IN THE APOSTLESHIP OF PETER. Peter's experience is the experience that will come to nearly all the boys and girls who read these pages. The knowledge of truth, and the testimony of the gospel may come gradually to most of them. The one great lesson for them to learn even in youth is, that purity of thought, and a sincere heart seeking the Savior's guidance daily will lead to a testimony of the truth of Christ's gospel as sure and permanent as that which Peter possessed as he descended Mt. Hermon after seeing the Transfiguration of Christ, and hearing the voice of God testify to his divinity.

But knowing that Jesus is the Savior of mankind did not give Peter a comprehension of the gospel plan. In this regard, he had yet much to learn. And, it may be, that his strength of character, or shall we say his judgment, was not yet so sound as it should have been in a man whose whole life should be as firm as a rock.—AA, pp. 48-49.

Petera-McKay, David O.TPINSTRUCTIONS TO THE FIRST CHIEF APOSTLE. It is said when Peter went out speechless from the face of all, and filled the silence, weeping bitterly, that his grief was so heavy that he remained alone all day during Friday and Saturday following the Savior's crucifixion. If so, his sorrow for what he had done was made all the more acute as he recalled the many kind words the Savior had spoken to him, and the many happy moments he had spent in the Lord's company. Every word and act and look associated with his Master would flash upon his mind with a new meaning. Perhaps for the first time in his life, he now fully realized why the Lord had desired his nature and faith to be as "the Rock." Through the mist of his bitter tears, he saw all the true attributes of manhood as they were personified in Jesus—reverence, brotherliness, patience, sincerity, courage.

Petera-McKay, David O.TPThese and many other noble traits made Jesus appear to him now more holy than ever. But the more clearly Peter saw Christ's strength and holiness, the more clearly he realized his own littleness and misery. This last manifestation of his weakness, which led him to deny his Lord, made him see himself in a new light, and it had a decisive effect upon him. Out of the "deep silence" of his suffering, those two days, there was born that strength which Christ had urged upon him ever since he called him Peter.—AA, pp. 66-67.

Several days after this, Peter and six other disciples were back on the sea of Tiberias, fishing. They were in Galilee, evidently waiting to meet the Lord there as he had promised. One evening, as if Peter had almost despaired of waiting, he said to the others, "I'm going fishing."

"We also go with thee," said they.

They entered into a boat immediately, and let down their nets. They toiled all night and caught nothing, just as some of them had done on a memorable occasion several months before.

As morning dawned, they saw a man standing on the shore, but in the distance, they could not tell who he was. Suddenly the man cried, "Sirs, have ye any meat?"

"No," was their reply.

"Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find," said the man.

They did so, and caught so many fish that they could scarcely draw in the net.

John, whose loving eyes were made more keen by a loving heart, rushed to Peter's side and whispered, "It is the Lord."

Instantly, Peter knew John spoke the truth, and man of action that he was, he put on his fisherman's coat, plunged into the sea, and hastened to the feet of the Master. The others came in the little ship, dragging the net of fishes.

Jesus had already started a fire and was cooking them something to eat. After the greetings, he said, "Bring of the fish which ye have now caught."

Peter was the leader in going to the net and in drawing it to the land. While the fish were cooking, the disciples counted the number caught, and found that in that one draught there were 153; "and for all there were so many, yet was the net not broken."

Jesus had shown them where to catch the fish; he had started the fire on which to cook them; and now "he taketh the bread and giveth them and the fish likewise." Surely these little incidents would tend to impress them with the truth that if they "would seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness all else will be added." At any rate, this is the lesson taught on that great occasion: The Apostles were not now to spend their lives seeking the things which perish, but in searching for souls that will endure throughout all eternity. Many are now together in the fold of Christ, and the shepherd is called away. Henceforward Peter and his associates must be the keepers of this flock.

When they had broken their fast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these?" "Yea, Lord," answered Peter, "thou knowest that I love thee."

"Feed my lambs." That is, Take care of the little ones in my Church. Do not let them go astray in paths that will lead them to sin and misery.

He saith unto him again the second time, "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me?"

"Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee."

"Feed my sheep." Keep the older ones together and give them the words of life as thou has received them from me.

A third time Jesus said, "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me?"

And Peter, somewhat grieved, answered, "Lord thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee."

"Feed my sheep."

And then the Savior admonished Peter not always to follow his own inclinations and impulsive nature, but ever to do his duty as the shepherd of the fold. When Peter was young and did not have the knowledge and responsibility he now possessed, he could go fishing and make money or study or do whatever he wished, but now he must attend to his duties in the kingdom of God no matter what might come to him personally in doing so. Even though Peter's duty led to the cross, the Savior said, "Follow me."

While this conversation was going on, Jesus and Peter were walking alone a little ahead of the others. Peter turned and saw John following close to them.

"Lord," said Peter, "what is John to do?"

"If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee, follow thou me." As much as to say, Just attend faithfully to your duty, Peter; teach others to do the same; and all will be well. (See John 21.)

This is the last recorded word of Christ to Peter; but he was present, of course, when the Savior gave his final charge to the Twelve. (See Mark 16:16.)

From this time Peter's zeal in the work of the ministry was constant, and his boldness unsubdued.—AA, pp. 69-73.

OTHERS CHOSEN TO ASSIST THE APOSTLES. As the membership of the church increased, men were called and ordained to various offices in the work of the ministry. Besides the Apostles, there were evangelists, pastors, teachers, deacons, etc. Among the first to be chosen and ordained to a particular office of service in the Church were "seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost, and wisdom." Their names were Stephen, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolas. They are called deacons, and one of their chief duties was to oversee the distribution of food among the poor.—AA, p. 91.

PETER'S DIFFICULTY IN UNDERSTANDING HIS CALLING. Though only a few years had passed since the Apostles had received the final commission to "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel ..." (Mark 16:15), yet, through their earnest and continuous labors, churches were established in all Judea, Galilee, and Samaria. As it was the duty of the Twelve to look after the interests of the whole church, it became necessary for them to travel throughout all the land of the Jews. Peter visited from place to place, organizing, ordaining, blessing, and preaching the gospel of Christ.—AA, p. 95.

It had been Peter's duty and privilege to preach the gospel first to the Gentiles. Please note that when the Lord desired the Gentiles to hear his word, he instructed the chief of the Twelve to turn the key that opened the gospel door to them. This is one of the special duties of the Apostleship.

Since that time, many Gentiles had become converted; and in some cities they met and worshiped together with the Jews. This was particularly true in Antioch, an important city of Syria where the followers of Jesus were first called Christians.

But there were certain men from Judea who went to Antioch and caused trouble. These were Jews who had accepted the gospel but who still believed that the Gentiles would have to do everything the Jews did before they could obtain salvation.

The question as to whether the Gentiles might receive the gospel and be saved, without conforming to every Jewish rite, came before the Twelve and other Church leaders in Jerusalem.

"And when there had been much disputing, Peter rose up, and said unto them, Men and brethren, ye know how that a good while ago God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the gospel, and believe.

"And God, which knoweth the hearts, bare them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us;

"And put no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith." (Acts 15:7-9.)

He then told them not to provoke God by passing some rule that would compel the Gentiles to do what the Lord does not require of them, for, he added, "But we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as they." (Ibid., 15:11.)

There was a time when Simon, the Jewish fisherman, with all his Jewish prejudices, would have rather yielded to the Jewish side of this question; but now, it was not Simon, the fisherman, who spoke, but Peter, the chief Apostle of the Lord. What were prejudices to him in the light of the inspiration of truth! All that was necessary for him to know was whether the thing was right, and prejudice or no prejudice, favor or no favor, he would defend it.

It is true that once after this council, so Paul says, (See Gal. 2:7), Peter withdrew from the company of some Gentiles because some of the Jews came down from Jerusalem. Paul says he rebuked Peter for his actions on this occasion, but we have no record of what Peter said or did. Knowing Peter as we do, we are safe in concluding that he did not intentionally waver from the right. It seems more probable that Paul misunderstood Peter's motives. At any rate, we may rest assured that what Peter said and did was intended to help those who were influenced by his actions.

From that time, we know very little of Peter's travels. By reading his epistles, we get a little insight into the nature of his labors and travels during the last years of his life. Undoubtedly, he visited every country where there were organized branches of the Church, even to the "seven churches in Asia."

We do not know just where he died nor the kind of death he suffered, but it is evident that the end was not far off when he wrote his second epistle to the churches. That was about thirty-five years after he first met the Savior. He was in the ministry then, approximately thirty-five years, perhaps longer.—AA, pp. 108-110.

Petera-McKay, David O.TPA LESSON FROM THE CHIEF APOSTLE. To the priesthood I quote the truth and the admonition given by the chief Apostle to the members of the priesthood over nineteen hundred years ago—that chief Apostle, my favorite, wrote this letter:

Petera-McKay, David O.TP"The elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed:

Petera-McKay, David O.TP"Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind;

Petera-McKay, David O.TP"Neither as being lords over God's heritage, but being ensamples to the flock.

Petera-McKay, David O.TP"And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away.

Petera-McKay, David O.TP"Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves unto the elder. Yea, all of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble.

Petera-McKay, David O.TP"Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time:

Petera-McKay, David O.TP"Casting all your care upon him; for he careth for you.

Petera-McKay, David O.TP"Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour:

Petera-McKay, David O.TP"Whom resist stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world." (I Peter 5:1-9.)

Just one element I wish to emphasize. The instructions I give are nineteen hundred years old, yet new today and applicable as then to elders, from the chief elder. But he said, be "ensamples to the flock." (Ibid., 5:3.) Ever keep in mind, fellow workers, that example should start at home. That is the best place to exercise the lofty ideals of the priesthood.—CR, April 1948, pp. 171-172.

JAMES, THE SON OF ZEBEDEE

James the Apostlea-McKay, David O.TPWhen the Twelve were chosen, James was chosen next to Peter, and one of the three who constituted what we might call the Presidency of the Twelve. In this position, he became closely associated with the Redeemer and was an eyewitness to some of the most sacred incidents in his Lord's ministry. Thus, with Peter and John, he was present in the room when the little daughter of Jairus was restored to life.

He was also one of the favored three on the Mount of Transfiguration; and was one of those chosen to accompany the Master to the secluded place in the Garden of Gethsemane, when Christ suffered those bitter agonies preparatory to his betrayal and sufferings on the cross.

About forty-two or forty-four years after Christ, Herod Agrippa, as you have already learned, commenced a bitter persecution against the Saints. James was among the first to be arrested.

Sentence was passed upon him very soon after he was apprehended, yet, so remarkable were his faith and his courage during the trial that the officer who guarded him, (who, some say, was his accuser) repented of his sins, became converted, and declared his faith in Christianity.

As James was being led to the place of execution, this officer threw himself at the Apostle's feet, and humbly begged forgiveness for what he had said against him.

Putting his arm around the penitent man, James answered, "Peace, my son, peace be unto thee, and pardon of thy faults."

Both were then executed by order of the cruel Herod.

James the Apostlea-McKay, David O.TPThus James, the first martyr Apostle, partook of the cup of which he had said to his Lord many years before he was willing to drink.—AA, pp. 115-117.

JOHN, THE BROTHER OF JAMES

In the first chapter of the gospel according to John, we read that two disciples of John the Baptist heard their master bear witness to the divinity of Jesus. Said the Baptist, referring to Jesus walking alone in the distance, "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world." (John 1:29.) One of the two disciples who heard this testimony is named; he was Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter. (See ibid., 1:40.) The other is not named. Indeed throughout the entire book, which, undoubtedly, was written by John himself, the name of John, son of Zebedee, is never once written. In the account of the Last Supper, we read of a "disciple whom Jesus loved," who sat so near the Lord that his head could rest on Jesus' bosom.

These two instances, and others that might be named, indicate to us a prominent trait in John's character; viz., an unassumed modesty that won him the respect and love of all who knew him.

John the Beloveda-McKay, David O.TPBut John was the son of Salome and Zebedee, and the younger brother of James, with whom he was called "Boanerges," or Son of Thunder. This gives us a little insight into another phase of his character. Like his brother James, he was evidently fiery in his zeal in whatever he undertook to do, and fearless in doing what he thought was right.

John the Beloveda-McKay, David O.TPA modesty that made him shrink ever from praising himself or unduly pushing himself forward; a fearlessness in defending what is right, and a love for his Master that gave him the highest place in the Savior's heart—these are three traits of John's character which stand out distinctly in the fragmentary accounts of his life.

John the Beloveda-McKay, David O.TPHe lived, and was probably born in Bethsaida, the home of Peter and Andrew and Philip. He was a fisherman by trade and worked with his father and brother James. His father, Zebedee, owned his own ships, and employed servants; so we conclude that he was well-to-do financially. (See Mark 1:20.)

John the Beloveda-McKay, David O.TPHe was a seeker after true learning and especially after those things which would tell him about God and the hereafter. He kept his mind and heart pure, so that he could appreciate the truth when he heard it.

John the Beloveda-McKay, David O.TPWhen, therefore, John the Baptist came out of the wilderness preaching repentance and declaring that the kingdom of heaven was at hand, John was one of the fearless young men who believed the Baptist and followed him. Thus he was prepared to accept John's testimony of Jesus after the latter was baptized in Jordan, and was one of the two who had the first interview with the Savior of the world at the beginning of his ministry.

On the same occasion when Simon Peter and his brother were called as disciples of Jesus, James the son of Zebedee and John were with their father mending their nets, and when Jesus called them, they immediately left the ship and their father and followed him. (See Matt. 4:21-22; Luke 5:1-11.)

Luke tells us that John was present at the miraculous draught of fishes and was very much astonished at what he heard and saw on that occasion. It was one of the first lessons, if not the first impressive lesson, that taught him the great truth that obedience to Christ's words brings blessings.

John the Beloveda-McKay, David O.TPONE OF THE SPECIAL THREE. From this time on to the end of his eventful life, he was always in the ministry. When Jesus chose his disciples, John was chosen one of the special three, although he was the youngest member of the Twelve.

John the Beloveda-McKay, David O.TPFrom that time, John was in the close companionship of Jesus, and witnessed some of the most remarkable and divine incidents recorded in the history of Christ's ministry. He was one of the three Apostles permitted to remain in the room when the little daughter of Jairus was restored to life. (See Luke 8:51.) He was on the Mount of Transfiguration when the Savior conversed with Moses and Elias and when a voice from heaven said, "This is my Beloved Son, hear him." (See Ibid., 9:28-35.)

With Peter, James, and Andrew, John was present on the Mount of Olives when Jesus taught them concerning the destruction of the temple and of Christ's second coming. How the memory of such occasions must have filled his soul in after years, with rejoicing and sweet content!

To him and Peter was entrusted the duty of making preparations for the Passover.

At the solemn moment when the Savior said, "One of you shall betray me," it was John, the "disciple whom Jesus loved" who received the answer indicating who the traitor was.

When the gloom of Gethsemane began to weigh heavily upon the spirit of Jesus, John was one of the three unto whom the Savior said, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with me." (Matt. 26:38.)

Later that same night, when the traitor gave the kiss of betrayal, and the soldiers arrested Jesus and bore him away a prisoner, all the other disciples fled, but John accompanied his Master to the house of the high priest and later admitted Peter, who, you remember, had "followed afar off."

Though we are not told, yet we can imagine what this beloved disciple's feelings were as he listened to the false and wicked accusations against his Lord, and how his heart must have ached as he saw Jesus beaten and scourged, and a crown of thorns put on his head. If he had wanted to call down fire from heaven and consume the Samaritans who refused shelter and accommodations to his Lord, what must have been the state of his fiery soul when he beheld the Jews and their judges persecuting the Christ to death!

John the Beloveda-McKay, David O.TPHow his soul must have been rent in agony as he saw his Savior nailed to the cross, and yet what peace must have come to him as he received from the dying lips of his Master one of the dearest commissions ever given to mortal man. As the three Mary's and John stood by the cross, Jesus looked down upon them and said to his mother, "Woman, behold thy son!" and to John, "Behold thy mother!"

John the Beloveda-McKay, David O.TP"And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home." (John 19:27.)

On the Sunday morning following the crucifixion, John was with Peter when Mary Magdalene came running to them, saying: "They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid him." (Ibid., 20:2.)

As soon as the Apostles heard this, they ran for the spot where Jesus had been buried. John being the younger outran Peter and was the first to see the empty tomb; and "...looking in, saw the linen clothes lying; yet went he not in." (Ibid., 20:5.) A moment later, however, he followed Peter into the tomb, made a careful examination of the linen clothes and napkin that was about the head; but not yet realizing that Christ was to rise the third day, each returned to his own home.

John was with the ten and later with the eleven when Christ appeared to them in the upper room. Of this and other glorious experiences he bears testimony in his gospel. "...that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name." (Ibid., 20:31.)—AA, pp. 118-123.

JOHN'S ACTIVITIES, CA. 35-50 A.D. For about fifteen years after the Savior's ascension it is believed that John continued at Jerusalem and remained a true son to Mary. During all that time, however, he was always active in the ministry.

He was with Peter going to the temple when the lame man at the Gate Beautiful asked them for alms.

With Peter he exercised his faith on that occasion to bless the poor man who had never walked.

John, undoubtedly, testified to the multitude who assembled at Solomon's porch on the day of this miracle; but no historian has told us what he said. We infer from what Luke says that John spoke at that time; but only Peter's sermon, and only a little of that, has been preserved.

While they were speaking, the captain of the temple arrested them and put them in prison.

When they were brought out before the council next day and told not to preach about Jesus any more, John was just as bold as Peter in declaring, "Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye,

"For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard." (Acts 4:19-20.)

After they were released, they continued preaching to the people and praising the Lord for all his wonderful manifestations to them. The great spiritual feast that resulted from their labors must have filled John's soul with a divine peace such as he had never before experienced, for of all the Apostles, he was the most spiritual-minded.

During this period, he was imprisoned several times, but never once did he waver in his determination to let all the people know that Jesus Christ was the Redeemer of the world. He could suffer and be happy because he loved those whom he served. Thus in the beginning of his ministry his character shone out in true greatness; for he was "willing, patient, and strong to endure for others."

When the Samaritans received the gospel through the preaching of Philip, John accompanied Peter to Samaria, and conferred the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands upon those whom Philip had baptized.

No doubt this was just one of many visits he made during those fifteen years that he remained at Jerusalem. The Twelve, the seventies, elders, priests, teachers, and deacons were out preaching in all the cities roundabout Jerusalem, and the three chief Apostles, Peter, James, and John would be required, and when not required would be invited, to organize the branches and to meet with the new converts and give encouragement in their glorious faith.

When the great question arose about what the Gentiles who joined the Church should be required to do, John was one who sat in the council held at Jerusalem. Paul, writing about this council, mentions James, Cephas, and John who "seemed to be pillars." In the light of the organization of the Church today, we know that Peter, James, and John were the men who presided at that time, although it was James who rendered the decision that was made effective throughout all the provinces.—AA, pp. 125-127.

JOHN AFTER THE COUNCIL OF JERUSALEM. An important council was held about fifty years after the birth of Christ (50 A.D.) During the next eighteen years John seems to have been hidden from view. Nothing is known about what he did or where he went. It is presumed that he left Jerusalem, and seldom, if ever, returned. If so, then we may rightly conclude that Mary, the mother of Jesus, had left Jerusalem also, and left it and all her loving kindred and friends on earth for a happy, glorious meeting with her Son in their heavenly home on high. The dutiful and loving attention John had bestowed upon Mary, he is now free to give to the Church which bears her Son's name.

Undoubtedly he visited nearly all, if not all the important places where Christians dwelt; but most of his latest years seem to have been spent in Asia Minor.

Tradition informs us that he made his home at Ephesus, a large and populous city of Iona, about forty miles from Smyrna. It was noted chiefly for its wickedness and the beautiful temple of Diana. Some claim that Jesus' mother Mary and Mary Magdalene went to Ephesus with John and died there. The tradition is a pleasing one; for with the devotion of a son to his mother, as shown by John, there is associated Mary Magdalene's love, which might well be expressed in the words of another beautiful woman, who said to her husband's mother, "Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God:

"Where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried: ... " (Ruth 1:16-17.)

From Ephesus John visited all the branches of the church laboring, especially among the "seven churches in Asia."

When John had spent several years at Ephesus, a cruel Roman emperor, during his persecution of the Church, arrested him, had him carried to Rome, condemned him to death, and had him plunged into boiling oil. John's life being preserved through the power of God, he was then banished to Patmos. All that John says about it is that he was " ... in the isle that is called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ." (Rev. 1:9.) It is quite evident from this that he had been persecuted for his belief in the gospel and for his unwavering testimony of the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ. He was probably the last living witness of the Savior's miracles and teachings. Perhaps that is why he was banished. But wicked men could not banish the testimony he had borne. That was planted in the hearts of thousands of sincere believers and, like seeds sown in fertile soil, would grow and bear rich harvests for ages to come.

Nor did banishment injure the aged Apostle, for he was not alone even on that uninhabited and barren rock. One Sunday morning, or the "Lord's day," as he called it, he heard behind him a great voice, as of a trumpet that said to him, " .. What thou seest, write in a book, and send it unto the seven churches which are in Asia; ... " (Rev. 1:11.) He turned, and saw the Son of Man clothed with a garment down to the foot and bound with a golden girdle. As he beheld his Lord wrapped in such divine splendor, he fell at his feet as dead. But the Savior, John says, " ... laid his right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first and the last:

"I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore." (Ibid., 1:17-18.) He was again commanded to write all he had witnessed and what would yet be shown him in vision. Thus was given to the "seven churches of Asia," and subsequently to the world, what is now known as "Revelation," the last book in the Bible, but the first one written by its author.

Upon the death of Domitian, the cruel emperor who had banished him, the Apostle was permitted to return to Ephesus, where he continued his preaching, writing, and testimony.

Besides "Revelation," he wrote his gospel and his three epistles.

John the Beloveda-McKay, David O.TPJohn's second epistle should be of special interest to the young. From it we infer that there were two Christian homes, in each of which John took delight. The mothers were sisters. His letter is addressed to "The Elect Lady" or, as she is sometimes called, the Lady Electa and her children. John tells of his love and that of others for them—mother and children—because of their Christian character. He tells of his great joy because of the children walking in the truth, living as children should live who have learned of the teachings of Christ.

It is said that when he became so old and feeble that he could not walk to church nor preach to his people, his loving friends would carry him to the place of meeting. On these occasions, he would repeat again and again, "My dear children, love one another." One day some asked him, "Master, why dost thou always say this?" He answered, "This is what the Lord commands you; and this, if you do it, is sufficient."

"Beloved, follow not that which is evil, but that which is good. He that doeth good is of God: but he that doeth evil hath not seen God." (III John 11.)—AA, pp. 129-132.

THE ANCIENT APOSTLES AND THEIR PROBLEMS

"GOD IS NO RESPECTER OF PERSONS." You remember how difficult it was for the Lord to convince Peter that the Gentiles were worthy to be baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ. Peter saw in a vision a vast sheet descending from heaven in which there were unclean animals, and he heard a voice saying, "Arise, Peter; slay and eat." But Peter said, "Not so, Lord: for nothing common or unclean hath at any time entered into my mouth." (See Acts 11:7-8.)

When Peter realized the meaning of the vision, his whole Jewish nature was shocked; for to obey was to break the law of his forefathers by associating with Gentiles. The Jewish Christians who were with Peter from Joppa to Caesarea were "astonished" when they saw "the gift of the Holy Ghost poured out" on the "unclean" Gentiles. When Peter reached Jerusalem, he was accused of having not only associated but also having eaten with Gentiles, but Peter had learned by revelation that "what God has made clean" no one should "call common or unclean," that the Lord is "no respecter of persons" and that "every nation" that accepts him and "feareth him and worketh righteousness" may receive his blessings.

THE QUESTION AGITATED. But there were many Jews in the Church who did not believe this, and the only condition on which they would accept a Gentile was that he should obey the Jewish religion also. When this class of Christians heard that Paul and Barnabas had baptized hundreds of Gentiles, they became very much agitated in their feelings, and some of them went to Antioch and began to preach, first privately then publicly, that unless the Gentiles obeyed a certain Jewish rite, they could not be saved. Paul and Barnabas had told the Saints that obedience to the gospel of Christ would save the Gentiles as well as the Jews, and that the Gentiles did not have to become Jews. Now these men from the chief branch of the Church declared that Paul and Barnabas were wrong. No wonder "those who from among the Gentiles were turned unto God," were "troubled" and perplexed. Indeed, the controversy became so sharp that it threatened to lead some out of the Church.

MESSENGERS SENT TO JERUSALEM. So it was " ... determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them, should go up to Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders about this question." (Acts 15:2.)

The church in Antioch evidently believed Paul and Barnabas to be in the right, for when they started on their journey they were escorted on their way by the church. As they passed through Syro-Phoenecia and Samaria, and told the Saints who greeted them how the Gentiles had been converted, they " ... caused great joy unto all the brethren." (Ibid., 15:3.)

This was Paul's third visit to Jerusalem since his conversion. The first was three years after he joined the Church, when he spent two weeks with Peter, and then had to flee for his life. The second was when he accompanied the messengers who brought relief to the Saints in Judea during the famine. That was the time Peter was sentenced to be killed. Fifteen years had passed since he left Jerusalem for Damascus with papers to arrest all Christians whom he found! Now he enters the city as the defender of one of the greatest truths that the Christian Church or the world can know; namely, that God is no respecter of persons but will bless every nation as it obeys the principles of life and salvation.

PAUL IN COUNCIL WITH THE LEADERS. He first met in council with Peter, James, and John, and received for the first time, so far as we know, "the right hand of fellowship" from John, the beloved disciple. Titus was with Paul as an example of those who were Gentile converts.

This visit was really an appeal to the Presidency of the Twelve, and confirms the belief of the members of the Church today that Peter, James, and John were appointed leaders at that time just as three high priests are now chosen as the First Presidency of Jesus Christ's Church.

At length the great meeting was called at which was to be settled once and for all the standing of the Gentiles in the Christian Church. "It was a scene of earnest debate, and perhaps, in its earlier portion, of angry disputing"; but finally Peter addressed the assembly and told how God had revealed to him the fact that the Gentiles could accept the gospel without obeying all the Jewish ceremonies.

Then Paul and Barnabas spoke amidst great silence, while every eye was riveted upon these two great missionaries aries who had first organized branches of the Church among Gentile nations.

Finally, James, the brother of the Lord, who was known among the Jews as "James the Just," arose and gave the decision of the council, which established the union of the Jewish and the Gentile Christians.

PAUL RETURNS TO ANTIOCH. Thus the controversy ended, and Paul's mission to the Gentiles was authoritatively approved. When he started back to Antioch, he was accompanied by Judas, surnamed Barnabas, and Silas, "chief men among the brethren." It seems that John Mark went with them also. They carried with them the decree of the council to be read to the churches that had been so disturbed by the controversy.—AA, pp. 167-171.

MINISTRY AND AUTHORITY OF THE EARLY APOSTLES

CHOSEN BY INSPIRATION. The first important point to note is the prayerfulness with which Christ approached the choosing of his Twelve. If you will read in the sixth chapter of Luke from the twelfth to the sixteenth verses, you will find there a very brief account of Christ's choosing the Twelve. The twelfth verse, especially, is significant:

"And it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God." (Luke 6:12.) (There is a very clear exposition at once of two divine Personages in the Godhead—God the Father to whom Christ prayed, God the Son who had the responsibility of establishing the gospel in the Meridian of Time and throughout all ages.) "And when it was day, he called unto him his disciples: and of them he chose twelve, whom also he named apostles." (Ibid., 6:13.)

Apostlesa-McKay, David O.TPSIGNIFICANCE OF THE NUMBER TWELVE. Some have asked whether the number twelve had any significance. Well, it has. The people to whom Jesus first came were the descendants of the twelve tribes of Israel. They were looking forward to an earthly king, as well as one who would stand at the head of these twelve tribes. Now it is not clearly stated anywhere in the scriptures whether Jesus chose the Twelve because there were twelve tribes of Israel, but the implication is that he did. We find in secular literature the following:

"The Apostles were twelve in number. The number was intended to be significant. Its import could not have been lost on the Twelve themselves when they were first called, or on the multitude who witnessed their election. Our Lord was evidently thinking of the twelve tribes of Israel. Though ten of the tribes had largely disappeared, the mission of the Messiah was to be to all the tribes of the nation. Hence the fitness of the number chosen by our Lord. There was one Apostle for each tribe. Nor should it be overlooked that the employment of this number was a fresh claim on the part of Jesus to be the Messiah. His disciples would argue this: 'Who but the Messiah could venture to create a body or group of twelve disciples only? Nobody had done so before, no prophet, not even the Baptist. Jesus then must be the Messiah.' "

Again we read: "Their number, corresponding to that of the twelve tribes, shows that they are destined primarily to work among the children of Israel, to whom, accordingly, they made their first appeal in Jerusalem."

Now, if that were all we had, I would hesitate about even mentioning this, associating the number twelve with the twelve tribes, but if you will turn to the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 29, verse 12, you will find the following:

"And again, verily, verily, I say unto you, and it hath gone forth in a firm decree, by the will of the Father, that mine apostles, the Twelve which were with me in my ministry at Jerusalem, shall stand at my right hand at the day of my coming in pillar of fire, being clothed with robes of righteousness, with crowns upon their heads, in glory even as I am, to judge the whole house of Israel, even as many as have loved me and kept my commandments, and none else."

I think we need not pause longer on the significance of the number. It is a fact that that number was chosen, the group consisted of twelve, that it was so during Christ's ministry among men. As far as we can find in the Acts of the Apostles, it continued to be so. It is very difficult to find out whether every vacancy that occurred was filled, thus continuing the exact number of twelve, but we do know that the first vacancy made by Judas Iscariot was filled before the work was taken up, and we can readily infer that that policy was continued throughout the ministry of the Twelve, at any rate in this dispensation the Lord again chose twelve, and he also chose twelve from among the Nephites; so it would seem that there is some significance to the number as it relates to the Council.

APOSTLES ORDAINED AND QUALIFIED. Now what about the ministry of the Twelve? We are told that they were ordained and set apart. The inference in Matthew is that the Savior not only ordained them, or authorized them, but he also qualified them—note that—he qualified them to have power over unclean spirits, over diseases, over those spirits which were troubling the people, and sent them forth authoritatively commissioned to represent him, the Author of life. Two great objectives he set clearly before these Twelve. If you will read in Matthew, chapter ten, you will find there the instructions given to the Twelve when Christ first sent them out.

SPECIFIC AND GENERAL COMMISSIONS. Now here you will have to study carefully, and it might not be so interesting to you, but you who would like to follow it, I would suggest this: that you will note the first commission Christ gave related to a temporary mission, and that will be covered from the fifth to the fifteenth verses. "Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not:

"But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." (Matt. 10:5-6.)

See how he circumscribed them! In effect he said: That is your mission now, only to the lost sheep of the House of Israel, not to the Samaritans who are looked upon with distrust by the Jews because they turned away from the teachings of Judah. No Samaritan was to receive the gospel under the first commission.

The second part is found from the sixteenth to twenty-third verses. This relates more to the gospel ministry of that time. Here Jesus refers to some of the principles general in application—one of them is "lose yourself for the good of others."

Then the third part from verses twenty-four to forty-two, Christ gave the wider application, "Go ye and teach all nations." This was given after his death and after his resurrection. Note the difference: First, an immediate mission, second, a gospel of general application, and third, a universal assignment with a promise. Upon them he placed the responsibility of carrying the gospel to the world. These instructions the Twelve carried out specifically, and at first held strictly to their calling that they must go only to the Jews and not to the Gentiles.

APOSTLES NOT OF THE TWELVE. I want to bring to your attention another testimony concerning the reality of the resurrection. It is given by Paul. He, too, was an Apostle, though you cannot find that he was ever sustained as one of the council. By the way, there are Apostles who are not members of the council. I think there were in that day, at least they were considered to be Apostles. In one instance, for example, Paul and Barnabas are referred to as "these Apostles." As far as we know, Barnabas was never an Apostle. The point I am making is that a man may be an Apostle but not one of the Council of the Twelve. We have had that in our day. John W. Young was ordained an Apostle February 4, 1864, but he was never a member of the Council of the Twelve from that time to the day of his death. Daniel H. Wells was sustained as a counselor to the Twelve Apostles, and I have heard President Grant say no wiser counselor ever lived in this Church or in the United States than Daniel H. Wells. He was not, however, sustained as a member of the quorum, nor as an Apostle, but just counselor to the Twelve. Brigham Young, Jr., was ordained as an Apostle by his father on February 4, 1864, but he did not become a member of the Council of the Twelve until October 1868, when he was chosen to fill the vacancy caused by George A. Smith. Elder Sylvester Q. Cannon was ordained an Apostle but was not sustained as a member of the Council of the Twelve for some time.

Now, whether Paul was a member or whether he was not, we are not going to say, but he was an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ and a witness of his resurrection. This is what he wrote deliberately to a group of Saints known as Corinthians: "For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures;

"And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the scriptures:

"And that he was seen of Cephas , then of the twelve:

"After that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep.

"After that, he was seen of James; then of all the apostles.

"And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time.

"For I am the least of the apostles, that am not meet to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God." (I Cor. 15:3-9.)

Apostlesa-McKay, David O.TPAN APOSTLE'S DUTY. An Apostle's duty as commissioned is to be a special witness of the Lord Jesus Christ, to bear witness to his doctrine, of its effect upon mankind.—RSM, 25:806-813 (1938).

---
Notas:
[^1] See also, chapter on "Education," for materials in religious education work and calling of teachers, etc.
[^2] Preparation, presentation of material in the light of the restored gospel, sweet, spiritual, moral, uplifting influence, punctuality—in short, a real Latter-day Saint CHAPTER 17
