David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 18

THE SPIRIT OF THE WORK IN THE MODERN CHURCH

THE SPIRIT OF THE WORK

EFFORTS OF PRIESTHOOD WORKERS. It is a source of real encouragement to contemplate the loyalty and energetic efforts of the priesthood of the Church, including, of course, the General Authorities, stake and ward officers, presidencies of missions, missionaries, officers, and members of branches throughout the world. I believe I can say in truth that the standard of efficiency in missions and in organized stakes has never been so high.—CR, April 1952, pp. 11-12.

ORGANIZATIONAL EFFICIENCY. When you go home to your ward, look around next Sunday and try to estimate how many of the Latter-day Saints are absent from the sacrament meeting. It may be that there are twenty percent, or fifty percent absent. Suppose your estimate is fifty percent; then there are that many people in the ward who are neglecting one of the duties of a Latter-day Saint.

Upon whom rests the responsibility of bringing in these brethren and sisters? First, in my opinion, it rests upon the bishopric. As the bishop sits there, let him look around and notice whether all the presidents of the various organizations in the ward are present. If the presidents of the priesthood quorums be absent, it is the duty of the bishopric, I think, to visit those officers and bring them. They may go further; it is their duty to visit the various families and members who are absent and endeavor to bring them in. But it is not the bishopric's meeting; this Church rests upon all and not upon a few.

If one of the seven presidents of the seventies' quorum in that ward is present, and he finds that some of the seventies are absent, the responsibility of bringing them to meeting rests upon him. If presidents of the various quorums of deacons are present, they should note what quorum members have absented themselves from that meeting, and let them assume the responsibility of visiting those members. And so throughout the various organizations in that ward. Where is the responsibility, then? It is divided as it should be, as God intends it to be, among the people composing the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; the responsibility does not rest upon the officers alone; it rests upon the members also. God has blessed them with—what? Wealth? No, probably not. With intellectual superiority? Possibly not, but he has blessed them with moral strength and with a knowledge of the gospel, or else they were not true to themselves when they went down into the waters of baptism. He has blessed them with a knowledge of the truth; and the knowledge of the truth is not enough unless it is expressed, unless it is bringing others to that knowledge. That is the spirit and responsibility of the Latter-day Saint, and it rests upon all.—CR, October 1906, p. 114.

a-McKay, David O.FriendshipTPTHE BLESSINGS OF FRIENDSHIP AND FELLOWSHIP IN THE CHURCH. Among life's sweetest blessings is fellowship with men and women whose ideals and aspirations are high and noble. Next to a sense of kinship with God come the helpfulness, encouragement, and inspiration of friends. Friendship is a sacred possession. As air, water, and sunshine to flowers, trees, and verdure, so smiles, sympathy, and love of friends to the daily life of man! "To live, laugh, love one's friends, and be loved by them is to bask in the sunshine of life."

Church Activitya-McKay, David O.TPOne of the principal reasons which the Lord had for establishing his Church is to give all persons high and low, rich and poor, strong and feeble an opportunity to associate with their fellow men in an atmosphere of uplifting, religious fellowship. This may be found in priesthood quorums, auxiliaries, sacrament meetings. He who neglects these opportunities, who fails to take advantage of them, to that extent starves his own soul.—CR, April 1940, p. 116.

I am happy in my love for my immediate associates, President George Albert Smith and President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and for these noble men of the Council of the Twelve, the Patriarch, the Assistants to the Council of the Twelve, the Council of the Seventy, the Presiding Bishopric. I find it a joy to work with you loyal men who preside in stakes and wards and branches. It is a privilege to have the opportunity to labor with you, to recognize your unselfish devotion to the Church.—CR, October 1947, p. 115.

CONFIDENCE IN LEADERSHIP. My confidence in the First Presidency as noble men and inspired leaders is secure. My association with the Council of the Twelve, with members of the Deseret Sunday School Union board, with members of other general boards, with stake and mission presidencies, and with the priesthood generally throughout the Church is a constant source of inspiration and delight.

The teachings and life of the Master have never before seemed to me more beautiful, more necessary, and more applicable to human happiness. Never have I believed more firmly in the perfection of humanity as the final result of man's placement here on earth. With my whole soul I accept Jesus Christ as the personification of human perfection—as God made manifest in the flesh, as the Savior and Redeemer of mankind.—CR, April 1932, p. 62.

It is just twenty-eight years since I was called into the Council of the Twelve. I have looked introspectively into my own soul and thought this:

"Never before in my life have I felt so grateful for my membership in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Never before have I felt more intensively how beneficial the Church has been to me and my loved ones. Never before has my testimony been stronger. Never have I felt so deeply in every fiber of my being that this Church was established by God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, and that the men who have guided its destiny have been inspired by the revelations of God to them."—CR, April 1934, p. 20.

Grant, Heber J.a-McKay, David O.TPA TRIBUTE TO PRESIDENT HEBER J. GRANT. I have never known a man who exemplified so completely the mastery of mind over matter—whose will could so masterfully bring under subjection physical whims and desires. Perseverance and self-mastery are qualities that will always be connoted with the name of Heber J. Grant.—IE, 48:334 (1945).

WE ARE NOT ALONE. One of the elements in the incident to Paul near Damascus is the great fact that Jesus, our Lord, is interested in his Church, and in the members. As he was interested then, so he is interested today.

I like to feel that he is watching over us, that he is grieved when we do not comply with the ideals and the standards he has given us in the gospel. He was grieved with Saul, a chosen servant, who was going about blindly to destroy the Church. He is delighted when he finds the brethren whom he has appointed doing their duty and trying to live clean, upright lives, living in accordance with the standards of the gospel.

I like to feel that his servants whom he has chosen in this dispensation are also interested, and I hope that President George Albert Smith, who was with us not long ago, is pleased with what we have done during the last six months. I am sure he is pleased with the dedicating of the temple site in Los Angeles because I know that was an enterprise that was dear to his heart.

I like to feel that President Heber J. Grant is near us, ready to help, especially pleased to see that the Church is growing. And President Joseph F. Smith, President Lorenzo Snow, President Wilford Woodruff—those men, I have met—President Woodruff, in our home, closely associated with President Smith, and as you know, with President Grant and President George Albert Smith.

I like to think that President John Taylor is equally interested, also President Young, and especially the Prophet Joseph. The work over on the other side is real, and the curtain sometimes between us and them is very thin. I hope the Lord will help us to go forward as these, his former representatives, would like us to go forward, that we shall always realize that this is the Church of Jesus Christ, who is our head.—CR, October 1951, p. 160.

Relief Societya-McKay, David O.TPTHE WORK OF THE RELIEF SOCIETY. The responsibility of the Relief Society is to aid the priesthood in establishing the kingdom of God, in relieving the suffering and giving succor to the poor, and in many ways in contributing to the peace and happiness of the world. In no one way can these high achievements be better realized than in excelling in the art of home building.—RSM, 23:9-10 (1936).

Relief Societya-McKay, David O.TPOne of the most encouraging promises ever given to people who love service is that made by the Savior in these words, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matt. 25:40.) It is because the Relief Societies of the Church include generally our mothers, and because they are devoted to the service of God's children, that this organization merits first place among the auxiliaries of the Church of Jesus Christ. I grew to manhood before I realized the significance of the service that is rendered by our sisters in this Church. In fact I had to go on my first mission before I had a glimpse of the magnitude and beauty of the service that is rendered by our sisters of the Relief Society.—RSM, 23:689 (1936).

THE TABERNACLE CHOIR AND ITS SERVICE. We must not close the conference without expressing appreciation to the Tabernacle choir, its leader, assistant, to the organists, and to every member. That singing group has attained, through merit, outstanding recognition as one of the great choral organizations of the world. It merits the gratitude of all members of this Church. I do not know of another choir in the world that gives so much time and means, financially, in their service, as the members of this choral group. In your behalf, I thank them with all our hearts for their unselfish devotion and continual attention to this great duty.—CR, October 1951, p. 157.

Musica-McKay, David O.TPMusic is truly the universal language, and when it is excellently expressed, how deeply it moves our souls!—IE, 48:309 (1945).

Musica-McKay, David O.TPUNISONAN IDEAL. The Lord has said: "For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads." (D. & C. 25:12.)

Your unison in song in the national broadcast this morning deeply impressed me—yours were truly songs of the heart. I pray that they will be visited with blessings upon your heads, and that this choir in rendering such a wonderful service to the Church, to the state, and to the nation may receive added blessings. I would that the same oneness, unity, and harmony manifested in that congregational singing might characterize every righteous endeavor of the Church.—CR, October 1936, pp. 102-103.

Unitya-McKay, David O.TPUNITY IN CHURCH ORGANIZATIONS. In branches and wards, there is no virtue more conducive to progress and spirituality than the presence of this principle. When jealousy, backbiting, evil-speaking supplant confidence, self-subjection, unity, and harmony, the progress of the organization is stifled.—CR, October 1939, p. 102.

DETAILS OF CHURCH ADMINISTRATION

HIGH STANDARDS ENJOINED FOR CHURCH SOCIALS. I have in mind only one or two items to give at the conclusion of this impressive conference. One that I mention by way of caution is that in your carnivals which you hold in order to raise money for building purposes, you avoid those games which are unbecoming or that will in any way cast reflection upon our young girls or men who hold the priesthood. We know the difficulties that you have to raise fifty percent of the cost of these edifices, and we commend you highly, and our sisters, for the effort you put forth. But there are some games which are carried on in carnivals outside the Church which are unbecoming the recreation furnished by the Church officers.

One I will name is a feature in which young Bee Hive girls come out in public in bathing suits, sit on a springboard before young men who throw balls to hit a certain spot which will loosen the springboard and cause the young girl to drop into a tank of water.

I have seen colored and white men do that for so much money, but let us not have our young girls do it, nor men who hold the leadership in the priesthood.—CR, October 1951, pp. 178-179.

Conferencesa-McKay, David O.TPPURPOSES OF CONFERENCES. Reference to the Doctrine and Covenants will disclose the fact that there are four principal purposes of holding conferences of the Church:

Conferencesa-McKay, David O.TPFirst, to transact current Church business.

Conferencesa-McKay, David O.TPSecond, to hear reports and general Church statistics.

Conferencesa-McKay, David O.TPThird, to " ... approve of those names which I Lord] have mentioned, or else disapprove of them. ... " (D. & C. 125:144.)

Conferencesa-McKay, David O.TPFourth, to worship the Lord in sincerity and reverence, and to give and to receive encouragement, exhortation, and instruction.—CR, October 1938, pp. 130-131.

THE NEED FOR CHECK-UP. It is a good thing in the Church, as in business, to check upon ourselves to see whether we are succeeding or failing.

Progressa-McKay, David O.TPOrganizations as individuals are either progressing or retrogressing; they seldom if ever stand still. To progress is to obey the law of life. If the Church or any part of it were not improving, you may rest assured that it would be deteriorating. No ward, stake, or branch of the Church can long remain stationary. It is a source of satisfaction to all of us to realize that we belong to a Church that is moving forward.—CR, October 1938, p. 131.

THE DANGERS OF UNAUTHORIZED DIRECTION. It is a little dangerous for us to go out of our own sphere and try unauthoritatively to direct the efforts of a brother. You remember the case of Uzza who stretched forth his hand to steady the ark. (See I Chron. 13:7-10.) He seemed justified, when the oxen stumbled, in putting forth his hand to steady that symbol of the covenant. We today think his punishment was very severe. Be that as it may, the incident conveys a lesson of life. Let us look around us and see how quickly men who attempt unauthoritatively to steady the ark die spiritually. Their souls become embittered, their minds distorted, their judgments faulty, and their spirits depressed. Such is the pitiable condition of men who, neglecting their own responsibilities, spend their time in finding fault with others.—CR, April 1936, p. 60.

Offensesa-McKay, David O.TPIN CASES OF OFFENSE. Has somebody offended you in the Church? You may hold resentment if you wish, say nothing to him, and let resentment canker your soul. If you do, you will be the one who will be injured, not the one who you think has injured you. You will feel better and be far happier to follow the divine injunction: If you have aught against your brother, go to him. (See Matt. 5:23-24.)—DNCS, January 2, 1952, 1952, p. 3.

THE SELECTION OF PERSONNEL. Bishops, do not hesitate to ask the men and women whom you choose to teach our children the following direct questions:

Can you support the authorities of the Church? Are you in harmony with the bishopric? with the stake presidency? the General Authorities?

Do you keep the Word of Wisdom when you are out in society, on the street, or wherever you are?

Do you pay your tithing?

Do you keep the Sabbath day holy?

Are you honest in your dealings with your fellow men?

Do not hesitate to put these and other pertinent questions directly to teachers when you call them. Appeal to them and try to make them realize that to be a teacher is to be a leader, a co-partner with the Creator in molding souls.—IE, 47:721 (November 1944).

ASPECTS OF GENERAL CHURCH ADMINISTRATION

THE CALL TO MEMBERSHIP IN THE FIRST PRESIDENCY, OCTOBER 1934. My beloved brethren and sisters, if it were possible I would have you interpret my feelings this morning by looking into the depths of my soul and thus save me the seeming impossibility of describing them to you. Needless to say I am overwhelmed. During the past few days I have had difficulty in keeping my thoughts and feelings under control. The light heart, the buoyancy of spirit that should accompany the high appointment that has come to me has been somewhat counterbalanced by a heaviness incident to the realization of the great responsibility that comes with the call to the First Presidency.

I love President Heber J. Grant. He has been to me a true friend; more than that, since my father died, I have felt free to go to President Grant for help and counsel as I would go to my own father. His nature is as open, as pure and clear as a faultless crystal—open, loyal, true. I esteem it indeed the highest compliment and privilege to have this expression of his confidence. With all my soul I pray for strength that I may not disappoint him, and that I may be true to the trust that he and my heavenly Father have thus reposed in me.

I have known President Clark since my school days at the University of Utah. I admired him then. I considered him one of the choicest young men I had ever seen or had ever known. His ability was evident even to his schoolmates. He and the sweet girl who later became my sweetheart and wife, were graduated with their A. B. degrees on the same day. We have followed him in his work in Washington; we were thrilled when we learned of the responsibility that he carried there, and the trust which the members of the Senate of the United States placed upon him even before his name was generally known. I love him as a friend, and to be associated with him now in this high quorum, the highest in the Church, makes me feel very happy and thankful, but also very humble.

And so if you could look into my soul, you would see sincere gratitude and deep appreciation. You would find there also a regret that I am leaving the immediate association with the members of the Council of the Twelve. For twenty-eight and one-half years it has been my privilege to work side by side with these good and able men. President Clawson I love with all my soul. His worth and ability are not generally known. He is retiring, he is quiet in his labors, a perfect gentleman, genial, kind, and considerate. As the President of the Council he is prompt in attending to questions and problems referred to the group, as loyal and true in his testimony as the polar star, unwavering, undeviating in the discharging of duty and trust. It is not easy to disentwine my soul directly from his, my president. That entwinement is just as binding with the hearts of these brethren with whom I have worked daily, at times in committees, considering the welfare of the Church at large, and the welfare of individuals.

I want to bear witness today that you may travel the world over, you may read your histories of men devoted to great undertakings and noble problems, but you cannot find a group of men whose lives are more consecrated, whose desires are more noble in the interests, the happiness and peace of mankind, than are the lives and desires of these, my associates in the Council of the Twelve Apostles of this Church. You must live with them to know them. You must be in daily contact with the burdens they are carrying, with their concerns and anxieties for the youth, their willingness to go to the ends of the world at a moment's call if need be to establish better conditions, to make the world happier, more peaceful, more just, and bring about more amicable conditions and relationships in human society. And so it is not an easy task, I say, it is not without regret that I withdraw my membership in that Council.

I appreciate the trust you, my brethren and sisters, have manifested in me. It is a wonderful thing to be trusted. I agree with him who says that to be trusted is a greater compliment than to be loved. Love is the sweetest thing in the world, but to be trusted throws upon him who receives that trust an obligation that he must not fail to discharge. And so I pledge you here, my fellow workers in the First Presidency, you my brethren of the priesthood, in whose company I have spent so many happy hours in priesthood and auxiliary work, I pledge you, my brethren and sisters, to give my best in the service of God.

I uphold before you this morning the President of this Church as God's representative, divinely appointed, and say to all Israel, stand by your chief. Let that spirit of unity and oneness for which our Lord and Savior prayed on the night of his betrayal, be characteristic of this his Church: Father, keep them one, as thou and I are one.—CR, October 1934, pp. 89-91.

THE CALL TO SERVE AS PRESIDENT OF THE CHURCH. My beloved fellow workers, brethren and sisters: I wish it were within my power of expression to let you know just what my true feelings are on this momentous occasion. I would wish that you might look into my heart and see there for yourselves just what those feelings are.

It is just one week ago today that the realization came to me that this responsibility of leadership would probably fall upon my shoulders. I received word that President George Albert Smith had taken a turn for the worse and that the doctor thought the end was not far off. I hastened to his bedside, and with his weeping daughters, son, and other kinfolk, I entered his sickroom. For the first time, he failed to recognize me.

Then I had to accept the realization that the Lord had chosen not to answer our pleadings as we would have had them answered and that he was going to take him home to himself. He rallied again later in the day. Several days preceding that visit, as President Clark and I were considering problems of import pertaining to the Church, he, ever solicitous of the welfare of the Church and of my feelings, would say, "The responsibility will be yours to make this decision," but each time I would refuse to face what to him seemed a reality.

When that reality came, as I tell you, I was deeply moved. And I am today, and pray that I may, even though inadequately, be able to tell you how weighty this responsibility seems.—CR, April 1951, p. 157.

The Lord has said that the three presiding high priests chosen by the body, appointed and ordained to this office of Presidency, are to be "upheld by the confidence, faith, and prayer, of the Church." No one can preside over this Church without first being in tune with the head of the Church, our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. He is our head. This is his Church. Without his divine guidance and constant inspiration, we cannot succeed. With his guidance, with his inspiration, we cannot fail.

Next to that as a sustaining potent power come the confidence, faith, prayers, and united support of the Church.

I pledge to you that I shall do my best so to live as to merit the companionship of the holy Spirit, and pray here in your presence that my counselors and I may indeed be "partakers of the divine spirit."

Next to that, unitedly we plead with you for a continuation of your love and confidence as you have expressed it today. From you members of the Twelve, we ask for that love and sympathy expressed in our sacred Council. From the Assistants to the Twelve, the Patriarch, the First Council of the Seventy, the Presiding Bishopric, we ask that the spirit of unity expressed so fervently by our Lord and Savior when he was saying good-bye to the Twelve, may be manifest by us all.

You remember he said, as he left them: "And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are. ...

"Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word;

"That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou has sent me." (John 17:11, 20-21.)

Brethren and sisters, brethren of the General Authorities, God keep us as one, overlooking weaknesses we may see, keeping an eye single to the glory of God and the advancement of his work.

And now to the members of the Church: We all need your help, your faith and prayers, not your adverse criticisms, but your help. You can do that in prayer if you cannot reach us in person. The potency of those prayers throughout the Church came to me yesterday when I received a letter from a neighbor in my old home town. He was milking his cows when the word came over his radio which he has in his barn that President Smith had passed. He sensed what that would mean to his former fellow townsman, and he left his barn and went to the house and told his wife. Immediately they called their little children, and there in that humble home, suspending their activities, they knelt down as a family and offered prayer. The significance of that scene I leave for you to understand. Multiply that by a hundred thousand, two hundred thousand, half a million homes, and see the power in the unity and prayers, and the sustaining influence in the body of the Church.

Today you have by your vote placed upon us the greatest responsibility, as well as the greatest honor, that lies within your power to bestow as members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Your doing so increases the duty of the First Presidency to render service to the people.—CR, April 1951, p. 157.

THE METHOD OF CHURCH COUNCILS

Councilsa-McKay, David O.TPTo think independently! Men sit in council, but the value of that council is for each one to express what he feels, independently of whether it is going to please somebody else or not. That is the value of counsel and associated with that is the ability to yield that independent thought to the thought of the group—three members of a bishopric sitting there counseling, each one giving his best thought, his best judgment, and even the inspiration that comes to him. But when two decide, then the other says, "Then that becomes my view with yours."

I saw it in a council meeting one day when a question of grave importance came up. I was in harmony with my President in the Council, President Francis M. Lyman, and with other members of that Council, and we were united as we met the First Presidency that morning.

President Joseph F. Smith did not ask our view that day. Usually he asked the junior member to express his thoughts and give his best judgment. To our surprise the President did not ask that. He arose and said, "This is what the Lord wants."

While it was not wholly in harmony with what he had decided, President Francis M. Lyman, the President of the Twelve, was the first on his feet to say, "Brethren, I move that that becomes the opinion and judgment of this Council."

"Second the motion," said another, and it was unanimous. Six months did not pass before the wisdom of that leader was demonstrated.

Think independently, but be united with the majority of your associates in council.—DNCS, June 11, 1952, p. 3.
