David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

BOOK IV

THE CHURCH AND MODERN SOCIETY

Charactera-McKay, David O.TP"We should put forth every effort to supplant the aristocracy of wealth with the aristocracy of character and to awaken in the minds of the youth a realization that to be honest, to be dependable, to be a loyal citizen of the country, to be true to the standards of the gospel are the noblest ideals of life."

—DAVID O. MCKAY

Conference Report

October 1930, p. 10.

CHAPTER 19

OUR CHANGING TIMES

DOMINANT INFLUENCES IN MODERN SOCIETY

THE ARISTOCRACY OF PHYSICAL FORCE AND BIRTH. To understand more clearly conditions as they exist, I think it is well to consider the dominant influences of society today. If we go back through history, we find that at one time the world was governed by the spirit of might; physical force was the aristocracy of the age. And naturally men chose to be strong in physical achievements. Later that period gave way to another aristocracy or ruling power. The sons of these physical men became the rulers, and so there developed an aristocracy of birth.

Materialisma-McKay, David O.TPTHE ARISTOCRACY OF WEALTH. You and I are witnessing and have witnessed the decay of this aristocracy. Thrones are crumbling; their power is diminished. Titles can be purchased by money. Supplanting the aristocracy of birth has come the aristocracy of wealth. Money, it is said, can buy anything.

Materialisma-McKay, David O.TPWe in this financial age need to realize this when we examine and study the conditions that are influencing the youth of today. Many of them are seeking to be wealthy. They are thinking that success lies only in the obtaining of the dollar, and with that unwise ideal they will sacrifice that which is higher and better than any material possession.

THE ARISTOCRACY OF CHARACTER. Do not misunderstand me, I would not underrate the value of wealth. I am cognizant of the fact that the second great commandment was to replenish and subdue the earth. I realize that one great purpose of life is to subdue matter, and I rejoice when I see the great reservoirs filled with water from which flows that element which will change the sagebrush flat into a waving wheat field, and that is wealth. I do not take second place to anyone in the realization of the good which this can do. I am merely emphasizing the thought that there is a nobler ideal in life than the accumulating of wealth.

Charactera-McKay, David O.TPWhen God gave us the command to subdue matter, he meant us to use the power derived therefrom, the power of material things, to realize something which is higher; and that is character, a life that will merit the inspiration of God. What the sunshine is to the field and to the flowers, the Holy Spirit is to the life of man, and the Holy Spirit does not abide with base characters. He will not dwell in unclean tabernacles.

My thought is that we should put forth every effort to supplant the aristocracy of wealth with the aristocracy of character and awaken in the minds of the youth a realization that to be honest, to be dependable, to be a loyal citizen of the country, to be true to the standards of the gospel are the noblest ideals of life. The important problem is how to instil these lofty principles into the minds of young people, and thereby make them worthy citizens.—CR, October 1930, pp. 9-10.

A REVOLUTIONARY PERIOD. We are living in what may well prove to be the most epoch-making period of all time. There is ample evidence on every hand that we are witnessing one of those tidal waves of human thought and emotion which periodically sweep over the world and change the direction of human endeavor. It is a time that demands clear thinking and sound judgment. Whether we are willing to admit it or not, this is a revolutionary period.

There is social and political upheaval. "Thoroughly tested, well-tried principles are being thrown into discard. Long accepted social theories," writes Charles Foster Kent, "have suddenly been rejected, and new ones are being adopted. Many of the moral standards of our fathers are being set aside in theory as well as practice. ... Religious dogmas long regarded as the cornerstones of religion and the church are being disproved or supplanted by the discoveries of modern science."

It is not strange, therefore, that the majority of the men and women in this war-shattered and war-threatening world are unhappy, because they feel the foundations beneath them are tottering. As reported in the public press a year or so ago, an experienced United States congressman, reputably one of the best lawyers in Congress, said: "There isn't a person in this room now who can be certain that he can leave to his children the heritage of the privilege of being free."

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TPCHARTING A TRUE COURSE. Today, if ever, is a time for young people who are not satisfied with merely building "birds' nests" or with temporary desires and pleasures of the moment, to get in mind eternal verities, fundamental truths, and make them life's guiding stars.

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TPIf in this unsettled sea of human perplexities, yearnings, disappointments, and despair, we would pause and eliminate from our minds our immediate demands and schemes for livelihood, if we would set aside our desires for personal pleasure resulting from indulgence in gratification of appetites and passions, if we would for an hour or two withdraw ourselves completely from the physical, the sensual, the political, and even the social influence of this human world, and let our souls commune with self and with the infinite—we should find that only in the recognition and adoption of eternal verities can the yearning of a sincere mind be satisfied and peace and happiness be realized.

REALITY IN PERSPECTIVE. The captain of the Kon-Tiki, when midway in the Pacific Ocean, experienced in reality what I am now suggesting you try to experience in imagination. Floating on a raft with his five companions, a thousand fathoms of water beneath them, a myriad of glittering, tropical stars in the firmament above, he writes: "Whether it was 1947 B.C. or A.D. suddenly became of no significance. We lived—and that we felt with alert intensity. We realized that life had been full for man before the technical age also—in fact, fuller and richer in many ways than the life of modern man. Time and evolution somehow ceased to exist: All that was real and that mattered were the same today as they had always been and would always be."

The captain seemed to feel what our poet said about truth:

" ... 'Tis the last and the first, For the limits of time it steps o'er. Though the heavens depart, and the earth's fountains burst, Truth, the sum of existence, will weather the worst, Eternal, unchanged evermore." John Jacques, "Oh, Say What Is Truth."

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TPIf as I say, we could divest ourselves of all immediate wants and perplexities and talk with self in a serious sort of way, we should find ourselves giving value to like realities. Out of such soul communion would come a recognition that no matter what physical, material, political, industrial, and other changes may occur, no matter how theories of governments may change; how fashions, customs, and ideals may be accepted and abandoned, there remain unchanging verities eternally operative in the universe, ever contributing to the spiritual progress, to the peace, to the happiness of the individual and of the race.

FUNDAMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS. With this recognition would come certain fundamental questions, the answer to which can be found only by reference to eternal truth. A few of these vital problems might be as follows:

First—The ever-present reality and mystery of life and immortality of the human soul.

Second—The existence of God and our relation to him. Is it possible for man's spirit to be in harmony with that divine Being?

Third—These eternal verities accepted, the question arises what is the noblest aim in life—pleasure, wealth, or character?

Fourth—Every human heart yearns for love even more than the body yearns for food. Every normal person seeks a soul mate and recognizes the family as the true source of love's expression.

Such questions enter either in a fleeting or contemplative degree the mind of every thinking or contemplating person.—DNCS, June, 6, 1951, p. 2.

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AND THE REVOLUTIONS OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-McKay, David O.TPFor nearly twenty centuries millions of Christians have prayed for the coming of the kingdom of God, and for more than twenty centuries, millions of people have persistently rejected the conditions indispensable to the realization of this era of peace and brotherly kindness.

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-McKay, David O.TPEven though the essentials for a better world have not been generally accepted, yet mankind has ever striven for a better way of living. In every progressive age of the world's history, thinking people have been dissatisfied with their current social and economic conditions and have sought for remedial changes. Many of their hoped-for Utopias, however, though they have inspired men to action, have ended only as dreams and fantasies.

POLITICAL UPHEAVALS INSUFFICIENT. In response to this urge for change, the twentieth century is no exception. Indeed, during the last fifty years people have witnessed greater political unrest, more stupendous upheavals than have probably occurred in the same length of time in the history of the world. European monarchies have been overthrown. Democracy, as exemplified in Great Britain and her dominions and in the United States, has successfully withstood the battling horrors of a world war, and now, after only a quarter of a century, is again either actually participating in or standing on the brink of a second devastating conflict.

If, in the spirit of charity, we say that misguided men have brought all this about because of their desire for a better government, the fact still remains that civilization is encompassed by social upheavals that threaten to divert, if not entirely thwart, the progress and happiness of the present generation.—CR, October 1940, p. 101.

Wara-McKay, David O.TPTHE REVOLUTIONARY SWEEP OF WORLD WAR I. When I think or read of the horrors of the most wicked of wars now going on in Europe, when I picture young men who have been forced to carry the gun and slay their fellow men, running across a field, burrowing into the earth as animals, to protect themselves from their fellow men, when I read of these men lying heaped in trenches, and in fancy hear their groans as they turn their ghastly faces to heaven, when I think of the devastated towns and see fleeing from those towns husbandless women, dragging fatherless children, when I think of the thousands of human beings who are going to die of starvation and disease—because we are told that for every soldier that dies in battle five others at least will die of exposure, disease, and starvation—I say when I think of all these horrors that come in the wake of war, I try to find out the cause of it all.

Wara-McKay, David O.TPEach nation is calling its people to "Come to the defense of the nation, because the war is forced upon us." It seems to have such right on its side that it is fighting for its life, for its country, its God. But the real causes are not evident; however, you will discover that one cause of the disastrous war lies deeply rooted in the fact that those highly so-called Christian nations have never applied the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Wara-McKay, David O.TPFAILURE TO APPLY CHRISTIAN PRINCIPLES. The leaders and rulers who brought this war upon the people failed to apply the little, simple principles that Christ taught centuries ago. Why, if they had applied only one of his teachings, the whole war might have been averted; for example, if you bring your gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thou hast aught against thy brother; leave there thy gift upon the altar and go first to thy brother; first reconcile thyself to him, then come and offer thy sacrifice. (See Matt. 5:23-24.) If the first two nations that clashed, because of having misunderstood each other, had applied that little simple doctrine and lived it, maybe the whole thing would have been averted for a time.

Wara-McKay, David O.TPBut that is only one. The roots of the causes of this war lie deeply bedded in vanity, one monarch feeling above another, so far above him, in fact, that he would not arbitrate, would not go to his brother and have an understanding of the misunderstandings that had risen. Yes, the causes of war are vanity, selfishness, unjust commercialism, unrighteousness, and other things contrary to the spirit of the gospel of Jesus Christ. O if the people of the world could only apply the gospel in their nationalism! But they have considered it only as a thing apart from daily life—as something to be treated as a mere social function. They haven't felt that it is a vital force, the vital force in humanity.

It may be that this dreadful carnage which is going on—the toppling of thrones, the destruction of monarchies, may be but a step to prepare the way for the preaching of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and the giving to the millions of honest souls in those countries the opportunity of accepting it. I, for one, believe it with all my soul. Upon whom, then, rests the responsibility of carrying this message to them after the way is prepared? Upon whom but those unto whom has been given the power and authority to represent God in this world? That is you, my brother; that is you, my sister. How glorious the gospel seems to us; but oh, how mighty the responsibility upon the elders of the Church! The first step toward carrying this responsibility is to apply our religion in our lives.—CR, October 1914, pp. 88-89.

THE MORAL CRISIS OF OUR AGE. The world faces a crisis—a terrible crisis. Opportunity is given for men to choose wisely and live, or disregard the Master's teachings and die. Down through the ages comes resounding the cry of Joshua—

" ... choose you this day whom ye will serve; ... but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord." (Joshua 24:15.)

And the thrilling words of Peter when commanded not to speak at all, nor to teach in the name of Jesus:

"Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye.

"For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard." (Acts 4:19-20.)

The choice today is between dictatorship with the atheistic teachings of communism, and the doctrine of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, obedience to which alone can make us free.—CR, April 1948, p. 70.

Wara-McKay, David O.TPTHE NEW BARBARISM. "During the first half of the twentieth century we have traveled far into the soul-destroying land of socialism and made strange alliances through which we have become involved in almost continuous hot and cold wars over the whole of the earth. In this retreat from freedom the voices of protesting citizens have been drowned by raucous shouts of intolerance and abuse from those who led the retreat and their millions of gullible youth, who are marching merrily to their doom, carrying banners on which are emblazoned such intriguing and misapplied labels as social justice, equality, reform, patriotism, social welfare.

Wara-McKay, David O.TP"Intoxicated with pride in our achievement, enmeshed in the interesting problems still unsolved, we have left unguarded the gate through which are pouring the destructive hordes and forces of a new invasion of barbarism." [^1]Hearing the dangers just enumerated, the nation is threatened with the disintegrating influence of moral turpitude; honesty seems to be outmoded; the stability of the family life is threatened; loyalty and patriotism have lost their order; crime and lawlessness, particularly among young people, are increasing alarmingly.—DNCS, October 18, 1952, pp. 2, 4.

Moral Decaya-McKay, David O.TP"MEN AND BRETHREN, WHAT SHALL WE DO?" Throughout the world generally today there is a spirit of unrest, a grasping for untried ideologies (and our community is no exception), and, what is worst of all, a tendency toward moral abandonment. It is all too apparent that "our spiritual culture lags far behind our material culture in its development."

Now is a time when peoples in all the world should pause and in all earnestness repeat the Pentecostal question propounded to Peter and other Apostles:

"Men and brethren, what shall we do?" (Acts 2:37.)

THE UNITED NATIONS ON TRIAL. Representatives of fifty nations are now assembled trying to find an answer. Communist nations, however, are clashing with Christian groups, and it looks as though the proverbial dove of peace, if not killed, might again be seriously crippled.

At the final plenary session of the United Nations conference when the charter was about to be signed, five great leaders invoked the Lord's aid to the end that the cause of peace would not fail.

Said Mr. Edward Stettinius S. Secretary of State in 1945]:

"To the governments and peoples of the fifty nations here represented, this charter is now committed, and may Almighty God from this day on and in the months and years to come sustain us in the unalterable purpose that its promise may be fulfilled."

The Earl of Halifax, chairman of the delegation of the United Kingdom, said:

"Let us also, mindful alike of the world's need and of our own weakness, pray that, under God's guidance, what we have done here in these last weeks will be found worthy of the faith which gave it birth, and of the human suffering which has been its price."

His Royal Highness, Amir Faisal Ibin Abdiel Aziz, chairman of the delegation of Saudi Arabia, stated:

"As long as we are united together in a spirit of co-operation, the hands of Almighty God will lead us. We shall always have his aid so long as we help one another."

And Field Marshal Jan Christiaan Smuts of South Africa, said:

"May heaven's blessings rest on it."

And the President of our own United States prayed that under God's guidance the cause would succeed.

Unless such appeals were mere empty phrases, these leaders indicate the only safe and sure way in which wars may be averted and peace among nations established. Not through communistic theories, not by the manifestations of mistrust, suspicion, and hatred will the turbulency of national ills be quieted. Unless the spirit of Christianity permeate the deliberations of the United Nations, dire tragedies await humanity.—CR, October 1947, pp. 117-118.

AMERICAA CHOICE LAND. The economic progress of our country during the past century has been phenomenal. So also has been her influence politically among the nations. Today America is reputedly the only nation in the world "capable of sustaining western civilization."

Opposed to her is Russia, which has renounced faith in God and in his overruling power in the universe.

The threatened impending clash between these two nations is more than a test of political supremacy, more than a fight between capitalism and communism—it is the evercontending conflict between faith in God and in the gospel of Jesus Christ, and disbelief in the philosophy of Christian ideals. Faith in man is the power that leads to brotherhood; faith in God, the ladder by which men climb toward perfection. Faith is strength; doubt, weakness and disintegration.

There can be no question about the outcome of the anticipated ominous clash, which we earnestly hope and pray will never come, between these two great nations of conflicting ideals, if the inhabitants of America will but keep their faith in the Lord of heaven and earth, and in the principles of peace taught by his Son on the shores of Galilee two thousand years ago. Upon this is the promise of possession of this land and prosperity therein based:

"Behold," says the prophet, "this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ, ... " (Ether 2:12. Italics author's.)—IE, 50:562-563 (1947)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] W. C. Mullendore, president, Southern California Edison Co.
