David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 20

WAR AMONG NATIONS

THE CURSE AND PROBLEM OF ORGANIZED WARFARE

" ... and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

"But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken it." (Micah 4:3-4.)

So wrote the Prophet Micah, probably quoting Isaiah, seven hundred fifty years before Christ. Nearly twenty-seven hundred years have passed since the eye of prophecy visioned a time when "war shall be no more." During the intervening centuries, many nations have lifted up sword against nations; and war has continued to be one of mankind's greatest evils. Truly it seems that human beings are more prone to war than to peace.

WORLD WAR II IN RETROSPECT. The latest war (I wish we could say confidently the last) was one of the most devastating in the history of the world. What destruction, sorrow, and suffering it has caused! According to reliable estimates, its direct cost is over one trillion thirty billion dollars, not counting the destruction and damage of property. There have been over a million casualties in the United States, another million and a half in Britain, making a combined loss in these two countries alone of killed, wounded, missing, and prisoners, of two and a half million. The Russian and Chinese losses exceed those numbers by millions. Add the millions of dead, wounded, and missing by the Germans, the Japanese, and those of the crushed countries of Europe, and the cost in wealth and in human life becomes staggering. We are close enough to the tragedy to realize that war is "the greatest curse that can be entailed upon mankind." "Under its standards gather violence, malignity, rage, fraud, perfidy, rapacity, and lust."

We wonder how many more years will pass before "... they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make them afraid: ..." (Micah 4:4) when, in Alfred, Lord Tennyson's words:

"The war drums throbbed no longer, and the battle flags were furled In the Parliament of man, the Federation of the world."

"Locksley Hall."

—IE, 48:638 (1945).

BASIC CAUSES OF ARMED CONFLICT

LIKE CAUSES PRODUCE LIKE EFFECTS. Approximately only a quarter of a century ago, the world listened to the clanging of arms of nations fighting in a world-wide war that was supposed to end war forever. Up to that time it was the bloodiest war in history.

Again, misguided leaders of nations, worshiping the god of materialism, have brought on World War II, and unless the nations avoid the evil things which caused this war, there will be a World War III even more destructive, more terrible than the present murderous conflict. Like causes produce like effects.

THE ANALYSIS—WITH A VIEW TO AVOIDING FUTURE CONFLICT. Now, while the trying exigencies of war are wringing our hearts, it would seem the part of wisdom for men to examine some of the basic causes that produce armed conflict with the view of avoiding them in the future.

I. Development of Brutal Instincts.

The seeds of war lie in man's nature. These seeds germinate at the first natural urge for self-preservation, self-perpetuation, or a desire for conquest.

The fruit of such seeds is hatred and brutality.

Knowing this, the world's chief gangster trained his youth to be brutal. In anticipation, indeed, in glorification of armed conflict, this man declared that he would train youth to be brutal. "In my great educative work," said he, "I am beginning with the young. ... Weakness has to be knocked out of them. ... A violently active, dominating, intrepid, brutal youth—that is what I am after. There must be no weakness or tenderness in it. I want to see once more in its eyes the gleam of pride and independence of the beast of prey."

It is significant that one hundred years before this egotistic leader began to poison the minds of youth, a German philosopher—Heinrich Heine—warned the German people that:

"Evils will follow the rise of 'Germanic pantheism,' because then there will awaken in him that fighting folly that we find among the ancient Germans, that fights neither to kill nor to conquer, but simply to fight. Christianity has—and that is its fairest merit—somewhat mitigated that brutal German lust for battle. But it could not destroy it; and once the taming talisman, the cross, is broken, the savagery of the old battlers will flare up again, the insane rage of which Nordic bards have so much to say and sing. That talisman is brittle. The day will come when it will pitiably collapse. Then the old stone gods will rise from forgotten rubble and rub the dust of a thousand years from their eyes; and Thor will leap up and with his giant hammer start smashing Gothic cathedrals ... and when you hear a crash as nothing ever crashed in world history, you'll know that the German thunder has hit the mark. At that sound the eagles will fall dead from the sky, and the lions in the farthest desert of Africa will put in their tails and slink away into their royal caves. A play will be performed that will make the French Revolution seem like a harmless idyll in comparison. ...

"Beware! I wish you well; that is why I tell you the bitter truth. You have more to fear from a liberated Germany than from the whole Holy Alliance with all its Croats and Cossacks." (Heinrich Heine, Works of Prose, ed. by Herman Kesen, pp. 51-53.)

II. The Collapse of Humanitarian Principles.

The substitution of ancient gods for Christianity was followed by the collapse of humanitarian principles, and, as Will Erwin said in "An Appeal to Common Sense," men were back to the ethics of the barbarian hordes. Barbarians of the twentieth century before Christ killed in any manner which their imagination suggested. And so now do civilized men of the twentieth century after Christ. The barbarians of the twentieth century before Christ killed the women and children of the enemy as tribal self-interest seemed to dictate, and so now do so-called civilized men of the twentieth century after Christ. The barbarians of the twentieth century before Christ made slaves of the conquered people, or forced them to pay tribute; so virtually do civilized men of the twentieth century after Christ.

"A brutal youth," having in their eyes "the gleam of the beast of prey" harp back to the law of the jungle, as far from the teaching of Christ as hades from heaven! It is the doctrine of avarice, selfishness, and hate.

Hatreda-McKay, David O.TPThere are some things which man should hate—he should hate injustice; hate hypocrisy; hate wickedness in all its forms; but never hate mankind.

We hope and pray that this World War II will soon come to an end, and that war-weary, heavyhearted peoples may again have peace.

Peace will come and be maintained only through the triumph of the principles of peace, and by the consequent subjection of the enemies of peace, which are hatred, envy, ill-gotten gain, the exercise of unrighteous dominion of men. Yielding to these evils brings misery to the individual, unhappiness to the home, war among nations, with resultant misery and death.

Governments, Civila-McKay, David O.TPTwo thousand years ago Jesus wept over Jerusalem, the inhabitants of which were blind to the things which pertained to their peace. Today contention, strife, and hatred are manifest between capital and labor unions, and bitterness among advocates of nazism, fascism, communism, and capitalism. No matter how excellent any of these may seem in the minds of their advocates, none will ameliorate the ills of mankind unless its operation in government be impregnated with the basic principles promulgated by the Savior of men. On the contrary, even a defective economic system will produce a good result if the men who direct it will be guided by the Spirit of Christ.

Peacea-McKay, David O.TPActuated by that Spirit, leaders will think more of men than of the success of a system. Kindness, mercy, and justice will be substituted for hatred, suspicion, and greed. There is no road to universal peace which does not lead into the heart of humanity.

III. To Avoid Another War People Must Change their Way of Thinking.

Men say that so long as human nature is as near to the animal nature as it is, that selfishness, suspicion, greed, chicanery will continue to pervade and govern human society. If that be true, then man must rise above the animal instincts, and strive for the higher and more abundant life. If this requires a change of human nature, then human nature must be changed.

IV. Eliminate Arrogance of Superiority.

Peacea-McKay, David O.TPWith the Spirit of Christ in their hearts no nation will arrogate to itself superiority over others but give to each nation, however small, however seemingly backward, the right of self-determination.

V. Seek Material Advancement as a Means to Spiritual Attainment.

Governments, Civila-McKay, David O.TPWith the spirit of the gospel in men's hearts, nations will accept the truth that integrity is more to be desired than intellectual acumen or the accumulation of wealth. Men will then look upon material advancement not as an end in itself, but as a means to spiritual attainment. They will recognize the significance of "But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you." (Matt. 6:33.) Statesmen, churchmen, schoolteachers, civic officers, newspapermen—all who in any way mold public opinion—must grapple intelligently with spiritual apathy and moral decay.

Some day men must realize that only true religion can satisfy the yearning soul.

VI. Two Great Forces Point the Way to Peace.

I see two great forces leading the way from the abyss of another world war into the realm of peace and progress—America and the gospel of Jesus Christ.

United States of Americaa-McKay, David O.TPAMERICA'S OPPORTUNITY. America has the great opportunity to lead the world from political intrigue and cheap demogoguery, from national selfishness, from unrighteous usurpation of power, and from unholy aggrandizement. She must prove to the people of Europe and of all the world that she has no selfish ends to serve, no desire for conquest, no arrogance of national or race superiority. When these ideals are established, America can blaze the trail and lead the world to peace.

"This is a land where hate should die— This is a land where strife should cease, Where foul, suspicious fear should fly Before our flag of light and peace."

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPBut I repeat, permanent peace will be found only in the application of the principles of the gospel of peace. Christ came to earth to bring peace and good will. When he said: "I came not to send peace, but a sword," (Matt. 10:34) he perceived how the acceptance of eternal principles might render asunder the dearest ties, and how a man's foes may become those of his own household. Asserting the principles of the gospel over everything else, he added: "He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me." (Ibid., 10:37.) Thus he but emphasized the great truth that acceptance of the principles of the gospel is the supreme purpose of life.

Again the Lord has revealed himself to man, and in that revelation may be found the answer to the perplexities and yearnings of the human soul.

Again in this age Christ has said:

"I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." (John 8:12.)

I feel that we can join with the poet in saying:

"O Christ, who died to give men life, Bring that victorious hour, When man shall use for peace, not strife, His valor, skill, and power."

God grant that the nations of the earth will soon open their eyes and behold the light of the world and thereby accept in this day the things which belong unto their peace.—IE, 47:657-658, 708 (1944).

Disobediencea-McKay, David O.TPGOD NOT THE CAUSE OF WAR. I am not one of those who sees in this world catastrophe the hand of God as its cause. I do not believe that God has caused the misery, the famine, the pestilence, and the death that are now sweeping the war-torn countries of Europe. I do believe that the conditions of the world today are a direct result—an inevitable result—of disobedience to God's laws.—CR, April 1917, p. 46.

Commenting upon the unjustifiable attempts of strong nations to subdue weaker nations, one of our leading popular contributors to syndicated newspapers said:

"Out of all history you will find but one world conquerer who came with clean hands, and those hands the soldiers pierced with iron spikes as they nailed the Nazarene to the cross."

It was this same clean world conqueror who said:

"Therefore, whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, ...

"And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, ... (Matt. 7:24, 26.)—CR, October 1935, p. 97.

MAN BRINGS CONFLICT UPON HIMSELF. Man, through his littleness, through his rejection of the gospel, his selfishness and weakness, brings contention and strife upon himself.

But a wise Father will work out of men's mistakes and blunders greater blessings than they might have obtained with their own wisest foresight. Gloomy clouds often hang heavily about us, but the rains that descend from them often prove a blessing. So it may be with the ominous clouds lowering today over civilization.

I do not believe in the advocacy of discouragement and gloom; better, the gospel of hope. Remember, the Church of Jesus Christ is established nevermore to be thrown down or given to another people. The gospel has not yet been preached to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, and I am sure that the Lord will open up the way for the consummation of his purposes.—CR, October 1941, p. 53.

Why this world-wide holocaust? Why this mad orgy of death? Because man is acting contrary to eternal principles of right!—CR, October 1942, p. 67.

Moral Decaya-McKay, David O.TPVICIOUS WAR PROPAGANDA—A COMMENT ON KOREA (1951). At the moment there is being enacted a great world drama, the final act of which we can only dimly surmise. In Korea one of the bloodiest wars of modern times is raging. But here is a singular thing. Engaged in it are soldiers from South Korea, the United States, Great Britain, France, Turkey, Greece, the Netherlands, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Thailand, the Philippines, South Africa, and one or two other nations—all enlisted under the United Nations' banner.

Political relationships leading up to their fighting as an international army need not concern us this morning, but there is one significant fact most worthy of attention: Battling for the same cause are Buddhists, followers of Confucius, Moslems, and Christians. Opposed to these are communists, openly avowed to be anti-Christ. Two hundred twenty-nine thousand casualties are already reported in this conflict!

More destructive to the spreading of Christian principles in the minds, particularly of the youth, than battleships, submarines, or even bombs, is the sowing of false ideals by the enemy. Particularly, during the last five years, communist Russia has gained for the time being conquests over the satellites under her domination, including China, and is now threatening Japan by sowing seeds of mistrust in the body politic.

Misrepresentation, false propaganda, innuendoes soon sprout into poisonous weeds, and before long the people find themselves victims of a pollution that has robbed them of their individual liberty and enslaved them to a group of political gangsters. Let us draw a lesson from this.

So it is with evil thoughts that may be permitted insidiously to enter and to find lodgment in the human mind.—CR, April 1951, p. 96.

CAN WAR BE JUSTIFIED? AN INQUIRY AND EXAMINATION AS AMERICA ENTERED WORLD WAR II

THE QUESTION RAISED. In the face of the tragic condition among mankind, honest thinking men and women ask how is it possible to reconcile the teachings of Jesus with the participation of the Church in armed conflict.

THE NATURE OF WAR. War is basically selfish. Its roots feed in the soil of envy, hatred, desire for domination. Its fruit, therefore, is always bitter. They who cultivate and propagate it spread death and destruction and are enemies of the human race.

War originates in the hearts of men who seek to despoil, to conquer, or to destroy other individuals or groups of individuals. Self-exaltation is a motivating factor; force, the means of attainment. War is rebellious action against moral order.

The present war had its beginning in militarism, a false philosophy, which believes that "war is a biological necessity for the purification and progress of nations." It proclaims that "might determines right," and that only the strongest nations should survive and rule. It says, "The grandeur of history lies in the perpetual conflict of nations, and it is simply foolish to desire the suppression of their rivalry."

Wara-McKay, David O.TPWar impels you to hate your enemies.

Wara-McKay, David O.TPThe Prince of Peace says, love your enemies.

Wara-McKay, David O.TPWar says, curse them that curse you.

Wara-McKay, David O.TPThe Prince of Peace says, pray for them that curse you.

Wara-McKay, David O.TPWar says, injure and kill them that hate you.

Wara-McKay, David O.TPThe risen Lord says, do good to them that hate you.

Wara-McKay, David O.TPWAR THE ANTITHESIS OF CHRISTIANITY. We see that war is incompatible with Christ's teachings. The gospel of Jesus Christ is the gospel of peace. War is its antithesis and produces hate. It is vain to attempt to reconcile war with true Christianity.

Wara-McKay, David O.TPIn the face of all this, I shall seem inconsistent when I declare that I uphold our country in the gigantic task it has assumed in the present world conflict and sustain the Church in its loyal support of the government in its fight against dictatorship.

JUSTIFICATION OF THE POSITION TAKEN BY THE CHURCH—CHRIST'S TEACHINGS NOT TO BE PERVERTED. In justification of this seeming inconsistence, I shall not attempt to prove that there are occasions when Jesus would approve of a nation's starting a war. That he used force to drive from the temple the money changers and other desecrators of the house of God is a fact; but only a misapplication of the text can make that incident a justification for one Christian nation's going to war against another. On that occasion, as on all occasions, Jesus opposed and denounced wrong. With the strength of fiery indignation and of his own moral force, and not merely with a whip of small cords, Jesus drove the self-convicted desecrators from the temple.

Neither shall I attempt to prove that he favored war when he said: "Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword." (Matt. 10:34.) They who would quote this saying as indicating that Jesus approves war surely put a strained interpretation on its true meaning, which refers most clearly to the incompatibility between truth and error. It clearly refers to the necessity of a choice, which has been made by thousands, between accepting the gospel or continuing in ease and comfort with relatives. There is not in that quotation any justification for one Christian nation's declaring war upon another.

Nor, again, would I try to justify my seeming inconsistency by referring to what he said on another occasion as follows:

"But now, he that hath a purse, let him take it, and likewise his scrip: and he that hath no sword, let him sell his garment, and buy one.

"And they said, Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said unto them, It is enough." (Luke 22:36, 38.)

Without reading into the text something which is not intended or even implied, the most that one can get from this admonition is that henceforth the disciples going forth into an antagonistic world might supply themselves with necessary support and the usual means of defense.

None of these sayings of the Savior's can be taken to prove that he justifies war.

Tolstoy, in his Christianity and Patriotism, says:

"A Christian state, to be consistent, ought, on entering upon a war, not merely to remove the crosses from the churches, to turn the churches themselves into buildings for other purposes, to give the clergy other duties, and above all, to prohibit the gospel—but ought to renounce every precept of morality which follows from the Christian law."

Notwithstanding all this, I still say that there are conditions when entrance into war is justifiable, and when a Christian nation may, without violation of principles, take up arms against an opposing force.

Such a condition, however, is not a real or fancied insult given by one nation to another. When this occurs, proper reparation may be made by mutual understanding, apology, or by arbitration.

Neither is there justifiable cause found in a desire or even a need for territorial expansion. The taking of territory implies the subjugation of the weak by the strong—the application of the jungle law.

Nor is war justified in an attempt to enforce a new order of government, or even to impel others to a particular form of worship, however better the government or eternally true the principles of the enforced religion may be.

Wara-McKay, David O.TPTWO PRIME CONSIDERATIONS—POSSIBLY A THIRD. There are, however, two conditions which may justify a truly Christian man to enter—mind you, I say enter, not begin—a war: (1) an attempt to dominate and to deprive another of his free agency, and (2) loyalty to his country. Possibly there is a third, viz., defense of a weak nation that is being unjustly crushed by a strong, ruthless one.

Paramount among these reasons, of course, is the defense of man's freedom. An attempt to rob man of his free agency caused dissension even in heaven. Scriptures tell us:

"... Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels,

"And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven.

"And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him." (Rev. 12:7-9.)

In that rebellion Lucifer said in substance: "By the law of force I will compel the human family to subscribe to the eternal plan, but give me thine honor and power."

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPTo deprive an intelligent human being of his free agency is to commit the crime of the ages.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPSo fundamental in man's eternal progress is his inherent right to choose that the Lord would defend it even at the price of war. Without freedom of thought, freedom of choice, freedom of action within lawful bounds, man cannot progress. The Lord recognized this and also the fact that it would take man thousands of years to make the earth habitable for self-governing individuals. Throughout the ages advanced souls have yearned for a society in which liberty and justice prevail. Men have sought for it, fought for it, have died for it. Ancient freemen prized it; slaves longed for it; the Magna Charta demanded it; the Constitution of the United States declared it.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TP"This love of liberty which God has planted in us," said Abraham Lincoln, "constitutes the bulwark of our liberty and independence. It is not our frowning battlements, our bristling seacoasts, our army, and our navy. Our defense is in the spirit which prizes liberty as the heritage of all men, in all lands, everywhere. Destroy this spirit, and we have planted the seeds of despotism at our very doors."

A second obligation that impels us to become participants in this world war is loyalty to government.

"We believe that governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man; and that he holds men accountable for their acts in relation to them, both in making laws and administering them, for the good and safety of society.

"We believe that no government can exist in peace, except such laws are framed and held inviolate as will secure to each individual the free exercise of conscience, the right and control or property, and the protection of life." (D. & C. 134:1-2.)

The greatest responsibility of the state is to guard the lives and to protect the property and rights of its citizens; and if the state is obligated to protect its citizens from lawlessness within its boundaries, it is equally obligated to protect them from lawless encroachments from without—whether the attacking criminals be individuals or nations.

We are informed by competent authority that twenty years ago the government of the United States entered into an agreement with Japan to maintain peace in the Pacific Ocean, and "keep honorable hands off China." "Before the year was over," writes Mark J. Gayn, in an article Prelude to Treachery, "the ablest men on the Japanese naval general staff went to work blueprinting war on the United States and Britain."

From such treachery the state is in duty bound to protect itself, and its only effective means of doing so under present world conditions is by armed force. As a Church:

" ... we believe that all men are justified in defending themselves, their friends, and property, and the government, from the unlawful assaults and encroachments of all persons in times of exigency, where immediate appeal cannot be made to the laws, and relief afforded." (D. & C. 134:11.)

Wara-McKay, David O.TPEven though we sense the hellish origin of war, even though we feel confident that war will never end war, yet under existing conditions we find ourselves as a body committed to combat this evil thing. With other loyal citizens we serve our country as bearers of arms, rather than to stand aloof to enjoy a freedom for which others have fought and died.

Wara-McKay, David O.TPOne purpose of emphasizing this theme is to give encouragement to young men now engaged in armed conflict and to reassure them that they are fighting for an eternal principle fundamental to the peace and progress of mankind.—CR, April 1942, pp. 70-74.
