David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 21

THE CONTROL OF WAR AND THE QUEST FOR PEACE

THE CONTROL OF WAR

POLITICAL PROPOSALS. Statesmen, men of science, thinking men in all nations, laymen everywhere sense the need of something definite to which to look forward, some clear beacon that will guide the stranded nations to a safe harbor or permanent peace. As practical steps toward that goal they say: (1) mete out just punishment to villains and murderers; (2) make restoration of sovereign rights to those who have been deprived of them by force; (3) secure equal enjoyment by all nations of world trade and materials needed for prosperity; (4) establish improved labor standards, economic advancement, and social security for all; (5) declare a peace assuring safety and tranquility the world over; (6) grant freedom of the seas to all; (7) exact promise of abandonment by all nations of the use of force, and of disarmament of aggressive nations pending the establishment of general security. These and other expressed aims are worthy ideals and point to the fact that generally in men's hearts there is a desire to treat fairly their fellow men.

Peacea-McKay, David O.TPTHE INDISPENSABLE IDEA. In all such seeking, however, there is one idea indispensable to the establishment of a permanent peace which too many men and some nations have obliterated from their minds, but which now should be reburnished until it shines as the unclouded noonday sun. I call it an idea, having in mind the fact that "there is more dynamite in an idea than in many bombs." It is as old as the Lord's first message to man, and some of you listening in will call it trite—men in the past have entertained it for a time, have dallied with it, then without attempting to make it a reality have permitted it to drop below the plane of consciousness and even to sink into the abyss of unbelief. This idea, so frequently mentioned but so seldom practised, connotes things, which, if lost, civilization itself is lost. It connotes the right to live, to be treated decently, to be kindly spoken to, to enjoy home, to love, and to be loved. It connotes strength to defend the right—sympathy for those who, striving, have failed. It connotes justice and mercy. It turns the eye and the heart from beastly passions to noble aspirations.

It is Christ's plan of love and service.—CR, October 1942, pp. 68-69.

WORLD FEDERATION AND HUMAN NATURE. Individuals, groups, and nations viewing with alarm the many critical national, industrial, and moral problems are hoping that "some means will be found to turn our misdirected powers into new channels, leading to the establishment of new and prosperous conditions."

Radio and press commentators, contributors to magazines, editorial writers, and statesmen suggest various plans and policies as solutions of our difficulties and perplexities. One of the best is a plan for a world federation, supported by a sufficiently strong armament to enforce its laws and statutes.

One great objection to its adoption, however, is that "human nature is not spiritually ready" for such a federation.

It is of this "spiritual readiness" I wish to speak.

It is the duty of the members of the Church to hold aloft true spiritual standards. Then we shall be better prepared for any eventuality brought about by pagan aggression. These principles have been proclaimed in all ages. They are simple, easily understood, but all too generally ignored.—CR, April 1948, p. 65.

THE RULE OF LOVE MUST SUPPLANT THE RULE OF FORCE. If the world would be at peace, it must supplant the rule of force by the rule of love. The scriptures tell us that in the beginning Satan proffered to force all men into subjection to the will of God. By compulsion he would save every person, and for so doing he asked that the honor and the glory that are the Lord's should be his.

There is an example of dictatorship supreme!

In contrast to this, the Lord's plan was to give men their free agency. The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

"To every man is given an inherent power to do right or to do wrong. In this he has free agency. He may choose the right and obtain salvation, or he may choose evil and merit abomination."

A man may act as his conscience dictates so long as he does not infringe upon the rights of others. That is the spirit of true democracy, and all government by the priesthood should be actuated by that same high motive. We are told,

"That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, ...

"No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; ...

"Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy." (D. & C. 121:36, 41, 43.)

Peace is not found in selfishness, but in striving to help make the world better and happier.—CR, October 1938, p. 134.

Peacea-McKay, David O.TPI know of no better way to bring about harmony in the home, in the neighborhood, in organizations, peace in our country, and in the world than for every man and woman first to eliminate from his or her heart the enemies of harmony and peace such as hatred, selfishness, greed, animosity, and envy.

"And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?" (Matt. 7:3.)

Pertinent to this thought, Charles Wagner, author of The Simple Life, makes this comment:

"Each person's base of operations is the field of his immediate duty; neglect this field, and all you undertake at a distance is compromised. First, then, be of your own country, your own city, your own home, your own church, your own workshop; then, if you can, set out from this to go beyond it. That is the plain and natural order, and a man must fortify himself with very bad reasons to arrive at reversing it."—CR, October 1941, p. 57.

CONFIDENCE IN OUR FELLOW MEN. Essential to our peace of mind, and eventually to the peace of nations, is to keep confidence in our fellow men. You say, how can we keep confidence when men are so corrupt? I answer that even if two or three, or even a score of men prove themselves dishonest and wicked, we are not justified in losing confidence in all men. Most people are honorable and upright—I like to think that—and desirous to:

" ... do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God." (Micah 6:8.)

Even if international leaders of a nation or of five nations disavow their Creator, and that's what they are saying in their hearts, "my power and the might of mine hand have got me this wealth," and even deny the Christ who redeemed them, let us remember that ten times that number of nations still profess to believe in God and in individual freedom.

These three principles—faith in God—acceptance of Christ as the Savior of man—confidence in our fellow men—are summed up by the Savior as follows:

"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

"This is the first and great commandment.

"And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." (Matthew 22:37-39.)—CR, April 1948, p. 68.

Man's suspicion and lack of trust are among the greatest enemies of peace. Nations are distrustful of one another.

Backbitinga-McKay, David O.TPThis lack of confidence in one's fellow man is even more of an individual than a national vice. We are prone to magnify weaknesses and to imagine vices in others that do not exist. We chew the cud of slander with satisfaction—slander, "whose whisper over the world's diameter, as level as the cannon to its blank, transports his poisoned shot." Talk about battles yet to be fought! Backbiting and evil speaking head the list!

"If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, ... this man's religion is vain." (James 1:26.)—IE, 48:638, 1945.

THE QUEST FOR PEACE

WHAT THE WORLD NEEDS TODAY. The world has just emerged from the most gigantic war of history, as a result of which, it is suffering from the usual postwar maladies—unrest, dissatisfaction, financial stringency, underproduction, high cost of living. A superficial examination, then, seems to indicate that the world's trouble today is caused by the war, so we might hastily conclude that what it most needs is an antidote—an international tribunal or a League of Nations—to prevent even the recurrence of this calamity.

However, a more critical examination reveals the fact that the war was an effect as well as a cause. It was the result of a condition in which the root of all the world's ills finds nourishment. This condition was created by the warped judgment, the unspiritual, the anti-Christian ideals fostered by a coterie of individuals in whose hands had been placed the steering wheel of the German ship of state. Treitschke's and his kindred teachers' anti-Christian philosophy was the element in which the seeds of the war germinated. He taught that the "state is the highest thing in the external society of man," and renouncing the foundation of all moral standards declared that the "absolute sovereignty of the state cannot be bound by any obligation, even of its own making." "A state cannot bind its will for the future over against other states." Out of such doctrine sprang the warped judgment that declared an international agreement "nothing but a scrap of paper." He further taught that war is sanctified, that it should "be conceived as an ordinance set by God," and that "the living God will see to it that war shall always recur as a terrible medicine for humanity."

Instructed in such pernicious doctrine, it is no wonder men harbor the unchristianlike spirit.

The world needs today, the application in all phases of daily life of principles that are directly opposite to these debasing standards.

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPIn other words the world needs practical religion—it needs applied Christianity. It needs not only to pray, "Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven," (Matt. 6:10) but also to work for the "establishment of divine government among human beings."

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPThis implies that religion among men must be not only a subjective feeling, an inward state, but also an expression of that feeling manifested in human associations and social relations.—YWJ, 31:386-387 (1920).

Peacea-McKay, David O.TPTHE NEED FOR PEACE. The greatest need of this old world today is peace. The turbulent storms of hate, of enmity, of distrust, and of sin are threatening to wreck humanity. It is time for men—true men—to dedicate their lives to God, and to cry with the spirit and power of the Christ, "Peace, be still. ... " (Mark 4:39.)—MS, 85:802 (1923).

A GUIDE TO PEACE. Jesus said on one occasion to his disciples who were somewhat worried and anxious because Jesus had told them he was going to leave them,

"Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me." (John 14:1.)

In that one sentence, Jesus gives both a comforting admonition and a guide to contentment and peace.—CR, April 1948, p. 64.

It is not an easy thing to make God the center of our being. To do so we must determine to keep his commandments. Spiritual attainment, not physical possessions, not the indulgence and the gratification of the body, must become the chief goal.

Natural Mana-McKay, David O.TPOnly in the complete surrender of our inner life may we rise above the selfish, sordid pull of nature. We should seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness. (See Matt. 6:33.) What the spirit is to the body, God is to the spirit. As the body dies when the spirit leaves it, so the spirit dies when we exclude God from it. I cannot imagine peace in a world from which God and religion are banished.—IE, 48:639 (1945).

THE ATOMIC BOMB IS NOT THE THREAT. The most ominous threat to the peace and happiness of mankind in this the twentieth century is not the probable misuse of the atomic bomb, but the dwindling in men's hearts of faith in God. "Epochs of faith are epochs of fruitfulness; but epochs of unbelief, however glittering, are barren of all permanent good."—IE, 50:507 (1947).

DISREGARD FOR THE MORAL LAWTHE REAL THREAT. Declarations recently made by one or two rulers of nations indicate the unrest, political upheavals, and a tendency to barbarism, in which "might makes right." These things are in direct opposition to the life and teachings of him whose resurrection from the grave is being celebrated today.

One man recently said: "We must arm. The watchword is this: more cannons, more ships, more airplanes, at whatever cost, with whatever means, even if it should mean wiping out all that is called civil life.

"When one is strong, one is dear to one's friends and feared by one's enemies. Since prehistoric times the shout has come down on the wave of centuries and the series of generations, 'Woe to the weak.' "

During World War I such mad doctrine cost the lives of nine million men. Commenting upon that holocaust a recent writer says: "Why in the name of reason and sweet mercy had this iniquitous bedlam come to pass?" And then he answers: "The question is not new, yet it struck at me with fresh, relentless force, and across my mind flashed the endless explanation advanced by human ingenuity, the talk of economic stress, of boom and slump, of unemployment and the rest; of the rise and fall of nations; the need for colonies; the survival of the fittest; the whole bag of tricks. How fatuous, how futile they all seemed! For it was clear, acutely clear. There was only one reason, one basic explanation: Man had forgotten God! Millions now living were blind and deaf—dead indeed to the knowledge of their Creator. For countless human souls that name was nothing but a myth. For others, an inherited tradition to which lip service must be paid; for others a convenient oath; for others bland hypocrisy."

And so I say today, the line is sharply drawn between the teachings of Christ and the proclamations and practices of autocrats, who with radical disrespect for men and the human ideals of justice, liberty, equality, and fraternity, "relegate to the limbo of old superstitions, God, the soul, and moral law."—CR, April 1939, p. 111.

Let us hope that a time will soon come when men with such natures and aspirations will be so few that we shall not have to fight them as we do a pack of wolves. Let us strive to make real the dream that Christian nations will some day unite not for war but for the establishing of the kingdom of God which should be a real and not a mystical kingdom.—DNCS, December 25, 1943, pp. 1, 5.

THE BATTLE AGAINST SELFISHNESS. Another old battle still raging and one we must win before permanent peace is established on earth is the battle against selfishness.

Selfishnessa-McKay, David O.TPSelfishness is the root from which spring most human ills and suffering. Selfishness promises satisfaction, but its fruit is disappointing and produces only ill will and unhappiness. Selfishness and enmity caused the first recorded murder and the first implied rejection of the great truth that man is his brother's keeper.

It was selfishness that caused the violation of the Munich Pact, which led, in September 1939, to the murderous invasion of Poland and the subsequent destruction of European nations with all its attendant horrors and human suffering. It was selfishness and inordinate ambition that caused the Pearl Harbor tragedy.

Selfishnessa-McKay, David O.TPUnless the battle against selfishness is won at the peace table, our hopes for a permanent peace may be shattered, and the world again stricken in warfare.

Nature's law demands us to do everything with self in view. Self-preservation is the first law of mortal life. But Jesus says:

"He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it." (Matt. 10:39.)

Selfishnessa-McKay, David O.TPJesus on the Mount of Temptation triumphed over all appeals to selfishness and thereby set an example to all men who would strive for spiritual attainment. As Jesus resisted the tempter, so selfishness must be overcome by subjugation and resistance. There is no development of character without resistance; there is no growth of spirituality without overcoming.

"And he that overcometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the nations." (Rev. 2:26.)—IE, 48:639 (1945).

Intemperance goes hand in hand with lawlessness, and lawlessness is an enemy of peace.—IE, 48:699 (1945).

WHAT MEN MIGHT DO. If men and nations will hold their belief in God and accept the teachings of Jesus Christ, pilotless planes and other argosies of the air encircling the globe in a nightless world will carry not bombs of merciless destruction but gifts and blessings to what is now a groping, benighted world.—CR, October 1947, p. 121.

Peacea-McKay, David O.TPThe soul is the fountain from which the peace of the world will spring. Centered in the heart also are the enemies to peace—avarice, ambition, envy, anger, and pride. These and other vices which bring misery into the world must be eradicated before permanent peace is assured. There shall have to be felt in the hearts of men more consideration for others—there shall have to be manifested around the coming peace table at least a little of the Christ spirit—do unto others as you would have others do unto you. (See Matt. 7:12; Luke 6:31.)—IE, 47:62 (1943).

Religiona-McKay, David O.TPTrue religion is today the world's greatest need—a sense by the individual of a relationship with God—that indefinable something which enters into the soul of man and which unites him with his Creator.

"The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit." (John 3:8.)

Religiona-McKay, David O.TPA celebrated British statesman, Edmund Burke, in the latter half of the eighteenth century wrote: "True religion is the foundation of society. When that is once shaken by contempt the whole fabric cannot be stable nor lasting."—IE, 48:699 (1945).

Peacea-McKay, David O.TPTHE GRAND DESIGN. Some day intelligent human beings will realize the importance and benefit of living in right relations one with another. When that time comes, the Savior's prayer will be in people's hearts—Make them one, as thou Father and I are one. (See John 17:21.)

This condition can be achieved not alone from mere belief, nor from oratorical exhortation, but by the application in business, social, and national life of the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ.—CR, October 1937, p. 103.
