David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 22

THE CAUSE OF HUMAN LIBERTY

THE DOCTRINE OF FREE AGENCY

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPTHE POWER OF CHOICE—A DIVINE GIFT. Man's greatest endowment in mortal life is the power of choice—the divine gift of free agency. No true character was ever developed without a sense of soul freedom. If a man feels circumscribed, harassed, or enslaved by something or somebody, he is shackled. That is one fundamental reason why totalitarianism is so diabolically wrong, and some day in the future must be defeated. God intends man to be free.—IE, 44:396 (1941).

Agencya-McKay, David O.TP"... remember, my brethren ... ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold, God hath given unto you a knowledge and he hath made you free." (Helaman 14:30.)

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPNext to the bestowal of life itself, the right to direct that life is God's greatest gift to man. Among the immediate obligations and duties resting upon members of the Church, and one of the most urgent and pressing for attention and action of all liberty-loving people is the preservation of individual liberty. Freedom of choice is more to be treasured than any possession earth can give. It is inherent in the spirit of man. It is a divine gift to every normal being. Whether born in abject poverty or shackled at birth by inherited riches, everyone has this most precious of all life's endowments—the gift of free agency, man's inherited and inalienable right.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPFree agency is the impelling source of the soul's progress. It is the purpose of the Lord that man become like him. In order for man to achieve this it was necessary for the Creator first to make him free. "Personal liberty," says Bulwer-Lytton, "is the paramount essential to human dignity and human happiness."—CR, April 1950, pp. 32-33.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPA FUNDAMENTAL GOSPEL PRINCIPLE. I refer to the fundamental principle of the gospel, free agency. References in the scriptures show that this principle is (1) essential to man's salvation; and (2) may become a measuring rod by which the actions of men, of organizations, of nations may be judged.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TP"Therefore, cheer up your hearts, and remember that ye are free to act for yourselves—to choose the way of everlasting death or the way of eternal life." (II Nephi 10:23.)

Agencya-McKay, David O.TP"For the earth is full, and there is enough and to spare; yea, I prepared all things, and have given unto the children of men to be agents unto themselves." (D. & C. 104:17.)

Agencya-McKay, David O.TP"Behold, here is the agency of man, and here is the condemnation of man; because that which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them, and they receive not the light." (Ibid., 93:31.)

Agencya-McKay, David O.TP"Therefore, it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TP"And for this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land, by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed the land by the shedding of blood." (Ibid., 101:79-80.)

Again:

Agencya-Young, BrighamTP"My independence is sacred to me—it is a portion of that same Deity that rules in the heavens. There is not a being upon the face of the earth who is made in the image of God, who stands erect and is organized as God is, that should be deprived of the free exercise of his agency so far as he does not infringe upon others' rights, save by good advice and a good example." (Brigham Young.)

It is true that faith is an essential principle in all progress, not spiritual progress only, but to all progress. But next to faith as an essential to man's advancement is free agency.

The history of the world with all its contention and strife is largely an account of man's effort to free himself from bondage and usurpation or to protect himself in the freedom he possessed.—CR, April 1940, pp. 116-117.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPThere exists an eternal law that each human soul shall shape its own destiny. No one individual can make happiness or salvation for another. "Even God could not make men like himself without making them free."—DNCS, June 8, 1935, p. 1.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPI believe that God is love, that he is our Father and desires the happiness and eternal life of his children. Indeed, this is his glory, "... to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) He has placed man upon earth and, as he revealed to the Prophet Joseph, as recorded in the twenty-ninth section of the Doctrine and Covenants, he gave to man that he might be an agent unto himself. (See 29:35.)

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPMen may choose the right or they may choose the wrong; they may walk in darkness or they may walk in the light; and, mind you, God has not left his children without the light. He has given them in the various dispensations of the world the light of the gospel wherein they could walk and not stumble, wherein they could find that peace and happiness which he desires, as a loving Father, his children should enjoy, but the Lord does not take from them their free agency.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPThe Prophet Lehi, in speaking to his son Jacob, bears testimony to that truth in unmistakable terms. He says: "Wherefore, the Lord God gave unto man that he should act for himself. Wherefore, man could not act for himself save it should be that he was enticed by the one or the other." (II Nephi 2:16.) And then, in the twenty-seventh verse: "Wherefore, men are free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great mediation of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (II Nephi 2:27.)—CR, April 1937, p. 47.

MAN WILL REBEL AGAINST TYRANNY. I do not know that there was ever a time in the history of mankind when the evil one seemed so determined to strike at this fundamental virtue of free agency.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPBut, thank heaven, there is innate in man a feeling that will rebel against tyranny. It has manifested itself throughout the ages; for example, in the days of King John men who resented dictatorship gathered at Runnymede and made the king sign a paper that a man has the right to be tried by his peers, and that the individual is not a mere pawn in the hands of a dictator. A few hundred years afterward came the Declaration of Independence, and then the Constitution of the United States, fundamental in which is the right of the individual to worship God, to speak as he feels, to own his property, to take care of his family—his home, his castle.—DNCS, January 2, 1952, p. 3.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPRESPONSIBILITY ATTACHES TO FREE AGENCY. With free agency there comes responsibility. If a man is to be rewarded for righteousness and punished for evil, then common justice demands that he be given the power of independent action. A knowledge of good and evil is essential to man's progress on earth. If he were coerced to do right at all times or were helplessly enticed to commit sin, he would merit neither a blessing for the first nor punishment for the second.

Thus we see that man's responsibility is correspondingly operative with his free agency.—CR, April 1950, p. 33.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPFreedom of the will and the responsibility associated with it are fundamental aspects of Jesus' teachings. Throughout his ministry he emphasized the worth of the individual and exemplified what is now expressed in modern revelation as the work and glory of God. Only through the divine gift of soul freedom is such progress possible.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPForce, on the other hand, emanates from Lucifer himself. Even in man's pre-existent state, Satan sought power to compel the human family to do his will by suggesting that the free agency of man be inoperative. If his plan had been accepted, human beings would have become mere puppets in the hands of a dictator, and the purpose of man's coming to earth would have been frustrated. Satan's proposed system of government, therefore, was rejected, and the principle of free agency established in its place.—CR, April 1950, pp. 34-35.

THE INTERACTION OF FREE AGENTSSOCIAL CONSEQUENCES. There is another responsibility correlated and even coexistent with free agency, which is to infrequently emphasized, and that is the effect not only of a person's actions but also of his thoughts upon others. Man radiates what he is, and that radiation affects to a greater or lesser degree every person who comes within that radiation.—CR, April 1950, p. 34.

FREEDOM REQUIRES JUSTICE AND FAIR PLAY: ANECDOTE. I believe we ought to be influenced in this as a crowd of sailors was governed by one of their number many years ago. It was during the anti-slavery agitation, and a meeting was called in Faneuil Hall, Boston. Some sailors had been hired to break up the meeting. They went there in a body, danced around on the floor, sang, yelled, and in every way possible tried to prevent the orators from addressing the meeting. In vain were they appealed to. Their love of liberty, the memory of their old home, the honor of Massachusetts, all were invoked; but still they continued their disturbance and refused to be quiet.

Suddenly a man, evidently one of their number, arose. Quieted for a moment by his appearance, thinking they had found a champion, the mob ceased its noise. The man said, "Boys, I would not be quiet unless I had a mind to." Encouraged by this remark, the mob burst into loud applause, which lasted probably five minutes. When it ceased, because of the men's desire to hear more, the man continued: "No, I would not be quiet if I didn't have a mind to; but, if I were you, I would have a mind to, not because of the memory of this hall, not for the honor of Massachusetts, not for loyalty to her government only, but because you are men; and honorable men always stand up for the liberty of right, justice, and free speech." They were quieted; their manhood had been touched.—CR, October 1906, pp. 111-112.

FREEDOM OF WORSHIP. This principle of free agency and the right of each individual to be free not only to think but also to act within bounds that grant to everyone else the same privilege are sometimes violated even by churches that claim to teach the doctrine of Jesus Christ. The attitude of any organization toward this principle of freedom is a pretty good index to its nearness to the teachings of Christ or to those of the evil one; for example, I read recently the statement of a leading clergyman who claimed the divine right of his church, wherever it was in power, to prohibit any other church from promulgating its doctrine. And, "if religious minorities actually exist, they shall have only a de facto existence without opportunity to spread their beliefs."

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPHe who thus tramples underfoot one of God's greatest gifts to man, who would deny another the right to think and worship as he pleases, propagates error and makes his own church in that regard as far as he represents it a propagator of evil.

Contrast this unchristian-like stand with the statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith:

"We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience, and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may." (Article of Faith No. 11.)—CR, April, 1950, p. 36.

THREATS TO POLITICAL LIBERTY

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPTHREATS TO INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM. Individual freedom is threatened by international rivalries, interracial animosities, and false political ideals. Unwise legislation, too often prompted by political expediency, is periodically being enacted that seductively undermines man's right of free agency, robs him of his rightful liberties, and makes him but a cog in the crushing wheel of a regimentation which, if persisted in, will end in dictatorship.—CR, April 1950, p. 35.

THE THREAT FROM THE RULE OF FORCE. Force rules in the world today; consequently, our government must keep armies abroad, build navies and air squadrons, create atom bombs to protect itself from the threatened aggression of a nation which seems to listen to no other appeal than compulsion.—CR, April 1950, p. 35.

THE KIND OF POLITICAL LEADERSHIP NEEDED. Today there is a great need in the world for men of integrity, men of honor, men whose word is as good as their bond, leaders of nations who will consider international agreements sacred.—CR, October 1951, p. 11.

COMMUNISM AND OTHER "ISMS." Today there are in this country enemies in the form of "isms." I call them anti-Americanisms. Only a few of the leaders fight openly—most of the army carry on as termites, secretly sowing discord and undermining stable government. Of the truth of this statement recent investigations made by a committee of the United States Senate bear ample evidence. Of the menace of one of these, Dr. William F. Russell, Dean of Teachers' College, Columbia University, in an address "How to Tell a Communist, and How to Beat Him," is one of the many authorities whom we might quote as to the pernicious activity of these groups.

Dr. Russell says:

"Communist leaders have steadily insisted that communism cannot live in just one country. Just as we fought to make 'the world safe for democracy,' so they are fighting to make the world safe for communism. They are fighting this fight today. Every country must become communistic, according to their idea. So they have sent out missionaries. They have supplied them well with funds. They have won converts. These converts have been organized into little groups called 'cells,' each acting as a unit under the orders of a superior. It is almost a military organization. They attack where there is unemployment. They stir up discontent among those oppressed. * * * They work their way into the unions, where they form compact blocks. They publish and distribute little papers and pamphlets. At the New York Times they pass out one called 'Better Times.' At the Presbyterian Hospital it is called 'The Medical Worker.' At the College of the City of New York, it is called 'Professor, Worker, Student.' At Teachers' College it is called 'The Educational Vanguard.' These are scurrilous sheets. In one issue I noted twenty-nine errors of fact. After a recent address of mine they passed out a dodger attacking me, with a deliberate error of fact in each paragraph. These pamphlets cost money—more than one hundred dollars an issue. The idea is to try to entice into their web those generous and public-spirited teachers, preachers, social workers, and reformers who know distress and want to do something about it. These communists know what they are doing. They follow their orders. Particularly they would like to dominate our newspapers, our colleges, and our schools. The campaign is much alike all over the world. I have seen the same articles, almost the same pamphlets, in France and England as in the United States.

"You see, when it comes to fighting communists I am a battle-scarred veteran. But after twenty years I cannot tell one by looking at him. However, only the leaders proclaim their membership. The clever are silent, hidden, anonymous, boring from within. You can only tell a communist by his ideas."

Their method of working their way to the seizure of power he describes as follows:

"Talk about peace, talk about social equality, especially among those most oppressed. Talk about organization of labor, and penetrate into every labor union. Talk on soap boxes, publish pamphlets and papers. Orate and harangue. Play on envy. Arouse jealousy. Separate class from class. Try to break down the democratic processes from within. Accustom the people to picketing, strikes, mass meetings. Consequently attack the leaders in every way possible, so that the people will lose confidence. Then in time of national peril, during a war, on the occasion of a great disaster, or on a general strike, walk into the capital and seize the power. A well-organized minority can work wonders."

I have been informed from several sources that some of these spurious political growths are sprouting here in our own midst, that members of these groups have even received instructions regarding what to do in case this country should become involved in war. The nature of these instructions savors very much of the diabolical gunpowder plot in the time of James the First of England.

Secret Combinationsa-McKay, David O.TPLatter-day Saints should have nothing to do with secret combinations and groups antagonistic to the constitutional law of the land, which the Lord "suffered to be established," and which "should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh according to just and holy principles."

Of course there are errors in government which some would correct; certainly there are manifest injustices and inequalities; and there will always be such in any government in the management of which enter the frailties of human nature. If you want changes, go to the polls on election day. Express yourself as an American citizen, and thank the Lord for the privilege that is yours to have a say as to who shall serve you in public office.—CR, October 1939, pp. 103-105.

Do not let advocates of communism mislead you in their attempt to denounce capitalism. Fundamental in the belief and promulgation of communism is the denial of the existence of God and the desire to substitute for the belief confidence in the state. The state is not an organization to suppress people. The state should have no power but that which the people give it; and when the state becomes a director, a controller of the individual, it becomes despotism; and human nature has fought that since man was created; and man will continue to fight that false ideal.

Individual freedom is innate in the human soul. God has given us our free agency, and next to life itself that is our greatest gift from heaven, and you red-blooded men and women know that is true because of your own love of liberty.—DNCS, April 30, 1952, p. 2.

I wish to mention another condition that gives cause for concern and apprehension, and that is the insidious influences, as well as the blatant heralding of ideas that undermine century-tried principles of peace, of justice, and of advancement toward the day of universal brotherhood.

We are grieved when we see or hear men and women, some of whom even profess membership in the Church, looking with favor upon the pernicious teachings of these groups, especially communism. These credulous, misguided persons claim to be advocates of peace and accuse those who oppose them as advocates of war. They should remember that all of us should ever keep in mind that there are some eternal principles more precious than peace, dearer than life itself.

Our revolutionary fathers sensed this, and their innermost feelings were expressed in the words of Patrick Henry: "Is life so dear or peace so sweet as to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery?"

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPFree agency, for example, is a divine gift, more precious than peace, more to be desired even than life. Any nation, any organized group of individuals that would deprive man of this heritage should be denounced by all liberty-loving persons. Associated with this fundamental principle is the right of individual initiative, the right to worship how, where, or what one pleases, and the simple privilege to leave a country, if one chooses, without having to skulk out as a culprit at the risk of being shot and killed.

At heart communism is atheistic, and fascism is equally antagonistic to freedom and to other Christian principles—even denying the divinity of Jesus Christ and the existence of God.—CR, October 1951, pp. 10-11.

THE DANGERS OF DISUNITY. What really prompts me to emphasize this principle is the presence in our own United States of influences the avowed object of which are to sow discord and contention among men with the view of undermining, weakening, if not entirely destroying our constitutional form of government. If I speak plainly, and in condemnation lay bare reprehensible practices and aims of certain organizations, please do not think that I harbor illwill or enmity in my heart towards other United States citizens whose views on political policies do not coincide with mine. But when acts and schemes are manifestly contrary to the revealed word of the Lord, we feel justified in warning people against them. We may be charitable and forbearing to the sinner but must condemn the sin.

There is a danger even more menacing than the threat of invasion by a foreign foe. It is the unpatriotic activities and underhanded scheming of disloyal groups and organizations within our own borders. This country is so situated geographically that there need be little fear of invasion by an outside enemy. Furthermore, the government, knowing who and where the enemy is, can make ample preparation to meet his attacks. But the secret, seditious scheming of an enemy within our own ranks, hypocritically professing loyalty to the government, and at the same time plotting against it, is more difficult to deal with.

Disintegration is often more dangerous and more fatal than outward opposition; for example, an individual can usually protect himself from thunder showers, and even from tempests, from freezing weather or intense heat, from drought, or floods, or other extremes in nature; but he is often helpless when poisonous germs enter his body or a malignant growth begins to sap the strength of some vital organ.

The Church is little if at all injured by persecution and calumnies from ignorant, misinformed, or malicious enemies; a greater hindrance to its progress comes from faultfinders, shirkers, commandment breakers, and apostate cliques within its own ecclesiastical and quorum groups.

So it is in government. It is the enemy from within that is most menacing, especially when it threatens to disintegrate our established form of government.—CR, October 1939, pp. 102-103.

THE DEFENSE OF LIBERTY

FOR WHAT DO WE STAND? We have cause for apprehension. I refer to the efforts to deprive man of his free agency—to steal from the individual his liberty.

United States of Americaa-McKay, David O.TPThe two most important documents affecting the destiny of America are the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States. Both these immortal papers relate primarily to the freedom of the individual.

United States of Americaa-McKay, David O.TPFounded upon that principle of free enterprise fostered by these documents, the United States of America in less than two centuries has achieved a greatness that exceeds that of any other country in the world.

Our national standards are threatened. Add to this the increasing tendency to abandon ideals that constitute the foundation of the American home, and you will agree with me that there is cause for apprehension.

Now what shall we do about it? That concerns us.

When Paul was a prisoner in Rome, he sent a letter to Timothy, saying: "Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine.

"For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears;

"And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables." (II Timothy 4:2-4.)

It is as important today as when Paul wrote that farewell message to Timothy that officers and teachers in the Church "preach the word; be instant—that is, eager, earnest—in season and out of season."

THE WORD TO PREACH. Today, in the midst of the world's perplexity, there should be no question in the mind of any true Latter-day Saint as to what we shall preach. The answer is clear.

Gospela-McKay, David O.TPIn the year 1830, there was given to the people of this land and of the world, a divine plan whereby individuals can find security and peace of mind and live in harmonious accord with their fellow beings. In all man's theories and experiments since history began, human intelligence has never devised a system which, when applied to the needs of humanity, can even approach this plan in effectiveness.

In simple words, then, this is the word which we should preach—the gospel plan of salvation.

The founders of this great republic had faith in the economic and political welfare of this country because they had faith in God. Today it is not uncommon to note an apologetic attitude on the part of men when they refer to the need of God governing in the affairs of men. Indeed, as has already been said, the success of communism depends largely upon the substitution of the belief in God by belief in the supremacy of the state.

Testimonya-McKay, David O.TPPreach in season and out of season belief in God the eternal Father, in his Son Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost.

Second: Latter-day Saints proclaim that fundamental in this gospel plan is the sacredness of the individual, that God's work and glory is "... to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)

Under this concept, it is a great imposition, if indeed not a crime, for any government, any labor union, or any other organization to deny a man the right to speak, to worship, and to work.

Governments, Civila-McKay, David O.TPThird: Preach that the plan involves the belief that governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man. Man was not born for the benefit of the state. Preach "... that no government can exist in peace," and I quote from the Doctrine and Covenants, "except such laws are framed and held inviolate as will secure to each individual the free exercise of conscience, the right and control of property, and the protection of life." (D. & C. 134:2.)

Fourth: Preach the sacredness of family ties—the perpetuation of the family as the cornerstone of society.

Fifth: Proclaim the necessity of honesty and loyalty, doing an honest day's work for an honest day's pay. Preach that honesty in government is essential to the perpetuation and stability of our government, as it is necessary to the stability of character in the individual. "We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men; ... If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things." (Article of Faith No. 13.)

To summarize: Let us be instant in season, and out of season, declaring that a kind and loving heavenly Father is as ready and eager today as ever to bless and to guide all his children who will sincerely seek him, and I bear you witness to that truth.

Proclaim that his beloved Son, the Redeemer and Savior of mankind, stands at the head of his Church that bears his name—that he guides and inspires those who are authorized to represent him here on earth—authorized by the priesthood when heavenly messengers bestowed upon the Prophet Joseph Smith and others associated with him divine authority.

Preach that the responsibility of declaring this plan of life, this way of life, this plan of salvation rests upon the entire membership of the Church, but most particularly upon those who have been ordained to the priesthood and who have been called as leaders and servants of the people.

To them today, as Paul said to Timothy, we give the admonition:

"Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine."(II Timothy 4:2.)

"In Zion let God's name be praised Who has a feast prepared, The glorious gospel standard raised, The ancient faith restored. Swift heralds, the glad news to bear O'er land and ocean fly; And to the wondering world disclose The message from on high."

God gives us power to fulfil this destiny of the Church, and to perform our duties.—CR, April 1952, p. 13-16.
