David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 23

POLITICAL LIBERTY

GOVERNMENT AND LIBERTY

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPFREE AGENCYTHE KEY DOCTRINE REPEATED. In the light of the principle of free agency, it is not difficult to distinguish between the right and the wrong system of government. It is not difficult to tell when an organization transcends its bounds and becomes despotic.—CR, April 1940, p. 117.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPPOLITICAL FREEDOM. Man's free agency is an eternal principle of progress, and any form of government that curtails or inhibits its free exercise is wrong. Satan's plan in the beginning was one of coercion, and it was rejected because he sought to destroy the agency of man which God had given him.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPWhen a man uses this God-given right to encroach upon the rights of another, he commits a wrong. Liberty becomes license, and the man a transgressor. It is the function of the state to curtail the violator and to protect the violated.—CR, April 1940, p. 118.

It is well ever to keep in mind the fact that the state exists for the individual, not the individual for the state. Jesus sought to perfect society by perfecting the individual, and only by the exercising of free agency can the individual even approach perfection.—CR, April 1940, p. 118.

POLITICAL ATTITUDES. Knowledge of God and his laws means stability, means contentment, means peace, and with that a heart full of love reaching out to our fellow man offering the same blessings, the same privileges. Love will beget tolerance and kindness. Now I bespeak that during the next month or so, when our towns and cities and states will be more or less stirred up by political contention, that we remember to have charity and love for one another. Oh, let us not deal in personalities and tear down a brother's reputation and hurt his feelings! We are striving to establish the kingdom of God; let us hold to that fact as the anchor of our soul and then breathe forth charity and love to those who may not see just as we do. I mean that while we are urging our particular political beliefs, that we avoid dealing in personalities; we cannot afford to hurt a brother's feelings and wound him.—CR, October 1912, p. 122.

Votinga-McKay, David O.TPTHE VOTING FRANCHISE. Our community is a great factor in the teaching of our children. Our officers, public servants, are teachers of the youth, and they carry the responsibility of teachers. It is our duty, therefore, as citizens of this great republic, to exercise our right at the ballot box. It is our duty to see that men in both our great parties are chosen who will teach not only by precept, but also by example, obedience to law; that these men so elected will appoint men under them who will not scoff at the law, or who will not in any way protect those men or women who violate moral laws.

I said that the greatest obligation upon society is the proper training of youth. The home, our quorums, our officers in the community are three great educational factors, and all three are subject to our sentiment, our approval.—CR, April 1928, pp. 105-106.

The philosopher Thoreau said, "It matters not half so much what kind of ballot you drop into the ballot box once a year, as what kind of man you drop out of bed into the streets every morning."—CR, October 1951, p. 11.

GOOD GOVERNMENT DEFINED. "Government represents the authority of the group, usually exercised in an external coercive way, to enforce the will of the group upon its individual members." That government is best which has as its aim the administration of justice, well-being, and the promotion of prosperity among its members.—CR, April 1930, p. 80.

RIGHTS OF LABOR AND UNION MEMBERSHIP. Latter-day Saints should avoid affiliation with any committee, any group, any union that would, through coercion or force, deprive a person of the free exercise of his or her freedom of choice. It is understood, of course, that any person is free to join a union, when to do so favors his best interests; but no one should be compelled to join, or be deprived of any right as a citizen, including the right to honest labor, if he chooses not to become a member of a union or specially organized group.—CR, April 1940, p. 118.

Conservationa-McKay, David O.TPTHE CONSERVATION OF RESOURCES. We have heard, during the last year, a great deal about the necessity of conservation. We have been admonished from pulpits and by the press to conserve our resources, and in a measure the people have responded nobly to that appeal. On every hand you can see evidences of the desire on the part of the people to conserve the products of the earth and to utilize them for the blessing of the people who are in distress. There is more care taken on the farm to reap the harvest with which God has blessed the people; there is more thought given in the kitchen, and the foodstuff is being conserved and more economically used, perhaps, than ever before. Economy and thrift are fundamentals in the social organization and in the teachings of this Church.—CR, October 1917, p. 55.

THE CONSERVATION OF HUMAN WELL-BEING. This conservation and care is in keeping with the example which Jesus gave his disciples. You remember on one occasion he fed the multitude and commanded them to sit on the ground and with five barely loaves and two fishes fed the five thousand, after which he said, "Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost." (John 6:12.)

All this conservation of material things, I say, is most commendable and pleasing to God, but the greatest conservation that mankind can engage in is the conservation of youth, the conservation of manhood, and the protection of womanhood. I appeal to the Latter-day Saints today to give more thought to the protection, to the consideration of the dearest possession you have—your sons and daughters.—CR, October 1917, p. 56.

AMERICA: THE PROMISED LAND OF FREEDOM

THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE "NEW WORLD." America, and this includes Canada and the southern republics, was a choice land when the Jaredites left the land of Shinar approximately four thousand years ago. So was it fourteen hundred years later when Lehi and his colony formed the nucleus of a nation, prospered on the bounty of the country, and after a thousand years perished because of transgression.

America was a great land when the stately Indian chiefs ruled their tribes, which thrived from the Bering Sea in the north to the Panama and the towering Andes in the south.

United States of Americaa-McKay, David O.TPTHE HOPE OF CIVILIZED MAN. Today, yielding to the demands of the greatest economic era since the dawn of her creation, America is demonstrating the vastness of her resources and the extent of her natural possibilities as never before. This country is not only the choicest of all lands, but now also the preserver of true liberty, and the hope of civilized man!

United States of Americaa-McKay, David O.TPGod has made America fruitful; man must make and keep the nation great.—CR, April 1943, p. 17-18.

THE CHURCH, GOSPEL PRINCIPLES, AND AMERICAN FREEDOM. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints believes with the Prophet Lehi that America is a "land of promise, a land choice above all other lands"—a land of liberty unto those who keep the commandments of God. But "... if the day shall come that they will reject the Holy One of Israel, the true Messiah, their Redeemer and their God, behold, the judgments of him that is just shall rest upon them." (II Nephi 1:10.) The Church believes, also, that before the end of wickedness shall come, and wars shall be no more, this gospel of the kingdom must be preached to all the world. (See Matt. 24:14.)

United States of Americaa-McKay, David O.TPThe Constitution of this government was written by men who accepted Jesus Christ as the Savior of mankind. Let men and women in these United States then continue to keep their eyes centered upon him who ever shines as a Light to all the world. Men and women who live in America, "the land of Zion," have a responsibility greater than that yet borne by any other people. Theirs the duty, the obligation to preserve not only the Constitution of the land but also the Christian principles from which sprang that immortal document.

With the appeals for freedom that you transmit to your fellow countrymen across the sea, send also in messages that connote a sincerity never before expressed, an avowed conviction that Christ is the way, the truth, the life, the only safe guide to that haven of peace for which men and women the wide world over are earnestly praying. (See John 14:6.)

To this end let members of the Church, and honest men in every clime accept, not as an abstract, inapplicable saying, but as an eternal and guiding truth, the declaration of the Redeemer: "I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." (John 8:12.)—CR, October 1942, p. 70.

THE AMERICAN HERITAGE OF FREEDOM. As precious as life itself is our heritage of individual freedom, for man's free agency is a God-given gift. In sensing our responsibility to preserve it for ourselves and our posterity, let students and patriotic people ever keep in mind the warning voice of James Russell Lowell proclaiming: "Our American republic will endure only as long as the ideas of the men who founded it continue dominant."

There is a crying need today to have this truth heralded throughout the land that youth especially may appreciate and hold the freedom of the individual as sacred as did our revolutionary fathers.

United States of Americaa-McKay, David O.TPInto the soul of every student I would have instilled the patriotic fervor of Patrick Henry: "Were my soul trembling on the wing of eternity, were this hand freezing to death, were my voice choking with the last struggle, I would still, with the last gasp of that voice, implore you to remember the truth: God has given America to be free."

Already there are insidious influences working termite-like to destroy this basic principle of true democracy.

As reported in the public press a year or so ago, an experienced United States Congressman, reputably one of the best lawyers in Congress, said: "There isn't a person in this room now who can be certain that he can leave to his children the heritage of the privilege of being free."—DNCS, June 20, 1951, p. 3.

To live in a land in which each individual has the right to life and liberty is a glorious privilege.

United States of Americaa-McKay, David O.TPIf any man in this country prefers a government ruled by a dictator, he should go where the dictator rules; but here in the United States of America the people believe in a government as Abraham Lincoln declared, "of the people, by the people, and for the people."—CR, April 1940, p. 118.

A LAND OF PLENTY AND OUR OBLIGATIONS. Approximately thirty-five centuries ago Moses, "the human transmitter of the greatest human conduct code of all time," warned the people of Israel as follows:

"Therefore thou shalt keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to fear him.

"For the Lord thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths that spring out of valleys and hills;

"A land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees, and pomegranates; a land of oil olive, and honey;

"A land wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any thing in it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest dig brass.

"When thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the Lord thy God for the good land which he hath given thee.

"Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, in not keeping his commandments, and his judgments, and his statutes, which I command thee this day:

"Lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast built goodly houses, and dwelt therein;

"And when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou hast is multiplied;

"Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, which brought thee forth. ...

"And thou say in thine heart, My power and the might of mine hand hath gotten me this wealth.

"But thou shalt remember the Lord thy God: for it is he that giveth thee power to get wealth, that he may establish his covenant. ...

"And it shall be, if thou do at all forget the Lord thy God, and walk after other gods, and serve them, and worship them, I testify against you this day that ye shall surely perish." (Deut. 8:6-14, 17-19.)

All that Moses wrote in praise of the richness and productivity of the promised land, and more than he wrote, can be applied to this great land of America—a land of corn, wheat, barley, and all other kinds of grain—a land of milk and honey —a land where we eat bread without scarceness—a land whose stones are gold, silver, and iron, and out of whose hills we dig copper—a land aptly called the "granary of the world."

His words of admonition are equally applicable—

"When thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the Lord thy God for the good land which he hath given thee." (Deut. 8:10.)—CR, April 1948, pp. 65-66.

THE CHURCH'S OBLIGATION TO BE EXEMPLARY. We learn from authentic sources that communistic countries, operating from behind the "iron curtain" accuse democratic countries, and particularly the United States, of virtually every political and moral crime under the sun. Our democracy is described as an instrument to enslave people.

Such slander has been compared to slugs that crawl over our cabbages. You may kill them, but there is still the slime.

"The surest method against such slander is to live it down in perseverance in well doing, and by prayer to God that he would cure the distempered mind of those who traduce and injure us."

To the Church today are applicable the words of the Savior:

"Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." (Matthew 5:16.)

If we would face the future, no matter what it may be, with calmness of spirit, with an assurance that God governs in the affairs of men, let us as individuals and as a group live exemplary lives.—CR, April 1948, p. 69.

America is a land of boasted liberty, but liberty may be either helpful or fatal according to the use made of it. Is it liberty when a group of men with threats of violence prevent an employer from entering his own property? No! Liberty is shackled and violence rules! "Liberty is an atmosphere of the higher life, and it is only by a slow and patient inward transformation that one becomes capable of breathing it.

ConscienceLibertya-McKay, David O.TP"Liberty?—it is respect; liberty?—it is obedience to the inner law; and this law is neither the good pleasure of the mighty, nor the caprice of the crowd, but the high and impersonal rule before which those who govern are the first to bow the head. Shall liberty, then, be proscribed? No; but men must be made capable and worthy of it, otherwise public life becomes impossible, and the nation, undisciplined and unrestrained, goes on through license into the inextricable tangles of demogoguery."—CR, April 1937, p. 29.

CONSTITUTIONAL GUARANTEES OF LIBERTY

Constitution of the United Statesa-McKay, David O.TPTHE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. If we would make the world better, let us foster a keener appreciation of the freedom and liberty guaranteed by the government of the United States as framed by the founders of this nation. Here again self-proclaimed progressives cry that such old-time adherence is out of date. But there are some fundamental principles of this republic which, like eternal truths, never get out of date, and which are applicable at all times to liberty-loving peoples. Such are the underlying principles of the Constitution, a document framed by patriotic, freedom-loving men, who Latter-day Saints declare were inspired by the Lord.—CR, October 1940, p. 104.

Constitution of the United Statesa-McKay, David O.TPNext to being one in worshiping God, there is nothing in this world upon which this Church should be more united than in upholding and defending the Constitution of the United States.—CR, October 1939, p. 105.

THE LAND OF THE FREE. Many years ago the Lord said to the prophet, speaking of America, that no king shall ever rule this land. (See II Nephi 10:11.) It is the land of the free; and it has become an ensign to the whole world. In this land was first revealed in this dispensation, the gospel of Jesus Christ. As thrones topple and monarchies crumble, we will see that the people who are given their free agency will begin to appreciate the principles of self-government, preparatory to their accepting the gospel of Jesus Christ, which is the perfect law of liberty. I can see in all this a step toward a truer brotherhood—a preparation for the millennium. It may yet be far in the future, no one knows, but I can see divine influence overruling the destiny of nations, at least preparatory to the preaching of the gospel of Jesus Christ.—CR, April 1917, p. 49.

I am grateful for this republic and for the individual freedom vouchsafed by the Constitution of the United States and the Bill of Rights. I observed firsthand on my recent trip the evils of communistic dictatorship. It leaves no doubt in my mind of its evils.—DNCS, September 6, 1952, p. 3.

CONSTITUTIONAL PRIVILEGES TO BE UPHELD. I repeat that no greater immediate responsibility rests upon members of the Church, upon all citizens of this republic and of neighboring republics than to protect the freedom vouchsafed by the Constitution of the United States.

Constitution of the United Statesa-McKay, David O.TPLet us, by exercising our privileges under the Constitution—

Constitution of the United Statesa-McKay, David O.TP(1) Preserve our right to worship God according to the dictates of our conscience.

Constitution of the United Statesa-McKay, David O.TP(2) Preserve the right to work when and where we choose. No free man should be compelled to pay tribute in order to realize this God-given privilege. Read in the Doctrine and Covenants this statement:

Constitution of the United Statesa-McKay, David O.TP"... it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to another." (D. & C. 101:79.)

Constitution of the United Statesa-McKay, David O.TP(3)Feel free to plan and to reap without the handicap of bureaucratic interference.

Constitution of the United Statesa-McKay, David O.TP(4) Devote our time, means, and life, if necessary, to hold inviolate those laws which will secure to each individual the free exercise of conscience, the right and control of property, and the protection of life.

To sum up this whole question: In these days of uncertainty and unrest, liberty-loving people's greatest responsibility and paramount duty is to preserve and proclaim the freedom of the individual, his relationship to Deity, and, (repeating the message of our President, to which I subscribe with all my soul) the necessity of obedience to the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ—only thus will mankind find peace and happiness:

"If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed;

"And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:31-32.)—CR, April 1950, p. 37.
