David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 24

THE CHURCH AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF SOCIETY

THE TRANSFORMATION OF SOCIETY

Mission of the Churcha-McKay, David O.TPTHE MISSION OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS. The mission of the Latter-day Saints may be considered in two great aspects; one, the proclamation to the world of the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ—the declaration to all mankind that God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ appeared in this dispensation to the Prophet Joseph Smith. That in itself is a wonderful message.

Mission of the Churcha-McKay, David O.TPThe other great purpose of the Church is to translate truth into a better social order, or in other words, to make our religion effective in the individual lives of men, and in improving social conditions.—CR, October 1927, p. 11.

a-McKay, David O.Jesus ChristTPThe other day I read, in a very carefully written book, on the life of Christ—a summary of his teachings to the world. The eminent writer said:

a-McKay, David O.Jesus ChristTP"Christ came to the world and gave to the world a message, which consists, first, in giving to men a true conception of God; second, in teaching men how to attain a larger and freer life."

Then, basing the message, or the third lesson, upon the fact that a man's actions depend upon his motives, he draws this conclusion,

Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TP"Christ's message meant the ultimate development of God's kingdom or rule upon earth, which is destined to transform society. Loyalty to the divine King—the common Father of all mankind, is the strongest and only universal bond that can bind all men together. His teachings, therefore, have a large social, as well as individual significance, for they contemplate a universal brotherhood or democracy in which all men are united in the common desire to do the will of God."

Missionary Worka-McKay, David O.TPI think this is a good summary of the message that your sons and daughters are giving to the world. They teach to all men a true conception of God. They invite the world to investigate the great declaration that God and his beloved Son have appeared in person in this dispensation. What a glorious message! Second: they are teaching men the means of attaining a higher and freer and diviner life. Say what you will, that is their only purpose, and they prove their sincerity in it by leaving their loved ones, leaving their vocations, spending their own money, or the hard earnings of their beloved parents, in trying to induce men to hear that message. Third: they can stand before the people of the world and say that the gospel of Jesus Christ does contemplate, in its ultimate consummation, the transformation of society; and who, conversant with world conditions today, will say that the time is not ripe for society to be transformed!—CR, October 1922, p. 77.

THE RIGHT LEADERSHIP. Truly, the time has come as perhaps never before when men should counsel together, and in wisdom determine how the world may be made a better place in which to live.

To achieve this desired end, the first and most important step is to choose as leader one whose leadership is infallible, whose teachings when practised have never failed. In the present tempestuous sea of uncertainty, the pilot must be one who through the storm can see the beacon in the harbor of peace.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TPThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints proclaims that there is but one such guiding hand in the universe, but one unfailing Light, and that the Light of Christ who said: "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly." (John 10:10.) An active, sincere faith in the basic teachings of Jesus of Nazareth is the greatest need of the world. Because many reject this truth is all the more reason why sincere believers should proclaim it.—CR, October 1940, p. 102.

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPWhen the people who call themselves Christian militantly enlist under the leadership of the One to whom they refer as King of the world; when they accept as facts and not as theories his moral and spiritual teachings; when for selfishness they substitute kindness and thoughtfulness for others; when they aggressively defend the principles of true liberty, then may we begin to realize the hope that wrong may be abolished, righteousness be enthroned in human hearts, and honest relations and justice become the daily practice of society. Then, and not until then, will the kingdoms of this world become the kingdoms of our God.—CR, October 1940, p. 105.

THE GOSPEL DESTINED TO TRANSFORM SOCIETY. Missionaries are preaching that the gospel is destined to transform society. We believe it and we believe that from an economic standpoint, from a social standpoint, from a spiritual standpoint, we can offer to the world today such practical ideals in organized society, that if applied to the world, would alleviate much of the suffering and misery in this poor war-ridden, famine-stricken, selfish world. Take for example the little simple work of the fast day contribution to the poor.

I remember mentioning that before an audience in New Zealand, at Auckland, about six hundred nonmembers being present. We took that as the theme because a day or two before the meeting a paper had published the fact that citizens had discovered some suffering women and children about whose condition nobody seemed to be aware.

Following the meeting, a man said: "Do you really mean to say that every member of your Church is visited every month by some officer?"

"Yes, that is the plan."

"And that the amount contributed once a month on your fast day is sufficient to meet all the needs of the poor?"

"Yes, that is the fact. All do not do it, however," I confessed.

Ah, that is it. Don't you see—all do not comply. All do not come up to the standard. O fathers and mothers, what an example to the world in economic salvation if we could only live up fully to this economic principle!—CR, October 1922, p. 79.

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPCONTRIBUTING TO SOCIAL TRANSFORMATION. All should take pride in making Mormonism a synonym for trustworthiness, temperance, chastity, honesty, justice—these are fundamental principles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and by exemplifying them in our lives we contribute to the transformation of society, we translate our religion into better social conditions and bring salvation and peace to men here and now.—CR, October 1927, p. 14.

NEED OF GOSPEL PRINCIPLES FOR SOCIAL WELL-BEING. The battle against godlessness must still be fought. Nietzsche, even before World War I, denounced Christianity as a cunningly devised system that has "debauched and undermined and sapped the vigor of the modern European world, and is the most powerful instrument of racial degeneration ever devised by the common herd."

Nietzsche is dead, but the poisonous seeds that he and others like him have sown in blindness and bitterness still produce fruit of skepticism and unbelief. In charity we can say that the Christianity Nietzsche condemns is not the gospel of Jesus Christ as taught by the Redeemer of man. But egotists and misled people who cannot discriminate between truth and error still find themselves wavering with respect to the divine mission of Jesus Christ.

Every true Christian, and especially every faithful member of the Church of Jesus Christ, should be militant in defending the principles of the gospel as given by our Lord and Savior, for, in the words of Mark Hopkins, true Christianity "promotes industry, honesty, truth, purity, kindness. It humbles the proud, exalts the lowly, upholds law, favors liberty, is essential to it, and would unite men in one great brotherhood. It is the breath of life to social and civil well-being here, and spreads the azure of that heaven into whose unfathomed depth the eye of faith loves to look."—IE, 48:638-639 (1945).

If you are now thinking that the application of Christ's teaching is impracticable under modern conditions, let me ask you to bring to mind a few specific examples of people who have devoted themselves to the common good. Recall the life of Florence Nightingale, and a million others like her, unheralded and unsung. Think of the Red Cross, a comparatively recent organization among Christian nations. Think of Abraham Lincoln, consecrating his life to his country.

If still you are doubtful, consider the humble life and great achievements of Dr. George Washington Carver, "who has done more than any other living man to rehabilitate agriculture in the South." He refused a proffered salary of $100,000, preferring to devote his talents and energy to the benefit of his fellow men.

Christianity applied to daily life!—CR, October 1937, p. 102.

MEN MUST CHANGE THEIR THINKING. Because of terrible forces, newly discovered, scientists and military experts are now saying that all present means of defense are inadequate, are in fact already antiquated, and must be changed if the world is to be protected from future devastation.

Peacea-McKay, David O.TPI would that these men of reputed wisdom and foresight would lay equal emphasis on the fact that the future safety of the world depends not so much upon the changing of defenses as upon the changing of men's way of thinking and acting. Men and nations must have a change of heart. Hate, envy, suspicion, and greed must be supplanted by sympathy, forbearance, tolerance, and justice before peace comes.—IE, 48:638 (1945).

A CHANGE IN HEART NOTED. Today as we behold nations grasping at one another's throats, the strong crushing the weak, we are prone to think that righteousness among nations is waning. In our own country, we know that the struggle is still rife between capital and labor; that enemies to our democratic institutions are becoming more blatant; we see political demagogues more seemingly successful, drunkenness and immorality still flauntingly defiant; and we wonder whether mankind is growing better or worse. In private life unemployment, disappointments, adversity, sickness, and sorrow make us discouraged and sometimes despondent.

Still I am confident that truth will yet prevail, and in that confidence say with the Psalmist:

"Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord." (Psalm 31:24.)

Peacea-McKay, David O.TPWe may take courage in what I believe is a fact, that in the hearts of more millions of honest men and women than ever before in the history of the world, war is abhorrent. War has lost its false glamor and boasted glory. Such an attitude at least keeps alive our hope for the dawning of that day when men "... shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more." (Isaiah 2:4.)—CR, April 1940, p. 114.

OPTIMISM FOR A REVOLUTIONARY AGE. Please do not think me a pessimist. I love life. I think it is a joy to live in this age. Every morning, as I greet the sun as he ushers in these unexcelled autumn days, I feel the joy of living. I realize the accomplishments, to a certain degree, of this wonderful mechanistic age. Today time and distance are practically annihilated. Fifty years ago neighbors fifty miles apart were comparatively strangers. Today you can go to your telephone and in a few minutes talk to a friend seven thousand miles away. When Charles A. Lindbergh reached the American Embassy in Paris, after having flown from New York to Paris in thirty-three hours, he went to the telephone and within an hour told his mother that he had reached his destination in safety. If we were in tune at this moment, we could hear Big Ben striking over Westminster Abbey.

Millions of people in the world heard Admiral Richard E. Byrd at the South Pole. Men are penetrating the stratosphere and hoping for the nearby day when they will eat breakfast in New York and luncheon in Paris.

Gospela-McKay, David O.TPYes, it is a glorious age in which we live, but no thinking man will doubt that this age is fraught with limitless perils as well as with untold possibilities. It is because of threatening dangers that the world should become anchored in the eternal truths of Jesus Christ, and realize that there are eternal verities in this changing world.—CR, October 1935, p. 98.

THE MODERN EFFORT TO SAVE THE WORLD

FROM WHAT DOES THE WORLD NEED SAVING? During my visit reporters have asked me in one way and another, this question: "In what respects is Mormonism attempting to save the world?"

I have answered by asking another question. "What does the world need saving from?" And they have hesitated to say.

But we do not hesitate to answer that the world needs saving, first, from a shrinking faith in the existence of God; and second, from ignorance of our relationship to God, and from their own sins and weaknesses; and third, from fear of oppression by their neighbors, and fear of the hatred of mankind.

Goda-McKay, David O.TPREBUILDING FAITH. Now, think of the first: Mormonism declares to the world that our Father in heaven is a real person; that he can appear as a personal being to his children even today as he did in ancient times. That is a glorious message to the world; there is nothing more important since the Savior walked the earth. It declares to the world that God is not just a force permeating all the universe—but that power may express itself and manifest itself as a person. Those who hesitate to believe that and who say, "Why, you are too practical in trying to personalize God," lose sight of this great fact, that no matter how much greater God may be than a person, he is greater than the greatest of his works. The greatest of his creations is man, a personal being. As one man has said: When we visualize God as a spirit, we are looking at him through the clearest lens by which the human mind can comprehend the infinite. We can visualize his Son, Jesus Christ, who walked as a person on the shores of Galilee, and he said, If ye have seen me, ye have seen the Father also. (See John 14:9.)

Goda-McKay, David O.TPAnd so the Church declares to the world that our Father in heaven is real, that we may get in communication with him if we live properly.

REPENTANCE THE WAY OUT. That brings us to the second plan that the Church has of saving the world. Let me here repeat that passage of James describing pure religion: "Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world." (James 1:27.)

Let us consider that second part. The message of Mormonism is to help men recognize their weaknesses and to help man overcome those sins and weaknesses. Here we have not time to discuss what sin is, but John Wesley's mother reputedly has given us this:

"Would you judge of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of pleasure? Take this rule: Now note—whatever weakens your reason, impairs the tenderness of your conscience, obscures your sense of God, takes off your relish for spiritual things, whatever increases the authority of the body over the mind, that thing is sin to you, however innocent it may seem in itself."

Repentancea-McKay, David O.TPThe message of these young men who are going in all parts of the world, the message of the Church to all the world is: Repent of those things which contribute to the superiority of the physical senses over our love for spirituality. That is why they cry repentance! What does repentance mean? A change of life, a change of thought, a change of action. If you have been angry and hateful, change that hatred and enmity to love and consideration. If you have cheated a brother, let your conscience smite you and change that, and ask his forgiveness, and never do it again. In thus changing your life from those things which are on the animal plane, you repent of your sins. If you profane Deity, never do it again! Instead of profaning his name, worship him! And once that feeling of change comes to the soul, you desire to be born again, to have a new life.

A NEW BIRTHA CHANGED LIFE. Then what is the next step in the gospel? Burying the old man with all that hatred and jealousy and sin.

Repentancea-McKay, David O.TPThis changing of life, this repenting is what the world needs. It is a change of heart. Men must change their way of thinking! Change their way of feeling! Instead of hating and fighting and crushing one another, they should learn to love!

Some men say you cannot change the lives of men, you cannot change their hearts.

We proclaim that God has restored the gospel of Jesus Christ and made himself known again to man. We whisper to all the world, repent of the evils of your heart. Give your hearts to God instead of yourself, in selfishness. And then we proclaim, serve your fellow men instead of exploiting them. That is what James had in mind when he said, "... visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction. ..." (James 1:27.) Serve one another; make your livelihood, subdue nature, yes; cultivate your fields of beets, fields of potatoes, rye six feet tall, rectangular fields of wheat and of oats. In all these missions of Europe we have seen just such products. We commend that.

The Lord has said, subdue nature, but not just for ourselves, not just to make our own comfort. Provide for our loved ones, yes, educate them and give them comfort, but use all that God gives us in the earth for his glory and his kingdom. "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matt. 25:40.)

God help us all to proclaim to the world the necessity of repentance, the importance of baptism, first to fulfil all righteousness, second as the entrance into the kingdom of God, the doorway into his Church, and third to bury our old life and be guided by his holy spirit.

I know the gospel is divine, and the world needs it. When God's will shall be done on earth as it is done in heaven, then there will be hastened that universal brotherhood of man for which we are all praying. May the Latter-day Saints in Germany, and in every other mission in Europe, keep their faith and live in accordance with the teachings of the gospel, I humbly pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen. (From the text of an address given by President David O. McKay at Conference of the West German Mission held in the Palm Gardens, Frankfurt, Germany, July 2, 1952.)—DNCS, July 30, 1952, p. 7.

THE ELIMINATION OF EVIL. On the night of Gethsemane, in the Upper Room, before Jesus and the Apostles left for the garden, he prayed:

"... I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, ...

"I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil." (John 17:11, 15.)

The mission of the Church is to minimize and if possible eliminate evil from the world. The need of such a unifying force is expressed by a leading writer (Samuel Z. Batten) as follows:

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TP"The world has many good people in it today, more who are ready to believe than ever before, but these people possess no unifying ideals, no organic principles, no coherent view of life, no synthetic program of action. Society is coming to self-consciousness, and is beginning to take note of its troubles and needs, but it has no clear sense of direction, no organizing impulse, no all-inclusive ideals, no mighty impulsion. ... Is there anything by which our nature can gain its unity; our race acknowledge its brotherhood, our humanity order its affairs as a whole?"

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TPWe answer, yes—such a uniting force, such an ideal is the gospel of Jesus Christ as restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith. It explains man's life and its purpose, and has within it the vital saving elements, noble ideals, and spiritual uplift for which the heart of man today is yearning.—CR, April 1941, pp. 107-108.

THE DOCTRINE OF INDIVIDUAL EFFORT. Present-day difficulties and perplexities call for individual as well as co-operative effort. To paraphrase Lord Nelson's famous statement: Now is the time for every man to accept responsibility and to do his duty.

Undoubtedly there are many causes contributing to these untoward conditions, chief of which is failure to adopt the teachings of Jesus.

Well, what can we do about it? Sometimes when we think how little we can do, we almost despair of attempting to do anything. But there are a few simple but fundamental things which everyone can do.

One of these is for each individual to work out his own salvation.

Salvationa-McKay, David O.TPAn outstanding doctrine of the Church is that each individual carries this responsibility, and that the salvation of man is a process of gradual development. The Church does not accept the doctrine that a mere murmured belief in Jesus Christ is all that is essential to salvation. A man may say he believes, but if he does nothing to make that belief or faith a moving power to do, to accomplish, to produce soul growth, his protestation will avail him nothing. "Work out your own salvation" is an exhortation to demonstrate by activity, by thoughtful obedient effort the reality of faith. But this must be done with "fear and trembling"; that is, with a consciousness that absolute dependence upon self may produce pride and weakness that will bring failure. With fear and trembling we should seek the strength and grace of God for inspiration to obtain the final victory.

Salvationa-McKay, David O.TPHowever, to work out one's salvation is not to sit idly by dreaming and yearning for God miraculously to thrust bounteous blessings into our laps. It is to perform daily, hourly, momentarily, if necessary, the immediate task or duty at hand, and to continue happily in such performance as the years come and go, leaving the fruits of such labors either to self or to others to be bestowed as a just and beneficent Father may determine.—CR, April 1938, pp. 16-18.

THE CONQUEST OF SOCIAL EVILS

ELEMENTS THAT PROMOTE SOCIAL DISINTEGRATION. Right thinking, upright men and women everywhere are desirous of eliminating from our communities evil elements that are constantly disintegrating society—the liquor problem with its drunkenness, poverty, and misery; immorality with all its attendant evils; war, which is literally hell on earth.

What should be our attitude towards these social conditions? First, see to it that as individuals we do not by our acts contribute to their existence, and second, put forth every righteous effort to eradicate them from our communities.—CR, April 1941, p. 108.

CRIMINAL LAW ENFORCEMENT. It is from within, morally speaking, that our cities become corrupt; not from outward, open assaults on virtue, but from insidious, corrupt actions of trusted individuals. Our government, as you know, has recently uncovered a gambling ring that covers a twenty billion dollar business in vice. Many large cities in the United States are connected with it and contaminated by it.

Too many of these city officials license darkened rooms wherein men and women, and not infrequently teen-age boys and girls, may guzzle beer and whiskey and indulge in other vices sought by persons of low ideals. For the permission and perpetuation of such dens of iniquity in our cities, the public is not entirely free from blame. However, those who are elected to office—commissioners, peace officers, trusted servants of the people—are most directly responsible.

Generally speaking, these men are honest in their intentions and actions to enforce the laws and if possible to eradicate, at least to reduce to a minimum, the evils upon which the underworld thrives. One or two, or a half a dozen unprincipled men, however, can frustrate the most earnest efforts of the upright officials; for example, officers informed that minors are permitted to enter a certain "joint" will find when they get to the place that the proprietor has been "tipped off," and seemingly everything is within the law.

If and when appreciation for such "tip-offs," and other favors, is expressed in secretive payments of money, those participating in the graft may meet in a room, a club, or in a private residence, ostensibly to play a social game of poker, and under this guise divide their ill-gotten gains. Thus do our cities, as individuals, become corrupt from within.—CR, April 1951, p. 97.

STEMMING CRIMINALITY. There are two ways to stem criminality. One is by united, concentrated public opinion. The other, and more effective, is by personal contact. There are many in this audience who can look back with gratitude to the visit of some kind man, somebody who put his hand on your shoulder and said: "Don't do that," or "I commend you for not doing this, my boy." Some word of commendation, some gentle hand led you back into the path that has given you the success which you have attained. Personal influence—we must not lose sight of it! That organization which can supply that personal influence with the least waste of effort, and with the highest degree of efficiency, is the most potent organization in the world.

You have before you, bishops, the following means in your hands: the priesthood, Relief Society, Sunday School, Young Men's and Young Women's Mutual Improvement, and Primary Associations, not to name the Church schools and seminaries. I say bishops, because the bishop is the head of these organizations, and if the bishop will accept the responsibility of formulating and of assigning the list, as I am going to outline it, there need not be a boy or girl who within two months may not have had a personal visit from an efficient officer or teacher.

So we find in each group there are one or two, three or four, who need special care, special guidance. How best can we reach them? In this way: Let every teacher in the quorums, every teacher in these auxiliaries have before him the list of these potential delinquents. Be not satisfied with the good class you have Sunday morning or Tuesday night, but feel that the work is not done until you have carefully considered that other list which you hold in your hand, in regard to which you will report to your bishop at least once a month your success in reaching those whose names are found thereon.

Worth of Soulsa-McKay, David O.TPWe know you can't bring them all in. We have tried it. But you can bring some, "And if it be so that you should labor all your days ..." says the Lord through the Prophet, "and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!" (D. & C. 18:15.) And who knows what that soul may be in that kingdom? Through loving effort you might discover some "inglorious Milton."—CR, April 1931, pp. 82-83.

Moralitya-McKay, David O.TPRAISING MORAL STANDARDS. It is charged that "one of the distinctive traits of modern society in every country is the sinking of the moral ideal in the minds and life of the people." Manifestly, then, an essential in world betterment is the raising of the moral standard.

If anyone says, "This is trite," then I say such a thought itself justifies the call for men who will rededicate themselves to the principles of honesty, justice, tolerance, and love, and who will practise these virtues in their business and professional activities. "And this life is possible," as someone has declared, "in social conditions the most diverse, and with natural gifts the most unequal. It is not fortune, or personal advantage, but our turning them to account that constitutes the value of life."

"Nothing," says Emerson, "can bring you peace but the triumph of principles."—CR, October 1940, p. 103.

THE BUILDING OF ZION

A MODERN ZION. "... Zion shall flourish, and the glory of the Lord shall be upon her." (D. & C. 64:41.)

Ziona-McKay, David O.TPZion means literally a "sunny place," or "sunny mountain." It first designated an eminence in Palestine on which Jerusalem is built. In the Doctrine and Covenants, Zion has three designations: first, the land of America; second, a specific place of gathering; and third, the pure in heart.

As the Zion in Jerusalem was distinct as it stood wrapped in the clear sunshine, so I like to think of modern Zion as enveloped in heavenly light, because of merited divine favor. In considering how best to build Zion today let us, as wise and able architects do, see clearly first what we are going to build. Let us draw some plans and specifications.

If we have in mind the physical Zion, then we must strive for more fertile acres; bring from the mountains gold and silver in abundance; found factories to furnish more employment; extend in length and width our concrete public highways; build banks to protect, or to dissipate, as has been the case recently, the wealth we accumulate; transform our vast coal fields into electricity that will furnish light, heat, and power to every family; improve the means of communication until with radio in our pockets we may communicate with friends and loved ones from any point at any given moment.

Ziona-McKay, David O.TPIs it these physical phases of Zion which we are to build? Certainly it is difficult to picture the city of Zion without at least some—if not all—such modern necessities and luxuries. On the other hand, it is possible to have all these things and instead of reaping the blessings of Zion, suffer the very torments of hell. If the wealth, for example, from the wide acres be obtained by the oppression of the poor; if the gold and silver be obtained at the expense of human happiness and even of life itself; if in the palatial offices men sit and scheme how to prey upon their fellows, plan to extort money by kidnapping, or other unholy efforts, then all of these advantages will be but a means of making life miserable and unhappy.

It is well, therefore, for us to realize at the outset that "the greatness of a nation is measured, not by its fruitful acres, but by the men who cultivate those acres; not by great forests, but by the men who use those forests; not by its mines, but by the men who work them." America was a great land "choice above all other lands" when Columbus discovered it. Men of America have made it a great nation.—IE, 38:229 (1935).

Ziona-McKay, David O.TPZION, THE PURE IN HEART. The Zion we build will pattern after the ideals of its inhabitants. To change men and the world we must change their thinking, for the thing which a man really believes is the thing which he has really thought; that which he actually thinks is the thing which he lives. Men do not go beyond their ideals; they often fall short of them, but they never go beyond them.

Victor Hugo said: "The future of any nation can be determined by the thoughts of its young men between the ages of eighteen and twenty-five." Thus it is easy to understand why the Lord designates Zion as "... the pure in heart ..." (D. & C. 97:21); and only when we are such, and only when we have such shall Zion "... flourish, and the glory of the Lord shall be upon her." (Ibid., 64:41.)

Ziona-McKay, David O.TPThe foundation of Zion then will be laid in the hearts of men; broad acres, mines, forests, factories, beautiful buildings, modern conveniences, will be but means and accessories to the building of the human soul and the securing of happiness.

Ziona-McKay, David O.TPTHE FOUR CORNERSTONES. Let us then as we draw our plans for Zion today choose what we may call the "four cornerstones of Zion's inhabitants."

First: A firm belief and acceptance of the truth that this universe is governed by intelligence and wisdom, and, as Plato said, "... is not left to the guidance of an irrational and random chance."

Ziona-McKay, David O.TPThe second cornerstone is that the ultimate purpose in God's great plan is the perfecting of the individual.

Ziona-McKay, David O.TPIt is his desire that men and women become like himself.

Ziona-McKay, David O.TPThe third cornerstone is a realization that the first and most essential thing in man's progress is freedom—free agency. Man can choose the highest good, or choose the lowest good and fall short of what he was intended to be.

Ziona-McKay, David O.TPThe fourth cornerstone is a sense of responsibility toward other individuals and the social group.—IE, 38:229, 254 (1935).

TRANSFORMING SOCIETYLOCAL COMMUNITY PRIDE. One of the best ways of building up our home, be it a domicile, a city, a state, or a nation, is to speak well of that home, city, state, or nation. Let the tongue be under control and speak well of the home. I have rejoiced time and again, when visiting the different stakes surrounding Utah, to hear our brethren tell about the advantages of some particular town. "Why," they would say, for example, "we are blest with the purest air, we have the best water that can be found in the world"; and they will enumerate, one after another, the benefits and blessings of that particular locality.

I recall now how the brethren in Canada were eager to impress those who were with them with the resources of that country. Why, the advantages were innumerable; for example, one visitor said, "But you haven't the scenery we have in Utah." "Yes, we have," persisted President Edward J. Wood. "We have even better scenery than you have in Utah." "Where?" "I will show you," and then a ride forty miles from Cardston took us to one of the most beautiful mountain scenes in the world—the Switzerland of America.

He felt that there was nothing that could make him feel dissatisfied with his home there. "Even the winds in Canada," he said, "are blessing us, because they blow the snow off, so the cattle can eat the grass." This is the point—he could see good in everything. There was contentment—not a spirit of tearing down, finding fault, complaining. I believe it is a good lesson; let us speak well of our home city; let us see the advantages of it.—CR, April 1910, p. 107.

PRIDE IN THE STATE. Let us speak well of our home state. But we cannot speak well of the state unless we speak well of the men who have founded the state. There is no other state in the union that can boast of stronger, truer, more virtuous, upright, God-fearing citizens and men of God than can the state of Utah. Let the young men throughout Zion realize this fact, and let their tongues proclaim it, and let them not encourage the company of those who would use this unruly member to vilify the men who founded this empire.

I overheard a conversation the other day which in effect was as follows: A prominent man and his wife evidently had been entertaining an eastern visitor who had been interested in the history and in different places of Salt Lake City. I judged that he was profoundly impressed, as every honest thinking man is when he sees the results of the labor and industry of the pioneers of our state. Among other things, he mentioned his going to church.

"I was at church last Sunday," I heard him say.

"Oh, were you?" answered his host, followed by some remark that I did not catch. "Well, where did you go to church?"

"At the Tabernacle."

And the sneer on that woman's face made my blood boil. With the sneer came some remark about not dignifying the Tabernacle as a church.

I saw the shadow of disappointment creep over that eastern visitor's face. He had dignified it, and he had been profoundly impressed, but when our own people, citizens of this state, though not members of the Church, spoke evil of something in our midst, the shadow of disappointment darkened his countenance. It will always be so.

O let us speak well, when we can do it truthfully—and we can in this case. Let us speak well of our city and state, to all who come within our borders; let us speak of the advantages and growth of our state.

SPREAD "GLAD" TIDINGSNOT BAD. Let us speak well of those within our Church. Brethren and sisters, Christians have the responsibility of giving good news to the world—not bad news. Latter-day Saints have the responsibility of carrying glad tidings to the world. Let us not wait until we go abroad to carry it; let us give the good news today—good news of our neighbors, good news of our bishops, good news of our stake workers, good news of all whom we meet and whose company we may chance to be thrown into. If we cannot speak well of them, truthfully, let us refrain from speaking at all.—CR, April 1910, p. 108.

Criticisma-McKay, David O.TPPOSITIVE SOCIAL CRITICISM. Then say you, would you not speak of evil conditions? Must we not raise our voice in denouncing conditions and men who are bringing evil upon us? Yes, speak of conditions; but it is unnecessary to revile the character of men. We cannot do it as true Latter-day Saints; we must rise above it. Though we are in the world, we must not be of the world. There is a trait in the hearts of the world to pick at their fellow men. Emerson says that so pronounced is this tendency that an accident cannot happen in the street without the bystanders becoming animated with a faint hope that the victim will die. We cannot encourage that tendency. As James says, it is from the earth—sensual, devilish. We must not pick out that which will tear down a brother's character, nor the character of the city, the state, or the nation.—CR, April 1910, p. 109.
