David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

BOOK V

THE IMPROVEMENT OF MAN IN SOCIETY

"The responsibility is upon each individual to choose the path of righteousness, of faithfulness, and of duty to fellow men. If he chooses otherwise and as a result meets failure, misery, and death, he alone is to blame."

—DAVID O. MCKAY

Conference Report April 1938, p. 18.

CHAPTER 25

THE NATURE OF MAN

THE CONDITION OF MAN

FIRST CONSIDERATIONS. Adam and Eve chose to take upon themselves mortality, and they were banished from God's presence. They were driven from the garden, and in their humiliation, their judgment or their memory was taken from them.

Now, imagine, young men and women, in what condition were those first people when they were placed upon this earth to gain their livelihood by the sweat of their brow, not remembering as the years passed, their spiritual state in the garden.

I picture them subject to the earth. If their bodies became cold, it was the sun that warmed them. If their throats became thirsty, it was a stream that quenched that thirst. If they wished to have a soft bed, it was a skin, or the leaves of the trees that furnished it. In a word, the earth produced that which satisfied their wants and needs and the mysteries of Nature would stir their souls.

They were subsisting upon what the earth gave them, and if, in that condition, ten, fifteen, twenty, one hundred, five hundred years passed, if no voice had come from "toward the garden," what condition would they have been in? They would naturally be grateful for the sun, for the moon and the stars that gave light by night; for the streams and other gifts of nature. The book of Moses says that under that condition some of them became, "carnal, sensual, and devilish by nature."

There is a passage in the Bible which says, "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God." (Eph. 2:8.)

There are several good explanations of that, but to me here is one of the best illustrations of the grace of God to man. Adam heard the voice of God "toward the garden." And the Lord gave him commandments and said: "... offer the firstlings of their flocks ... unto the Lord." (Moses 5:5.) By inference we conclude, the best that you raise in the garden and the field. See what that means in developing spirituality?

Selfishnessa-McKay, David O.TPSelfishness, the animal nature, would say, "I want that." But God, knowing that the highest purpose of man is to develop the spirit within him, said, Give the firstlings to God, thinking not of self, but of something higher. What a sublime purpose! What an essential purpose! It was as if the Lord said: You who live in the earth need the experience to know good from evil, and to live not for yourself, but for God. Whatever you do—do in his name.—DNCS, January 2, 1952, pp. 2, 3.

MAN, HIS KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEFS. I should like to take as text that remarkable passage: "But there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding." (Job 32:8.)

Man is a dual being. This fact I have accepted, it seems, since childhood, although I was a little shaken regarding it when I took psychology. James, the psychologist, however, recognized that the field of spirituality was beyond him. His honest attitude helped me during the period of doubt and hasty conclusions characteristic of youth.

This we do know: that we are here, and that we come in contact with things which our senses disclose. I am conscious of everything I see or hear. There are animals which receive these impressions in a different manner from that through which we receive them. A snake, for example, has no visible ear, but he hears and interprets vibrations through his skin, or possibly through his tongue. There are very few things which we do know, even with these five physical senses. An Indian philosopher classified all things into the following four groups:

"Things we know. "Things we assume to know. "Things we believe. "Things of which we are wholly ignorant."

As illustrations of the first class he listed:

"We know that we exist. "We know that other people exist. "We know that other things besides ourselves also exist. "We know that fire burns and that water quenches thirst. "We know that snow is soft and white and that ice is hard and cold to our senses. "We know that flowers bloom and that birds sing. "We know that certain things we call food, water, and air are necessary to what we name the life of our physical bodies. "We know when we are happy and we know what sorrow is. "We know these things," he explained, "because they fall within the radius of our own individual experience."

As illustrations of the second class he recorded:

"We assume to know that the earth is round. "We assume to know how old we are ... "We assume to know about Columbus ... Washington ... Moses ... Benjamin Franklin ... Newton, etc."

Of "things we believe," he wrote:

"Many there are who believe in a God in the sense that the Great Creative Intelligence is a distinct and definite personality ... "There are also those who believe in the absolute, inherent immortality of all mankind."

Of "things we do not know, or assume to know," he wrote:

"We neither know, nor assume to know, nor can we formulate a well-defined belief as to when time began or when, if ever, it will end; where space begins, how far it extends, or where, if at all, it ends; ... when ... matter first came into existence ... how many suns, moons, and stars there are throughout all the universe of space; ... the number of fishes or other living things in all the waters of the earth, the insects which pervade the atmosphere. ... "

According to the statements thus set forth, how limited is that first class! We know only the things which come within the limit of these five senses. Yet, I must challenge that statement because there are other things which we know, as assuredly as we know those which we are seeing at this moment. I can see—I know that book raised up in evidence.] If I take that and get its dimensions, I still find that I do not know it. I don't know the story of that binding, whether it goes back to the woods and the subsequent progress it has made. In other words, I don't know that which I say I know. If I take a thread and dissect it and split it up into molecules, then atoms, then electrons, and attempt to analyze it, I shall finally get to the point where I see I do not know it. But what I think about that book or that desk, I know, as I know nothing else in the world. The most real thing to me in all my existence is my thought.

And what you are thinking, whatever it may be, is the most real to you in this world at this moment. You can analyze your brain and catch the explosion in the brain which seems to produce the thought, but the thought is yours, as literally as the coat you are wearing or any physical part of your being.

Now what is that something which claims the thought? My thesis is based on the claim that that which claims the thought is the spirit, and that this spirit within may become aware of fact independently of these five senses—perhaps through vibrations, perhaps independent of them, I don't know.

Spirit Elementa-McKay, David O.TPI know that thought or feeling of awareness may be sensed independently of these five senses. The spirit in man controls this physical body just as the driver of an auto may control that machine. Just so, may man be controlled. Furthermore the spirit may become cognizant of an event prior to its happening or which is beyond the limit of these five senses.

What I am going to say now you may be inclined to question.

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPI am wondering if in early times when men walked and talked with God, if they were not more responsive spiritually than they are today. Adam, Enoch, Moses, Peter, John the Beloved, Abraham, all had this gift of spiritual response. Christ had it in perfection. Joseph Smith possessed the gift—but there is a remnant of it in everyone's soul, and particularly everyone who holds the priesthood. If you haven't had the experience that was given by the Lord through Joseph Smith to Oliver Cowdery, let me read this passage from the Doctrine and Covenants 9:7-9: "Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me.

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TP"But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right.

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TP"But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong; therefore, you cannot write that which is sacred save it be given you from me."

There are certain parts of the body known as "vestigial organs"; for example, the tonsils, after a certain age; the appendix is another example. Sometimes I wonder if the spirit nature of man today hasn't been restricted in its manifestations and expressions—its responses feeble but not wholly lost.

Wordsworth said:

"Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting; The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting And cometh from afar: Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home." "Intimations of Immortality."

And so in finding and trailing this spiritual contact with the Infinite, God is pulling us back into his presence. If you have ever felt the touch of inspiration, you will know that what I say is true.

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPYou know that you love, and love is not part of your physical body but a definite and divine attribute of the human soul. There is an eternal part of us which will outlive the sun, the moon, and the earth itself.—DNCS, August 8, 1936, p. 1.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPFREEDOM OF THE INDIVIDUAL. The power of choice is a God-given gift, and the purpose of life is happiness. Things which pertain to the physical nature are so easily obtained and the pleasure so immediate that many spend most of their time seeking them and neglecting the permanent joys of the spirit.—DNCS, June 6, 1951, p. 2.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPTHE PRINCIPLE OF CHOICE. The principle of choice came to Adam and Eve and to Cain and Abel. Let me refer to the account of those two boys. They, too, heard the doctrine, " ... offer the firstlings of their flocks, for an offering unto the Lord." (Moses 5:5.) They, too, heard, bring the best product the earth gives. And one of those boys gave the firstlings of his flock, and gladly gave them. But the other kept the best to himself.

When the Lord rewarded Abel, on natural principles, Cain became jealous. He became so envious that in anger he slew his brother. God asked Cain, "Where is Abel, thy brother?" " ... Am I my brother's keeper?" answered the guilty man, sullenly. Said the Lord, "If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door." (See Gen. 4:9, 7.)

Thus briefly were eternal principles promulgated in the first stages of man on earth, and applicable today.

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TPThe choice is given, whether we live in the physical world as animals, or whether we use what earth offers us as a means of living in the spiritual world that will lead us back into the presence of God.

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TPThis means specifically:

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TPWhether we choose selfishness or whether we will deny ourselves for the good of others;

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TPWhether we will cherish indulgence of appetite, passion, or whether we will develop restraint and self-control.

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TPWhether we choose licentiousness or chastity;

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TPWhether we will encourage hate or develop love;

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TPWhether practise cruelty or kindness;

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TPWhether be cynical or sanguine—hopeful;

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TPWhether we be traitorous—disloyal to those who love us, to our country, to the Church or to God—or whether we will be loyal;

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TPWhether we be deceitful, or honest, our word our bond;

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TPWhether a slanderous or a controlled tongue.—DNCS, January 2, 1952, p. 3.

Salvationa-McKay, David O.TPINDIVIDUALISM. We are not saved as a state. We are not saved as a group. Man is saved as an individual, and as an individual he lived in the life of the Savior, the Son of Man.

Salvationa-McKay, David O.TPNo person was too humble, no person was too simple to receive his attention, and to have the right to live. The story of Jesus is the story of his dealings with individuals.—DNCS, June 11, 1952, p. 15.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPThe responsibility is upon each individual to choose the path of righteousness, of faithfulness, and of duty to fellow men. If he chooses otherwise, and as a result meets failure, misery, and death, he alone is to blame.—CR, April 1938, p. 18.

THE SACREDNESS OF PERSONALITY. There is an unchanging truth in an unchanging world which should be an anchor to the soul of every person in it: the sacredness of personality. The least child was sacred to Jesus. It is not the will of your Father in heaven that one of these little ones should perish. That simple truth in the world, what would it mean?

"Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matt. 25:40.)

And in this modern day he said:

"Remember the worth of souls is great.... " (D. & C. 18:10.)

A proper conception of this divine principle would change the attitude of the world to the benefit and happiness of all human beings. It would bring into active operation the Golden Rule: Do unto others as you would have others do unto you. (See Matt. 7:12.)—CR, October 1935, p. 101.

RESPECT FOR ALL RACES. What a different world this would be if men would accumulate wealth, for example, not as an end but as a means of blessing human beings and improving human relations. A Christian conception of the right and value of a human soul, even though his skin be dark, would have prevented the slaughter that at this moment is being perpetrated in Ethiopia.—CR, October 1935, p. 101.

MAN AND HIS NATURE

Choicea-McKay, David O.TPDUAL ASPECTS. Man has a dual nature: one, related to the earthly or animal life; the other, akin to the Divine. Whether a man remains satisfied within what we designate the animal world, satisfied with what the animal world will give him, yielding without effort to the whim of his appetites and passions and slipping farther and farther into the realm of indulgence, or whether, through self-mastery, he rises toward intellectual, moral, and spiritual enjoyments depends upon the kind of choice he makes every day, nay, every hour of his life.—CR, April 1949, p. 13.

Body, Physicala-McKay, David O.TPTHE BODY. The body with its five or more senses, with its appetites and passions, is essential to life and happiness, but in the ultimate analysis it is only a means to a higher end. When man makes its gratification an end in itself, he frustrates the purpose and descends to sensuality. Therefore, " ... choose you this day whom ye will serve; ... " (Joshua 24:15.)—CR, April 1949, p. 16.

Body, Spirita-McKay, David O.TPA SPIRITUAL BEING. Man is a spiritual being, and at some period of his life everyone is possessed with an irresistible desire to know his relationship to the Infinite. He realizes that he is not just a physical object that is to be tossed for a short time from bank to bank, only to be submerged finally in the everflowing stream of life. There is something within him which urges him to rise above himself, to control his environment, to master the body and all things physical and live in a higher and more beautiful world.—CR, October 1928, p. 37.

Worldlinessa-McKay, David O.TPThose who choose to remain in this material world and who close their eyes to the promise and possibility of a higher life, merely acknowledge that our purpose here is to be born, to live, breathe, prepare in a general way for those who follow after us, and then to die.—DNCS, June 8, 1935.
