David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 26

THE BUILDING OF HUMAN CHARACTER

MAN AND CHARACTER DEVELOPMENT

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPTHE UPWARD CLIMB. Since man's first advent on earth, God has been urging him to rise above the selfish, groveling life of the purely animal existence into the higher, more spiritual realm. After several thousand years of struggling, mankind even now but dimly recognizes the fact that the greatest of the world's leaders are those who most nearly approach the teachings of the Man of Galilee. This is psychologically sound because the thoughts a man harbors determine the realm in which he serves. "Be not deceived", writes Paul to the Galatians, "God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TP"For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting." (Gal. 6:7-8.)—CR, April 1951, pp. 95-96.

Thoughtsa-McKay, David O.TPTHE POWER OF THOUGHT. What a man continually thinks about determines his actions in times of opportunity and stress. A man's reaction to his appetites and impulses when they are aroused gives the measure of that man's character. In these reactions are revealed the man's power to govern or his forced servility to yield.—CR, October 1951, p. 8.

THE POWER OF ACTIONS. Actions in harmony with divine law and the laws of nature will bring happiness, and those in opposition to divine truth, misery. Man is responsible not only for every deed, but also for every idle word and thought. Said the Savior:

" ... every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment." (Matthew 12:36.)

As a boy I questioned that truth when I first heard it expressed by my father. I remember saying to myself, "Not even the Lord knows what I am thinking now." I was very much surprised, therefore, when later as a student in the university, I read the following in William James' Psychology about the effect of thought and action on human character:

SPINNING OUR OWN FATES

Little Thingsa-McKay, David O.TP"We are spinning our own fates good or evil, and never to be undone. Every smallest stroke of virtue or of vice leaves its ever so little scar. The drunken Rip Van Winkle, in Jefferson's play, excuses himself for every fresh dereliction by saying, 'I won't count this time.' Well! he may not count it, and a kind Heaven may not count it; but it is being counted none the less. Down among his nerve-cells and fibers the molecules are counting it, registering and storing it up to be used against him when the next temptation comes. Nothing we ever do is, in strict scientific literalness, wiped out. Of course, this has its good side as well as its bad one. As we become permanent drunkards by so many separate drinks, so we become saints in the moral, and authorities and experts in the practical and scientific spheres, by so many separate acts and hours of work. Let no youth have any anxiety about the upshot of his education, whatever the line of it may be. If he keep faithfully busy each hour of the working day, he may safely leave the final result to itself. He can with perfect certainty count on waking up some fine morning, to find himself one of the competent ones of his generation, in whatever pursuit he may have singled out. Silently, between all the details of his business, the power of judging in all that class of matter will have built itself up within him as a possession that will never pass away. Young people should know this truth in advance. The ignorance of it has probably engendered more discouragement and faint-heartedness in youths embarking on arduous careers than all other causes put together." (Psychology, Henry Holt and Co., N. Y. 1892, p. 150.)—CR, April 1950, pp. 33-34.

Submissivenessa-McKay, David O.TPGIVING GOD THE GLORY. A willingness to give God the glory is a sure means of subduing selfishness. Faith, therefore, is a foundation element in true character building; for an upright character is the result of continued effort and right thinking, the effect of long-cherished associations with God-like thoughts. He approaches nearest the Christ spirit who makes God the center of his thoughts and acts, and who can say in his heart, " ... not my will, but thine, be done." (Luke 22:42.)—IE, 47:13 (1943).

THE ROLE OF IDEALS

THE EFFICACY OF STRIVING. I never hear one of our brethren bear testimony to the divinity of this work, without feeling that the strength and growth of his character depends upon a consistent life with that testimony; and it makes character to live in harmony with man's ideals, or at least to strive to live in harmony with them.

I can illustrate what I mean by relating an incident concerning two of our boys at college. They had been taught as you boys and I have been taught, that next to life itself, we should cherish chastity.

One of these boys noticed that there was a laxity among his classmates, and after a few months at college, he partook of a different spirit from the one he had in his home, and one night he said to his companion, who was older than he, "I am going out tonight with those fellows."

"Well, you'd better not," said his companion.

"Oh," he said, "I do not know! Those fellows have a good time, take their wine, have their cigarets and their cigars, they enjoy themselves; and here we are restrained. They get their lessons; they are doing just as well in college as we are; and I am going out with them. I am not so sure that our ideals are necessary, anyhow."

The older one walked up, put his hand on his companion's shoulder, and said, "Those boys may be getting along all right in school; they may do these things to which you refer with impunity; but you can't."

"Why?"

"Because you know better. And once you break through that ideal, your character is broken."

It was the best lesson he learned in college, and I am very glad that he learned it and lived it.—CR, October 1918, pp. 137-138.

Temptationa-McKay, David O.TPResist the devil, and he will flee from you. Court him, and you will soon have shackles, not on your wrists, but on your soul.—DNCS, August 8, 1951

IDEALS AND CHARACTER. I shall never forget the picture of an Arizona mother's parting with her son. It was about a year and a half ago, when we first entered the war. He was one of the first to go. The mother, with her heart almost breaking, went with him to the recruiting office, and in the presence of a United States officer, when she was taking her last good-bye, said, "John, I want you to come back to me just as clean and sweet as you are now, or do not come back at all."

And the officer said, "Why, madam, you must not expect that of your boy."

"I do expect it of him," she returned, "and every Mormon mother expects it of her boy. I do expect it of you, John, and I know you will." With that she gave him a caress and went back to her home, and he to fight for his country.

Don't you think that boy will strive for righteousness, for the ideals of home, and the ideals of his character? He knows what is right; and if he is going to be a man of strong character, he must maintain those ideals.—CR, October 1918, p. 138.

THE SPIRITUAL LAW OF CHARACTER. Is the truth of the paradoxical statement, losing oneself to find oneself, so elusive that mankind cannot grasp it? Or is it so in conflict with the struggle for existence that men consider it impractical? Even so, the fact remains that He who is " ... the way, the truth, and the life" (John 14:6) has herein set forth an immutable law, obedience to which will ameliorate those social and economic conditions in which

"Man's inhumanity to man

Makes countless thousands mourn."

Robert Burns, "Man Was Made to Mourn."

Self-Deniala-McKay, David O.TPSpecifically stated, this law is: We live our lives most completely when we strive to make the world better and happier. The law of pure nature, survival of the fittest, is self-preservation at the sacrifice of all else; the law of true spiritual life is deny self for the good of others.—I, 80:567 (1945).

MANHOOD AND WOMANHOOD

THE GLORY OF CREATION. We want men. There is nothing in life so admirable as true manhood; there is nothing so sacred as true womanhood. Manhood! Oh, what that means—to be a man, to be worthy of the honor that Anthony gave to Brutus, when he pointed and said:

"This was the noblest Roman of them all: All the conspirators, save only he, Did that they did in envy of great Caesar; He only, in a general honest thought And common good to all, made one of them. His life was gentle, and the elements So mix'd in him that Nature might stand up And say to all the world 'This was a man!' " Shakespeare, Julius Caesar.

Mana-McKay, David O.TPWordsworth's heart leaped up when he beheld a rainbow in the sky. Burns' heart wept when his plowshare overturned a daisy. Tennyson could pluck the flower from the crannied wall, and see, if he could read in it the mystery, all that "God and man is." All these, and other great men, have shown to us, in the works of nature, the handiwork of God. Shakespeare could find "tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, sermons in stones and good in every thing." All, I say, are expressions of goodness, and praises to God invite; but the glory of creation, "the beauty of the world," says Shakespeare, "the paragon of animals," is man. "An honest man is the noblest work of God." (Pope.)

Honestya-McKay, David O.TPWe delight in associating with true men; it is good to be in their presence. "They are living light fountains," says Carlyle, "which it is good and pleasant to be near." I often think that it is easy to be honest; and to be honest means that we are in harmony with divine law, that we are in keeping with the noblest work of God.—CR, October 1908, p. 108.

Steadfastnessa-McKay, David O.TPTRUE TO CONSCIENCE. All men who have moved the world have been men who would stand true to their conscience—not only James, not only Paul, Peter, and all those ancient Apostles, but all other great men in history. I often admire Luther; I cannot help feeling better when I read his words to the assembly at the Diet of Worms, all the Catholic Church opposing him, and all the powers of the land staring him in the face:

Steadfastnessa-McKay, David O.TP"Let me then be refuted and convinced by the testimony of the scriptures or by the clearest arguments, otherwise I cannot and will not recant, for it is neither safe nor expedient to act against conscience. Here I take my stand; I can do no otherwise, so help me God!"

Steadfastnessa-McKay, David O.TPIt was Joseph Smith who, after having a testimony of the Lord Jesus in his bosom, declared to the men who said, "It is from the devil"—ministers who had influence with him before, men whom he respected as, at least, attempting to teach the word of God—to them he said: "I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it." And he was true to this testimony to the last. When he was going to his death, he declared to all the world: "I have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward all men." Why? Because he had been true to it; he was a man possessing divine manhood, for true manhood is divine.

It was that spirit that prompted our leader (President Joseph F. Smith) to say to the world: "I will be true to those who have trusted me; I cannot do otherwise." That is the manhood the Latter-day Saint should possess, in defending the truth.—CR, October 1908, pp. 110-111.

Integritya-McKay, David O.TPMANHOOD SUSTAINS TRUTH. The man who is true to his manhood will not lie against the truth. We are told that we can crucify the Lord afresh. If that be true, we can betray the Lord afresh. There is that within every man which is divine, a divinity within every man's soul. It cannot die. God renews it, inspires it, works to keep it alive. The man who will be true to the divine within, is true to his Lord, and is true to his fellow men. The man who betrays that, the man who is untrue to that which he knows to be right, is wavering, is weakening. God pity him; he may go so far that he will step out of the light, out of that divine presence; and woe be unto him when he does; God help him.—CR, October 1908, p. 110.

FOUR PICTURES OF IMPORTANCE AND BEAUTY. There are four pictures upon which I always love to look. The first of these is the picture of Christ before Pilate when that Roman official said to the angry mob, "Behold the man!" (John 19:5.) And he said it, he pointed to Jesus, crowned with thorns, bearing upon his shoulders the purple robe. He pointed to one at whom the angry mob sneered, condemned as a felon and blasphemer, and yet when he said, "Behold the man!" he described one who was perfect in character, who was conqueror over weaknesses and temptations, and who could say, as he did to his fellow workers, "These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace ... be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." (John 16:33.) He is our pattern.

The other picture is Christ in his youth. Have you not admired the paintings of the best artists who have tried to picture purity and strength in that young boy of twelve years? I have, and I never look upon one of the choicest of these without feeling that I am looking upon one who is the embodiment of youthful strength, vigor, and purity.

The third is the picture of the boy who, as Hawthorne describes him, looked upon the great stone face, and, while thinking of the ideals and virtues characterized in that great work of nature, developed those same virtues in his own life.

The fourth is a picture in real life, a youth whose clear eyes picture the strength of young manhood and the purity of the life he has led. What more beautiful thing can one see in nature than that? We love beauty in womanhood; we also love handsomeness and strength in young manhood; and that strength and handsomeness come as a result of true living.—CR, October 1926, p. 112.

THE CONTROL OF APPETITE

Self-Controla-McKay, David O.TPNATURE OF THE PROBLEM. Appetite is a God-given quality. Blessed are they who have a good appetite. But to gormandize is injurious. And that brings me to one general statement, that most of our troubles here in this life in trying to subdue nature and subduing our appetites all come within the question of limitation. Many things are right, up to a certain point, and beyond that they become evils or vices.

Self-Controla-McKay, David O.TP A THREEFOLD CLASSIFICATION. Latter-day Saints should learn to control, to live within that proper limit; for example, and I shall just state it briefly, all evils may be classified into three groups, the first designated by those of which Paul says, "Let him that stole steal no more." (Eph. 4:28.) Exclude them from life entirely; stealing, lying, sinning sexually, murder, all those sins which should never be committed constitute this class. Never do them—there is no justification.

Self-Controla-McKay, David O.TPIn the second group are jealousy, hatred, envy, animosity—all such evils you must overcome by suppression. That is where your control comes in. Suppress that anger! Suppress that jealousy, that envy! They are all injurious to the spirit anyhow.

Self-Controla-McKay, David O.TPThen there is a third, and in that third group we find nearly all our difficulties, those things which are virtues up to a certain point, and beyond that point they become vices. I mentioned one—appetite. It is a virtue. It is a guide to you, but if you gormandize in food, you injure your body, you frustrate God's plan. Your appetite becomes depraved, corrupt, and it becomes an enemy to you. Our passions are virtues to perpetuate life. Prostitute them, and you have the vilest of sins!

Self-Controla-McKay, David O.TPSo the whole lesson is one of subduing, not just physical matter, that you might realize the ideal, but subduing your own passions and appetites, and conquering them. Some of you say we hear too much about keeping the Word of Wisdom. Why, it is one of the best lessons for the young in all this world, and for the old! You reach out to indulge in certain things. Resist, avoid creating an appetite for that which creates an appetite for itself. But beyond that, you develop the power to say, "No, thank you." And the strength that comes to the character more than compensates for any immediate pleasure.—DNCS, September 6, 1952, p. 15.

Self-Controla-McKay, David O.TPSELF-MASTERY. I commend to you, young man and young woman, the virtue of self-mastery, if you would fulfil the true measure of your life in subduing, in order to realize the ideal, the spiritual development of your soul.—DNCS, September 6, 1952, p. 15.

Couragea-McKay, David O.TPCOURAGE. It is easy enough to do right when in good company, but it is not easy to defend the right when the majority of the crowd are opposing it; and yet, that is the time to show true courage.—AA, p. 185.

CHARACTER BUILDING—THE PURPOSE OF RELIGION

Religiona-McKay, David O.TPTHE DEVELOPMENT OF CHRISTIAN CHARACTER. What is the end and purpose of religion, swaying the lives of men the centuries through? The Latter-day Saints answer in the words of the Lord revealed through the Prophet Joseph, that the end and purpose of true religion, which is the work of God, is " ... to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)—CR, October 1926, p. 111.

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPThe house is not the family. The wind may tear the root off, blow out the windows; the hurricane may even sweep the house away; but the family remains, that which makes the home. Nor is the body the life itself. It is but the house in which the spirit lives. Sickness may waste the body, but the true life is the spirit within, that which thinks and feels and loves and suffers and wills and chooses, aspires, and achieves. The purpose in life is to beautify, ornament, develop that something within. To develop a more radiant and lovely character is the true purpose in life.—FS, ms., Mrs. Emma Nelson Felt, December 19, 1945.

THE TWO METHODS. There are two ways in which character is built in our Church. One is positive. In that positive development we ask young men and young women to participate in the various organizations and the quorums of priesthood.

Now there is alongside these positive means a negative means. All through life the Latter-day Saint child is asked to refrain from indulgence in things that will tend to weaken character.—CR, October 1926, pp. 112-113.

Religiona-McKay, David O.TPRELIGIOUS CHARACTER AND CIVILIZATION. Pure religion gives one power to rise above the selfish, sensual, sordid life of what Eucken calls pure nature, and enables one to "experience a divinity in life above and beyond the world of sensible reality."

Religiona-McKay, David O.TP"Without this religion," this philosopher continues, "no true civilization is possible. A civilization declining all contact with a supernatural life and refusing to establish those mysterious inner relations, gradually becomes a parody of civilization."—CR, October 1937, pp. 100-101.

Parentsa-McKay, David O.TPHOW THE CHURCH CONTRIBUTES TO CHARACTER BUILDING. In the changing of men's lives the Church recognizes certain fundamental factors so essentially important that they are constantly called to our attention; for example, recognizing the reality of the divine edict "visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation ... " (Ex. 20:5) the Church emphasizes the necessity of moral and physical fitness for parenthood. Hence, the constant plea that young men and women live clean, chaste lives prior to their assuming the responsibility of marriage, and their remaining true to that sacred covenant. Hence is constantly held before us the ideal of temple marriage, where the sanctity of the marriage covenant is sealed and ratified by the highest divine authority given of God to man. Hence, the emphasis laid upon the Word of Wisdom wherein tobacco, stimulants, and narcotics are eschewed, and temperance and obedience to the laws of health encouraged and admonished. Hence the belief from childhood in being " ... honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men." (Articles of Faith No. 13.)

Church Programsa-McKay, David O.TPThe Church, recognizing the potency of other influences besides the home in the growing child's life before he reaches self-determination, offers a religious environment almost from the time of birth. The Sunday School, the Primary, the Mutual Improvement Associations arrange suitable instruction, entertainment, and proper guidance from the cradle roll to maturity.—CR, April 1941, pp. 106-107.

Little Thingsa-McKay, David O.TPIT IS THE LITTLE THINGS THAT COUNT. There is no one great thing which we can give a child which will determine his future any more than there was any one great thing which the rich young ruler could do to obtain eternal life, but there are many little things. As a child grows physically by eating regularly at intervals, by breathing fresh air constantly, by resting at stated intervals, so character is built by little things, by daily contacts, by an influence here, a fact or truth there.—I, 81:161 (1946).

HONESTY AND GENUINE CONVERSION. The man or woman who keeps the Word of Wisdom is true to himself or herself. The man who is honest with his God in paying his tithes and offerings is usually honest with his fellow men.—IE, 47:720 (1944).

Man's greatest need is real conversion to the eternal truths of the gospel—to the truth that Jesus Christ came to give life and light to the human family. I feel that with all my soul.—CR, October 1951, p. 11.

Church Membersa-McKay, David O.TPThe real test of any church or religion is the kind of men it makes.—CR, April 1949, p. 11.
