David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 28

OBEDIENCE TO LAW

THE TWELFTH ARTICLE OF FAITH

a-McKay, David O.Laws, CivicTPTEXT OF THE ARTICLE. Our twelfth Article of Faith says:

Laws, Civica-McKay, David O.TP"We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law."

Laws, Civica-McKay, David O.TPLAW AND THE COMMUNITY. Law, particularly in a democracy, is a system of social order established and enforced by society.

Laws, Civica-McKay, David O.TPDivine law has its origin in deity; social law sprang primarily from the moral sense of the community. In a democracy in which the will of the people is sovereign, law is successfully operative only to the extent that the moral sense of the community is in sympathy with it.

Laws, Civica-McKay, David O.TPThe three significant words used in the twelfth Article of Faith express the proper attitude of the membership of the Church toward law. These words are obey, honor, and sustain.

Laws, Civica-McKay, David O.TPSUSTAINING THE LAW. The article does not say we believe in submission to the law. Obedience implies a higher attitude than mere submission, for obedience has its root in good intent; submission may spring from selfishness or meanness of spirit. Though obedience and submission both imply restraint on one's own will, we are obedient only from a sense of right; submissive from a sense of necessity.

Laws, Civica-McKay, David O.TPHonor expresses an act or attitude of an inferior towards a superior. When applied to things, it is taken in the sense of holding in honor. Thus, in honoring the law, we look upon it as something which is above selfish desires or indulgences.

Laws, Civica-McKay, David O.TPTo sustain signifies to hold up, to keep from falling. To sustain the law, therefore, is to refrain from saying or doing anything which will weaken it or make it ineffective.

Laws, Civica-McKay, David O.TPWe obey law from a sense of right.

Laws, Civica-McKay, David O.TPWe honor law because of its necessity and strength to society.

Laws, Civica-McKay, David O.TPWe sustain law by keeping it in good repute.—CR, April 1937, pp. 27-28.

THE LAW OF LIFE

Laws, Divinea-McKay, David O.TPINTELLIGENT OBEDIENCE. We are all here to enjoy life in its fullest and most complete sense; but the message of the gospel of Jesus Christ is this: that to live one must live in obedience to law, physical law, intellectual law, spiritual law. Transgression of law always brings unhappiness; it always brings death when carried to the ultimate end. —CR, October 1920, p. 42.

Recently, a group of friends presented one of their number with a valuable, practical gift. In accepting it, the man said that wherever he might travel, the possession of that gift would be a constant reminder of his friends' affection and regard.

Brethren and sisters, all life is a gift of God. Appreciation of that fact should inspire us with a desire to live daily exemplary lives, that others, seeing our good deeds might be led to glorify our Father in heaven, of whose existence and inspiration I testify before you, and of the divinity of whose Church I bear testimony, in the name of Jesus Christ, our Redeemer.—CR, October 1951, p. 11.

COMPENSATION AND RETRIBUTION. Conformity to the Lord's word or law will invariably contribute to man's happiness and salvation. Those who do not what the Lord commands, we are told, will be subjected to justice and judgment. In other words, there is eternally operative in the moral world a law of compensation and retribution—compensation commensurate with conformity to law; retribution in actual degree to the extent of disobedience.

In this sense I use the word law as having a deeper significance than a rule or dictum prescribed by authority for human actions. It means, rather, a uniform order of sequence as operative and unvarying as the law of the inclined plane, or the law of falling bodies.

Confirmation of this may be found in the Lord's statement to Cain, the first disobedient son in history. "If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door... ." (Gen. 4:7.)

Aarona-McKay, David O.TPIt is also stated by the Prophet Joseph Smith, "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—

Aarona-McKay, David O.TP"And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D. & C. 130:20-21.)

It is said, parents, boys, and girls, that "the soul in the formative period of youth, while it is yet unspotted from the world, may be likened to a block of pure, uncut Parian marble, in which lie boundless possibilities of beauty or of deformity. From the crude marble one will chisel a form of exquisite grace and symmetry; another, a misshapen monstrosity, each visualizing in the formless stone the conception of his brain. Thus we are molded by our ideals."

Thoughtsa-McKay, David O.TPThoughts are the seeds of acts and precede them. Mere compliance with the word of the Lord, without a corresponding inward desire, will avail but little. Indeed, such outward actions and pretending phrases may disclose hypocrisy, a sin that Jesus most vehemently condemned.

"O generation of vipers," he exclaimed, "how can ye, being evil, speak good things?" (Matt. 12:34.) The Savior's constant desire and effort were to implant in the mind right thoughts, pure motives, noble ideals, knowing full well that right words and actions would eventually follow. He taught what modern physiology and psychology confirm—that hate, jealousy, and other evil passions destroy a man's physical vigor and efficiency. "They pervert his mental perceptions and render him incapable of resisting the temptation to commit acts of violence. They undermine his moral health. By insidious stages they transform the man who cherishes them into a criminal."

AN EXAMPLE FROM LITERATURE. Charles Dickens makes impressive use of the above fact in his immortal story, Oliver Twist, wherein Monks is introduced first as an innocent, beautiful child; but as "ending his life as a mass of solid bestiality, a mere chunk of fleshed iniquity. It was thinking upon vice and vulgarity, that transformed the angel's face into the countenance of a demon."

That great writer says this: "It is almost impossible to believe that such a devilish nature as Bill Sikes, depicted in the same book, could be found in human form," but Dickens says: "I fear there are in the world some insensible and callous natures that do become, at last, utterly and irredeemably bad. But whether this be true or not, of one thing I am certain—that there are such men as Sikes, who, being closely followed through the same space of time, and through the same current of circumstances, would not give by one look or action for a moment the faintest indication of a better nature. Whether every gentler human feeling is dead within such bosoms, or the proper chord to strike has rusted and is hard to find, I do not know, but the fact is so, I am sure."

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPI am trying to emphasize that each one is the architect of his own fate, and he is unfortunate, indeed, who will try to build himself without the inspiration of God, without realizing that he grows from within, not from without.—CR, October 1951, pp. 6-7.

Transgressiona-McKay, David O.TPNo man can disobey the word of God and not suffer for so doing. No sin, however secret, can escape retribution. True, you may lie and not be detected; you may violate virtue without its being known by any who would scandalize you; yet you cannot escape the judgment that follows such transgression. The lie is lodged in the recesses of your mind, an impairment of your character that will be reflected sometime, somehow in your countenance or bearing. Your moral turpitude, though only you, your accomplice, and God may ever know it, will canker your soul.—IE, 44:395 (1941).

Self-Controla-McKay, David O.TPSELF-CONTROL. The lesson of self-control should begin in childhood, in the home. Little children should have a sense of freedom to do as they wish up to a certain point. Beyond that point they cannot go, and that is when that freedom interferes with the rights, comfort, or convenience of another member of the family.—CR, September-October 1950, p. 165.

PRACTICAL PROBLEMS

DISRESPECT FOR LAW. One of the principal functions of religion is to develop a sense of confidence in man and faith in God as the Father of men. If the Church of Jesus Christ cannot do these things, then it will have failed in fulfilling its divine destiny. However, in efforts to establish confidence in man and social institutions, we must not shut from our minds certain unpleasant facts which tend to undermine confidence and disintegrate the very foundation upon which society is built.

Crimea-McKay, David O.TPDisrespect for law is among the worst of such evils. It is regrettable that the United States today has the reputation of being one of the most lawless of nations. This unsavory reputation is attributed largely to the shattering during World War I of long-cherished ideals and the lowering of moral standards; and it is true that the war was in every respect a vast school of demoralization. Every rule of morality, public and private, was openly infringed.

There are those who blame prohibition for the wave of lawlessness that has been sweeping over the country, but since the repeal, the illicit traffic in booze still continues unabated. Drunkenness is increasing, and so is the number of intoxicated drivers who imperil the lives of innocent people on the public highway. In the use of tobacco the law is flagrantly violated and dishonored.

Note the following: "Any person who sells, gives, or furnishes any cigar, cigaret, or tobacco in any form, or any opium or other narcotic in any form to any person under twenty-one years of age is guilty of a misdemeanor." And again, "Any person under the age of twenty-one years who buys, accepts, or has in his possession any cigar, cigaret, or tobacco in any form, or opium or any other narcotic in any form is guilty of a misdemeanor or shall be deemed a delinquent child as the case may be."

VIOLATIONS BODE ILL FOR SOCIETY. It augurs ill for society when in the face of such a law on the statute books, many high school boys from fifteen to nineteen years of age indulge openly in this pernicious habit. That such violations occur constantly in our own community, none can deny.

Petty thefts, holdups, and robberies of various kinds and degrees are all too common.

Illegal possession of corporate property is a new menace. Millions of dollars are being lost to laborers, and bitter animosities engendered by sit-down strikes, a new weapon in the hands of unionism which may prove a boomerang to honest labor. If lawlessness or even disregard for the rights of employees on the part of employers is the cause of sit-down strikes, then the menace of such strife to the stability of society is only increased.

These things which I have merely named indicate the trend to disregard law and order. Of all crushing taxes that impede the economic recovery of the American people, the crime tax is the greatest.—CR, April 1937, pp. 28-29.

THE MANUFACTURE AND SALE OF LIQUOR. There is much being said now about the law prohibiting the manufacture and sale of liquor. Latter-day Saints should uphold that law everywhere, at socials, at banquets. Civil officers, members of clubs who are contributing to the formation of public opinion ought to be proud to uphold that law. It is a constitutional law, and it is time that the leaders of this country, the politicians, the statesmen, the leaders in civic affairs in the state and in the cities should so speak of this law, so act towards it, that public sentiment would be turned in favor of its enforcement.

Alcoholic Beveragesa-McKay, David O.TPLatter-day Saints, we are expected to uphold it and to uphold every other law which contributes to the advancement and peace of mankind. And these laws against the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors are such laws, and conditions now in society — with millions of automobiles, the drivers of which must be at their very best, active mentally, quick to respond physically in emergency—make it necessary that we eliminate from society anything that will becloud the brain or leave the driver's hand unsteady. We are living in a condition in which we cannot with impunity foster traffic in intoxicating liquors. God said long ago that they were not good for man. Our boys and girls, from the standpoint of integrity and consistency, should take a stand against the use thereof.—CR, October 1927, p. 14.
