David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 29

SPIRITUALITY

THE NEED FOR SPIRITUAL RENAISSANCE

TO CHANGE THE WORLD. Never before in the history of the world has there been such need as today of spiritual awakening: not that man is more depraved, not that he is less religious, but that he has in his grasp such seemingly unlimited mechanized power. If you put bombs into the hands of an inexperienced child, he is likely to blow himself to pieces; and, to a degree, that is just what we are witnessing in the world today.—DNCS, April 30, 1952, p. 3.

"SPIRITUAL RENAISSANCE AND IMPROVEMENT OF HUMAN CHARACTER." I wonder if all these inventions during the past century have contributed to an increase in character, in honesty, in upright living, in a more sacred and reverent devotion to Christ and his gospel. I wonder whether the character of the men who are profiting by these wonderful inventions is any stronger and better than the character of the man who carried that hay on his back.

Are the men any better than the tall, handsome, upstanding young Swiss, who graciously stood by his cow and cart to let my son take his photograph, a young man in whom I thought I saw reflected the pride of the Swiss, the love of freedom and independence. After all, it is what is within the man that counts!

Spirit of Darknessa-McKay, David O.TP"For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" (Matt. 16:26.) Recently, on the deck of the Battleship Missouri, in Yokohama Bay, when Japan surrendered, General Douglas MacArthur said:

Spirit of Darknessa-McKay, David O.TP"If we do not now devise some greater and equitable system, Armageddon will be upon us. The problem is basically theological and involves a spiritual renaissance and improvement of human character. It must be of the spirit if we are to save the flesh."

I do not know that the problem is basically theological; we can have a study of theology without having character, without having religion; but the true meaning of that great general's utterance is in the following words, it "involves a spiritual and renaissance and improvement of human character."

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPAnd more recently, a man teaching physical science in one of our leading universities, studying, evidently, the same great problem as it applies to humanity today, said, "I have come to three conclusions. The first is that salvation is not to be found in science. Second, we must have a moral revival. Third, we can have no moral revival without a living religion."—DNCS, September 6, 1952, p. 4.

THE STRUGGLE FOR SPIRITUAL POWER

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPEARTH THE PROVING GROUND. Man's earthly existence is but a test as to whether he will concentrate his efforts, his mind, his soul upon things which contribute to the comfort and gratification of his physical instincts and passions, or whether he will make as his life's end and purpose the acquisition of spiritual qualities.—RSM, 28:364 (1941).

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPIn the hands of undeveloped, spiritually dead people has been placed the power of explosives, the radio, the airplane, the submarine, all the concentrated power of electricity, and even that of the breaking up of the atom. Unless there is a spiritual awakening, civilization is threatened. The carnal-minded in the world are causing heartaches and threatening the extinction of the race.

But the sun of hope is rising. Thinking men and women are recognizing the need of man's looking up toward the heavens instead of groveling in response to the animal instinct. One man, commenting on this, said that if all the destroyers of civilization could be eliminated, and the traits of the rest of us that come from destructive strains could be eliminated, an approach to the millennium some hundred years hence is by no means inconceivable.

Spiritual awakening in the hearts of millions of men and women would bring about a changed world. I am hopeful that the dawning of that day is not far distant. My faith in the ultimate triumph of the gospel of Jesus Christ assures me that a spiritual awakening must come. It will come through the acceptance of Jesus Christ and obedience to his gospel.—RSM, 28:367 (1941).

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPCIVILIZATION ON TRIAL. Civilization has grown too complex for the human mind to visualize or to control. Unless man comes to a speedy realization that the higher and not the baser qualities of man must be developed, then the present status of civilization is in jeopardy. Life on the animal plane has as its ideal the survival of the fittest—kill or be killed, crush or be crushed, mangle or be mangled. For man, with his intelligence, this is a sure road to anguish and death.

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPThe spiritual road has Christ as its goal. The individual lives for something higher than self. He hears the Savior's voice saying: "I am the way, the truth, and the life... ." (John 14:6.) Following that voice, he soon learns that there is no one great thing which he can do to attain happiness or eternal life. He learns that "life is made up not of great sacrifices or duties, but of little things in which smiles and kindness and small obligations given habitually are what win and preserve the heart and secure comfort."—RSM, 28:366 (1941).

THE SPIRITUAL LIFE. "For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose (forfeit) his own soul (life)? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul (life)?" (Matt. 16:26.)

In quoting this passage, I have in mind to emphasize the dual nature of man—physical and spiritual. Joseph Smith's Revised Version, substituting as it does, the word life for soul makes justifable the conclusion that preserving one's physical life is deemed more precious than the acquiring of any earthly emoluments, or the possessions of the wealth of the world.

However, that Jesus had in mind the soul as a spiritual entity is confirmed by Mark who, recording this incident, adds: "Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels." (Mark 8:38.)

Luke confirms this thought as follows: "For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and lose himself, or be cast away?

"For whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his own glory, and in his Father's and of the holy angels." (Luke 9:25-26.)

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPIf we accept the spirit entity of man as real and eternal, how utterly foolish to ignore or to neglect its development by giving most, if not all, of our attention to physical needs, pleasures, and passions!—DNCS, June 6, 1951, p. 2.

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPTHINGS WHICH STIFLE THE SPIRIT. There are some things which stifle spiritual contact. This old earth has tended to stifle spirituality right from the beginning. In the history of creation man was banished from the presence of God. Every one of us born here was so banished, and in our humiliation our judgment was taken from us. Man who once basked in the presence of God was later left to find his own way with nature. In his struggle for existence, he would go hungry, thirsty, cold, and nature would satisfy his wants. He would strike down a wild beast, and its meat would be his. Another man, seeing him, would try to get it. Then followed the combat of primitive man. Thus man "began from that time forth to be carnal, sensual, and devilish." (P. of G. P., Moses 5:13.) Such was the experience of man in his primitive state. In the struggle for physical necessities, higher spiritual values were either negative or forgotten.

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPSo, today, a man who will unleash his passions and win his success at the expense of his fellows, develops selfishness—perhaps sensuality at the expense of spirituality.—DNCS, August 8, 1936, p. 1.

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPIt is said that one Roman emperor offered a reward to anybody who would invent a new pleasure. Nero set Rome on fire for the mere pleasure of a new form of diversion. Rome fell because of extravagence, luxury, and dissipation. In personal, as in national life, these are unfailing signs of decline and decay. Truly,

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TP" ... he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting." (Gal. 6:8.)—CR, April 1949, p. 14.

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPTHE TRAGEDY OF FALSE IDEALS. The real tragedy of following false ideals is that by so doing we stifle and sometimes choke out spirituality completely.—CR, April 1949, p. 16.

As in the days of old, so there are today some who prefer to revel in what I have heard President George Albert Smith designate as the devil's territory rather than to strive for the higher and better things of life. Persons who condemn their will to the service of their appetites suffer the penalties.—CR, April 1949, p. 14.

Adversitya-McKay, David O.TPADVERSITY'S USES. There are those who have met disaster, which almost seems defeat, who have become somewhat soured in their natures, but if they stop to think, even the adversity which has come to them may prove a means of spiritual uplift. Adversity itself may lead toward and not away from God and spiritual enlightenment; and privation may prove a source of strength if we can but keep a sweetness of mind and spirit.—CR, October 1936, p. 103.

Adversitya-McKay, David O.TPTHE SOUL MUST BE IN TUNE. It is said that all the music we hear is that which the soul itself produces when it responds to the myriad voices from without. These sounds and voices from nature, God's great orchestra, must be reproduced by the soul's response before they can become music to us. It is not the music without that we hear, but the spirit's limitation of it.

Adversitya-McKay, David O.TPIf then, the soul be tuned to the same key so as to give a true response, rest assured that our lives will be filled with harmony and joy, for God's hand never strikes a discord.—FS, ms., Emma Lucy Gates Bowen, May 3, 1951.

THE ATTRIBUTES OF SPIRITUALITY

Adversitya-McKay, David O.TPTOWARDS THE COMPANIONSHIP OF THE HOLY GHOST. Spirituality is the consciousness of victory over self, and of communion with the Infinite. Spirituality impels one to conquer difficulties and acquire more and more strength. To feel one's faculties unfolding and truth expanding the soul is one of life's sublimest experiences.

Adversitya-McKay, David O.TPBeing "honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men" are attributes which contribute to spirituality, the highest acquisition of the soul. It is the divine in man, the supreme, crowning gift that makes him king of all created things, the one final quality that makes him tower above all other animals.

Holy Ghosta-McKay, David O.TPDivine is that admonition and promise given to the Prophet Joseph Smith:

Holy Ghosta-McKay, David O.TP" ... let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

Holy Ghosta-McKay, David O.TP"The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever." (D. & C. 121:45-46.)—CR, April 1949, p. 17.

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPTHE TRUE LIFE OF MAN. After all, the spiritual life is the true life of man. It is what distinguishes him from the beasts of the forests. It lifts him above the physical, yet he is still susceptible to all the natural contributions that life can give him that are needful for his happiness or contributive to his advancement. Though in the world, he is not of the world. (See John 8:23.)

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPJesus taught that men and women fail to live truly, unless they have spirituality. In the Life and Teachings of Jesus, we read that the spiritual force underlies everything, and without it nothing worth while can be accomplished. "Spiritual needs can be met only by spiritual means. All government, laws, methods, and organizations are of no value unless men and women are filled with truth, righteousness, and mercy. Material things have no power to raise the sunken spirit. Gravitation, electricity, and steam are great forces, but they are all powerless to change the motives of men and women." "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." (John 3:3.)—CR, October 1927, pp. 120-121.

God, Fatherhood ofa-McKay, David O.TPTHE FOUNDATIONS OF SPIRITUALITY. Spirituality and morality as taught by the Latter-day Saints are firmly anchored in fundamental principles, principles from which the world can never escape even if it would, and the first fundamental is a belief—with Latter-day Saints a knowledge—in the existence of a personal God. Latter-day Saint children have been taught to recognize him and to pray to him as one who can listen and hear and feel just as an earthly father can listen, hear, and feel, and they have absorbed into their very beings, from their mothers and their fathers, the real testimony that this personal God has spoken in this dispensation. There is a reality about it.—CR, April 1934, pp. 22-23.

Life, Purpose ofa-McKay, David O.TPFOUR GUIDING PRINCIPLES. The guiding principles to the realization of the higher life are not many or complex. Indeed, they are few and simple, and can be applied by everyone in any phase of life.

Life, Purpose ofa-McKay, David O.TPI. Recognition of the reality of spiritual values.

Life, Purpose ofa-McKay, David O.TPII. Sense of obligation to the social group.

Life, Purpose ofa-McKay, David O.TPIII. Power of self-denial and the resultant self-mastery.

Life, Purpose ofa-McKay, David O.TPIV. A consciousness that the ultimate purpose of life is the perfecting of the individual.—DNCS, June 8, 1935, p. 6.

Servicea-McKay, David O.TPGIVING. There is more spirituality expressed in giving than in receiving. The greatest spiritual blessing comes from helping another. If you want to be miserable, just harbor hate for a brother; and if you want to hate, just do your brother some injury. But if you would be happy, render a kind service, make somebody else happy.—CR, October 1936, pp. 104-105.

THE SPIRITUAL LIFE

Spiritual Lifea-McKay, David O.TPA SOUND PHILOSOPHY. Jesus said, " ... Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin:

Spiritual Lifea-McKay, David O.TP"And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these." (Matt. 6:28-29.) I have heard skeptics say, "How impractical! How impractical such teaching! Taking no thought for tomorrow!" Some critics are judging without understanding what the Great Teacher had in mind.

Spiritual Lifea-McKay, David O.TPEven from our scanty knowledge and power of analysis, let us consider the lilies of the field, how they grow. Down deep in the soil the lily sends its roots, seeking sustenance from the earth, not as an end; from that sustenance received, there comes through the earth a little plant, weak at first, but it grows into a stock.

Spiritual Lifea-McKay, David O.TPAll that sustenance is being produced for one purpose, that that lily might bloom in the sunshine and reproduce its kind. So we, with our tentacles, our roots, which we call hands and muscles and brain, bring our sustenance from the earth—not as an end, but that the spirit might so live that it may bask in the sunshine of the Holy Spirit. That is not impractical! That is sound philosophy, and true, as every saying of Christ is true.—DNCS, September 6, 1952, p. 4.

MATERIAL MEANS AND SPIRITUAL ENDS. That we must make a living is clearly manifest on every side. We are placed here to deal with the earth and earthly problems. Multiply, replenish, subdue, have dominion over the earth—these were the original commands given to man. Nature's first law is self-preservation, and efforts to gratify the flesh, satisfy the appetites, gain physical comfort and physical enjoyment, occupy the attention and time of the majority of the people of the world.

He that will not provide for his loved ones is worse than an infidel, and so it is a virtue to provide for loved ones; it is a necessity to preserve life. Too many people make this the sole purposes of life; but that is only a means—it is not an end in itself! Make it an end, and we are still on the animal plane, for that is the aim and purpose of every beast that creeps on the earth.

Spiritual Lifea-McKay, David O.TPMan has a higher purpose. I remember reading, many years ago, "The purpose of life may be summed up in one sentence, to subdue matter, that we might realize the ideal!" I liked it! Conquer! Conquer the earth! Conquer the roaring streams that come out of the canyons in the springtime. Harness them. Instead of letting them destroy the land below by floods, hold back that mighty torrent and bring it down to irrigate the orchards and the fields, and thus furnish livelihood for thousands, tens of thousands, and millions. Subdue and conquer, yes! That we might realize the ideal. And what is that ideal? I cannot think of any higher and more blessed ideal than so to live in the Spirit that we might commune with the Eternal. Can you?—DNCS, September 6, 1952, p. 4.

The true aim of life is seeking the spiritual development rather than physical enjoyment or the acquisition of wealth. DNCS, September 6, 1952, p. 4.
