David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 30

MAN AND SPIRITUAL PROGRESS

FUNDAMENTAL FACTS OF LIFE

MAN A DUAL BEING. Man is a dual being, and his life a plan of God. That is the first fundamental fact to keep in mind. Man has a natural body and a spiritual body. In declaring this fact the scriptures are very explicit:

"And the Gods formed man from the dust of the ground, and took his spirit (that is, the man's spirit), and put it into him; and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul." (P. of G. P., Abraham 5:7.)

Spiritual Lifea-McKay, David O.TPMan's body, therefore, is but the tabernacle in which his spirit dwells. Too many, far too many, are prone to regard the body as the man, and consequently to direct their efforts to the gratifying of the body's pleasures, its appetites, its desires, its passions. Too few recognize that the real man is an immortal spirit, which "intelligence or the light of truth," animated as an individual entity before the body was begotten, and that this spiritual entity with all its distinguishing traits will continue after the body ceases to respond to its earthly environment. Said the Savior:

Spiritual Lifea-McKay, David O.TP"I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father." (John 16:28.)

As Christ's pre-existent Spirit animated a body of flesh and bones, so does the pre-existent spirit of every human being born into this world. Will you keep that in mind as the first basic truth of life?

The question, then, is: Which will give the more abundant life—pampering our physical nature or developing our spiritual selves? Is not that the real problem?

INDULGENCE LEADS TO UNHAPPINESS. Another basic fact to keep in mind is indulgence. Indulgence in appetites and desires of the physical man satisfy but for the moment and may lead to unhappiness, misery, and possible degradation; spiritual achievements give "joy not to be repented of."

In his epistle to the Galatians, Paul specifically enumerates the "works of the flesh," as he calls them, and the "fruits of the Spirit." Note this classification: The works of the flesh are manifest as these:

" ... Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,

"Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,

"Envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

"But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,

"Meekness, temperance: against such there is no law.

"And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.

"If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit." (Gal. 5:19-25.)

SPIRITUAL PROGRESS DEMANDS EFFORT. From the forty days' fast on the Mount of Temptation to the moment on the cross when he cried in triumph: "It is finished," Christ's life was a divine example of subduing and overcoming. Full of significance are his words spoken in his farewell address to his disciples:

"These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." (John 16:33.)

Moralitya-McKay, David O.TP"Moral law"—I am quoting now from a scientist who has glimpsed these eternal truths I have named—

Moralitya-McKay, David O.TP"Moral law imposes disinterestedness; it orders that which is disagreeable, hard, and painful. Its requirements often revolt the flesh whose sole ambition is to persist and to enjoy. It demands the throttling of selfish sentiments for the sake of something which is still obscure to those who do not have faith, but which is even more powerful than the instinct of self-preservation: human dignity imposes a highly moral existence and paves the way to spirituality. And the greatest miracle is that this cruel law has won the universal respect of man who sometimes uses his intelligence to combat it, thus affirming its reality.

Moralitya-McKay, David O.TP"The joys it procures compensate for the sacrifice it demands. The sentiment of duty accomplished is accompanied by a kind of total satisfaction which alone gives true peace of soul. The moral man—in olden days one would have said the virtuous man—spreads happiness and good will around him, or, if happiness is impossible, the resignation which takes its place." (Lecomte du Nouy—Human Destiny. [^1]

There are thousands, millions of men and women who have high standards, and we do not have to yield to the few who fail.

THE CHALLENGE OF EIGHT DIFFICULTIES. Now, having in mind these four fundamental facts of life—the dual nature of man; his freedom of choice and his responsibility therefor; indulgences contrary to one's conscience leave heaviness of heart and unhappiness while spiritual achievements always give joy; spiritual progress demands effort. Let us consider these eight difficulties:

Sabbath Daya-McKay, David O.TPThe First Problem: The Sabbath Day. Is it better to cherish Church ideals on Sunday, or indulge in Sunday sports? This is simply a question of physical pleasure or spiritual development, and in that we should keep in mind the following: First, Sunday is a day of rest, essential to the true development and strength of the body, and that is a principle which we should publish more generally abroad and practise. A second purpose for keeping holy the Sabbath day is: " ... that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world. ... " (D. & C. 59:9.) That is a glorious phrase.

Sabbath Daya-McKay, David O.TPThird, keeping the Sabbath day holy is a law of God, resounding through the ages from Mount Sinai. You cannot transgress the law of God without circumscribing your spirit.

Sabbath Daya-McKay, David O.TPFinally, our Sabbath, the first day of the week, commemorates the greatest event in all history—Christ's resurrection, and his visit as a resurrected being to his assembled Apostles.

Sabbath Daya-McKay, David O.TPNow if you want to indulge in bodily exercises and amusements, you cannot do it on the Sabbath day with impunity.

Companionshipa-McKay, David O.TPThe Second Problem: Choosing Companions. Having in mind our basic truths, this question is a simple one—Whether you will choose companions who appeal to your baser nature, or those who inspire you always to be at your best.

Recently, I was thrilled and thankful when I heard a young Latter-day Saint woman say that she felt she would have to give up her sweetheart. She likes him, and he likes her, but lately he has chosen the way of the world. He likes a cigaret; he speaks disparagingly of the ideals of the Church. Fortunately, she is wise enough to observe that tendency, and she has "given him up." I say with all my heart: God bless her, because she knows that companionship leads to love. It is from such companionship that you find your companion for the future. If she joins her life with his, her ideals are going to be lowered; and she would rather take a little suffering now than much suffering later.

Companionshipa-McKay, David O.TPChoose good companions, and find among them those with whom you would like to go through life and eternity.

Word of Wisdoma-McKay, David O.TPThe Third Problem: Observing the Word of Wisdom. I am merely going to add one thought: Obedience to the Word of Wisdom develops greater spiritual power, that spiritual power which comes from resistance.

Word of Wisdoma-McKay, David O.TPIt is better for you in youth to say, "No, thank you," when offered to indulge in things which create an appetite for themselves. Be master, not a slave. Look around you and you will see the slaves to appetite—unfortunately now, increasingly among women—slaves! Where is the spiritual power in these future mothers?

Servicea-McKay, David O.TPThe Fourth Problem: Does Active Membership in the Church Inhibit or Enhance One's Freedom and Development? Can you think of any organization in the world in which you can serve more effectively in an organized way than in the Church of Jesus Christ? Now, I mention service and character because those are the only two things which we can take with us in a few years when we leave this world.

"... shew me thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works." (James 2:18.)

Chastitya-McKay, David O.TPThe Fifth Problem: Chastity. The dominant evil in the world today is unchastity. I repeat what appeared over the signature of President Joseph F. Smith while he was living:

Chastitya-McKay, David O.TP"No more loathsome cancer disfigures the body and soul of society today than the frightful affliction of sexual sin. It vitiates the very fountains of life and bequeaths its foul effects to the yet unborn as a legacy of death."

The question is: What have you made of yourself—your character; and what service have you rendered to others?

Chastitya-McKay, David O.TPHe who is unchaste in young manhood is untrue to a trust given to him by the parents of the girl, and she who is unchaste in maidenhood is untrue to her future husband and lays the foundation in the home of unhappiness, suspicion, and discord. Do not worry about these teachers who say something about inhibitions. Just keep in mind this eternal truth, that chastity is a virtue to be prized as one of life's noblest achievements. It contributes to the virility of manhood. It is the crowning virtue of womanhood, and every red-blooded man knows that is true. It is a chief contributing factor to a happy home; it is the source of strength and perpetuity of the nation.

The Sixth Problem: To Be in the World But Not of the World. There is no loss of prestige in maintaining in a dignified way your standards. And when I hear girls expressing the thoughts that young women have that they are afraid that they might lose the influence or the respect of their sweethearts, I thought of a great illustration in literature wherein a Jewish maiden won the respect even of a profligate.

Read the story of Rebecca, that beautiful character in Sir Walter Scott's Ivanhoe, who was the prisoner of Brian de Bois-Guilbert. He had chosen her for base reasons. Others of his crowd chose the old father to rob him of his wealth. When Brian de Bois-Guilbert came in to take charge of his prize, Rebecca "had already unclasped two costly bracelets and a collar, which she hastened to proffer to the supposed out-law, concluding naturally to gratify his avarice was to bespeak his favor." "Take these," she said, "and be merciful to me and my aged father! These ornaments are of value, yet they are trifling to what he would bestow, to obtain our dismissal from this castle, free and uninjured."

"Fair flower," replied the outlaw, "these pearls are orient, but they yield in whiteness to your teeth; the diamonds are brilliant, but they cannot match your eyes; and ever since I have taken up this wild trade, I have made a vow to prefer beauty to wealth."

"Thou art no outlaw," said Rebecca; "no outlaw had refused such offers. ... Thou art a Norman—a Norman, noble perhaps in birth—Oh, be so in thy action, and cast off this fearful masque of outrage and violence!"

"I am not an outlaw, then, fair rose of Sharon. ... And I am one who will be more prompt to hang thy neck and arms with pearls and diamonds, which so well become them, than to deprive thee of these ornaments."

"What would'st thou have of me," said Rebecca, "if not my wealth? We can have nought in common between us—you are a Christian—I am a Jewess—our union were contrary to the laws alike of the church and the synagogue."

"It were so, indeed," replied Brian de Bois-Guilbert, laughing: "wed with a Jewess—not if she were the Queen of Sheba!"

And then Rebecca knew his purpose. She threw open the latticed window, and an instant later stood on the verge of the parapet, with not the slightest screen between her and the tremendous depth below, and exclaimed: "Remain where thou art, proud Templar, or at thy choice, advance!—one foot nearer, and I plunge myself from the precipice; my body shall be bruised out of the very form of humanity upon the stones of that courtyard, 'ere it become the victim of thy brutality!"

As she spoke thus, she clasped her hands and extended them toward heaven, as if imploring mercy on her soul before she made the final plunge. The Templar hesitated, and a resolution which had never yielded to pity or disgrace gave way to his admiration of her fortitude. "Come down," he said, "rash girl!—I swear by earth, and sea, and sky, I will offer thee no offense."

And the reprobate for the first time in his life was taught respect for womanhood.

You can be in this world and "not of the world." Keep your chastity above everything else.

Cleanlinessa-McKay, David O.TPThe Seventh Problem: The Value of Doing Right Though None Might See Me. "Tell me what you think about when you do not have to think, and I will tell you what you are."

Cleanlinessa-McKay, David O.TPTemptation does not come to those who have not thought of it before. Keep your thoughts clean, and it will be easy to resist temptations as they come.

The Eighth Problem: Getting Back on the Moral and Spiritual Highway. I, too, have mentioned the prodigal son who first "came to himself" before he turned his face homeward. Come back home, back to the path of virtue, but sense your own evil, and remember that there might be many who have been hurt on your way down.

When a man was asked how he could help those he had injured, particularly in slander, a good, wise, old man took a sack of feathers, scattered them, and then he said: "Now, try to gather them up."

He said: "Oh, I cannot!"

That is just it. Let us be careful that we have not wounded people and hurt them as we have been going down selfishly on the road of indulgence.

Young people: Is it the body you are going to serve and be a slave to or is it the spirit you are going to develop, and live happily in this life and in the world to come?

"I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil." (John 17:15.)

God give us power as young people and as parents to live in the world but be above the world.—IE, 52:558-560, 600-602 (1949).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] (Permission granted by Longman's Green & Co., Copyright, 1947 by Lecomte du Nouy.)
