David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 31

REACHING YOUTH

OUR GREATEST SOCIAL OBLIGATION

THE YOUTH OF THE LAND. An eminent statesman in the United States once wrote:

"If we work upon marble it will perish; if upon brass, time will efface it. If we rear temples they will crumble into dust. But if we work upon immortal minds, imbue them with principles with a just fear of God and love of fellow men, we engrave upon those tablets that which time cannot efface and which will endure through all eternity."

Youtha-McKay, David O.TPThat thought, impressively expressed, gives us an idea of the theme I should like to stress. We are deeply perturbed, in these days, about great social questions. The best minds of the nation are now struggling with problems associated with one of the greatest financial crises that have ever swept this nation and the world. Important as this is, and other social and political questions, I believe that the most profound problem which this country faces, indeed the greatest obligation upon the government today, national, state, and local, is to determine how best to guide, protect, and educate properly, childhood and youth. This may seem commonplace to many of you, so commonplace that you will wonder why I take the time to speak of it.

Childrena-McKay, David O.TPBe that as it may, I believe all agencies interested in child welfare could cooperate in this great work to the great good of our state and nation. There are phases of this problem which affect the happiness and peace of mind of every father and mother in the land. The question of child health and guidance goes to the very root of our national life.—CR, October 1932, pp. 64-65.

THREE PARABLES AND THEIR APPLICATION. In the fifteenth chapter of Luke there is recorded a very significant message from Christ, relative to the lost and found. That message is embraced in three remarkable parables: one, the parable of the lost sheep; another, the lost coin; and a third, the prodigal son.

In the first the straying one seems to have become lost through stupidly wandering away for the necessary things of life. Perhaps the wandering was prompted by just a desire to seek the necessary things of existence.

The second, however, relates to a different kind of lost one—one that seems to be wholly unconscious of having wandered away; and the third, to another class, one who deliberately and wilfully become estranged from God.

I am not sure that I have applied these parables properly, but certainly there are just such classes of young men and young women who wander away and become lost. There are those in the world who become so absorbed in gaining a livelihood, and so interested in the material things of life, that they lost sight entirely of the religious ideals.

Childrena-McKay, David O.TPOf the second class, those who are unconscious of being in the dark, there are many such—speaking of the nation at large. It is admitted that in the United States there are twenty-seven million children who, though nominally Protestant, are not receiving any religious instruction. There are eight million children, if I remember rightly, less than ten years of age, who receive absolutely no religious instruction. I think we may consistently place this large group in the second class named—little children growing up in darkness, unconscious of the light. They are like an Easter lily before it blooms. They have an existence but are struggling out of the darkness of humanity. They may never bloom into the sunlight of the Holy Spirit. Now that is a tragedy.

Of the third, we see around us every day young men who wilfully and deliberately choose the pathway of indulgence, which leads them away from the Holy Spirit and leads them away from the testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ. It is a great mission, the greatest in the world, to reach out after these young people, to extend a hand to the child, following Jesus' injunction to Peter to bring the lambs into Christ's fold. Indeed, there is nothing greater.

Childrena-McKay, David O.TPI think Herbert Hoover, when President of the United States, expressed the importance of such a mission most impressively when he said:

Childrena-McKay, David O.TP"These questions of child health and protection are a complicated problem, requiring much learning and much action, and we need have great concern over this matter. Let no one believe that these are questions which should not stir a nation, that they are below the dignity of statesmen or government. If we could have but one generation of properly born, trained, educated, and healthy children, a thousand other problems of government would vanish. We would assure ourselves of healthier minds in more vigorous bodies, to direct the energies of our nation to yet greater heights of achievement. Moreover, one good community nurse will save a dozen future policemen."—CR, April 1931, pp. 79-80.

PROPER ACCOUNTING. How may we reach these youth? In some of the organizations of the Church every boy and girl should be enrolled. His name or her name should appear on some record, if not on several records, throughout the Church, and some teacher or some officer has the obligation of coming in contact with that individual boy or girl.—CR, April 1931, pp. 81-82.

THE POWER OF PERSONALITY. You are not going to bring back erring youth unless you first let them know that you are interested in them. Let them feel your heart touch. Only the warm heart can kindle warmth in another. Wayward boys and girls are sometimes suspicious of people around them. Others get the idea that they are not wanted. The kind hand or the loving arm removes suspicion and awakens confidence. Your own experience bears ample evidence of the value of personal companionship.—CR, October 1932, pp. 67-68.

CHURCH SERVICE TO YOUNG WOMEN AWAY FROM HOME. A few years ago there appeared in one of our magazines, the story of a little lad who wandered from his mother's lap in the Badlands of the Dakotas and was lost. As night came on, the mother was distracted and the neighbors alarmed. The next morning, on the public square of the town near there, the sheriff met a group of farmers, teachers, office men, citizens of all ranks. He organized them for a systematic search. Before they started out he said, "Little Ronald is somewhere out in those Badlands. We must organize and search every bush, every crevasse, every water hole. We must not come back without that little boy. Pray God that we are not yet too late." They started out that Wednesday, but it was not until Thursday, and at about three o'clock in the afternoon that a mighty shout went up. They had found the boy.

Brethren, a few years ago you received a letter stating that a committee had been appointed by the Council of the Twelve to look after some of our girls who had wandered into the "badlands" of the city. They did not intend to get caught in the meshes of sin, but they had wandered from home and the protecting influence of home surroundings. You were asked if you would not kindly send to this committee the names and the addresses of those girls who came away from your town, just so that members of this committee could see that they became associated with some ward, with some young people here of good reputation, and in some cases, in all cases if possible, could see that they found suitable employment.

Later, you were asked from this pulpit if you would not please give closer attention to that phase of salvation of our youth. Only a few, comparatively speaking, have responded to that call. Well, if they were lost and faced physical death, you would not hesitate, the whole town would not hesitate to go out and rescue the lost girl or the lost boy. I want to tell you, from direct reports from our police officers who cooperate, in several instances some of these fine girls have suffered things worse than death.

Now we ask you once again please to send the names of those girls who legitimately, who unknowing what awaits them, some of them, leave their homes and come to Salt Lake City or Ogden or Provo, or some center, seeking employment, seeking to better themselves. Please cooperate with this committee or enable the members thereof to cooperate with you, so that these choice young people may not be ensnared by vicious men who lie in wait, not only to deceive, but to ruin.

Now, be careful, if the parents are sending them in, that you do not offend those parents; that is not necessary. This is merely a means of cooperating with parents in helping young people to start out from home to better their conditions.—CR, April 1952, pp. 85-86.

YOUTH AND ITS ASPIRATIONS

A THREEFOLD CLASSIFICATION. I invite your attention for a few minutes to aspirations. Aspiration means "a desiring ardently; a strong wish, a longing for the realization of high ideals."

Just by way of emphasis, let us consider youth as grouped into three classes—

(1) The infusorian class into which fall the listless, drifting youth.

Down among the lowest types of living creatures, there is a little animal that moves about aimlessly. It "swims randomly about, moving apparently by flailing stimuli in its medium; and in its course it comes now in contact with some nutritive substance which it absorbs, and now into the neighborhood of some creature by which it is swallowed and digested. Lacking those developed senses and motor powers which higher animals possess, ninety-nine in the hundred of these minute animals seldom live but for a few hours, disappearing either by innutrition or by destruction." The infusorians enter upon life aimlessly, and ninety-nine out of one hundred of these animalculae perish in consequence.

Indifferencea-McKay, David O.TPNow you see what I mean by the infusorian group. One writer refers to them as that "great under class of men, content to creep, and without thought of wings for rising. Mere drifters are they, creatures of circumstances, indifferently remaining where birth or events have started them, having food and raiment, therewith they are content. No inspirations fire them, no ideals rebuke them, no visions of possible excellence or advancement smite their vulgar contentment. Like dead leaves swept forward upon the current, these men drift through life. Not really bad, they are but indifferently good, and therefore are the material out of which vicious men are made. In malarial regions, physicians say men of overflowing health are safe because the abounding vitality within crowds back the poison in the outer air, while men who live on the borderline between good health and ill, furnish the same conditions for fever that consume away the life. Similarly, the men who live an indifferent, supine life, with no impulses upward, are exposed to evil and become a constant menace to society."

(2) The firefly youth. Higher in the scale of intelligence and moral uplift, there are those who may be classed as the firefly men.

Often on a summer's evening, you students as children have observed what we used to call the "lightning bug." These flying creatures seemed most active just before a shower. The light from each would shine but for an instant, then the thing would be absorbed in the darkness. Another momentary flash, then blackness again!

Youtha-McKay, David O.TPSuch is the firefly youth with respect to the noble aspirations. He has luminous hours in which his soul ardently desires to rise above all things mean and sordid and to bask in the realm of enlightenment and beauty. He would be valiant and courageous in defending virtue and the right under all circumstances. If he could only obtain strength and power, he would use them to help his fellow men and to make the world better! But when a few hours later he associates with companions unfired by such noble ideals, the light of his aspirations fades; the fires of enthusiasm die; and his soul is absorbed in the darkness of indifference and indulgence.

Youtha-McKay, David O.TPGood intentions must be carefully cherished or they will soon perish.

Youtha-McKay, David O.TPHowever, it is better to have hoped and yearned for better things, and had the hopes fade than never to have yearned at all. The flicker at least shows the presence of a light that might be fanned into a constant flame. That is better than damp driftwood from which will come not even a spark.

Youtha-McKay, David O.TP(3) The conifer youth. Then there is the third group, which I call the conifer youth. In using this term, I have in mind not just the ordinary cone-bearing tree of the conifer group, but particularly, the Giant Sequoia or "Big Tree" of the Sierra Nevadas. It grows from two hundred to three hundred and forty feet in height. The diameter is ordinarily ten to fifteen feet, and sometimes reaches twenty-five to thirty-five feet! There is a grove of these ancient trees in the Sequoia forest of the Yosemite Valley. One, "The General Sherman," is estimated to be 3500 years old. One cannot stand in the presence of this oldest living thing in existence without sensing a feeling of awe akin to reverence. It was probably alive as a mere twig when the pyramids of Egypt were being built. It was young and vigorous when Greece was in its glory; it was just a young tree when Rome ruled the world. Empires have risen and fallen. Millions of men have lived and died during the tree's lifetime. It has withstood lightning, floods, fire, and still lives on!

Youtha-McKay, David O.TPIt has survived because it has within it the powers of resistance.

Youtha-McKay, David O.TPThe conifer youth senses the fact that man is not a mere animal, a creature of the flesh which profiteth nothing, but a spiritual being, a soul. He realizes that he is more than a physical object that is tossed for a short time from bank to bank, only to be submerged finally in the ever-flowing stream of life. There is something within him which urges him to rise above himself, to control his environment, to master the body and all things physical, and to live in a higher and more beautiful world. "These are the soul-architects who build their thoughts and deeds into a plan; who travel forward, not aimlessly, but toward a destination; who sail, not anywhither, but toward a port; who steer, not by the clouds but by the fixed stars. High in the scale of manhood these who ceaselessly aspire toward life's great Exemplar."

Jesus Christ As Exemplara-McKay, David O.TPThe great Exemplar is Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, who in material possessions had "nowhere to lay his head," yet, as one writer has said more impressively than I, "a man of truly colossal intellect, incomparable as he strides across the realm and ages, yet always thinking the gentlest, kindliest thoughts; thoughts of mildness as well as majesty; thoughts of humanity as well as divinity. His thoughts were wings to all the low-flying; his thoughts freed those who had been snared in the thickets; his thoughts set an angel down beside each cradle; his thoughts of the incarnation rendered the human body forever sacred; his thoughts of the grave sanctified the tomb. Dying and rising, his thoughts clove an open pathway through the sky. Taught by him, the people have learned to think—not only great thoughts, but good ones, and also how to turn thoughts into life."—Newell Dwight Hills, "The Mind and Right Thinking."

THOUGHTS OF YOUTH DETERMINE CHARACTER. "... as he thinketh in his heart, so is he: ..." (Prov. 23:7.)

The thoughts that a youth harbors during the formative period in his life will determine into which class he falls—whether he is a listless infusorian, a firefly youth with regards to good intentions, or an outstanding Sequoia in the realm of character.—DNCS, May 8, 1943, pp. 1-4.

DANGERS TO AVOID

In their yearning for a good time, young people are often tempted to indulge in the things which appeal only to the baser side of humanity, five of the most common of which are: first, vulgarity and obscenity; second, drinking and petting parties; third, unchastity; fourth, disloyalty; and fifth, irreverence.

Vulgaritya-McKay, David O.TPVULGARITY AND OBSCENITY. Vulgarity is often the first step down the road to indulgence. To be vulgar is to give offense to good taste or refined feelings. A young man who would tell a vulgar joke in the presence of ladies discloses a nature leaning towards that which is low and coarse. A girl who would encourage it and laugh at it is taking a step toward that which is crude and unrefined.

Vulgaritya-McKay, David O.TPMost of you have read David Starr Jordan's denunciation of this vice. He concludes it by saying:

Vulgaritya-McKay, David O.TP"We find the corrosion of vulgarity everywhere, and its poison enters every home. The billboards of our cities are covered with its evidence; our newspapers are redolent with it; our story books reek with it; our schools are tainted by it; and we cannot keep it out of our homes, or our churches, or our colleges."

It is only a step from vulgarity to obscenity. The executive secretary of a committee appointed to curtail the distribution of obscene literature put on my desk only recently a most vile plaque, covertly cast reportedly here in our city, and sold to our young people at a nominal price. The best way to rid society of such baseness is for parents, businessmen, and especially every decent young person, to refuse to tolerate it and to report the vendors to the officers of the law.

DRINKING AND PETTING PARTIES. It is right, indeed essential, to the happiness of our young people that they meet in social parties, but it is an indication of low morals when for entertainment they must resort to physical stimulation and debasement. Such indulgence weakens one's character, discredits one's family name, robs one's future wife or husband of a priceless treasure, and sows seeds that may ripen into bitter fruit of marital suspicion, unhappiness, and divorce. A girl who sacrifices self-respect for social popularity debases true womanhood.

A spotless character, founded upon the ability to say no in the presence of those who mock and jeer, wins the respect and love of men and women whose opinion is most worth while. Drinking and petting parties form an environment in which the moral sense becomes dulled and unbridled passion holds sway. It then becomes easy to take the final step downward in moral disgrace.

UNCHASTITY. The test of true womanhood comes when woman stands innocent at the court of chastity. All qualities are crowned by this most precious virtue of beautiful womanhood. It is the most vital part of the foundation of a happy married life. There is a general idea throughout the world that young men may sow their wild oats, but that young women should be chaperoned and guarded. But even in this matter of chaperonage, there is too much laxity on the part of parents, if recent reports are to be relied upon.

Moralitya-McKay, David O.TPIn the Church of Jesus Christ there is but one standard of morality. No young man has any more right to sow his "wild oats" in youth than has a young girl. He who comes to his bishop to ask for a recommend to take a pure girl to the altar is expected to give the same purity that he hopes to receive.

A woman crowned with virtue is the "highest, holiest, most precious gift to man," excepting only salvation offered in the gospel, and that forms part of it. But a woman who barters her virtue "is not one of the least of man's shames."

Disloyaltya-McKay, David O.TPDISLOYALTY. When, instead of high moral principles, a life of immoral indulgence is chosen, and man or woman gets far down in the scale of degeneracy, disloyalty is an inevitable part of his or her nature. Loyalty to parents becomes quenched; obedience to their teachings and ideals abandoned; loyalty to wife and children smothered in base gratification; loyalty to Church impossible and often supplanted by sneers at its teachings, and that means the perpetrator is "left to himself to kick against the pricks and to fight against God."

IRREVERENCE. At this stage, irreverence is an inevitable consequence, a pretty sure sign of moral weakness. No man will rise high who jeers at sacred things. It is said that when Mr. Melville D. Landon (Eli Perkins) was preparing his volume on Kings of the Platform and Pulpit, he wrote to Colonel Robert G. Ingersoll for a copy of his most famous lecture. In a letter which accompanied the manuscript, Mr. Ingersoll said:

"Whatever you do, do not put anything into the book against Christ. I may have said silly things about him when a boy in Peoria, Illinois, but I now regard him as the one Perfect Man."—CR, April 1949, pp. 14-16.

Popularitya-McKay, David O.TPTHE TEMPTATION OF FALSE POPULARITY. Young men and women sometimes yield to indulgence for the sake of popularity. One who persistently bids for popularity at the expense of health and character is a foolish man. "A man who stands behind a bar and swallows drink after drink for the sake of sociability is paying a high price for a miserable product. Social popularity purchased in such a way and at such a price is not good enough for an honest man to wipe his feet upon." Indeed, men who yield to temptation to seek popularity among friends lose the very thing they desire, while the boy who maintains his standards wins their respect. Let me illustrate:

A year or so ago the president of one of the leading fraternities at the University of Utah, who maintained the standards of his Church under all conditions, was present with a group of students when one of his fraternity treated his comrades with cigarets. He passed the president of the fraternity without offering him a cigaret. Facetiously, the young Mormon boy said: "What's the matter, Bill, aren't you offering me one?" Bill, even though a smoker himself, replied: "Jack, if I ever saw you with a cigaret in your mouth, I would knock you cold!" The more the Mormon boy maintained his standards, the greater respect he won from his non-Mormon associates.—DNCS, January 25, 1947, p. 8.

VAIN SHORTCUTS. We need not shut our eyes to the fact that too many of our young folk respond to the call of the physical because it seems the easy and natural thing to do. Too many are vainly seeking shortcuts to happiness. It should always be kept in mind that that which is most worth while in life requires strenuous effort.

"Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat:

"Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." (Matt. 7:13-14.)—CR, April 1949, pp. 13-14.

THE DANGER OF UNSTABLE OPINIONS. Now what are the sinful influences around us that tend to divert young people's minds from this right channel? We are living in an age which, measured by the standards of the gospel, is full of unstable opinions; and into that world of shifting uncertainty our young people are thrown. Think for a moment how their thoughts are diverted from our standards as they read some of the articles in current magazines.

From a leading magazine I have culled, just at random, this, in relation to religion:

Academic scholars who are shaping the thoughts of youth are declaring that one religious faith is just as good or just as useless, according to the professor's particular viewpoint, as another. "Buddhism, Hinduism, Judaism, Christianity, all spring from the same source, and in the ultimate analysis mean the same thing."

That is one of the things which I call unstable, and which threaten young people with an influence that will throw them into the fatal channel of wrong thinking. In customs and fashions, what was considered bad taste yesterday has become quite acceptable today.

In regard to the ideals of success and the standards that lead to success, I quote this surprising statement:

"Success is not the result of hard work, clean living, and personal integrity. The vulgar, proud, and haughty, not the meek, inherit the earth."

Young men and young women read those things, and their minds are diverted from the channel of right thinking and right living. Unstable opinions, shifting uncertainties!

Again, the wholesomeness of our ancestral home life is questioned. That thought, too, is leading our young people to think in a wrong direction.

Modesty, "that diamond setting to female beauty," is in some circles considered prudish, puritanic; and the influence is leading astray some of our girls who are susceptible to the influence of society.

Ride along the highway, see the obnoxious and sometimes obscene advertisements, how they flaunt themselves in the face of every traveler; and even obnoxious advertisements enter our homes over the radio.

COUNTERACTING SUPERFICIAL NONSENSE. Now, the important question with us today is, what are we doing to counteract this tendency towards fatal wrong thinking? I am going to name only three common phases of our Church which are fundamental toward right thinking and right living.

I should like to name, first, the duty that rests upon every parent and upon every teacher within this Church to arouse within the mind of the child a sense of responsibility toward other individuals and toward society.

I wish to name as the second principle a little simple thing which even in the naming will indicate to you perhaps how many have wandered from it, the simple principle of prayer. There are men in our midst who say that prayer is not efficacious. Unfortunately, some of our young people believe such fallacious remarks. Prayer is a fundamental principle of religion, the Christian religion particularly, and prayer is a force for good. A praying man is a growing man.

Sabbath Daya-McKay, David O.TPA third principle that contributes to right religious attitude is reverence—reverence for the Sabbath day and all things sacred. Reverence directs thought toward God. Without it there is no religion. Let us not make Sunday a holiday. It is a holy day, and on that day we should go to the house of worship and seek our God. If we seek him on the Sabbath day, get into his presence on that day, we shall find it less difficult to be in his presence the following days of the week.

Chapelsa-McKay, David O.TPThere should be more reverence for the house of worship. I am offended when I see in Sunday School, or perhaps in Mutual, members leave the service after having rendered a musical number. Undoubtedly, they go to some other place to render the same service. Even that is not sufficient justification for the mark of seeming irreverence in leaving a worshiping assembly. Better secure somebody who can stay throughout the service, for the assembly in a dedicated chapel is in the presence of God. All are supposed to have come to meet him and worship him, and there should be present that spirit of order and reverence which will direct the worshipers' thoughts in the right channel.—CR, April 1929, pp. 99-102.

TestimonyTrutha-McKay, David O.TPANCHOR TO THE TRUTH. I know of no greater blessing you young folk can receive than to be anchored to the truth, and by that I mean three things: first, always to feel a surety that this Church is divinely guided; second, that the Lord has authorized his servants and placed upon them the duty to proclaim to the world the restoration and truth of the gospel of Jesus Christ; third, and most applicable to us all, that inspiration from the Lord is a reality, just as real as the love each one of us has for his loved ones.—CR, April 1950, p. 32.

BUILDING CONFIDENCE IN YOUTH

TO BUILD CONFIDENCE A BASIC OBLIGATION. One of the paramount duties, I might say the paramount duty, of parents is to win and merit the confidence and respect of their children. Equally paramount in the life of a bishopric of a ward is to win and merit the confidence of the people of their ward. Too few parents have the confidence of their children. There are too few officers in the Church who have the confidence of the members, particularly of the young people of wards and stakes.—CR, April 1944, p. 107.

Judging Othersa-McKay, David O.TPTHE POISON OF UNJUST JUDGMENT. I feel impressed to say a word about something which destroys that confidence. The Savior on one occasion said:

Judging Othersa-McKay, David O.TP"Judge not, that ye be not judged.

Judging Othersa-McKay, David O.TP"For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.

Judging Othersa-McKay, David O.TP"And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?" (Matt. 7:1-3.)

Judging Othersa-McKay, David O.TPThen in strong condemnatory terms he said:

Judging Othersa-McKay, David O.TP"Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye." (Matt. 7:5.)

Judging Othersa-McKay, David O.TPThe context of that scripture plainly indicates that the sin the Savior is condemning is the disposition to look unfavorably on the character and actions of others, which leads almost invariably to the pronouncing of rash, unjust, judgments upon them. Very often these judgments are formed on insufficient evidence and after superficial observations, and people who form them and express them in the presence of children put poison into those children's minds. Parents who speak at the table against the bishopric, against a teacher, stake president, or any other officer of the Church are, unwittingly, perhaps, but most assuredly, lessening in their children's minds the respect and confidence in Church authorities.—CR, April 1944, pp. 107-108.

Slandera-McKay, David O.TPTHE POISON OF SLANDER. One of the most deadly weapons of warfare is the poison gas. Slander is to a child's confidence in Church authorities in undermining character what poison gas is to the physical body. Now, that is putting it strongly, but I believe it is true. We should avoid as poison "Slander whose whisper over the world's diameter, as level as the cannon to its blank, transports its poison shot."—CR, April 1944, p. 108.

Youtha-McKay, David O.TPTHE STRENGTH OF WORTHY YOUTH. We hear a good deal of talk about our young people these days. Some say that they are indifferent, that they are losing their interest in the Church. I do not agree with this accusation. My experience with the young leads me to believe that there was never a time when youth more sincerely sought the truth, when they were more responsive to assignments made in the Church, when they were more observant of the ideals for which this Church stands.

Youtha-McKay, David O.TPOh, I am not blind to the fact that there are those who are wavering. I also know that there were young people during our youth who wavered. I realize that there are those who stand on the sidelines and, arrogating to themselves superior wisdom which they do not possess, would fain guide and dictate, but there have always been such. The great majority of our young people are desirous of living the truth.

Youtha-McKay, David O.TPI realize the temptations were never stronger than they are today; but the young people who resist these temptations deserve all the greater credit. We hear about young boys and young girls who indulge in things contrary to the teachings of their parents and the officers of the Church, and contrary to the ideals of the gospel, but we too seldom hear about the much larger group who are exerting an influence for good upon their fellow workers and upon their associates.

If time permitted, I might narrate several specific instances in which our girls have wielded an influence upon their associates and led not only members of the Church but also people outside of the Church to lay aside violations of the Word of Wisdom and to conform to the ideals and principles of purity of life.—CR, April 1934, pp. 21-22.

Youtha-McKay, David O.TPGenerally speaking, youth are anchored. Sometimes they seem to waver and digress from the standards. Some of them, it is true, lose their virtue, the most benighting and cankering condition that can contaminate young people's lives. I know that there is a looseness in sexual morality which is dangerous, which is threatening. I know too that such breaking down of moral standards is manifested not alone among the young people, and I warn the Church to guard against unchastity. Keep yourselves unspotted from the world, the fundamental element in pure religion.

Youtha-McKay, David O.TPNo, we are not shutting our eyes to the dangers, but I want to tell you we must not shut our eyes to the virtues of the tens of thousands of those who are true and valiant.—CR, April 1934, p. 22.

A SIGNIFICANT MEDICAL PROOF. I am very happy and deeply grateful for the high type of young manhood and womanhood being reared in the Church as indicated recently by a report of 6,556 prospective missionaries in their medical examination including serological tests preparatory to their going on missions.

In 1946 there were 2,263 so examined. In 1947, 2,134; likewise in 1948, 2,159, or a total, as I say, of 6,556. Negative tests were shown by 6,554; only one in 1946 and one in 1947 were positive—one in more than three thousand.—CR, April 1949, p. 11.

EVIDENCE FROM THE MILITARY. Speaking generally, I have confidence in our young people. This confidence springs primarily from my intimate associations with hundreds of returned soldiers and others who have gone on missions, particularly during the last three years. While our young men were in the army, most of them (there were exceptions, of course) conducted themselves creditably. They met as regularly as possible for sacred service. As an illustration: During the war in the Pacific when the conflict was at its height, a chaplain one day accosted a colonel, saying: "Are you going to conference tomorrow?"

"What do you mean, conference?" answered the colonel.

"The Mormon soldiers in New Britain are holding a conference tomorrow."

I heard that same colonel say, upon his return from the army, "Those soldiers are among the best missionaries that the Church has ever had."—CR, October 1948, p. 118.

THE NOBILITY OF CLEAN LIVING. As I recall the influences upon my young life, I believe the greatest was the memorizing of that important saying: "My spirit will not dwell in an unclean tabernacle."

Then there were others, and they were all in the form of warnings. The first came to me as a boy as I sat on a spring seat by the side of my father as we drove into Ogden. Just before we crossed the bridge over the Ogden River, a man came out from a saloon, which was just on the northern bank of the river. I recognized him. I liked him because I had seen him on the local stage. But on that occasion he was under the influence of liquor, and had been for, I suppose, several days.

I did not know he drank, but as he broke down and cried and asked Father for fifty cents to go back into the saloon, I saw him stagger away. As we drove across the bridge, my father said: "David, he and I used to go ward teaching together."—CR, April 1949, pp. 180-182.

RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT. If there is concern about the recalcitrance of boys and girls, this generation is no exception to those which have preceded it. Our great-grandfathers and their great-grandfathers worried about the forwardness and recklessness of their children and the bleakness of their future just as we do today.—CR, October 1948, p. 118.

YOUTH AND THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT

A DUTY OF CITIZENSHIP. It is the duty of every law-abiding citizen to see to it that our children have a wholesome community environment in which to live during their tender and impressive years.—CR, October 1948, p. 121.

Peacea-McKay, David O.TPIt is my purpose to say a few words about the effect of environment upon youth and the responsibility of adults to make home and civic environment a contributing factor to their right living.

Peacea-McKay, David O.TPThe following is pertinent to what I have in mind:

Peacea-McKay, David O.TP"It is the age that forms the man, not the man that forms the age. Great minds do indeed react on the society which has made them what they are, but they only pay with interest what they have received." (Macaulay.)

Peacea-McKay, David O.TPSo also is this ancient proverb applicable:

Peacea-McKay, David O.TP"If there is righteousness in the heart, there will be beauty in the character. If there is beauty in the character, there will be harmony in the home. If there is harmony in the home, there will be order in society. And if there is order in society, there will be peace in the world."—CR, October 1948, p. 117.

SOCIAL ACTIVITY UNDER PROPER ENVIRONMENT. I think it is almost a tragedy to have young girls and young boys grow up without opportunity of social activity under the proper environment, and recreational halls will be dedicated as fitting places for these young folk to come and meet one another, to meet the older ones, to participate in literature, in the art of dancing, in the drama, in music, and all other features that offer opportunity for development to our young boys and girls.

I am sorry that the latest custom among young people is to have a young man and his young sweetheart dance together all evening. I should rather see them exchange partners as was formerly the practice.

Some of our girls come, properly chaperoned, but they do not get the opportunity to participate in the dances. The recreation hall should be a place for cordiality where all young people may have an opportunity to mingle and to meet their mates. That means something in this day of divorces due to hasty marriages where they do not understand each other, where they marry not for ideal homes and the rearing of children, but for reasons lower than those which should actuate the idealism of proper marriage.—DNCS, April 30, 1952, p. 3.

THE HUMAN FACTOR. With the great masses of sensationalism and artificial stimulation to which the child of today is subjected in this age of mechanical wonders, it is of the gravest importance that society realize that it is only in the example of sincere living upon the part of the individual members of society that the child finds a dynamic impulse for his own wholesome development.

If we are sincere in our desire to reduce this delinquency among youth, let us look to ourselves as members of the community and as leaders and officials in civic circles.—CR, October 1948, pp. 120-121.

ADULT DELINQUENCY IN THE COMMUNITY. That there is a threatening increase in delinquency in our communities, particularly among boys and girls of high school age, is all too apparent to anyone who will open his eyes to see and his ears to hear; and steps should be taken to curtail this delinquency.

It is with this purpose in mind that I refer not to the delinquency of youth but to the delinquency of adults.

Youth is influenced by example and environment. Dominating groups exerting this influence are the home, the church, the school, social circles, and civic conditions.

Parentsa-McKay, David O.TPThere are too many delinquent fathers and mothers. Our homes are the centers that determine the type of our citizenry. To dignify home and parenthood is one of the noblest aims of human society. The greatest responsibility given to woman is the divine gift to be a mother. She thus blessed, who has health and opportunity, and shirks the responsibility for social prestige and pleasure, is recreant to her duty as wife and mother. The father, particularly, if he be a member of the Church and holds the priesthood, who fails to set a proper example before his children is a delinquent and is a contributor to child delinquency.

Parentsa-McKay, David O.TPUpon the responsibility of parents to have proper home environment, modern revelation is most explicit:

Parentsa-McKay, David O.TP"And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents.

Parentsa-McKay, David O.TP"For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized.

Parentsa-McKay, David O.TP"And their children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when eight years old, and receive the laying on of the hands.

Parentsa-McKay, David O.TP"And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord." (D. & C. 68:25-28.)

Quarreling among parents and children, faultfinding, backbiting, smoking cigarets, drinking intoxicating liquors, using profane language, make a home environment that contributes to delinquency. No parent can consistently teach faith in Christ who profanes the name of Deity. Profanity is never heard in the well-ordered home. Swearing is a vice that bespeaks a low standard of breeding. Blasphemous exclamations drive out all spirit of reverence. Irreverence is always a mark of delinquency.—CR, October 1948, pp. 118-119.

SPENDING TO SAVE, IMPORTANT. One man estimates that we are spending ten billion dollars a year in the punishment of criminals; yet each year crime is eating more deeply into the vitals of our civilization.

Crimea-McKay, David O.TPI suggest that we expend some of that vast sum of money to better advantage by putting forth more effort to stop the source of crime by giving a little more attention to the young, for, mind you, the average age of the criminal in the United States today is under twenty-one years. That is something which challenges our attention. We are not spending proportionately the amount in preventing lawlessness among our youth that we are spending in punishing those who become entangled in the meshes of the law.—CR, October 1930, p. 9.

WHAT HAPPENS OUTSIDE OF SCHOOL. I am concerned about the child when he is not in school, about what he is doing after school. The leisure time of youth is the dangerous time. That is when he needs the training, and yet in some of our states we have compulsory education up to fourteen years of age, and in those same states have laws prohibiting a boy from working until he is sixteen. There you find a two-year period in which the boy is left practically to go his way. And what is his way? He will find the gang, and gangs are often the breeding grounds of bootleggers and organized vice squads.

Young boys who are going their own way should be guided, no matter what it costs, along the paths of better citizenship. In Utah we have a law that compels the young man and the young woman to be in school until he or she is eighteen years of age. However, it is one thing to force a boy into school, it is another thing to arouse in his life an ideal or a desire to emulate the best in life.—CR, October 1930, p. 11.

Church Programsa-McKay, David O.TPBISHOPS, THE AARONIC PRIESTHOOD, AND COMMUNITY ENVIRONMENT. But now, brethren of the Church, do you realize that we have in the organization of the Church the best means in all the world of training youth? Your deacon quorums, what are they but opportunities for the young boys to meet together and satisfy that spirit of brotherhood? Bishop, what is your priests' quorum but an opportunity for you as a president of that quorum to get those young men around you as your bodyguard, young men who carve the social atmosphere of the ward, and whom you may lead in paths of honor, trustworthiness, and faith?—CR, October 1930, p. 13.

Some of our foolish girls, in the cities particularly, are becoming addicts to nicotine. We should warn them, labor with them—not drive them from us—bring them into our Mutuals, our Sunday Schools, and into our socials where they may mingle with those who cherish higher ideals. I want to tell you, brethren, that we cannot with impunity sit by and be satisfied with having the best of our boys and girls come to auxiliary and priesthood meetings and let the others go unvisited.

Church Programsa-McKay, David O.TPIf parents are failing in guiding the youth, then it is the duty of ward teachers and priesthood quorums and auxiliary teachers to supplant in the lives of these children the love which they are losing perhaps because of broken homes.—CR, September-October 1949, p. 190.

Church Programsa-McKay, David O.TPI look upon the organization of the Church as the greatest opportunity ever given to man for the proper training of youth.—CR, October 1930, p. 13.

Church Programsa-McKay, David O.TPI tell you the time has come for the nation, for the state, for the home, for the Church, to look more directly and particularly after the boys and girls and train them in the way they should go, and when they are old, few will depart from it.—CR, October 1930, pp. 13-14.

"Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me?"

"Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee."

"Feed my lambs."

Jesus said to him the second time: "Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me? ... Feed my sheep." (See John 21:15-16.)

This was one of the last and one of the most important injunctions that Jesus gave his Apostles following the resurrection. The Savior's charge to watch over the flock and to feed the lambs is as applicable at the present time as it was in the days of Peter. The Church of Jesus Christ must particularly accept this responsibility.—CR, April 1931, p. 79.

THE YOUNG MEN'S AND YOUNG WOMEN'S MUTUAL IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATIONS

The ultimate aim of Mutual Improvement work is to aid in bringing to pass, under the inspiration and guidance of the Lord, the immortality and eternal life of man.

Young Men's Mutual Improvement AssociationYoung Women's Mutual Improvement Associationa-McKay, David O.TPDIRECT AIM AND PURPOSE OF THE M.I.A. We have as the direct and immediate purpose, the establishing in the hearts of the young men and young women a testimony of the divinity of God's work, without which eternal life cannot be obtained—for " ... this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (Ibid., 17:3.)

MEANS OF ACCOMPLISHMENT. As a means of accomplishing this end, we have placed at our disposal and use the records of God's revelations to men, also the record of his hand-dealings with mankind. This includes, as you readily see, not only that which we have in sacred literature, known as the fundamental works of scripture, but also God's records in creation. Associated with these fundamental works of creation and revelation, we have access to all man's relationships with each other as social beings, and his attitude in relationship toward God and his work.

Young Women's Mutual Improvement AssociationYoung Men's Mutual Improvement Associationa-McKay, David O.TPIt is the records of God's hand-dealings with man that we are to consider now for a few moments. We call them lessons. We take from these records in scripture, in nature, or in life, some chapter, some incident, some paragraph, upon which we build a lesson, which we present to the young men and young women with the special purpose of convincing them of the truth—and having once convinced them, of moving them, if possible, to action to introduce that truth into their lives.

COMMANDED TO TEACH. We are definitely instructed by the Lord to devote special attention to this phase of our work. In section eighty-eight of the Doctrine and Covenants, we find the following commandment:

"And I give unto you a commandment that you shall teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom.

"Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand;

"Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms—

"That ye may be prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you." (D. & C. 88:77-80.)

Can you get in all literature a more comprehensive statement of the field into which teachers must enter for the purpose of being prepared to teach the word of God than in that revelation?

THE GREAT OBLIGATION IS PREPARATION. We are a Church of teachers. The Mutual Improvement Associations are two organizations of teachers. Even the young men and women whom you leaders teach are themselves in turn teachers. In the Latter-day Saint home the father and mother are required to be teachers of the word—expressly required so by the revelations of the Lord. Every auxiliary organization, every quorum, is made up of a body of men and women or of men, who are in the ultimate sense of the word, teachers; therefore, this revelation refers to all.

Teaching, Gospela-McKay, David O.TPNow, the great obligation upon a teacher is to be prepared to teach. A teacher cannot teach others that which he himself does not know. He cannot make his students feel what he does not feel himself. It is ridiculous to attempt to lead a young man or a young woman to obtain a testimony of the work of God, if the man or woman who is attempting to lead does not have that testimony himself or herself.

Teaching, Gospela-McKay, David O.TPHOW TO PREPARE. There are three things which must guide all teachers: First, get into the subject—any subject taken from this universe of facts mentioned in the revelation I quoted; second, get that subject into you; third, try to lead your pupils to get the subject into them—not pouring it into them, but leading them to see what you see, to know what you know, to feel what you feel.—IE, 22:899-900 (1919).

YOUTH AND THE RELIGIOUS LIFE

Joya-McKay, David O.TPTHE REALIZATION OF JOYA RELIGIOUS DUTY. It is a mistake for young people to become imbued with the feeling that anything associated with religion is unpleasant or depressing. Youth is the happy time of life; all the colors of the future are bright. Their hearts are hopeful. It is our duty to see that those hopes are realized.

I hope to say a word that will lead some of the young men and the young women to feel that those hopes are best realized within the confines of the religious life.—DNCS, July 4, 1936, p. 1.

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPCHURCH AND PARENTS TO DEMONSTRATE JOYOUS LIVING. It is the duty of parents and of the Church not only to teach but also to demonstrate to young people that living a life of truth and moral purity brings joy and happiness, while violations of moral and social laws result only in dissatisfaction, sorrow, and, when carried to extreme, in degradation.—CR, April 1949, p. 12.

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPI know that if our young people will accept the teachings and live the standards they will be the happiest, most joyous persons in all the world, and I know if they do not, they will bring sorrow upon themselves and upon their wives and children in the future.—CR, April 1949, p. 182.

YOUTH'S DEVOTION TO THE CHURCH. Every week I sit with my brethren and hear recommends from bishops of young men and young women to go on missions. While there are some who we think should not have been recommended, the great majority of these young men and young women are the noblest in the land.

The young men, even the boys in Sunday School, particularly those in the deacons' quorums, teachers, and priests, and girls of corresponding age, are a credit to the parents, a credit to the Church. As an illustration, out in Uintah recently, I had the privilege of dedicating three church edifices. I learned from the president of the stake that many people had "given their all."

I have heard that expression in other places, and took it at first that it was just an exaggerated expression of devotion. But when I learned on this occasion of a widow who had given all she could possibly give—others, each of whom had sold their last cow, and others who had taken the tax money that had been saved, then I began to realize that there was something in that phrase. And the whole thing was climaxed by the following incident.

The ward was putting forth every effort to finish the meetinghouse, but it was unpaid for. They needed more money. I am not sure that young boy's father is in the Church. I think he is, but he would not contribute, and I have to imagine the devotion of his mother. But this young boy, about fourteen, had saved money by shining shoes, washing automobiles, doing odd chores, and had saved a hundred and fifty-nine dollars.

He had heard of a recent call for more contributions and said to the president of the stake who was cashier of the bank: "I need the nine dollars, but I wish you would take the hundred and fifty and give to the bishop to help pay the cost of that meetinghouse."

"But," said the president, "you cannot afford it."

"Yes, I can."

He gave his hundred and fifty dollars as a contribution. Several months passed, and the ward needed more money, and that young boy out of his meager savings gave a total of two hundred and twenty-five dollars.

An entire group of the Lesser Priesthood taking turns in shifts carried every brick from one old meetinghouse over to the new.

Well, I could multiply incidents of the devotion of the youth, so I have not lost confidence in them, but we must not close our eyes to the approaching wolves who would ravish the flock. We must not close our eyes to the fact that there are conspiring men who would pollute young boys, and girls of corresponding age, for sake of increasing profits.—CR, September-October 1949, pp. 187-188.

YOUTH MUST BE COURAGEOUS TO MAINTAIN THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. I appeal to youth to be courageous in maintaining the moral and spiritual values of the gospel of Jesus Christ. After all, "For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?" (Matt. 16:26.)—CR, April 1936, p. 61.

Couragea-McKay, David O.TPCourage to maintain our ideals is another field in which we can manifest courage and merit the approval of God in whom we trust. These are times when men should keep their heads and not be swept from their moorings by every will-o'-the-wisp theory that is offered as a panacea of our present ills. The times call for courageous youth to hold aloft the moral standard. In that field we can find the truest moral courage. It is said that heroism is concentrated courage. Well, our greatest heroes are not always found on the battlefield. I think we find them also among our youth: young men and young women who, when put in social groups, will stand up fearlessly and denounce those things which we know sap the character, the very life energy of youth.—CR, April 1936, pp. 60-61.

YOUTH AND ITS TESTIMONY

THE LAW OF FAITH. A testimony comes from several sources, one of which I feel impressed to mention briefly.

One way of gaining a testimony is through miracles. I heard, during my brief stay in Palmyra at the Bureau of Information, of a nurse who had been told that a patient would die so far as the skill of doctors was concerned, for physicians had so concluded. Two of the elders administered to the patient, and she or he recovered. Observing the result of the administration, the nurse had said to somebody, "I know now that this is the true gospel." But did she?

What she really did know was that that young man or woman was healed by a blessing. Whether that patient was cured through his or her own faith or the faith of the elders or the power of the priesthood, she does not know. Such a blessing is a result of the gospel, and of the power of faith. Such blessings follow obedience to the law of faith.—DNCS, September 12, 1951, p. 2.

THE GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF TESTIMONY: REVELATION TO THE INDIVIDUAL SOUL. Let me say to you young brethren, don't you be discouraged if a testimony does not come all at once. It did not come suddenly to Peter. Let me call your attention to one instance.

After feeding the five thousand, you remember, the Savior crossed over to Capernaum on that tempestuous sea. Some of the five thousand walked around the northern shore and were in Capernaum to meet him the next day. Whether the Savior gave his address in the streets of Capernaum or in the synagogue, he delivered a masterful message, in which he said to the assembled multitude, "Ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled." (John 6:26.) They had seen the miracle, but they had missed something deeper, more significant.

Then Jesus delivered that remarkable sermon on the bread of life, but its symbolism they could not understand and began to walk away. Those who had followed him began to leave him and turn their backs upon him, and finally only the Twelve were left, unto whom he said, "Will ye also go away?" Peter, the impulsive leader, practical and sound spokesman (I love him!), said unto him: "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life.

"And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God." (See John 6:67-69.)

I linger on believe and are sure because I think that is the way Peter would have said it. It seemed that at that time Peter's testimony was not strong and definite. I may be wrong and do not ask you to accept that interpretation if you do not believe it, but of this we may be sure, on that occasion he did not get the word blessed.

Jesus took the disciples from Capernaum and went up into the mountain close by to teach them further, and it was while he was up there during that week that he asked the question, "Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?" They answered and said: "Some say that thou art John the Baptist: some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets." Then he said: "But whom say ye that I am?" And Peter answered without hesitation, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God."

"Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

"And I say also unto thee, That thou art Peter (Peter saw this testimony or revelation from God), and upon this rock I will build my Church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." (See Matt. 16:13-18.)

Testimonya-McKay, David O.TPInspiration, revelation to the individual soul, is the rock upon which a testimony should be built, and there is not one living who cannot get it if he will conform to those laws and live a clean life which will permit the holy Spirit to place that testimony in him.—DNCS, September 12, 1951, p. 4.
