David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 32

EDUCATION

TRUE EDUCATION: THE PARAMOUNT PURPOSE OF A FREE PEOPLE [^1]

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPOur nation is facing stupendously critical problems, not the least of which is the present-day indifference toward the need of better training and proper education of youth—America's most precious asset, her greatest safeguard, her most important, most potentially profitable enterprise!

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPEDUCATION FOR A LIVELIHOOD. Students enter school primarily to gain economic or social advantage. But this aim is not always achieved, nor is it, nor should it be, the highest purpose of education. However, we must not underestimate the value of obtaining an education for a livelihood. Education for economic advancement is a good investment for the individual as well as for the state. The United States as a nation is still young, but its brief history is replete with striking examples of the value of its free public school system even as a financial investment.

THE EXAMPLE OF DR. GEORGE WASHINGTON CARVER. Here, for instance, was a son of a slave entering Iowa State College, having worked his own way through the grades, high school, and three years at Simpson College. Four years later, he took his degree in agriculture. His work so impressed the authorities that they appointed him a member of the college faculty. Soon thereafter he refused a tempting offer of one hundred thousand dollars a year. As a child, frail and undernourished, he earned a living by doing odd household chores. His adopted parents wanted him to get an education but offered him no money. The handicapped boy's primary purpose was the same as that of every other child in America; namely, to gain economic and social betterment—to broaden his means of gaining a livelihood. Experts say that this man (Dr. Washington Carver) has done more than any other living man to rehabilitate agriculture in the South. Since 1898 the industry which he fostered has grown until it now runs into more than sixty million dollars a year.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPNo, I do not in the least disparage this aim nor criticize our public school system for planning to make possible its realization. But education for a livelihood is not the highest purpose of education.—CAUU, June 9, 1951, pp. 4-5.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPTHE PARAMOUNT EDUCATIONAL IDEAL, SPIRITUAL RATHER THAN ECONOMIC. After all is said and done, the most potent force for training youth in the United States today is our public school system. But let us face clearly and forcefully the fact that the paramount ideal permeating all education in the grades, the high school, through college and the university, should be more spiritual than economic.

I am but repeating what we all know and feel when I say that our country's greatest asset is its manhood. Upon that depends not only the survival of the individual freedom vouchsafed by the Constitution and Bill of Rights, and all other ideals, for which the founders of the republic fought and died, but also the survival of the best that we cherish in present-day civilization throughout the world.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPThe preservation of these must come through education. Lest you think that I am merely an idealist, appealing for something which cannot be attained practically through the curriculum of our public schools, let me say that if the purpose be properly emphasized and the desire to achieve it be generally sensed, the coming generation and adults of the present time can be influenced within the next ten years. Still fresh in our memory is the fact that a paranoiac, with a native ability to influence the masses, demonstrated through concentrated, continued effort by specially-trained instructors and leaders, how the minds of youth could be directed within two decades to accept even a perverted ideal. How near he came to this realization of his aim within a few short years is now a matter of history. If youth can be so influenced to degenerate to the jungle, it can also be trained by united purpose to ascend the path of spiritual attainment.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPOnly through proper education can these fundamental principles become fixed and guiding influences in the lives of human beings. Our educational system will radiate such principles just to the extent that we employ in our public schools, high schools, colleges, and universities men and women who are not only eminent in their particular professions but also loyal to the Constitution of our land, influential as leaders, noble in character.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPEDUCATIONAL IDEALS AND THE PERSONALITY OF THE TEACHER. Imagine what it would mean to the national integrity of America if every one of the half million graduates, in addition to his having earned his diploma, could cherish the memory of a noble character of whom throughout the years he could say as a Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States said of one who influenced his university career: "I admired him for his learning, loved him for his goodness, profited greatly from both. He believed that scholastic attainments were better than riches, but that better than either were faith, love, charity, clean living, clean thinking, loyalty, tolerance, and all the other attributes that combine to constitute that most precious of all possessions—good character."

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPIn his appreciation of the instructor who wielded the most influence in his life, this leader of men is but echoing the sentiments expressed by Ralph Waldo Emerson, reputedly the wisest American—"Character is higher than intellect: ... A great soul will be strong to live, as well as to think." The most potent influence in training our youth to cherish life, to keep their word of honor, to have increased respect for human kind and love of justice, is the life and personality of the teacher.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPGENERAL EDUCATION AND THE INDUSTRIAL AGE. The contribution of general education to the industrial and commercial greatness of the country is obvious on every hand—in research laboratories, in increased productivity of farms, in achievements of electrical, physical, chemical, engineering sciences, in harnessing, either for the benefit or destruction of man, the boundless force of atomic energy. But what true education has done, and may do to awaken in the human heart a sense of the end and aim of human existence on this earth, what it has done to raise the standard of citizenship, how it has helped to make living happier by contributing to the prosperity, peace, and security of our country, are beyond evaluation!

Stockholders—the people of the United States—must make this greatest of industries in our republic pay dividends in character and true citizenship or face inevitable failure and possible catastrophe.—CAUU, June 9, 1951, pp. 9-10.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPA FREE PEOPLE MUST STRIVE FOR THE HIGHEST AND BEST EDUCATION. Southey tells us that, in his walk one stormy day, he met an old woman, to whom, by way of greeting, he made the rather obvious remark that it was dreadful weather. She answered philosophically, that, in her opinion, "Any weather is better than none!" So we may say that any education is better than none, but a free people to remain free must ever strive for the highest and best.

To the members of the graduating class, I extend sincere congratulations upon your having completed the prescribed courses of study in your respective chosen professions, but, more than that, upon your increased ability to preserve the liberties of your country, and to be of greater service to your fellow men—for whatever your future successes or seeming failures, I still look upon all recipients of true education as individuals and groups radiating an influence that makes less dense and ineffective the darkness of ignorance, of suspicion, of hatred, of bigotry, avarice, and greed that continue to envelop in darkness the lives of men. Of course to quote Newel Dwight Hillis: "Not all men are of equal value—not many Platos—only one, to whom a thousand lesser minds look up and learn and think. Not many Dantes: one, and a thousand poets tune their harps to his and repeat his notes. Not many Raphaels; one, and no second. But a thousand lesser artists looking up to him are lifted to his level. Happy the town blessed with a few great minds and a few great hearts. One such citizen will civilize an entire community."—CAUU, June 9, 1951, pp. 10-11.

A FREE PEOPLE'S BEST INVESTMENT

THE FOSTERING OF FULL ECONOMIC FREEDOM. I should like to say a few words on "Education—A Free People's Best Investment."

The fostering of full economic freedom lies at the base of our liberties. Only in perpetuating economic freedom can our social, political, and religious liberties be preserved. However, that is a theme in itself.

There are many who believe sincerely that the liberties of the individual as vouchsafed in the Constitution of the United States are in dire jeopardy. There are some who doubt it, thinking that humanity will weather this crisis as it has surmounted others in the past; for example:

"The world is passing through troublous times. Young people of today think of nothing but themselves. They have no reverence for parents or old age. They are impatient of all restraint. They talk as if they alone know everything. As for girls, they are forward, immodest, and unwomanly in speech, behavior, and dress."

When was that written? In the year 1274!

"My grandad, viewing earth's worn cogs, Said things are going to the dogs. His grandad in his house of logs, Said things are going to the dogs. His grandad in the Flemish bogs, Said things are going to the dogs. His grandad in his old skin togs, Said things are going to the dogs. There's one thing I have to state, The dogs have had a good long wait!"

Such expressions of experiences of the past lead some to wonder whether present-day apprehensions of impending world catastrophe may not pass as have forebodings of other generations.

Let us today be appreciative of the fact that in the United States everybody has the right to express his or her own interpretation of impending events and that we can think and speak as we please without fear of oppression or punishment.

However, students, we must not let complacency blind our eyes to the real dangers threatening to destroy us. Judging from the written and expressed opinion of many of our leaders, our government is facing the greatest crisis in its history. —DNCS, March 12, 1952, p. 2.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPEDUCATION AN INVESTMENT, NOT AN EXPENSE. I wish to say that education is an investment, not an expense.—DNCS, March 12, 1952, p. 14.

Teaching, SecularEducationa-McKay, David O.TPINVEST IN OUTSTANDING TEACHERS. If the people of the United States would have the highest returns for their financial investment in education, they must as a matter of sound business judgment have, in all our schools, teachers of outstanding leadership and wholesome influence.—DNCS, March 12, 1952, p. 14.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPTHE NOBLEST PURPOSE IN EDUCATION. In my opinion, the highest, noblest purpose in all our education from the grades to the university is to teach citizenship and noble character. I believe that the thousands of students who have entered these halls have been made to sense, by absorption and by inference, that a man's character is greater than intellectual attainments or social privileges; that "every thought creates character; that every act is an incarnation of character; that every decision is a revelation of character; that habit is a pillar in the edifice of character."—DNCS, March 12, 1952, p. 14.

MORAL INSTRUCTION AND THE CURRICULUM. from The Child, His Nature and His Needs, a publication of the Children's Foundation, pages 102 and 106, I will read this question: "Should moral instruction receive a definite place in the school curriculum?" I want to tell you students, who will be leaders in a few years in scholastic fields and business, that unless we do make morality and ethics and spirituality and religion our direct aim this nation will not be prepared to counteract the evil influence of the teaching behind the iron curtain, the leaders of which are purposely, designedly, you take my word for it, teaching youth corrupt ideals and principles.

Now, our public schools, recognizing that, are setting forth ethical principles to be taught. But, note this, moral instruction is of the greatest usefulness where teachers are in earnest, where they possess the necessary skill, where they see that moral instruction is only one item in the general program of moral education, and where all the moral forces in the school are called into play together.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPNow, I pause long enough to ask the leaders of this nation, how is it possible to get leaders in our schoolrooms, hold them, have men of influence and women of superior ability to teach our children unless we are willing to compensate them properly in their efforts so to teach their children? It is folly for this nation to expect more teachers throughout the land to forsake other and more lucrative opportunities if they do not give to our teachers, our professors in the universities, in the high schools, and in day schools a compensation that their position merits. We'll have to face it, giving only five billion dollars for education in the United States and expending at the same time twenty billion dollars to take care of crime is inconsistent. It takes us back to that old story: Which will you have—a fence around the cliff or an ambulance down in the valley ?

* * * * *

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPHere are some of the ideals recommended by our public school officers in our morality code which are very commendable: self-control, kindness, sportsmanship, self-reliance, duty, reliability, good workmanship, teamwork, loyalty, obedience to duty and to constituted authority. That is very commendable: obedience to all is necessary to protect the fundamentals of our government — freedom, justice, and equality, moral ideals—but unless we have teachers who will inspire the students and become as it were, heroes, ideals at least, in the minds of those students, these ethical principles will not become very impressive. Now admitting all that is necessary, pleading with our government, our state officials as well, and local boards, rightfully and respectably to compensate our teachers, there is something higher and greater which our public school system cannot teach; that which the church school is unhampered in teaching.

Teaching, Gospela-McKay, David O.TPTo live an upright life, to conform to high ethical standards is the responsibility and duty of every teacher in the land. Greater even than this is the responsibility of the religious teacher. His profession is higher than that of the teacher in the common school, for in addition in his belief in the efficacy of ethical and moral precepts, a religious teacher assumes the responsibility of leading the youth into the realms of spirituality. His duty comporting with his pretensions and profession is to open the eyes of the blind that they may see God. What is there in man so worthy of honor and reverence as this, that he is capable of contemplating something higher than his own reason, more sublime than the whole universe, that spirit which alone is self-subsistent, from which all truth proceeds without which there is no truth? Leading youth to know God, to have faith in his laws, to have confidence in his fatherhood and to find solace and peace in his love—this is the greatest privilege, the most sublime opportunity offered the true educator.—DNCS, October 18, 1952, p. 4.

THE IDEA AND MEANING OF A UNIVERSITY

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPA university is not a dictionary, a dispensary, nor is it a department store. It is more than a storehouse of knowledge and more than a community of scholars. University life is essentially an exercise in thinking, preparing, and living. Without further comment, I give you this definition: The aim of education is to develop resources in the child that will contribute to his well-being as long as life endures; to develop power of self-mastery that he may never be a slave to indulgence or other weaknesses, to develop virile manhood, beautiful womanhood that in every child and every youth may be found at least the promise of a friend, a companion, one who later may be fit for husband or wife, an exemplary father or a loving intelligent mother, one who can face life with courage, meet disaster with fortitude, and face death without fear.—DNCS, October 18, 1952, p.2.

THE TEACHER AND THE TEACHING PROFESSION

Teaching, Seculara-McKay, David O.TPTHE NOBLEST PROFESSION. Teaching is the noblest profession in the world. Upon the proper education of youth depend the permanency and purity of home, the safety and perpetuity of the nation. The parent gives the child an opportunity to live; the teacher enables the child to live well. That parent who gives life and teaches his child to live abundantly is the true parent-teacher. However, today the customs and demands of society are such that the responsibility of training the child to live well is largely, and in too many instances, shifted entirely from the parent to the teacher.

Teaching, Seculara-McKay, David O.TPIn the ideal state, the teacher would be but the parents' ally, training the mind and encouraging worthy habits, and fostering noble traits of character inculcated by wise parental teaching and example, but in reality, the teacher, instead of being merely an ally must become the foster parent in training the child in the art of living. If that were all, his repsonsibility would be great enough; but it is not all. Often he faces even the greater task of overcoming the false teaching and improper training of unwise, irresponsible parents. In the light of such self-evident facts, I think it must be apparent to every thinking mind that the noblest of all professions is that of teaching, and that upon the effectiveness of that teaching hangs the destiny of nations. "All who have meditated on the art of governing mankind," says Aristotle, "have been convinced that the fate of empires depends upon the education of youth."—RSM, 21:722 (1934).

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPOBJECTIVES IN THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS. The general objectives in our public schools should be to assist the individual in the proper development of his physical, intellectual, and spiritual nature, that he may become of value to his country and of service to his fellow man. This objective can be accomplished only on the basis of true education.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPAnd what is true education? "It is awakening a love for truth; giving a just sense of duty; opening the eyes of the soul to the great purpose and end of life. It is not so much giving words, as thoughts; or mere maxims, as living principles. It is not teaching to be honest, because 'honesty is the best policy'; but because it is right. It is teaching the individual to love the good, for the sake of the good; to be virtuous in action because one is so in heart; to love and serve God supremely not from fear, but from delight in his perfect character." No one can successfully controvert the fact that upon the teacher rests much of the responsibility of lifting society to this high ideal.—RSM, 21:723 (1934).

The responsibility of the teacher, however, does not end in his duty to teach truth positively. He enters the realm of what-not-to-do as well as the realm of what-to-do. In the garden of the human soul, as well as in the fields of human endeavor, there are thorns and thistles as well as flowers and useful plants. Thrice deserving of condemnation is he who would crush in a boy's mind a flower of truth and sow in its stead the seed of error! Hence, the importance of the teacher's knowing what she is teaching, conscientiously believing that it is in harmony with God and truth. I merely throw out the thought because you can go down on your knees in your home and ask God to give you the power to speak truth.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPWise parents and leading educators in the nation today realize that good citizenship can be attained only through character development. The sincere teacher realizes that hers is the opportunity to inculcate the virtues that contribute to the building of true manhood and womanhood. Hers is the sublime task to lead children and youth to believe that compliance with high moral standards leads to success and happiness.—RSM, 21:723-724 (1934).

Teaching, Gospela-McKay, David O.TPTHE GREAT RESPONSIBILITY OF THE RELIGIOUS TEACHER. To live an upright life, to conform to high ethical standards is the responsibility and duty of every teacher in the land. Greater even than this is the responsibility of the religious teacher. The religious teacher's profession is higher than that of the teacher in the common school; for, in addition to his belief in the efficacy of ethical and moral precepts, the religious teacher assumes the responsibility of leading the youth into the realm of spirituality.—RSM, 21:725 (1934).

Not long ago I noticed a young girl in her teens put forth a special effort to address the little boy who was by my side. I did not know her, cannot call her name today, but I could see she wanted to recognize the lad, and I noticed that he was glad when he saw her reciprocate or to return her salutation. As we passed, I said, "Who is she?"

"She is my Religion Class teacher."

"What is her name?"

"I don't know what her name is, but, oh, she is a dandy!"

He used an incorrect word, evidently did not know its true meaning, but the significance he gave the word I knew, and the expression on his face I read, and in my heart I thanked the young girl for the influence she has over that boy. Only in her teens, but what that girl will say to him in his Religion Class, he will accept as gospel truth; what she does in her life, he will emulate; and that young girl carries the responsibility, in a way, of molding my son's character; and the hundred thousand teachers in this Church carry the same responsibility.—CR, April 1914, p. 89.

Teaching, Gospela-McKay, David O.TPThe most cherished opportunities of the religious teacher should be to lead the child to see, through the trouble and turmoil of a physical world, that "in all his dispensations God is at work for our good. In prosperity he tries our gratitude; in mediocrity, our contentment; in misfortune, our submission; in darkness, our faith; under temptation, our stead-fastness; and at all times, our obedience and trust in him."—RSM, 21:726 (1934).

Teaching, Gospela-McKay, David O.TPHOW TO SATISFY A CLASS. I have said to teachers on more than one occasion: If you will give your classes a thought, even one new thought during your recitation period, you will find that they will go away satisfied. But it is your obligation to be prepared to give that new thought.—DNCS, April 30, 1952, p. 3.

THE AWARENESS OF INDIVIDUALITY. From birth to death men differ. They vary as much as do flowers in a garden. In intellect, in temperament, in energy, and in training some rise to one level and some to another.

Teaching, SecularTeaching, Gospela-McKay, David O.TPThe successful teacher is one who, with a spirit of discernment, can detect to a degree at least, the mentality and capability of the members of his class. He should be able to read the facial expressions and be responsive to the mental and spiritual attitudes of those whom he is teaching. The great Teacher had this power of discernment in perfection as is well illustrated in his conversation with the woman of Samaria whose interests he not only interpreted, but whose soul he also read by virtue of her past deeds. Too few teachers have this gift, even to a limited degree, but every teacher has the responsibility of determining how best to approach the members of the class in order to make appeals that will be lasting.—RSM, 21:722 (1934).

Teaching, Seculara-McKay, David O.TPIt is written that "he who governs well leads the blind, but he that teaches gives them eyes."—CR, April 1914, p. 86.

Influencea-McKay, David O.TPSEEK THE BEST. The lives of men become signposts to us, pointing the way along roads that lead either to lives of usefulness and happiness or to lives of selfishness and misery. It is important then that we seek, both in life and in books, the companionship of the best and noblest men and women.—AA, p. 2.

THE CHURCH AND EDUCATION

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPWE ARE FREE "TO LAUNCH INTO THE REALM OF THE INFINITE" IN SEARCH OF TRUTH. The Church stands for education. The very purpose of its organization is to promulgate truth among men. Members of the Church are admonished to acquire learning by study, and also by faith and prayer, and to seek after everything that is virtuous, lovely, of good report, or praiseworthy. In this seeking after truth they are not confined to narrow limits of dogma or creed, but are free to launch into the realm of the infinite, for they know that

Educationa-McKay, David O.TP"Truth is truth where'er 'tis found,

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPWhether on Christian or on heathen ground."

Knowledgea-McKay, David O.TPIndeed, one of the fundamental teachings of the Church is that salvation itself depends upon knowledge; for, says the revelation, "It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance," (D. & C. 131:6) and again, "... if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come." (Ibid., 130:19.)

Knowledgea-McKay, David O.TPKNOWLEDGE AND THE USE OF KNOWLEDGE. But gaining knowledge is one thing and applying it, quite another. Wisdom is the right application of knowledge; and true education—the education for which the Church stands—is the application of knowledge to the development of a noble and Godlike character.

Knowledgea-McKay, David O.TPA man may possess a profound knowledge of history and of mathematics; he may be authority in psychology, biology, or astronomy; he may know all the discovered truths pertaining to geology and natural science; but if he has not with this knowledge that nobility of soul which prompts him to deal justly with his fellow men, to practise virtue and holiness in personal life, he is not a truly educated man.

Charactera-McKay, David O.TPCharacter is the aim of true education; and science, history, and literature are but means used to accomplish the desired end. Character is not the result of chance work but of continuous right thinking and right acting.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPSOME DEFECTS OF MODERN EDUCATION. True education seeks, then, to make men and women not only good mathematicians, proficient linguists, profound scientists, or brilliant literary lights, but also honest men, combined with virtue, temperance, and brotherly love—men and women who prize truth, justice, wisdom, benevolence, and self-control as the choicest acquisitions of a successful life.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPIt is regrettable, not to say deplorable, that modern education so little emphasizes these fundamental elements of true character. The principal aim of many of our schools and colleges seems to be to give the students purely intellectual attainments and to give but passing regard to the nobler and more necessary development along moral lines. This is particularly noticeable along the lines of self-control. Notwithstanding the study of hygiene in our public schools and the hundreds of books written in condemnation of the use of tobacco and alcoholic beverages, thousands of our school children are sapping their intellectual strength and blunting their moral sensibilities by the pernicious use of the cigaret and other forms of tobacco. The small percentage of these who reach college add to the tobacco the drinking habit, and to this sexual indulgence that leaves them stranded as moral wrecks before they are scarcely launched on their life's journey.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPFAITH IN THE DISSEMINATION OF NEW IDEAS. I think every progressive age of the world has had intellectual and socially-minded leaders who have sought a better way of living than that which was theirs. The good life, so important to man's happiness, has been the quest of the ages. To sense the need for reform has been easy, but to achieve it has been difficult and often well-nigh impossible. Ideas suggested and proposed by the wisest of men have too often been impractical, often fantastic, yet in most cases the world in general has been made better by the dissemination of new ideas, even though the experiments proved failures at that time.—IE, 45:12 (1942).

SchoolsEducationa-McKay, David O.TPTHE SCHOOL TENDS TO SUPERSEDE THE CHURCH AS AN INSTITUTIONAL SOCIAL INFLUENCE. If the reports be true, with reference to the indifference of the country as a whole toward Christian churches, we shall have to place next to the home, not the church, but the public school, as the most influential factor in lessening delinquency.—IE, 49:740 (1946).

SchoolsEducationa-McKay, David O.TPDUTIES OF CHURCH AND SCHOOL. A potent factor in character development is the public school.

Schoolsa-McKay, David O.TPTo these democratic institutions come children from all kinds of homes, including the delinquent. All I can say is that every teacher in church and in school should realize that he has the moral as well as the assigned responsibility to impress upon his students the true value of the highest and noblest things in life.—CR, October 1948, p. 120.

Schoolsa-McKay, David O.TPSchools and churches should radiate the fact that there are in life certain fundamentals which never change and which are essential to the happiness of every human soul.—I, 81:168 (1946).

TEACHERS AND ICONOCLASTS. You know there are occasionally men in the profession of teaching—as that is my profession I can speak plainly—who pride themselves on being iconoclasts; but unfortunately, when such teachers break their so-called images, they supply nothing to replace them. They destroy ideals but offer no others, thus leaving the young boy in doubt and uncertainty. Such a one seems to me to be heaving anchor and starting out on the ocean of life before his course is even charted.—CR, April 1932, p. 64.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPTRUE EDUCATION INVOLVES THE DEVELOPMENT OF CHARACTER. True education does not consist merely in the acquiring of a few facts of science, history, literature, or art, but in the development of character. True education awakens a desire to conserve health by keeping the body clean and undefiled. True education trains in self-denial and self-mastery. True education regulates the temper, subdues passion, and makes obedience to social laws and moral order a guiding principle of life. It develops reason and inculcates faith in the living God as the eternal, loving Father of all.—CR, April 1928, p. 102.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPThere is true nobility in the soul of that man or woman who sincerely desires and strives to lead children out of contaminating influences into an environment of high ideals and lofty endeavors.—I, 84:620 (1949).

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPA PROPOSAL FOR GENERAL EDUCATION. General education would be much more effective in producing true manhood and pure womanhood if it gave more attention to the virtue of self-control and self-denial. The student who learns to control his appetites and desires, and to deny himself for the comfort and well-being of others, is more truly educated than the selfish, self-indulgent pedant. This self-mastery comes as the result of continuous overcoming—resisting a temptation of appetite this hour, overcoming a tempting desire the next.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TP"It is impossible," says Charles Wagner, "to be brotherly, to love, to give one's self, unless one is master of himself." If this one element in true education were emphasized by teachers and practised in early life by resisting even only those temptations that appeal to the appetite, our school system would be open to less severe censure than it is today.

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPIn the meantime, let the Church continue its work in the interest of true education; and the Church schools and Sunday Schools ever keep before them the fact that only in true education lies the safety of the home, the state, and the nation, and that "In God's word we have a perfect standard both of duty and character, that by the influence of both, appealing to the best principles of our nature, we may be roused to the noblest and best efforts."—I, 46:584-585 (1911).

Educationa-McKay, David O.TPCHARACTER IS HIGHER THAN INTELLECT. Present-day conditions emphasize the fact (and I believe it with all my heart) that the most paramount objective of the public school system from kindergarten to the university should be character building and the evolving of true, loyal citizens of the republic. The teaching of the three "R's" of the arts and the sciences, even the delving into research work, should be but a means to the development of true manhood and noble womanhood. Education for loyal citizenship!—IE, 49:740 (1946).

MATERIAL AND CULTURAL SUPPLEMENTS. In teaching children, it should ever be kept in mind that "Behavior is caught, not taught." Example is more potent than precept. Parents have the duty to be what they would have their children become in regard to courtesy, sincerity, temperance, and courage to do right at all times.

It is true that

"We need not power or splendor, Wide halls, or lordly dome, The good, the true, the tender— These form the wealth of home."

The fact remains, however, that there are certain material and cultural needs which are indispensable to successful home life. During the present crisis, to prevent the breaking up of homes, these material needs must be furnished by the group, either through the Church or the state. Here is where the complete organization of the Church should function most adequately. The material as well as the spiritual needs of every family in the Church should not only be known as I have already stated, but also supplied by the bishopric of the ward, either directly or indirectly. In a superior and effective manner the Church can also and does supply cultural needs such as education, social opportunities, music, etc. These may be obtained by every child, every youth, every person in the Church who will avail himself or herself of the opportunities offered. I wonder if parents generally are doing all they can to see to it that their boys and girls are members of quorums and auxiliaries, organized for the express purpose of supplementing the home in the training of youth.—CR, April 1935, pp. 114-115.

EDUCATION FOR BALANCED LIVING. Institutions made to the young who are yet undecided as to what are the most important things in life may shake the faith of youth, and "Youth without faith is as day without sun."

Teaching, Gospela-McKay, David O.TPI cite that instance to bring home to us today the necessity of parents and officers in the Church teaching more earnestly and diligently the principles of life and salvation to the youth of Zion and to the world in order to keep the latter properly balanced through the formative period of their lives.

"Our civilization is imperiled today," writes an American statistician, "simply because it is ill balanced. Our spiritual culture lags so far behind our material culture, in its development, that we have no adequate control over the latter. Our science, our education, and our government can do much to help correct this lack in our spiritual development, but in the main this must be done, if done at all, by religion and by the Church, for religion is the creator and the conservator of our social ideals, and the church is their chief propagator."

The confidence and faith I have expressed in the First Presidency, the Twelve, and others of my associates, as well as in the gospel and especially in the Savior, applies also to the tenets and teachings of the Church. Every one when properly interpreted and applied has in it a saving power and blessing for all who will accept it.—CR, April 1932, pp. 63-64.

THE CHURCH EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM

BRIGHAM YOUNG UNIVERSITY. From its beginning, Brigham Young University has had the revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants that "Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be.

"All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence." (D. & C. 93:29-30.)

What an impressive example of inspiration to the Prophet Joseph Smith! When answering your students' questions on "intelligence" or the origin of life, you teachers are not hampered or hesitant when you give these revelations as eternal verities.

Thus we have the glorious truth that uncreated, ever-existent intelligence animated spiritual bodies,

"For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy;

"And when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy.

"The elements are the tabernacle of God; yea, man is the tabernacle of God, even temples; and whatsoever temple is defiled, God shall destroy that temple." (Ibid., 93:33-35.)

Thus may be found in this Church university without wonderment or equivocation the source not only of life, but also of intelligence, and the answer to the question of human immortality.

I heard your president say on an important occasion that this school is destined to be the greatest university in the world, and if we maintain these ideals, nothing can prevent its becoming so.

Another thought in this connection: When President Brigham Young called Brother Karl G. Maeser into his office and said, "We want you to go to Provo to organize and conduct an academy to be established in the name of the Church—a Church school," he implied that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ would be kept in mind as the head, center, and life of this institution. How could it be otherwise when the school was to be established in the name of the Church, which is the Church of Jesus Christ!—DNCS, June 6, 1951, p. 3.

God bless you, teachers of this faculty, you students, that you may lift this school, if it has not yet attained it, to that height wherein it may be an example to all higher institutions in the world, that we may contribute to the new trend of thought of educational leaders that the great need of the world today is more spirituality, less atheism, more love for God, and for one's fellow men!—DNCS, October 17, 1951, p. 7.

PARAMOUNT OBJECTIVES OF THE SEMINARY TEACHER. Two paramount objectives of a seminary teacher are:

Your work is to see into the boy's soul. There may be doubt and wonderment and questioning in him, so that he will come to you and say, "I don't believe you," and then you must lead him to the point where he will believe you. It is not enough to know youth by name but know their doubts and their wishes and their desires. Get over to the youth the fact that the physical part of their beings is but a machine, but the spiritual part is eternal.—DNCS, August 8, 1936, p. 8.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] To establish the reality of a divine spirit. From the address delivered by President David O. McKay at Commencement Exercises, University of Utah, U. of U. Stadium, Saturday, June 9, 1951, 6:30 p.m.
