David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

BOOK VI

A PHILOSOPHY OF FAMILY LIFE AND RELIGIOUS LIVING

Young Womena-McKay, David O.TP"The highest ideal for our young girls today, as for our mothers who crossed the plains, is love as it may be expressed in marriage and home building, and this virtue in which love finds true expression is based upon the spiritual and not the physical side of our being."

DAVID O. MCKAY

The Improvement Era

Volume 23:473.

CHAPTER 33

WOMANHOOD AND MOTHERHOOD

WOMANHOOD

Womena-McKay, David O.TPCREATION'S MASTERPIECE. A beautiful, modest, gracious woman is creation's masterpiece. When to these virtues a woman possesses as guiding stars in her life righteousness and godliness and an irresistible impulse and desire to make others happy, no one will question if she be classed among those who are the truly great.—FS, ms., Emma Lucy Gates Bowen, May 3, 1951, p. 1.

Young Womena-McKay, David O.TPIDEALS FOR YOUNG WOMANHOOD. The highest ideal for our young girls today, as for our mothers who crossed the plains, is love as it may be expressed in marriage and home building, and this virtue in which love finds true expression is based upon the spiritual and not the physical side of our being. If marriage and home building be based upon physical attraction alone, love will sooner or later become famished and home life a heavy, disheartening existence.—IE, 50:686 (1947).

WOMANHOOD SHOULD BE INTELLIGENT AND PURE. Womanhood should be intelligent and pure because it is the living life-fountain from which flows the stream of humanity. She who would pollute that stream by tobacco, poisonous drugs, or by germs that would shackle the unborn, is untrue to her sex and an enemy to the strength and perpetuity of the race.—RSM, 27:21 (1940).

TRUE BEAUTY

TRUE BEAUTY IS CHASTE. A young lady was once deploring the frequency of the changes in styles, when a young man to whom she spoke said, "Well, why do you women permit it? You don't have to adopt every suggestion of the fashion plate."

"If it were not for you men," she replied, "we wouldn't."

"For us men! How is that?"

"Yes, for you men; for, after all, to make an honest confession, one of the reasons for all this style in dress and complexion is to bring forth the admiration of you selfish 'lords of creation.' "

The conversation was carried on in a jocular vein and continued for some time. The thought that this opinion influenced the girl to make herself beautiful seemed to tickle the young man's conceit; and he unconsciously tipped his hat backward, seemingly to make room for the expansion. The girl was the young man's superior and called forth his admiration, not merely by her outward beauty, but by a quality a thousand times more powerful and admirable.

The reason given for some of the girl's efforts towards outward adornment reminds me of Pope's lines,—

"Fair tresses man's imperial race ensnare, And beauty draws us with a single hair."

Beautya-McKay, David O.TPYes, men are attracted by beauty, and thousands are ensnared by it. There are thousands of men who look for nothing else and who desire nothing else but to have their senses pleased or their passions gratified. These outward adornments will satisfy and only outward adornment will retain. When beauty fades, the passion seeks for gratification elsewhere. "Beauty is only skin-deep," and when outward adornment is all a girl possesses, the admiration she calls forth is even more shallow than her beauty.

Beautya-McKay, David O.TP"Beauties in vain their pretty eyes may roll; Charms strike the sight, but merit wins the soul."

Beautya-McKay, David O.TPIt is not my purpose to discourage efforts to enhance physical beauty. When given by birth, it should be nurtured in childhood, cherished in girlhood, and protected in womanhood. When not inherited, it should be developed and sought after in every legitimate and healthful manner.

Chastitya-McKay, David O.TPBut there is a beauty every girl has—a gift from God, as pure as the sunlight, and as sacred as life. It is a beauty that all men love, a virtue that wins all men's souls. That beauty is chastity. Chastity without skin beauty may enkindle the soul; skin beauty without chastity can kindle only the eye. Chastity enshrined in the mold of true womanhood will hold true love eternally.

In the last paragraph, I have said that chastity is a beauty that all men love. Well, I will not change it, for he who does not is not a man, "He should be sent back to nature's mint and reissued as a counterfeit on humanity's baser metal." Such a one is not worth a pure maiden's scorn, not to say smile.

Chastitya-McKay, David O.TPThe flower by the roadside that catches the dust of every traveler is not the one to be admired and is seldom if ever plucked; but the one blooming away up on the hillside, protected by a perpendicular cliff is the flower with the virgin perfume, the one the boy will almost risk his life to possess.

Chastitya-McKay, David O.TPMere outside adornment may please the senses of many superficial admirers; the adornment of the soul and the chastity of true womanhood will awaken in the soul of true manhood enduring life, that eternal principle which some day will redeem the world.—YWJ, 17:360-362 (1906).

BEAUTY OF SPIRIT AND CHARACTER. I hope our sisters will resist all the temptations of the world that may come under the heading—vanity. I hope that we may have strength to resist all the allurements that come with wealth and worldly position, when we make those two things an end in themselves.—CR, April 1907, p. 12.

A SOBERING LESSON. One of the first great lessons that I ever had in my life was when I was attending the University of Utah. Mother came down to visit four of us children who were here as students. I remember on one occasion as we returned home from the theater, we were aroused by the screaming of a woman in a neighboring house. I thought a man was beating his wife and ran over and tapped on the window, protesting against the attack, although I confess I was a little afraid he might come out and beat me. My brother ran over to the fire station and telephoned for the police. The landlady came before the officers. As she opened the door, I saw for the first time in my life, a drunken woman. I shall never forget the shock that I received. There in the doorway were two little girls crying. With the memory of the shock, however, I treasure the kindly love of my mother, who, though somewhat timid, walked into the house and put her arms around the two little girls. Enough of that scene!

Several years afterward I had occasion to teach a class in the State Industrial School of Utah. In the girl's department were two beautiful young women, whom I did not recognize, either by features or by name, until a little boy who had grown up on that same lot to which I have referred, went with me one day to the class, and one of these girls recognized him and came up and told about the time when she lived on that lot. They were the little girls whom my mother comforted in the presence of a drunken woman; both now in the reform school! They were not to blame—victims of an evil environment into which the mother had led them.—RSM, 18:349-350 (1931).

MOTHERHOOD

Motherhooda-McKay, David O.TPTHE GREATEST POTENTIAL INFLUENCE IN HUMAN LIFE. Motherhood is the greatest potential influence either for good or ill in human life. The mother's image is the first that stamps itself on the unwritten page of the young child's mind. It is her caress that first awakens a sense of security; her kiss, the first realization of affection; her sympathy and tenderness, the first assurance that there is love in the world. True, there comes a time when Father takes his place as exemplar and hero of the growing boy; and in the latter's budding ambition to develop manly traits, he outwardly seems to turn from the more gentle and tender virtues engendered by his mother. Yet that ever-directing and restraining influence implanted during the first years of his childhood linger with him and permeate his thoughts and memory as distinctively as perfume clings to each particular flower.

Motherhooda-McKay, David O.TPIn more than one instance in the life of fiery youth, this lingering influence has proved a safeguard in the hour of temptation—an influence greater in its restraining power than the threat of the law of the land, the ostracism of society, or the fear of violating a command of God. In a moment of youthful recklessness the youth might defy one or all of these forces, and do what his hot blood bade, but at the critical moment, the flash of a mother's confiding trust, the realization of her sorrow if he fail to be true to it have given him power to refrain from indulgence that might blight his entire career.—FS, ms., Lydia Elizabeth Spencer Clawson, February 5, 1941, pp. 5-6.

Motherhooda-McKay, David O.TPGROUP INFLUENCE. I shall never forget, as long as I live, the impression my mother gave me when she told the story of those two thousand sons who went to battle under the leadership of Helaman. Think of those boys. Hold them as a pattern, you priests, teachers, and deacons, yes, and high priests, seventies, and elders. If two thousand men in that ancient time could live such lives, two thousand, nay ten thousand and a hundred thousand, men can live it today. These were their principles, founded upon the principle of faith, inculcated into their hearts by their mothers, who taught them in their youth that if they prayed to God nothing doubting, their prayers would be answered. Such is their testimony; such was the result of their mothers' teachings, showing the influence of home on boys' lives.—CR, October 1911, p. 60.

PRIMARY ATTRIBUTES OF MOTHERHOOD. Motherhood consists of three principal attributes or qualities: namely, (1) the power to bear, (2) the ability to rear, (3) the gift to love.

Motherhooda-McKay, David O.TPSome women there are who possess only the first, and who, therefore, are unworthy the name of mother. Selfishly, passionately, they have expressed themselves, as others of their kind, on the low plane of physical life, scorning the responsibility to sacrifice for and to rear their offspring, choking the fountain of love by selfish and wilful neglect of their children.

Motherhooda-McKay, David O.TPIn contrast, there are other women, who, denied the power to bear children, adopt some as their own, rear them with an ability characteristic of and inherent in true womanhood, and fill the lives of their darlings with a love that only the yearning soul of such a mother can know. Such are true mothers, indeed, though part of the experience of motherhood be denied them!

Motherhooda-McKay, David O.TPThis ability and willingness properly to rear children, the gift to love, and eagerness, yes, longing to express it in soul development, make motherhood the noblest office or calling in the world. She who can paint a masterpiece or write a book that will influence millions deserves the admiration and the plaudits of mankind; but she who rears successfully a family of healthy, beautiful sons and daughters, whose influence will be felt through generations to come, whose immortal souls will exert an influence throughout the ages long after paintings shall have faded, and books and statues shall have decayed or shall have been destroyed, deserves the highest honor that man can give, and the choicest blessings of God. In her high duty and service to humanity, endowing with immortality eternal spirits, she is co-partner with the Creator himself.—IE, 39:269 (1936).

MOTHERA TRIBUTE. (In 1914 Congress authorized the President of the United States to designate by annual proclamation the second Sunday in May to be observed as "Mother's Day.")

A few nights ago I dreamed of Mother. She seemed as happy and beautiful as when, years since, she comforted and guided four girls and four boys in the cherished home of our childhood. The dream is mine. What it was is not here pertinent. But the joy I experienced at being once again in her company seemed so real that I could scarcely believe it was only a dream. I wish that I might dream of her oftener, for only in dreamland can we now hold converse over the incidents of my youth and early manhood, now treasured because of her association with them.

Fortunate the man who may go to his mother, at pleasure, and share her joy in reminiscence, or again receive her blessing in reality. Thrice fortunate the boy whose living mother's companionship is a daily guide and inspiration! Thrice blessed that girl into whose life radiates constantly the pure, self-sacrificing influence of a loving mother!

But this blessing, like all others that come to us without effort on our part, is too seldom appreciated until after it is gone. Children accept mother's and father's attention, care, and devotion as they accept the pure air and the glorious sunshine—just as a matter of course—as something which is their due in this workaday world.

Until "Where's Mother?" receives no sweet response do the childish minds realize how much Mother has been to them! Not until her smile and loving presence are but sacred memories do the children know that Mother held a place in their hearts that no one else can fill! It's an unfortunate phase of human nature that it is always inclined to undervalue its present blessings, that of Mother's and Father's presence being no exception.

It is most fitting, therefore, that our attention should be called to the fact that we are prone not only to undervalue mother's presence and love, but also, in consequence of this unconscious indifference, to neglect to express the appreciation and love we do feel for her. This is one purpose of Mother's Day. On this occasion we may recall memories of mothers who are gone, send loving messages to mothers too far away to visit, and make happier and more cheerful the lives of those who are near. The badge of the day is the white carnation, emblem of purity and enduring fidelity and love.

Throughout Christendom there is no married woman who may not be entitled to this tribute to motherhood. It is true that some wives have never been privileged to bear children, but it does not follow that they are not entitled to every honor due to the best of mothers.

Not only on one day, then, should we pay tribute to our mothers; but rather make that day the means of increasing our determination and ability to make every day of the year a day in which to honor Mother in particular and every woman who desires to be like Mother.—MS, 85:296-297 (1923).

THE GREATNESS OF MOTHERHOOD. The sweetness as well as the greatness of motherhood lies in the overcoming of selflove by Mother for her children. By nature the true mother is self-sacrificing. She is ever giving something of her life to make another either happier or better. Dying and giving—giving and dying—the two great elements that make the truly heroic—these are the Christlike virtues that make motherhood sublime.

The beginning of motherhood is but the entrance into the valley of the shadow in order to bring life to another. Herein is manifest love supreme; for "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends." (John 15:13.) That some women enter into this realm impelled by less lofty motives or uninspired by any self-sacrificing thought, there can be no doubt; but this fact cannot rob the truly heroic soul of the honor due her any more more than the recreant soldier forced to the conflict can deprive of undying fame the hero who gloriously offers his life for his country.

Motherhooda-McKay, David O.TPMotherhood is the one thing in all the world which most truly exemplifies the God-given virtues of creating and sacrificing. Though it carries the woman close to the brink of death, motherhood also leads her into the very realm of the fountains of life and makes her co-partner with the Creator in bestowing upon eternal spirits mortal life. Artists may make new visions real; poets express thoughts never known before or dress old ones in a more becoming garb; engineers may transform deserts into bounteous fields and fill them with prosperous towns and thriving villages; scientists may discover new elements and by various combinations thereof create means contributive either to progress or destruction—all these are in a measure revealers of unknown things; but the mother who, in compliance with eternal law, brings into the world an immortal spirit occupies first rank in the realm of creation.

Motherhooda-McKay, David O.TPMotherhood is just another name for sacrifice. From the moment the wee, helpless babe is laid on the pillow beside her, Mother daily, hourly, gives of her life to her loved one. It has been aptly said that babes draw strength at first from her bosom but always from her heart. All through the years of babyhood, childhood, and youth, aye, even after her girls themselves become mothers and her sons, fathers, she tenderly, lovingly sacrifices for them her time, her comfort, her pleasures, her needed rest and recreation, and, if necessary, health and life itself! No language can express the power and beauty and heroism of a mother's love.

For all this consecrated devotion, she asks nothing in return. If her love is reciprocated, she is content; but if not, and her wayward child with poisoned feelings turns heedlessly from her, she still loves on, giving in yearning and solicitude far more than the recreant deserves. No, she asks nothing in return; nothing for the roses she has transplanted from her own cheeks to those of her darling; nothing for the hours of vigilance during days and nights of sickness; nothing for the thousand self-denials and sacrifices that had to be made that the children in their "teens" might receive proper schooling and "appear well" with their comrades; nothing for the heartaches caused by thoughtless word or act of wayward youth.

Motherhooda-McKay, David O.TPNo, for all this and a thousand other things incident to motherhood, Mother asks nothing; but she deserves much. For kindness she deserves kindness; for tenderness, she should be given tenderness; for self-sacrifice, a little self-denial on the part of the children; for love, she should in return have love.

Motherhooda-McKay, David O.TPIn the most agonizing moment of his life, Christ thought of his mother. In this as in all other things, the Savior of men has given us an example. As Mother gave us our life "at the peril of her own," so we should be pleased, no matter what our desires, our condition, or our pains to give such of our time, our thought, our words, our means, as may be necessary to Mother's contentment and peace.

Motherhooda-McKay, David O.TPTo each mother's son or daughter, we would say: you need no suggestions on how to make your mother happy on Mother's Day as on every day in the year. If you order a white carnation to be given her, she will be pleased; if you tell her in a letter of your appreciation and love, she will shed tears of happiness; but if you keep the spotless character and purity of soul she has given you, she will rejoice as the most blessed of mothers.—MS, 86:296-297 (1924).
