David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 34

COURTSHIP AND MARRIAGE

COURTSHIP: THE ROAD TO HAPPY MARRIAGE

THE IMPORTANCE OF SKILLS, ACTIVITIES, ASSOCIATIONS. The achievement of a happy marriage begins in childhood and youth. The opportunity of marriage begins in the early days in school. The young girl who learns to play the violin is more likely to find a good mate than one who sits at home, refusing to go out in society.

The boy who participates in athletics is more likely to find a mate than one who sits by the radio. In other words, associations are conductive to happy marriages because one becomes acquainted, one with another. One has more opportunities for choice.

In this connection, think for a moment what the Church offers to its members, particularly to the young boys and girls.—DNCS, February 7, 1952, p. 3.

Dating and Courtshipa-McKay, David O.TPTHE PHILOSOPHY OF COURTSHIP. With the divinity of our marriage covenant, and the responsibility of parenthood ever in our minds, with temple marriage as an ideal for every worthy couple in the Church, we associate with courtship and marriage the most sublime ideals that influence human relations.—CR, April, 1935, p. 115.

Dating and Courtshipa-McKay, David O.TPHappiness does not begin at the altar; it begins during the period of youth and courtship. These seeds of happiness are sown by one's ability to master his driving passion. Chastity should be the dominant virtue among young people—the ideal which the world has not accepted and which many in the world will not believe exists or is cherished in the hearts of youth.—IE, 41:139 (1938).

Dating and Courtshipa-McKay, David O.TP"DATING": THE RESPONSIBILITY OF YOUNG MEN. Young man, always remember when you take your girl out to a party that her father and mother trust her to you. She is their most precious possession. If they gave you in trust a thousand dollars, you would not think of misusing it or spending it. They are giving into your keeping something which cannot be priced in money, and you are base indeed if you become disloyal to that trust. May I give you a heart petal here? I remember my father's admonition when I started in my teens to court a young girl: "David, you treat that young lady as you would have any young boy treat your sister." Young men, follow that advice and you will go through life with your conscience clear, and later in life you can say truthfully that with all your mistakes, you have never wronged a woman.—IE, 41:191 (1938).

TPCHOOSING A COMPANION: HOW CAN YOU BE SURE? In choosing a companion, it is necessary to study the disposition, the inheritance, and training of the one with whom you are contemplating making life's journey. You see how necessary it is to look for the characteristics of honesty, of loyalty, of chastity, and of reverence. But after having found them—"How, then," you ask, "may you tell whether or not there is any consanguinity, that something which will make you at least congenial in each other's company?" "Is there," you ask, "some guide?" Though love is not always a true guide, especially if that love be not reciprocated or is bestowed upon a surly creature or a brute, yet certainly there is no happiness without love. "Well," you may ask, "how may I know when I am in love?"

That is a very important question. A fellow student and I considered that query one night as we walked together. As boys of that age frequently do, we were talking about girls. Neither he nor I knew whether or not we were in love. Of course I had not then met my present sweetheart. In answer to my question, "How may we know when we are in love?" he replied: "My mother once said that if you meet a girl in whose presence you feel a desire to achieve, who inspires you to do your best, and to make the most of yourself, such a young woman is worthy of your love and is awakening love in your heart."

I submit that as a true guide. In the presence of the girl you truly love you do not feel to grovel; in her presence you do not attempt to take advantage of her; in her presence you feel that you would like to be everything that a "Master Man" should become, for she will inspire you to that ideal.

And I ask you young women to cherish that same guide. What does he inspire in you—to feel as Portia did when she loved? She was wealthy; she was beautiful; but for Bassanio she wished she were a thousand times more beautiful, ten thousand times richer—that is what true love does. When a young man accompanies you after a meeting, or after a dance, and he shows an inclination to use you as a convenience or as a means of gratification, then you may put it down that he is not prompted by love.

Dating and Courtshipa-McKay, David O.TPUnder such circumstances, no matter how fascinated you may be, young woman, no matter how confident you may feel that you love him, let your judgment rule and be master of your feelings. It may grieve you not to follow the inclination of your heart, but you had better be pained a little in your youth than to suffer pangs of torture later.—IE, 41:138-139 (1938).

Dating and Courtshipa-McKay, David O.TPA RULE FOR YOUNG WOMEN. Never marry a man who would deceive you, who would tell you a lie.—IE, 41:138 (1938).

AN HONEST PROPOSAL. Young man, if the girl with whom you are in love lives in a home of comparative luxury, and you hesitate to propose to her because you cannot offer her luxuries to which she has become accustomed, I suggest that a frank and open presentation to her of your problem might reveal the fact that you are misjudging her. You might discover that she will willingly share your poverty and help to build your home. If you enter into home building with a spirit of love and sacrifice, some day you will say as Henry Ward Beecher said: "We have a lovely home; it is fairly well-furnished; but I would like to live again those first two years when we rented one room in an attic and struggled together to make a picnic of our life."—IE, 41:191 (1938).

AN ANECDOTE. The problem of choosing a proper, congenial mate is most vital. In regard to this I suggest in general that you follow the advice of Sandy, the Scotchman, but not his example. His friend MacDonald came to Sandy and said, "I'm verra much worried, Sandy. I dinna ken whether to marry a rich widow whom I do not love, or marry a puir lass of whom I'm verra fond."

And Sandy said, "You'd better follow the promptins o' yer heart, MacDonald."

"All right," said MacDonald, "I'll do it. I'll marry the puir lass."

"In that case," said Sandy, "would you mind giving me the address of the widow?"—DNCS, February 27, 1952, p. 3.

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPCAREFUL OBSERVATION, SERIOUS AND PRAYERFUL THOUGHT NEEDED. No couple should enter into matrimony without careful observation and serious, prayerful thought. Everyone desires to live happily in married life. It is the natural, it is the normal life. The stability of government and the perpetuation of the race depend upon it. The happiness of mankind is not complete without congenial marriage.—IE, 41:138 (1938).

THE IMPORTANCE OF INTELLIGENCE. In Greek mythology there is a story of the three fates. In Rome these three fates were painted, presumably by Michelangelo, as three old women who control the destiny of mortals. They are three sisters. Clotho, the youngest, holds the distaff of life. Lachesis, the second sister, spins the thread as the years come and go. Atropos, the eldest, stands by with large open shears ready to cut the thread of life. If she cuts it short, the infant dies. If she permits the thread to unwind a little more, life is cut off in youth. But ofttimes she permits the thread of life to lengthen to old age. The mythical story implies that we are all subject to those three fates.

Applying this myth to our modern age, one writer on eugenics says: Science and the wide dissemination of knowledge have given us three fundamental things which determine our lives. These are heredity, environment, and self-effort, or what we make of ourselves by our own determination. These three modern fates should be kept in mind as we consider courtship and marriage.

What we are by heredity is determined; we cannot change it. We, who spring from families that have observed the gospel teachings, have inherited good qualities as well as good names. The least we can do is to transmit the same inheritance to our children. We are recreant to our obligation to society if we do not give to our progeny all the nobility bequeathed to us by our ancestors.

In our early youth, our environment is largely determined for us, but I wish to refer to the thought that in courtship and marriage we can modify, aye, can control to a very great extent, our environment. Morally speaking, we can carve the very atmosphere in which we live.

But the most important of these elements now is personal effort—that which we make of ourselves.—IE, 41:136-137 (1938).

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPTHE PHILOSOPHY OF MARRIAGE. The exalted view of marriage as held by this Church is given expressly in five words found in the 49th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, "Marriage is ordained of God." That revelation was given in 1831 when Joseph Smith was only twenty-five years of age. Presiding officers in stakes, wards, quorums, and auxiliaries, it is your duty and mine to uphold the lofty conception of marriage as given in this revelation and to guard against encroaching dangers that threaten to lower the standard of the ideal home.

Dating and Courtshipa-McKay, David O.TPIt is said that the best and noblest lives are those which are set toward high ideals. Truly no higher ideal regarding marriage can be cherished by young people than to look upon it as a divine institution. In the minds of the young such a standard is a protection to them in courtship, an ever-present influence inducing them to refrain from doing anything which may prevent their going to the temple to have their love consummated in an enduring and eternal union. It will lead them to seek divine guidance in the selecting of their companions, upon the wise choice of whom their life's happiness here and hereafter is largely dependent. "Our home joys," says Pestalozzi, "are the most delightful earth affords, and the joy of parents in their children is the most holy joy of humanity. It makes their hearts pure and good; it lifts them up to their Father in heaven." Such joys are within the reach of most men and women if high ideals of marriage and home be properly fostered and cherished.

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPAnd yet, if I mistake not the signs of the times, the sacredness of the marriage covenant is dangerously threatened. There are too many thoughtless, hasty marriages entered into without enough time taken to consider the temporal or eternal consequences. There are too many places where the marriage ceremony may be performed at any hour of the day or night without any previous arrangement—the license issued and the ceremony performed while the couple waits. Such marriages too often end in disappointment and sorrow; and, oh, how far they fall below the true ideal! As far as lies within our power, we must warn young couples against secret and hasty marriages.—IE, 56:221 (1953).

It is vital also to counteract the insidious influences of printed literature that speaks of the "bankruptcy of marriage," that advocates trial marriages, and that places "extra-marital relations" on a par with "extra-marital friendships."

I need say little about the growing evil of divorce and the resultant broken homes. You know that it is almost as easy to get a divorce as it is to get married. One of the peace officers in Salt Lake reported recently that eighty-six percent of the delinquent cases came from such broken homes. America seems to be drifting toward a low level as regards the law of family and home, with the result that sin and crime are increasing to an alarming extent among the youth of our fair land.

I mention these things not in the spirit of pessimism nor as a crier of impending calamity, but with the desire to call attention to the necessity of our maintaining the high standard of marriage set forth in the revelations of the Lord.—CR, April 1935, pp. 110-111.

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPETERNITY OF THE MARRIAGE COVENANT. The eternity of the marriage covenant is a glorious revelation, giving assurance to hearts bound by the golden clasp of love and sealed by authority of the Holy Priesthood that their union is eternal.

Other covenants also continue with eternal progress throughout the ages of eternity.—IE, 45:55 (1942).

And now a word about the eternity of the marriage covenant. Some people question that, too. But let's look at the principle of it. Will you name for me in your minds the most divine attribute of the human soul? It isn't sympathy. And, girls, be careful not to be misled by sympathy. True, sympathy is next to love, but it is not love. Love is the most divine attribute of the human soul, and if you accept the immortality of the soul, that is, if you believe that personality persists after death, then, you must believe that love also lives. Isn't that sound? And I ask you this: Whom shall we love when we recognize those personalities in the next world?

True, we are admonished to love everybody. Yes, we should love everybody now; but you and I know that we love those whom we know best. I love her whom I have seen sacrifice her life for the little loved ones—her by whose side I have sat and together prayed and yearned over our little darling. I shall love my mother who I know offered her life that I might have being. When we meet these personalities in the eternal realm, we shall recognize them and know them because of these experiences in this life. And that union of loving hearts will be perpetuated after life. That is why we are married—sealed—for time and eternity. It isn't just a mere dogma of the Church—it is a truth fundamental to the life and happiness of all humanity. It is the part of wisdom to choose the house of the Lord in which to plight your love and to consecrate your vows.

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPLet me give you a glimpse of the significance of such a marriage. The bridegroom kneeling at the altar has in his heart the dearest possession that a husband can cherish—the assurance that she who places her hand in his, in confidence, in marriage, is as pure as a sunbeam—as spotless as newly fallen snow. He has the assurance that in her purity and sweetness she typifies divine motherhood. Now, young man, is not that complete faith and confidence worth everything else in the world?

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPAnd equally sublime is the assurance the young girl has that the man whom she loves, to whom she gives herself in marriage, comes to her with that same purity and strength of character which she brings to him. Such a union will indeed be a marriage ordained of God for the glory of his creation.

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPThis is your heritage, youth, as you contemplate an eternal partnership, and I pray that you may realize it and find the true joy and happiness of such a cherished ideal.—IE, 41:191 (1938).

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPTHE MEANING OF MARRIAGE IN THE TEMPLE. Temple marriage is basically appealing; it is scientifically sound; and any young man who takes his sweetheart to a temple should go there with the understanding that their union is to be just as eternal as the love that has brought them to the altar, and there is no question about it.

Before you can get married in the temple, it is required that you have lived a clean life. You have the assurance, young lady, that the man whom you are about to marry is bringing to you a clean body. Each of you has the assurance that the source of life is unpolluted.

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPTo summarize: Young men and young women who would live the happiest lives would do well to prepare themselves to be worthy of that form of marriage which God has ordained—the union of a man and woman worthy to have their marriage solemnized in the temple of the Most High. There as true lovers kneel to plight their troth, each may cherish the assurance of the following:

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPFirst, that their married course begins in purity. The children who come to bless the union are guaranteed a royal birth so far as inheriting a clean body is concerned.

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPSecond, that their religious views are the same. The difficulty of rearing children properly is aggravated when Father and Mother have divergent views regarding doctrine and church affiliation. (Another great advantage of seminaries, auxiliaries, Sunday School, etc., you meet those of your own Church!)

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPThird, that their vows are made with the idea of an eternal union, not to be broken by petty misunderstandings or difficulties.

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPFourth, that a covenant made in God's presence and sealed by the Holy Priesthood is more binding than any other bond.

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPFifth, that a marriage thus commenced is as eternal as love, the divinest attribute of the human soul.

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPSixth, that the family unit will remain unbroken throughout eternity.

Boys and girls, God bless you to keep your lives unpolluted, that you may go in prayer to God and ask him to guide you in choosing your mates, and when chosen, that you will both so live that you can enter the house of God, and if he were present and asked you about your lives, you could answer him honestly, "Yes, we are clean."

A marriage begun on that basis, will bring you the happiness, the sweetest joy known in this life, or throughout eternity.—DNCS, February 27, 1952, pp. 4-5.

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPMarriage in the light of revelation is an institution with the stamp of divinity upon it, and no person and no state can deprecate that institution with impunity.—DNCS, February 27, 1952, p. 3.

THE PURPOSE OF MARRIAGE

REARING OF FAMILIES. Some young couples enter into marriage and procrastinate the bringing of children into their homes. They are running a great risk. Marriage is for the purpose of rearing a family, and youth is the time to do it. I admire these young mothers with four or five children around them now, still young, happy.—DNCS, June 11, 1952, p. 3.

The principal reason for marriage is to rear a family. Failure to do so is one of the conditions that cause love to wilt and eventually to die.—IE, 46:657 (1943).

INTELLIGENCE AND MUTUAL CONSIDERATION. Seeking the pleasures of conjugality without a willingness to assume the responsibilities of rearing a family is one of the onslaughts that now batter at the structure of the American home. Intelligence and mutual consideration should be ever-present factors in determining the coming of children to the household. When the husband and wife are healthy and free from inherited weaknesses and diseases that might be transmitted with injury to their offspring, the use of contraceptives is to be condemned.

The Lord has told us that:

"... whoso forbiddeth to marry is not ordained of God, for marriage is ordained of God unto man.

"Wherefore, it is lawful that he should have one wife, and they twain shall be one flesh, and all this that the earth might answer the end of its creation." (D. & C. 49:15-16.)

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPBy direct revelation, in this passage we have stated in a few words, the purpose of marriage. It is to bear children and rear a family. Let us keep that in mind. Hundreds are now saying, and hundreds more will say—"How can I marry and support a bride in a manner with which she has been accustomed? How can I get an education and support a family? I cannot even find a place in which to live."

Marriage#%%#a-McKay, David O.TPThese are practical questions, and our boys and girls are facing them. I am willing to recognize these and other difficulties and meet them, keeping in mind what the Lord has said that "marriage is ordained of God for man." And I repeat that the very purpose of marriage is to rear a family and not for the mere gratification of man or woman. Keeping this thought uppermost in married life, we shall have fewer difficulties and more readily find content./

OVERCOMING ECONOMIC DIFFICULTIES. How are we going to overcome some of these present-day difficulties? Postponement of marriage is not the answer. I know that there are many parents whose sons and daughters are struggling for an education who say it would be better if young couples postponed marriage until after they gained an education. I am not so sure about it. Each case must be considered on its merits. The principal thing is to be sure the couple love each other. Marriage without love will bring misery. But if they are sure they are mated and have the same ideals, generally early marriages are best.

There was a time in the beginning of this country—it goes back before the beginning of this country—when every girl was given a dowry, and we still have the practice of a girl's preparing a trousseau, which is a commendable practice. I think where parents can help they should help young couples, especially those who have five or six years ahead in getting a college degree. We still retain also the bridal shower, at which, in some countries, people give money.

I think the government is doing a good thing in giving our returned servicemen a few dollars to help them get a start after their having been discharged from the service. Recently I heard a most interesting report on this subject. The incident happened in Logan at the dedicatory service of a quonset house dedicated for worship on the campus of the Utah State Agricultural College. There were present a number of young married couples, young wives with babes in their arms. At the beginning of the dedicatory services, the presiding officer said, "We have many babes here today. If there be people present who do not like the crooning of babies, we will wait a few minutes now for these people to leave." To encourage thus the rearing of families is most commendable. That house was built expressly for young folk rearing families, young G.I.'s who have started out to build their homes even while they are getting an education.—IE, 51:618 (1948).

BIRTH CONTROL

Birth Controla-McKay, David O.TPAny effort or desire on the part of a married couple to shirk the responsibility of parenthood reflects a condition of mind antagonistic to the best interests of the home, the state, and the nation. No doubt there are some worldly people who honestly limit the number of children and the family to two or three because of insufficient means to clothe and educate a large family as the parents would desire to do, but in nearly all such cases, the two or three children are no better provided for than two or three times that number would be. Such parents may be sincere, even if misguided; but in most cases the desire not to have children has its birth in vanity, passion, and selfishness. Such feelings are the seeds sown in early married life that produce a harvest of discord, suspicion, estrangement, and divorce. All such efforts, too, often tend to put the marriage relationship on a level with the panderer and the courtesan. They befoul the pure fountains of life with the slime of indulgence and sensuality. Such misguided couples are ever seeking but never finding the reality for which the heart is yearning.

Depriving themselves of the comfort and happiness of the companionship of children, the barrenness of their lives drives the young couple to seek the hollow fads and fascinating excitements of "society," many of which pursuits are as antagonistic to the real purpose of life as the influence of evil can make them.

As I write these lines, I have in mind a young girl who has substituted for the reality of home and family, the froth of week-end parties and midnight carousals, including the most degrading but fashionable habit of cigaret smoking. She began her married life in honor and is the mother of two beautiful children; but she was caught in the whirlpool of pleasure and passion, and though flaunting daily the latest fashions, is sinking from respectability to degradation. "O what a falling off were here!" I cannot look upon such actions of young husbands and wives without a feeling of pity mingled with contempt. There is comfort only in the thought that in our communities such cases are exceptional.

Birth Controla-McKay, David O.TPLove realizes his sweetest happiness and his most divine consummation in the home where the coming of children is not restricted, where they are made most welcome, and where the duties of parenthood are accepted as a co-partnership with the eternal Creator.

Birth Controla-McKay, David O.TPIn all this, however, the mother's health should be guarded. In the realm of wifehood, the woman should reign supreme.

Man, not woman, is the chief cause of this evil of race suicide now sweeping like a blight through the civilized nations.

Birth Controla-McKay, David O.TPMarriage is ordained of God that children might be so trained that they may eventually be worthy of Christ's presence; and that home is happiest in which they are welcomed, as God and nature intended they should be.—RSM, 3:366-377 (1916).

PROBLEMS OF DIVORCE AND FAMILY DISORGANIZATION

Divorcea-McKay, David O.TPMISUNDERSTANDING BRINGS TRAGEDY. When we refer to the breaking of the marriage tie, we touch upon one of the saddest experiences of life. For a couple who have basked in the sunshine of each other's love to stand by daily and see the clouds of misunderstanding and discord obscure the lovelight of their lives is tragedy indeed. In the darkness that follows, the love sparkle in each other's eyes is obscured. To restore it, fruitless attempts are made to say the right word and to do the right thing; but the word and act are misinterpreted, and angry retort reopens the wound, and hearts once united become torn wider and wider asunder. When this heartbreaking state is reached, a separation is sought. But divorce is not the proper solution, especially if there are children concerned.—IE, 46:657, 704 (1943).

Divorcea-McKay, David O.TPDIVORCE UNDER EXTREME CONDITIONS ONLY. Except in cases of infidelity or other extreme conditions, the Church frowns upon divorce, and authorities look with apprehension upon the increasing number of divorces among members of the Church.—IE, 46:657 (1943).

GUIDANCE FROM THE SCRIPTURES. In all the problems and perplexities of human existence, Jesus Christ is the one safe guide to whom we can go for guidance and comfort. Mark's account of Jesus' answer to the Pharisees on divorce sets forth the Savior's attitude toward this vital question.

Divorcea-McKay, David O.TPA careful study of this text and other references that he made to marriage and divorce leave little doubt that Jesus set forth the lofty ideal that marriage is of divine origin and that the marriage bond should be held sacred.

When the Pharisees, seeking to justify the granting of divorce, cited the fact that "Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement and to put a wife away" on the ground of "some uncleanness," Jesus answered:

"For the hardness of your heart he wrote you this precept.

"But from the beginning of the creation God made them male and female.

"For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and cleave to his wife;

"And they twain shall be one flesh: so then they are no more twain, but one flesh.

"What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder." (Mark 10:5-9.)

In the light of scripture, ancient and modern, we are justified in concluding that Christ's ideal pertaining to marriage is the unbroken home, and conditions that cause divorce are violations of his divine teachings.

To look upon marriage as a mere contract that may be entered into at pleasure in response to a romantic whim or for selfish purposes, and severed at the first difficulty or misunderstanding that may arise, is an evil meriting severe condemnation, especially in cases wherein children are made to suffer because of such separation.

Marriage is a sacred relationship entered into for purposes that are well recognized—primarily for the rearing of a family.—IE, 48:238 (1945).

MAINTAINING FAMILY INTEGRITY: ADVICE TO THE PRIESTHOOD. I am going to venture to enter into a discussion of home life. I would rather enter into it as it should be, rather than what it sometimes is. But we find that the following conditions seem to be contributive to the separation of husband and wife, and the breaking up of the home: unfaithfulness on the part of either or both—(do you know what that means, those of you who have been through the temple?)—drunkenness, physical violence; in some cases imprisonment has brought disgrace to the family; the union of an innocent girl to a reprobate; some cases disclosed sordid, licentious, brutal actions of covetous men. I know you think those are harsh words, but you can read in some of these applications reports of treatment that has wrung women's hearts.

I know that the woman is to blame in some cases, and particularly young women who married young boys in a hurry when World War II broke out.

Abuse, Spouse and Childa-McKay, David O.TPMay I now suggest that we unite for just a few minutes as bishops, presidents of stakes, as fathers, and as young men contemplating marriage, to consider some things which will avoid the breaking up of the family, which will avoid this breaking of women's hearts, this turning out of children from what should be loving homes or throwing them entirely upon the responsibility of mothers. Let us instruct young people who come to us, to know that a woman should be queen of her own body. The marriage covenant does not give the man the right to enslave her or to abuse her or to use her merely for the gratification of his passion. Your marriage ceremony does not give you that right.

Second, let them remember that gentleness and consideration after the ceremony is just as appropriate and necessary and beautiful as gentleness and consideration before the wedding.

Third, let us realize that manhood is not undermined by the practising of continence, notwithstanding what some psychiatrists claim. Chastity is the crown of beautiful womanhood, and self-control is the source of true manhood, if you will know it, not indulgence. Sexual indulgence whets the passion and creates morbid desire.

Let us teach our young men to enter into matrimony with the idea that each will be just as courteous and considerate of a wife after the ceremony as during courtship.

And we have the ideal in this Church, I hope, today as ever, that a young man keep himself clean and pure during his courtship days, so that he can kneel at the altar and give just the same purity of life to that sweet girl as he exacts from her. I submit to you that that is a glorious ideal. I know the world thinks we cannot live it, but you and I know that we can and do so live.

Fourth, minimize the faults, commend virtues. After the first thrill of the honeymoon is worn off, couples begin to see frailties, idiosyncrasies which they had not noticed before. Responsibilities of motherhood come to the woman. Difficulties in paying debts come. And so we become prone to find fault. Let us learn to control ourselves in that respect.

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPI do not know who wrote this, but it is good advice: "In the first solitary hour after the ceremony, take the bridegroom and demand a solemn vow of him (this is to the girl) and give a vow in return; promise each other sacredly never, not even in jest, to wrangle with each other, never to bandy words, or indulge in the least ill-humor. Never—I say never! Wrangling in jest, putting on an air of ill-humor, merely to tease, becomes earnest by practice! Mark that!

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TP"Next, promise each other, sincerely and solemnly, never to keep a secret from each other, under whatever pretext, and whatever excuse it might be. You must continually, and every moment, see clearly into each other's bosom. Even when one of you has committed a fault, wait not an instant, but confess it. And as you keep nothing from each other, so, on the contrary, preserve the privacies of your house, marriage state, and heart, from father, mother, brother, sister, aunt, and from all the world. You two, with God's help, build your own quiet world. Every third or fourth one you draw into it with you will form a party and stand between you two. That should never be. Promise this to each other. Remember the vow at each temptation. You will find your account in it. Your souls will grow, as it were, to each other, and at last will become as one. Ah, if many a pair had, on their marriage day, known the secret, how many a marriage were happier than, alas, they are!"

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPI regard it as an incontrovertible fact that in no marriage circle can true peace, love, purity, chastity, and happiness be found, in which is not present the Spirit of Christ, and the daily, hourly striving after loving obedience to his divine commands, and especially the nightly prayer expressing gratitude for blessings received.

Homea-McKay, David O.TPGod help us to build homes in which the spirit of heaven on earth may be experienced. You and I know that that is possible; it is not a dream; it is not a theory. We may have that sweet companionship between husband and wife which grows dearer and dearer as troubles of life come on. We can have homes in which children will never hear Father and Mother wrangle or quarrel. God help us as men of the priesthood, to build such homes, and to teach young men and young women who are anticipating home life, to cherish such an ideal.—CR, April 1952, pp. 86-87.

Infidelitya-McKay, David O.TPA man who has entered into a sacred covenant in the house of the Lord to remain true to the marriage vow is a traitor to that covenant if he separates himself from his wife and family just because he has permitted himself to become infatuated with the pretty face and comely form of some young girl who flattered him with a smile. Even though a loose interpretation of the law of the land would grant such a man a bill of divorcement, I think he is unworthy of a recommend to have his second marriage performed in the temple. A separation because of infidelity is another matter.—IE, 46:647 (1943).

Infidelitya-McKay, David O.TPAs teachers, we are to let the people know, and warn these men—and this is not imagination—who, after having lived with their wives and brought into this world four and five and six children, get tired of them and seek a divorce, that they are on the road to hell. It is unfair to a woman to leave her that way, merely because the man happens to fall in love with some younger woman and feels that the wife is not so beautiful or attractive as she used to be. Warn him! Nothing but unhappiness for him and injustice to those children can result.—CR, April 1949, pp. 182-183.

CHASTITY TO BE MAINTAINED. No one can transgress the laws of chastity and find peace. That is the message to our boys, to our girls. No matter what the opportunity, no matter what the temptation, let the young man of Israel know that to find happiness he must hold sacred his true manhood; let him know that he is going to live and live completely by refusing to yield to that temptation. Then he is happy; he is happy. There is peace instead of turbulency in his soul.—CR, October, 1920, pp. 43-44.

Moralitya-McKay, David O.TPONE STANDARD OF MORALITY. In the Latter-day Saint Church there is but one standard of morality. In the world many people protect their girls and daughters, irrespective of religion. They know what it means for young girls to be treated as slaves, as playthings, and they shield their own daughters from the ravages of men. But their boys are too often left free to prey upon helpless creatures who are not so protected.

Moralitya-McKay, David O.TPThus in the world you have the double standard, but in the Church of Jesus Christ there is but a single standard. It applies to the boys as well as to the girls. If you follow that standard—indeed, if you will listen to the promptings of your best self, your clearest judgment, the whisperings of your own true heart, you will learn this lesson: That self-mastery during youth and the compliance with the single standard of morality is (1) the source of virile manhood; (2) the crown of beautiful womanhood; (3) the foundation of a happy home, and (4) the contributing factor to the strength and perpetuity of the race!—IE, 41:139 (1938).

THE PROSTITUTION OF LOVE. Man is endowed with appetites and passions for the preservation of his life and the perpetuation of his kind. These, when held under proper subjection, contribute to his happiness and comfort; but when used for mere gratification, lead to misery and moral degradation.

Chastitya-McKay, David O.TPAssociated with these natural instincts, young folk, is a sin that always seeks seclusion. It is the prostitution of love. God has instituted marriage and the family as the proper condition of expressing in our lives this divine virtue. But sometimes men and women with low ideals and weakened wills permit their passions, like unbridled steeds, to dash aside judgment and self-restraint and to cause them to commit sin that may sear their conscience and leave in their hearts an everlasting regret.

Chastitya-McKay, David O.TPIn this day when modesty is thrust into the background, and chastity is considered an outmoded virtue, I appeal to you to keep your souls unmarred and unsullied from this sin, the consequence of which will smite and haunt you intimately until your conscience is seared and your character sordid.

Remember, too, the significance of the Savior's saying that if any shall commit adultery even in his or her heart, he shall not have the Spirit but shall deny the faith and shall fear.

Resist evil, and the tempter will flee from you. If you keep your character above reproach, no matter what others may think or what charges they may make, you can hold your head erect, keep your heart light, and face the world undauntedly because you, yourself, and your God know that you have kept your soul untarnished.—CR, October 1951, pp. 8-9.

Chastitya-McKay, David O.TPHIGH THINKING AND FIDELITY. "My spirit," says the Christ, "will not dwell in unclean tabernacles." The corruption that is in the world through lust, as mentioned in one of Peter's epistles, has its source in thoughts and schemes harbored in the individual mind. A man who takes advantage of his neighbor in a business deal when the opportunity offers has prepared himself for the occasion by dishonest thinking. Young couples do not lose their chastity, named by the Book of Mormon as "precious above all things," without their having previously in thought justified the act.

The husband who coolly turns from a loyal wife and family and seeks illicit relationship elsewhere, perhaps with a disloyal wife of a neighbor, has previously poisoned his soul with immoral ideas. Disgruntled members of society, fault-finders, in wards and stakes, do not become such merely because of some offense, real or imagined. What they say and do have been preceded by selfish desires or unattained ambition.—CR, April 1951, pp. 96-97.

Bearing tragic witness to the lessening regard for purity in marriage is the large number of so-called war brides whose husbands have returned to face broken promises and tragic instances of infidelity.—IE, 49:690 (1943).

Appreciation is a great virtue, and if husbands and wives expressed it more frequently in our homes, wives would be happier, and husbands would probably be more kind.

I am glad to hear the presiding brethren express their love for their wives and appreciation for what the women have done in the building of this Church.—DNCS, January 2, 1952, p. 2.

KINDNESS OF HUSBANDS TO WIVES. I mention this now, because I think we are sometimes cruel to our wives. I have here two letters, one anonymous, another signed by a woman. They are asking "What shall we do? Our husbands are cruel to us."

Says one, "My husband has a terrible temper. He comes home and scolds the children. He is cruel to me. At first he seemed to be a good, loving husband, but when my first baby was born, then were born my troubles."

Abuse, Spouse and Childa-McKay, David O.TPI cannot imagine a man's being cruel to a woman. I cannot imagine her so conducting herself as to merit such treatment. Perhaps there are women in the world who exasperate their husbands, but no man is justified in resorting to physical force or in exploding his feelings in profanity. There are men, undoubtedly, in the world who are thus beastly, but no man who holds the priesthood of God should so debase himself.—CR, October 1951, p. 181.
