David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 35

THE HOME AND FAMILY LIFE

PARENTHOOD

A SACRED OBLIGATION. Equal in importance to the high conception of the marriage covenant is the teaching of the Church in regard to the responsibility of parenthood.

Parenthood and particularly motherhood should be held as a sacred obligation. There is something in the depths of the human soul which revolts against neglectful parenthood.

Parentsa-McKay, David O.TPParents cannot with impunity shirk the responsibility to protect childhood and youth.—CR, April 1935, pp. 112-113.

RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTHOOD. You may think me extreme, but I am going to say that a married woman who refuses to assume the responsibilities of motherhood, or who, having children, neglects them for pleasure or social prestige, is recreant to the highest calling and privilege of womankind. The father, who because of business or political or social responsibilities, fails to share with his wife the responsibilities of rearing his sons and daughters, is untrue to his marital obligations, is a negative element in what might be and should be a joyous home atmosphere, and is a possible contributor to discord and delinquency. Herbert Hoover, a former president of the United States, once said:

"Our country has a vast majority of competent mothers. I am not so sure of the majority of competent fathers."

Fathers may and should exercise a helpful, restraining influence, where a mother's tenderness and love might lead to indulgence on the part of the children. In this respect, however, every father should ever keep in mind that he was once a mischievous youngster himself and deal with his boy sympathetically.—IE, 49:691 (1946).

Homea-McKay, David O.TPUNITY IN THE HOME. I can imagine few if any things more objectionable in the home than the absence of unity and harmony. On the other hand, I know that a home in which unity, mutual helpfulness, and love abide is just a bit of heaven on earth. I surmise that nearly all of you can testify to the sweetness of life in homes in which these virtues predominate. Most gratefully and humbly, I cherish the remembrance that never once as a lad in the home of my youth did I see one instance of discord between Father and Mother and that good will and mutual understanding have been the uniting bond that has held together a fortunate group of brothers and sisters. Unity, harmony, good will are virtues to be fostered and cherished in every home.—CR, October 1939, p. 102.

THE ART OF HOME BUILDING

Homea-McKay, David O.TPBy the art of home building, I mean the inculcating in the lives of children a nobility of soul that leads them instinctively to love the beautiful, the genuine, the virtuous, and as instinctively to turn from the ugly, the spurious, and the vile.—RSM, 23:4 (1936).

Homea-McKay, David O.TPSIX ELEMENTS OF TRUE HOME BUILDING:

Homea-McKay, David O.TP1. Let us substitute the present tendency toward a low view of marriage with the lofty view which God gives it. Yesterday I stood at the altar of the temple, as I have stood many a time, and saw two hearts—two souls—slipping into one, as two dewdrops on the stem of a rose when the sun comes out in the morning, one slipping into the other, the two becoming one. That high view of marriage in the mind of that young bridegroom, and the appreciation of the sacredness of marriage by the bride, I think is one of the sublimest things in all the world. They had the high view of marriage, not a low view of it as a means of gratifying passion. Let us look upon marriage as a sacred obligation and a covenant as possibly an eternal one.

Homea-McKay, David O.TP2. Teach the young of both sexes in the responsibilities and ideals of marriage so that they may realize that marriage involves obligation and is not an arrangement to be terminated at pleasure. In this regard it is the duty of parents to set an example in the home that children may see and absorb, as it were, the sacredness of family life and the responsibility associated therewith.

Homea-McKay, David O.TP3. Instruct young girls in the fundamental arts of housekeeping, so that when responsibilities of wifehood come, they may be free from the difficulties and perplexities which arise from ignorance and inexperience.

Homea-McKay, David O.TP4. Marriages should be solemnized, as far as possible, in the house of God. This will minimize the evils that follow runaway marriages.

Homea-McKay, David O.TP5. Keep religion in home life. We should make it obvious, both by our actions and our conversation, that we are seriously interested in religious things and believe in them ourselves: faith in God, in the divine mission of Jesus Christ, and in the restoration of the gospel. Our religion should also take the form of honesty in our dealings with our family, our neighbors, and all with whom we come in contact; of kindness to our employees, or fair play to our employers; and good measure to our customers. Talk about these intangibles should become as common practice in our homes and offices as talk about golf, parties, and profits if we want to succeed in solving the family problems.

To give young people the right start in life, we must discuss with our children and friends questions of motive and subjects like birth, love, marriage, death, and destiny. Babson says: "One of the best things that could happen to America today would be a return to family prayers; the getting together after breakfast or in the evening for five or ten minutes for simple family worship! The saying of grace before meals would be a step in this direction." I am glad that that practice is general, I hope, throughout the Latter-day Saint homes.

Homea-McKay, David O.TP6. Teach the young that the foundations of a happy home are laid before even the bride and bridegroom kneel at the marriage altar.—RSM, 23:9-10 (1936).

When our children are given us, and that admonition "Suffer them to come back to me" is given, three means of developing them are at hand: The first is home influence; the second, activities—avenues of action, including vocations and avocations; and third, social environment. In all three of these there must be the predominating element of salvation—I mean physically, intellectually, spiritually. And what is it? Work! Work in the home! Work; legitimate work, in the avenues of life! Work, legitimate work in the social world!—CR, October 1909, pp. 89-90.

Homea-McKay, David O.TPIt isn't enough to say that we believe in home building and in the purity of the home. What are we doing? Go into the homes of true Latter-day Saints, and there see if the most substantial part of the nation—the home—is not the best that can be found. The family tie is an eternal one; it is not one of experiment; it is not one of satisfying passion; it is an eternal union between husband and wife, between parents and children. That eternal bond is one that must be held sacred by the man as well as by the woman. Is it a source of safety? Is it a blessing to humanity to have such homes? The safety of our nation depends upon the purity and strength of the home; and I thank God for the teachings of the Church in relation to home building, and the impression that kind parents have made, that the home must be the most sacred place in the world. Our people are home builders, and they are taught everywhere, from childhood to old age, that the home should be kept pure and safe from the evils of the world.—CR, April 1909, pp. 65-66.

Homea-McKay, David O.TPTHE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT. A good home requires good health habits through parents' instruction and example in eating, sleeping, and proper exercise. I need not dwell upon this phase of the fundamental conditions of a good home; if we can have properly ventilated homes, if we know what kind of food to give to the children, we are contributing to the health and happiness of the home.

Homea-McKay, David O.TPTHE CULTURE OF THE HOME. Parents must lead in the cultural development and show a willingness to answer questions. A child that is asking questions is contributing happiness to your life. Fortunate the child whose parents can leave their work occasionally to encourage the child in constructive play or spend a few hours in nature study!

UNDERSTANDING INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES. You wonder why one child is so different in disposition from another. Besides inherited tendencies, he has had different influences operating upon him. The first babe had no brothers to tease him; the tenth babe perhaps had nine.—RSM, 18:349 (1931).

A PHILOSOPHY OF FAMILY LIFE

Homea-McKay, David O.TPTHE SPIRITUAL ENVIRONMENT OF THE HOME. Every home has both body and spirit. You may have a beautiful house with all the decorations that modern art can give or wealth bestow. You may have all the outward forms that will please the eye and yet not have a home. It is not home without love. It may be a hovel, a log hut, a tent, a wickiup, if you have the right spirit within, the true love of Christ, and love for one another—fathers and mothers for the children, children for parents, husband and wife for each other—you have the true life of the home that Latter-day Saints build and which they are striving to establish.

Homea-McKay, David O.TPNo matter what they may be without, are your homes pure within? Are morning prayers offered there regularly? Or do the things of this world take you away from your homes and make you deprive yourself of morning prayers with the children? "Woe to that home where the mother abandons her holy mission or neglects the divine instruction, influence, and examples—while she bows, a devotee at the shrine of social pleasure; or neglects the essential duties in her own household, in her enthusiasm to promote public reform."

Homea-McKay, David O.TPWe must consider the home; it is the spring of life, if you please, of our social conditions today. It is no wonder, when we think of some home pictures that are shown to us, that millions and billions of dollars are spent trying to purify streams made impure by the unholy fountains of home life in the world.

Homea-McKay, David O.TPFrom such homes as these come the men who are trespassing upon the rights of others, come women who are degraded, and who are dragging their virtue and that of others in the mud. It is such homes from which springs much of the evil in society today. I wish the money now spent in police and detective work could be used in purifying those homes. What the world needs today is good parents. Where parents are incapable of rearing their children properly, the state should assist by means of guardians of the young who should be required to do individual work.—CR, October 1907, p. 63.

Homea-McKay, David O.TPAN ILLUSTRATION. One day a young son, just married, invited his father to visit him and his bride in their new home. The young son took the father from room to room and showed him the furnishings, the paintings on the walls and so forth, and the father said, "This is lovely. I congratulate you, but, Son, I have looked in vain for anything that indicates that you have a place here for God."

Homea-McKay, David O.TPIn writing about it later, the young man said, "I went through the rooms later, and I found that Father was right."

Homea-McKay, David O.TPLet us go back to our homes and see whether the spirit of our homes is such that if an angel called, he would be pleased to remain.—CR, October 1951, pp. 160-161.

To every sincere follower of Christ, religion should denote not only a sense of relationship to God, but also an expression of that feeling in actions with respect to right and wrong and obligation to duty.

This was undoubtedly the kind of religion Patrick Henry had in mind when, in the closing scene of his life, he said: "I have now disposed of all my property to my family. There is one thing more I wish I could give them, and that is the Christian religion. If they had that, and I had not given them one shilling, they would be rich; and if they had not that, and I had given them all the world, they would be poor."—CR, October 1937, p. 100.

"And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord." (D. & C. 68:28.)

This command leaves no question as to the responsibility of parents to teach their children—a responsibility too frequently shifted to the shoulders of the church, public schools, and officers of the law.—IE, 46:656 (1943).

Parentsa-McKay, David O.TPTHE IMPORTANCE OF EXAMPLE. I believe that parents generally are teaching their children the gospel, yet I am convinced that there is still much opportunity for improvement in this regard. I am not thinking of the set hours in which you sit down to teach these doctrines to your children, but of the example fathers and mothers give to their children regarding the faith that is dear to your hearts. Your example will teach these principles more effectively than what you say. Out of our homes come the future leaders of the government. If our homes were all they should be, the nation would be safe.—CR, October 1932, pp. 66-67.

Parentsa-McKay, David O.TPTHE HOME AND FAITH IN THE EXISTENCE OF GOD. If you ask me where I first received my unwavering faith in the existence of a God, I would answer you: in the home of my childhood—when Father and Mother invariably called their children around them in the morning and at night and invoked God's blessing upon the household and upon mankind. There was a sincerity in that good patriarch's voice that left an undying impression in the children's souls; and Mother's prayers were equally impressive.

I ask today that every father in the Church see to it that, in all sincerity, he impress his children with the reality of the existence of God, and with the reality that God will guide and protect his children. You carry that responsibility. Home is one of the units—the fundamental unit of society. Let the sincere investigators who believe more from what they see than from what they hear, find, upon investigation, that Mormons prove by example in the home, by devotion, and in their service to God, that they believe and know that God is their Father.

I knew before I heard my father testify that he had heard a divine voice, that he lived near to his Maker; and I know, by a nearness to that same Eternal Father since, that Father told the truth when he said he received in answer to prayer this admonition given in audible tones: "Testify that Joseph Smith is a prophet of the living God." Such is the reality of the true Latter-day Saints' conception of God the Father.—CR, October 1922, p. 78.

Familya-McKay, David O.TPSOME FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF FAMILY LIFE. There are a few fundamental principles which we should ever keep in mind. First, the eternity of the marriage relation. Oh, may our youth throughout the land realize that they have within their grasp the possibilities of that form of marriage which will contribute more to their happiness in this world and their eternal union and happiness in the world to come than can be obtained anywhere else in the world.

Familya-McKay, David O.TPSecond, let us hold to that first word in the second part of the fundamental law of humanity, the Ten Commandments. Those first few commandments refer to our relationship to God. The last few to our relationship to humanity. The second part begins with the word honor—"Honour thy father and thy mother." Let us cherish in our homes as we cherish the lives of our children themselves that word honor with all the synonyms—respect, reverence, veneration; honoring mother, honoring father, having them honor us as we honor and revere God our Eternal Father. Let the element of honor, devotion, reverence permeate the home life.

Familya-McKay, David O.TPThird, let us never lose sight of the principles of obedience. Obedience is heaven's first law, and it is the law of the home. There can be no true happiness in the home without obedience—obedience obtained, not through physical force, but through the divine element of love. There is no true home when love does not abide.—CR, April 1919, pp. 77-78.

The inspiration of God is seen in requiring the Latter-day Saints to keep their homes intact, and to teach their children the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. I mean that the gospel of Jesus Christ should be offered up in sincerity, that the children daily would realize that we desire in our home the presence of God. If we can invite the Savior there, we may know that the angels will be not only willing but eager to protect our boys and girls.

I believe that in most homes boys and girls are taught to pray before retiring for the night. I believe, however, that, too generally, the morning prayers are neglected. When we come to think of it, though, it is during the waking hours that our boys and girls need the protection of God, and the guidance of his Holy Spirit, more even than when they are asleep.

Parentsa-McKay, David O.TPThe dangers surrounding our boys and girls today are the dangers that come to them out in society, out in the darkness of the night, when they are away from the parental influence. I plead with the parents of the Church to know where your boys and girls are at night between the hour of sunset and the hour of retiring. I plead with you to know where they are during the day. Keep your minds upon them. Let your thoughts go with them.

Parentsa-McKay, David O.TPHomes are made permanent through love. Oh, then, let love abound. If you feel that you have not the love of those little boys and girls, study to get it. Though you neglect some of the cattle, though you fail to produce good crops, ever study to hold your children's love.—CR, October 1917, pp. 57-58.

IS FAMILY LIFE A PERMANENT FORM OF SOCIAL ORGANIZATION? We are living in a most momentous age. We see on every hand manifestations of commotion. The world seemingly is stirred as it has never been stirred before. Political institutions are crumbling. Old forms and methods are fast giving way to new ones. Political organizations are being revolutionized, some for better and some for worse. Old fundamental principles of government are tottering. Some have even been replaced by theories that are not tenable, others not practicable, and some that are infamous. In the midst of this world commotion the home, the fundamental institution of society, is also threatened.

Familya-McKay, David O.TPLatter-day Saints, the responsibility of saving this sacred institution devolves largely upon you, for you know that the family ties are eternal. They should be eternal. There is nothing temporary in the home of the Latter-day Saint. There is no element of transitoriness in the family relationship of the Latter-day Saint home. To the Latter-day Saint the home is truly the cell-unit of society; and parenthood is next to Godhood.

The relationship of the children to the parents should be one which would enable those children to carry out ideal citizenship as they become related to the state and to the larger forms of society. The secret of good citizenship lies in the home. The secret of instilling faith in God, faith in his Son, the Redeemer of the world, faith in the organizations of the Church, lies in the home. There it is centered.

God has placed upon you parents the responsibility of instilling these principles into the minds of children. Church schools, Sunday Schools, Mutual Improvement Associations, and Primary, are all helps in government, established here to assist in the upbuilding and guidance of the youth, but none of these—great and important factors as they are in the lives of our youth—can supplant the permanence and the influence of the parents in the home.—CR, April 1919, pp. 76-77.

Familya-McKay, David O.TPOh, I praise God for the instructions he has given his people regarding the sacredness, the sanctity, and permanence of the family relationship. Let us impress these instructions upon our children.—CR, October 1917, p. 56.

Homea-McKay, David O.TPRECREATION IN THE HOME. I wish to emphasize the fact that our homes should be more attractive and that more of our amusements should be in the home instead of out on the streets.—I, 80:562 (1945).

THE HOME AND SOCIETY

Homea-McKay, David O.TPA PLACE TO TEACH. The home is the best place in the world to teach the highest ideal in the social and political life of man; namely, perfect liberty of action so long as you do not trespass upon the rights and privileges of another.—IE, 49:691 (1946).

Homea-McKay, David O.TPTHE STATE HELPLESS WHEN THE HOME FAILS. The safety, the perpetuity of our government, or of any republican form of government, depends upon the safety and permanency of the home. Herein we get a glimpse of one thing in which this people may be the saviors, in a way, of this great nation. The home is the place where the perpetuation of the principles of liberty as well as the instructions in the gospel of Jesus Christ should be given to the children. When the home breaks up, then the children begin to wander off into sin. Then the law must reach out to bring them back and try to teach them some principles of service, and principles of true government; but, oh, how helpless, how helpless the state, when the home has failed!—CR, October 1917, p. 57.

Homea-McKay, David O.TPTHE SOURCE OF NATIONAL STRENGTH. The real source of security of our nation rests in the well-ordered, properly conducted homes.—IE, 48:239 (1945).

Homea-McKay, David O.TPThe character of the child is formed largely during the first twelve years of his life. It is estimated that in that period the child spends sixteen times as many waking hours in the home as in school and more than a hundred times as many hours in the home as in the church. Every child is, to a great degree, what he is because of the ever constant influence of home environment and the careful or neglectful training of parents.—CR, April 1935, p. 113.

Homea-McKay, David O.TPI desire to call attention to the fact that the united, well-ordered American home is one of the greatest contributing factors to the preservation of the Constitution of the United States. It has been aptly said that "Out of the homes of America will come the future citizens of America, and only as those homes are what they should be will this nation be what it should be."—CR, April 1935, p. 110.

Homea-McKay, David O.TPHOME BUILDING PARAMOUNT. Would you have a strong and virile nation? Then keep your homes pure. Would you reduce delinquency and crime? Lessen the number of broken homes. It is time that civilized peoples realized that prevention is more profitable than punishment and that the home is the incubator either of children of high character or of criminals. Home building, therefore, should be the paramount purpose of parents and of the nation.—CR, April 1935, p. 115.

Homea-McKay, David O.TPOne of the highest ideals of life is to keep secure and free from sorrow the homes of the Church and of the nation.—IE, 46:704 (1943).

Familya-McKay, David O.TPInfidelity and sexual immorality are two principal evils that threaten to weaken and to wreck present-day civilization. Unfortunately, the trends of modern life are tending to disintegrate the very foundation of the Christian home. Sexual laxity among young people, birth control, and intemperance are its insidious and vicious enemies. When family life disintegrates, the foundation and bulwark of human society is undermined.—CR, October 1947, p. 119.

THE PRECIOUS GIFT OF CHILDREN

Parentsa-McKay, David O.TPNext to eternal life, the most precious gift that our Father in heaven can bestow upon man is his children.—I, 84:620 (1949).

Childrena-McKay, David O.TPOur country's most precious possession is not our vast acres of range land supporting flocks and herds; not productive farms; not our forests; not our mines nor oil wells producing fabulous wealth. Our country's greatest resource is our children.—CR, October 1951, pp. 5-6.

Childrena-McKay, David O.TPTHINGS TO WHICH EVERY CHILD IS ENTITLED. There are three fundamental things to which every child is entitled: first, a respected name; second, a sense of security; third, opportunities for development.

The family gives to the child his name and standing in the community. A child wants his family to be as good as those of his friends. He wants to be able to point with pride to his father and feel an inspiration every time he looks at his mother. It is a mother's duty so to live that her children will associate with her everything that is beautiful, sweet, and pure. And fathers, even the poorest of us, from a financial standpoint, may so conduct our lives as to be able to give our sons a good name.

Childrena-McKay, David O.TPTHE SENSE OF SECURITY. In regard to the sense of security, every child is entitled to food, shelter, and raiment, and he should feel in his home a safe and comfortable protection from the outside world.

In this phase of family life the Church can render excellent service. No other organization in the world is so well prepared to know the physical and economic condition of each person as is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Now is an opportune time for the Church to demonstrate its efficiency not only in knowing the needs of the destitute but in supplying their needs.—CR, April 1935, pp. 113-114.

CHILDREN DESERVE TO BE TAUGHT INTELLIGENT OBEDIENCE. Unhappiness in the child's life, as in the adult life, springs largely from nonconformity to natural and social laws. The home is the best place in which to develop obedience, which nature and society will later demand.—I, 81:166 (1946).

It is my opinion, and my opinion is confirmed by experience, that the best time for the child to learn the rules of conformity is between the ages of three and five.—I, 81:166 (1946).

Homea-McKay, David O.TPHome is the center from which woman rules the world. It is there she teaches her child self-restraint, develops in him the confidence and strength that spring from self-control. It is there the child learns respect for the rights of others. It is in a well-directed home that men and women first develop a consciousness that true happiness lies in conforming one's life to the laws of nature and to the rules of social conduct.—IE, 50:641 (1947).

MUTUAL LOVE AND RESPECT

"HONOUR THY FATHER AND THY MOTHER." It is a dangerous sign when home discipline breaks down, and the loving advice of a wise father and a loving mother is defied. We are told by an elderly American explorer that among the Iroquois Indians "the crime which is regarded as most horrible, and which is without example, is that a son should be rebellious toward his mother" — an ideal that might be well cherished today among men who esteem themselves high in the scale of civilization.—CR, October 1951, p. 5.

PARENTS TO TEACH FILIAL PIETY. A great Chinese philosopher, as a minister of crime, is reported to have set free a son who had offended against the canon of filial behavior, on the ground that the father who had so ill-taught him was the one to blame. Said he:

"When superiors fail in their duty, should inferiors die? This father never taught his son to be filial. To act upon this charge would be to kill the innocent."—CR, October 1948, p. 120.

Honoring Father and Mothera-McKay, David O.TPFIDELITY TO PARENTS. Love is the highest attribute of the human soul, and fidelity is love's noblest offspring. To be the worthy son or the worthy daughter of noble parents is one of the greatest responsibilities of youth, one of the important duties of life. Disloyalty to righteous parents is as reprehensible as disloyalty to God. There is a sacred trust in sonship which should never be violated.—IE, 43:395 (1940).

FATHER AND SON. One evening, about five o'clock, four brethren were riding down Main Street in an automobile. Just as they passed First South Street, they heard a little plaintive cry, "Papa! Papa! Papa! wait" The father was the driver, and his ready ear recognized his son's voice. He brought the machine instantly to a standstill. As the men looked out, they saw coming out of that bustling, jostling crowd of humanity, a little nine-year-old boy, out of breath, panting, crying, because of his effort to overtake the machine.

The father said, "Why, where have you been, my son?"

"I have been looking for you."

"Well, did you leave the place where we agreed to meet?"

"Yes, I went up to see where you were."

The boy understood that they were to meet in front of the Tabernacle. The father evidently meant to meet the child father down the street. Through this misunderstanding the son had become separated from his parent, and the little child was thrown into that vast throng, unprotected.

Fatherhooda-McKay, David O.TPI believe that illustrates the keynote of warning that has been sounded frequently. Fathers, is there a misunderstanding between you and your sons? Is there one wandering amidst the throngs of life, surrounded by all kinds of temptations, and you expecting to meet him at an appointed place which he does not know? He may not come out from that throng and cry, "Father, Father!" and if he should, your ears might be deaf to that call, because of the concentration of your mind upon the affairs of life. So you might speed by him and leave him in the midst of evil, to find his own way home. Take your sons with you along this road of life, that you may have them with you in that eternal home where there is everlasting peace and contentment.—CR, October 1909, p. 89.

"Charity suffereth long, and is kind; ..." (I Cor. 13:4.)

Homea-McKay, David O.TPThe spirit of kindness is as enduring as love itself. Let us go home, and if we have been cruel, either by treating our wives with indifference, or by scolding or loud talking, if we have been cruel to our children by neglect or by striking them, let us see if we cannot repent and look introspectively and see whether or not we are to blame for some of the conditions that arouse these passions.—CR, October 1951, p. 182.

Homea-McKay, David O.TPCONTROL THE TONGUE! He is a weak man who will curse or condemn some loved one because of a little accident. What good does it do him? He would be a man if he would develop his spirit and control that anger, control his tongue. A little thing? Trace it, and you will find that not yielding and not controlling it bring many an unhappy hour in your home.—DNCS, September 6, 1952, p. 15.

Homea-McKay, David O.TPA PICTURE OF HEAVEN. I have but one thought in my heart for the young folk of the Church, and that is that they be happy. I know of no other place than home where more happiness can be found in this life. It is possible to make home a bit of heaven; indeed, I picture heaven to be a continuation of the ideal home.—IE, 51:618 (1948).
