David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 36

A PHILOSOPHY OF HAPPINESS

HAPPINESS AND THE POWER TO CHOOSE

Attitudesa-McKay, David O.TPTHE NATURE OF MEN AND NATIONS DETERMINED BY CHOICE. Man's success or failure, happiness or misery, depends upon what he seeks and what he chooses. What a man is, what a nation is, may largely be determined by his or its dominant quest. It is a tragic thing to carry through life a low concept of it.—CR, September-October 1950, pp. 108-109.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPFREE AGENCY REQUISITE TO HAPPINESS. There cannot be happiness without free agency. If the soul feels circumscribed, harassed, or enslaved by something or somebody, there cannot be true progress. That is why some of the nations today are wrong and some day in the future will have to change their policy. God intends men to be free.—IE, 42:459 (1939).

Happinessa-McKay, David O.TPChoosing the right with unvarying and unwavering determination, resisting temptations from within and from without, cheerfulness in the face of difficulties and experiences, reverence for God and respect for your fellow men, willingness to assist in the establishment of the kingdom of God—these, though you might miss some of the emoluments of the world, will bring peace and happiness to your soul, and through obedience to the principles and ordinances of the gospel, bring immortality and eternal life. Your soul will rise in ecstasy and clearer understanding of that great word of God given in modern revelation: " ... this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.)—CR, September-October 1950, p. 112.

Happinessa-McKay, David O.TPTHE GOSPEL AND CHOICE. Happiness consists in mastering evil tendencies, not in indulging them, and the gospel of Jesus Christ enables us to master those evil tendencies—DNCS, August 8, 1951.

Happinessa-McKay, David O.TPDISTINGUISH BETWEEN JOY AND PLEASURE. Let us in life distinguish between the joy that the Prophet Lehi had in mind when he said, "men are, that they might have joy," and the pleasure that the world is seeking by indulging in appetites and passions, vainly hoping to find happiness. Happiness springs from within.

The significance of pleasure is well expressed by the poet Burns in these words:

"But pleasures are like poppies spread: You seize the flower, its bloom is shed; Or like the snow falls in the river, A moment white—then melts forever; Or like the borealis race, That flits ere you can point their place; Or like the rainbow's lovely form, Vanishing amid the storm."

Burns, Tam o'Shanter.

Pleasure is not the purpose of man's existence. Joy is.—DNCS, Agust 8, 1951.

Joya-McKay, David O.TPSIN IS NEVER HAPPINESS. "The more I know intimately the lives of other men, to say nothing of my own," said Aldous Huxley in a letter to Charles Kingsley, "the more obvious it is to me that the wicked does not flourish nor is the righteous punished.

"The ledger of the Almighty is strictly kept, and every one of us has the balance of his operations paid over to him at the end of every minute of his existence. The absolute justice of the system of things is as clear to me as any scientific fact. The gravitation of sin to sorrow is as certain as that of the earth to the sun, and more so, for experimental proof of the fact is within the reach of us all, nay, is before us all our lives, if we had but the eyes to see it."

Associate with that the saying in the Book of Mormon, sin is never happiness. (See Alma 41:10.)—CR, October 1951, p. 8.

THE SEARCH FOR HAPPINESS

Happinessa-McKay, David O.TPTHE SEEDS ARE WITHIN US. There are seeds of happiness planted in every human soul. Our mental attitude and disposition constitute the environment in which these seeds may germinate. There is as much need for sunshine in the heart as for sunshine in the world. Today as perhaps never before, mankind needs encouragement and cheer.

It is a duty to seek to acquire the art of being cheerful. "A cheerful spirit is one of the most valuable gifts ever bestowed upon humanity by a kind Creator. It is the sweetest and most fragrant flower of the spirit that constantly sends out its beauty and fragrance and blesses everything within its reach." I think the writer goes to a little extreme. Cheerfulness is but one quality, but it is a wonderful strength in time of distress.—CR, October 1934, p. 92.

Happinessa-McKay, David O.TPHAPPINESS HAS SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC INGREDIENTS. I am happy when I know that my associates are happy. We cannot be happy if our loved ones are discouraged or ill. We are social beings, and our lives are intricately woven one with another, and we progress as a body when individuals in the body progress.

Happinessa-McKay, David O.TPI have noted recently something which has given me great concern. I have thought that I have detected in men and women who have called upon me and whom I have met in my travels just a little evidence of discouragement, and yet it is our right to be happy. It is the destiny of man to have joy.—CR, October 1934, p. 91.

Happinessa-McKay, David O.TPBUT THE QUEST IS UNFULFILLED IN THE SEARCH FOR MATERIAL TREASURE. If the experience of the past few years has taught us anything, it has taught us that it is unwise to seek happiness in wordly possessions only. I say "only" because I do not minimize the value of the material things of the world as contributing factors to man's peace, joy, and contentment. The Lord himself has said that if we worship him with rejoicing and prayer, with glad hearts and cheerful countenances, the fulness of the earth is ours.

In the Doctrine and Covenants he says plainly:

" ... the fulness of the earth is yours, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which climbeth upon the trees and walketh upon the earth;

"Yea, and the herb, and the good things which come of the earth, whether for food or for raiment, or for houses, or for barns, or for orchards, or for gardens, or for vineyards;

"Yea, all things which come of the earth, in the season thereof, are made for the benefit and the use of man, both to please the eye and to gladden the heart;

"Yea, for food and for raiment, for taste and for smell, to strengthen the body and to enliven the soul.

"And it pleaseth God that he hath given all these things unto man; for unto this end were they made to be used, with judgment, not to excess, neither by extortion." (D. & C. 59:16-20.)

Happinessa-McKay, David O.TPHowever, to seek happiness or even contentment in the acquisition of these worldly things alone is to lose sight of the higher purpose of life. And that is one reason why there is discouragement and why there is despair generally in the world. The seeking of these material things has been the end, and now that they seem to be suddenly wiped away, men are distracted.—CR, October 1934, pp. 92-93.

PROPER EVALUATION OF BLESSINGS. Brethren and sisters, with debts piled upon you, with difficulty to pay your taxes, with the loss of your home pending, if you would still be happy, look to yourself and count your blessings, and keep confidence in your God and in your fellow man.

Another source of joy within your reach is the proper evaluation of blessings. You have your health. Next to life itself that is one of the greatest blessings that can come to you—the second blessing that we mortals are capable of receiving, a blessing that money cannot buy. If you have it, thank the Lord night and morning that he has given it to you.

Attitudesa-McKay, David O.TPIn addition to this he has given you ability to appreciate his glorious gospel, the sunshine, the voice of nature speaking to you. Do you open your eyes and see it? I have rejoiced during this conference to hear the brethren acknowledge the blessing of our environment, the products of the field, scanty as they are, in some sections of the country, the flowers blooming, the sunsets, and above all the realization that we are living in God's world and that he is the Creator of it. If you stop to think, you still have the power and ability to appreciate and to enjoy things which no one, no depression can take from you.

There is something else which we sometimes do not properly evaluate. That is our family. I know it hurts us if we see our loved ones hungry. There is no need of any child's being hungry in this Church. Let us thank God for the organization and say we will buckle to and make our contributions so that these conditions will be removed, and thank him for our loved ones, ours for time and all eternity.

Finally, you have the opportunity for association with others, an ever present condition of happiness. If you affiliate with your quorum and other organizations, meeting regularly with your fellow men, you will know what that brotherhood is to which I have referred in my association with these brethren in the Council of the Twelve, a brotherhood which is eternal, a family relationship and social contact which will drive sorrow away under any conditions. You have, too, the realization that even if death should come you have the assurance that death is not victorious but has been overcome in the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ. Count these blessings. They are within the reach of every soul, no matter how humble or how great.—CR, October 1934, pp. 94-95.

KNOWLEDGE IS FUNDAMENTAL TO HAPPINESS. There are signposts along life's highway which, if followed, will lead any man to do the Lord's will, to know his Son, the Redeemer of the world, to know whom is eternal life. And while we are gaining this great knowledge which leads to immortality, we find the greatest joy in mortality that can be experienced by the human soul.—CR, September-October 1950, pp. 110-111.

No greater gift or blessing can come to man in this life than a knowledge that God lives, that Jesus is the Savior of the world, and that these two personages did actually appear to the Prophet Joseph and restore, through him, the gospel of Jesus Christ.—CR, October 1910, p. 47.

THE CONDITIONS OF HAPPINESS

Attitudesa-McKay, David O.TPTHE SECRET OF HAPPINESS. So many people have lost the proper sense of values and have sought peace and happiness in vain in the acquisition of wealth at the expense of spiritual growth.

Attitudesa-McKay, David O.TPWherein then does the secret of happiness lie? The Savior gives us the key to it when he says: "The kingdom of God is within you." The power is within man to choose the right or to choose the wrong. Happiness is not an external condition, it is a state of the spirit and an attitude of the mind.

FUNDAMENTAL GOALSWORTHY OBJECTIVES. Let us consider conditions in which we can always find happiness, conditions which are to the little seeds of joy in our souls what the ray of light and moisture are to the flowers and growing plants.

Attitudesa-McKay, David O.TPTo have faith that God is our Father is the safest anchorage of the soul and brings peace and solace under any condition; and the second is confidence in our fellow men. You note at once, of course, how these go back to those two great commandments: " ... love the Lord thy God with all thy might, mind, and strength, and thy neighbour as thyself." (See Matt. 22:37, 39.)

Now let us not consider these merely as orthodox principles. They are fundamental in our happiness and salvation here. I know that it is a little difficult today to keep confidence in certain groups of men. It is dreadfully discouraging to lose confidence in an associate. When we see and read about human jackals who are preying upon society, we find it hard sometimes to keep our poise and let the sunshine of confidence enter our souls, and yet I believe it is true that mankind generally are growing better. This I do know, that often when we misjudge a brother and seem to lose confidence in him, if we will go to him and find his point of view, our confidence will be restored.—CR, October 1934, pp. 93-94.

HEALTH, WORK, AND HAPPINESS. One condition of happiness is health, though we may be comparatively happy without it. I have seen cheerful, radiant people who have not enjoyed good health, but their joy and radiance result from patient endurance. A kind Providence seems to reward them.

To most of us who must be actively performing our duties, good health is essential to success and happiness. And obedience to the gospel of Jesus Christ contributes to both. It is glorious, glorious, to have the body respond to what the active spirit within would like it to perform. Compliance with the Word of Wisdom contributes to health and vigor of body and mind.

When Orlando, in As You Like It, was banished by his unscrupulous brother, his old servant, Adam, who had attended him from boyhood, proffered to go with him, saying,

"Let me be your servant: Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty." Then he gave as a reason, "For in my youth I never did apply hot and rebellious liquors in my blood, Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo The means of weakness and debility; Therefore my age is as a lusty winter, Frosty, but kindly: ..."

(Act II, iii, 17-68.)

Attitudesa-McKay, David O.TPNext to health as a means of giving happiness I think I would name work. That is why Latter-day Saints are so happy. They have so much to do they have not time to think of their troubles, but better than that, they are thinking of others. They are not seeking happiness, but when they give others joy, happiness is their reward.

For example, I have seen young girls who have spent the entire day serving people on Old Folks' Day, seeking the comfort and happiness of somebody else. I remember on one occasion when one of those young ladies came home in the evening she suddenly realized she was weary, threw herself on the cot, and said, "My, I am tired, but do you know this has been one of the happiest days of my life." She had found joy in work that gave joy to others.—DNCS, August 8, 1951.

Worka-McKay, David O.TPLearn to like your work. Learn to say, "This is my work, my glory, not my doom." God has blessed us with the privilege of working. When he said, "Earn thy bread by the sweat of thy brow," he gave us a blessing. Men and women have accepted it. Too much leisure is dangerous. Work is a divine gift.—DNCS, August 8, 1951.

"SERMONS IN STONES, BOOKS IN RUNNING BROOKS. ..." Another contributing factor to happiness is to be able to enjoy the gifts of nature.

The poorest man living can enjoy these because God gives all his blessings free:

" 'Tis Heaven alone that is given away, 'Tis only God may be had for the asking." Lowell, "The Vision of Sir Launfal."

Naturea-McKay, David O.TPEverybody can enjoy a glorious sunset. You would have to pay a great sum for a painting by a skilled artist. Only the wealthy can afford it, but almost any evening we can look at a brilliant western sky, and each one of us can say, "That's mine."

Too few of us appreciate what this means.—DNCS, August 8, 1951.

Consciencea-McKay, David O.TPHAPPINESS, CONSCIENCE, AND THE SENSE OF FREEDOM. The first condition of happiness is a clear conscience. No man who does wrong or who is unvirtuous will be happy. No unvirtuous woman can ever be happy unless he or she fully repents. Uprightness of character, honesty in dealing with your fellow men, honor bright, your word as good as your bond, then when your head touches your pillow at night, and you contemplate your actions during the day, you sleep with a good conscience.

Consciencea-McKay, David O.TPDaniel Webster said, "Weighed against conscience, the world itself is but a bubble, for God himself is in conscience lending it authority."

Happinessa-McKay, David O.TPHappiness is the end and design of life, for man is that he might have joy; but I repeat, it does not come from without.

Libertya-McKay, David O.TPThe second factor I name as contributing to happiness is a sense of freedom. It is sweet to contemplate that word. It is glorious to think of the liberties that we enjoy as citizens of this great republic. We love to look back to the heroes who offered their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor in defense of individual liberty.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TP"God is endeavoring to make men like himself. To do this he must first make them free." The philosopher who wrote those words got a glimpse of an eternal gospel truth. Man can choose the highest good or choose the lower good and fall short of what he was intended to be.

I leave this fundamental to happiness with the admonition to you to be true to the Constitution of the United States, to the Bill of Rights. Do not let any theories of misguided politicians induce you to do anything that will deprive us of our liberties as vouchsafed by that immortal document.

Self-Controla-McKay, David O.TPSELF-MASTERY EMPHASIZED AGAIN. A third contributing factor to happiness I name as the confidence of self-mastery. No one wishes to be a slave to other human beings; no one willingly bows down to a dictator. But some are slaves to themselves, to their appetites, and passions. They are not free. They have deprived themselves of freedom and of individual liberty. Instead of being kings and masters of self, they are slaves.

That is one reason why the Lord has given us the Word of Wisdom, one reason why he has told us to control our passions, to control anger, not to speak evil of one another, but to control that tendency of human nature to slander or to rejoice in a brother's faults.

Any physiology book will tell you how nicotine may harm the body, particularly how injurious is its effect upon the young. Science demonstrates that, too, but there is a greater reason why young people especially should not indulge in cigaret smoking or in habit-forming drinks—because as children of God they should not be slaves to an appetite.—DNCS, August 8, 1951.

THE GOSPEL OF JOY

Joya-McKay, David O.TPI think it is highly fitting to say a few words to refresh our own minds regarding the purpose of preaching the gospel. It is illustrated in the song "Joy, praise, exaltation of the soul." It is expressed in the scripture, "men are, that they might have joy." (2 Nephi 2:25.)

Happiness is the aim of the gospel, not pain nor grief, not gloom, not mere pleasure. There is a difference between pleasure and joy, between pleasure and happiness.

THE PROPHET'S TEACHING. The Prophet Joseph said that "Happiness is the object and design of our existence, and will be the end thereof if we pursue the path that leads to it." And this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and living all of the commandments of God. But we cannot live the commandments without first knowing them, and we cannot expect to know all or more than we now know unless we comply with or keep those we have already received. One purpose of proclaiming the gospel is to declare to the world what these commandments are as recorded in the gospels giving the account of Jesus' teachings and those of the Twelve who followed him.

Happinessa-McKay, David O.TPTHE GRAND PRINCIPLE OF APPLIED GOSPEL "SCIENCE"; UNSELFISH SERVICE. All mankind desires happiness. Many also strive sincerely to make the most and best of themselves. Surprisingly few, however, realize that a sure guide to such achievement may be found in the following declaration by Jesus of Nazareth: "For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it." (Matt. 16:25.)

This significant passage contains a secret more worthy of possession than fame or dominion, something more valuable than all the wealth of the world.

It is a principle, the application of which promises to supplant discouragement and gloom with hope and gladness; to fill life with contentment and peace everlasting. This being true, its acceptance would indeed be a boon today to this distracted world. Why, then, do men and nations ignore a thing so precious?

Is the truth in the paradoxical statement, losing one's life to find it, so elusive that mankind cannot grasp it? Or is it so in conflict with the struggle for existence that men consider it impractical?

Even so, the fact remains that He who is "The way, the truth and the life" has herein set forth an immutable law, obedience to which will ameliorate those social and economic conditions in which

"Man's inhumanity to man Makes countless thousands mourn." Burns, "Man Was Made to Mourn."

Self-Deniala-McKay, David O.TPSpecifically stated, this law is, "We live our lives most completely when we strive to make the world better and happier." The law of pure nature, survival of the fittest, is self-preservation at the sacrifice of all else; but in contrast to this the law of true spiritual life is, deny self for the good of others.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints accepts as fundamental this law of life. Faithful members thereof are convinced that only in its application can true happiness be found or a truly great character be developed; and they believe with Emerson that "character is higher than intellect—a great soul will be fit to live as well as to think." To them, also, the safety and perpetuity of our nation depend upon the character-building, law-abiding individual.

With this end in view, a virtual army of men and women, serving willingly without salary, offer every week to a whole generation of children and youth instruction and guidance in character-building and spiritual growth. In addition to this army of officers and teachers, men ordained to the priesthood have accepted the obligation to devote their time and talents as far as possible to the scattering of sunshine, joy, and peace among their fellow men.

In all such efforts these men and women are but actuated by the high ideals of the prophet of the nineteenth century who, exemplifying the teachings of Christ, said, "If my life is of no value to my friends, it is of no value to me."

Never was there a time in the history of the world when the application of this principle was more needed. Therefore, let sincere men and women the world over unite in earnest effort to supplant feelings of selfishness, hatred, animosity, greed, by the law of service to others, and thereby promote the peace and happiness of mankind.—CR, April 1936, pp. 45-46.

Servicea-McKay, David O.TPThere is one thing needful for joy to which man is entitled, and it is the greatest of all. It is the service we render mankind.

Charactera-McKay, David O.TPThere is something we can take home to God, in achieving which we find true happiness, and that is character—what you have made of yourself during this mortal existence. Character—it may be weak; it may be strong. You must decide, but whatever you make it during the twenty, thirty, fifty, seventy, eighty, one hundred years that you spend here will be what you take back there. Character and the service you have rendered will determine your position and place in the next world.—DNCS, August 8, 1951.

THE RESULTS ARE VISIBLE. A number of years ago, President Edward J. Wood, his counselors, and I were about to enter the temple at Cardston when an automobile stopped at the west gate. None of us recognized the travelers—a man, his wife, and two children, if I remember rightly. They came toward us, and then the gentleman introduced himself as a minister from Iowa.

He said, "We have just driven through Utah, and the first building that impressed us was the temple at St. George. We came north, and we saw the Manti Temple, a beautiful structure. We continued farther north, and visited the Temple grounds and the Tabernacle in Salt Lake City. Everybody around there seemed to radiate joy, and we heard the congregation sing 'Come, Come, Ye Saints.' Now in Canada we see this temple. There is something about the people whom we have met from St. George to Canada which has impressed us greatly. It is the happiness you seem to radiate. I am going to teach my congregation to sing that song, 'Come, Come, Ye Saints.' "

He was impressed with something which to him was indefinable. We are a happy people.—DNCS, August 8, 1951, p. 2.

Consciencea-McKay, David O.TPTHE REWARD OF CLEAR CONSCIENCE. It is glorious when you can lie down at night with a clear conscience, knowing you have done your best not to offend anyone and have injured no man. You have tried to cleanse your heart of all unrighteousness, and if you put forth precious effort, you can sense as you pray to God to keep you that night that he accepts your effort.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-McKay, David O.TPYou have a sense that you are God's child, not a mere cog of the state, but a person whose soul God wants to save. You have the strength, the sense of resistance to evil, to keep from evil. You also have the realization that you have made the world better for having been in it. These and a hundred other virtues and conditions are all wrapped up in the gospel of Jesus Christ.—DNCS, June 18, 1952, p. 3.

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TP"THE MEASURE OF THE STATURE OF THE FULNESS OF CHRIST." True happiness is found in living the Christ's life—on Monday as well as on Sunday. He who is virtuous only at intervals proves that his pretended virtue is but a sham. Such a person lacks sincerity, the foundation of a true character, without which happiness is impossible. He who seeks for happiness alone seldom finds it, but he who lives, that is, who loses himself to give happiness to others, finds that a double portion has come to himself. Membership in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints carries with it the responsibility to overcome temptation, to battle error, to improve the mind, and to develop one's spirit until it comes to the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ.—MS, 85:9, 1923.

Happinessa-McKay, David O.TPTHE GRAND KEY. If you would be happy, obey the principles of the gospel.—DNCS, January 2, 1952, p. 4.
