David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

BOOK VII

SELECTED ESSAYS AND ANECDOTES

"I wish I could say to every young man in the Church, that if you would be successful, if you would be happy, if you would conserve your strength, intellectual, physical, and spiritual, you will resist temptation to indulge your appetites and your passions."

DAVID O. MCKAY

The Improvement Era

Volume 48:310

CHAPTER 37

LESSONS FROM LIFE

I

BUILDING FOR ETERNITY

There is a mythical Greek tale that Charon was permitted once upon a time to visit the earth to see what men were doing. From a lofty eminence he looked over the cities, palaces, and other works of men. As he turned to resume his assigned task, he exclaimed: "These human beings are spending their time in building just birds' nests. No wonder they fail and are ashamed."

Eternitya-McKay, David O.TPMen today to far too great an extent not only are spending their time with things which have no permanent value but also are ruthlessly destroying much that they have built throughout the centuries. War is making the earth a shambles. Churches, palaces, cottages, hospitals in many parts of the globe lie in ruins as if shaken by a terrible earthquake. As accompaniment to this destruction there is a pall of night which seems to be enveloping nations as an impenetrable fog—a darkness that springs from hate; for, "... he that hateth his brother is in darkness, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth, because that darkness hath blinded his eyes." (I John 2:11.)—CR, October 1942, p. 67.

Eternitya-McKay, David O.TPAll the truly great men of the world have built something besides "birds' nests." Out of the deep longing of their minds and hearts, they have brought forth gems of truth that have made the world richer. They have wrought deeds of love and sacrifice that have inspired millions. In so doing, they might have suffered; many indeed have met untimely death; but all who thus gave their lives, saved them. That which we do for God and our fellow men lives forever; that which we do just for ourselves cannot endure.—AA, p. 3.

II

SHIPWRECK REPENTANCE

Repentancea-McKay, David O.TPIn August 1899, the steamship City of Rome collided with an iceberg just off the coast of Newfoundland. There was panic aboard the vessel, and for a time passengers wondered whether they would have to take to the lifeboats. Among those passengers was one who professed belief in God and in the restored gospel but had actually not conformed to his belief. He would not participate in worship; he violated the Word of Wisdom and assumed generally a careless attitude toward things religious. Every morning from the time that boat left Glasgow harbor until the morning of the collision this gentleman had taken his coffee at breakfast. At the moment of the collision he was at the bar. Strange as it may seem, in the hour of imminent danger he was the first of his group to suggest that they retire for prayer and seek God's protection. The vessel made no progress that night, a sleepless one for this particular passenger. Next morning he ordered neither tea nor coffee, and, seeing this, one of his companions said: "What's the matter, 'Doctor'? Aren't you going to have your coffee this morning?"

Repentancea-McKay, David O.TP"No, sir," came the prompt reply. And then seemingly in all earnestness he added: "I am not going to taste another drop of tea or coffee until we get to New York!"

Repentancea-McKay, David O.TPNo self-denial, no outward act, no pretense can conceal from the Lord an insincere heart.—IE, 48:69 (1945).

III

DANGEROUS REEFS

Twenty-four years ago when the steamship Marama dropped anchor outside the coral reef that surrounds the island of Rarotonga, a passenger desiring to go ashore asked the captain why he did not sail nearer to the wharf. In answer, the experienced seaman mentioned treacherous waters and pointed to an engine of one ship, the Maitai, and to the bow of another, still protruding out of the water—both carrying mute evidence of the danger of anchoring too close to the shore of this coral-bound island. "We anchor here," said the captain, "because it is safer to avoid being dashed to pieces, as were those two vessels, hulls of which lie on those dangerous reefs."

Marriagea-McKay, David O.TPA flippant attitude toward marriage, the ill-advised suggestion of "companionate marriage," the base, diabolical theory of "free sex experiment," and the ready-made divorce courts are dangerous reefs upon which many a family bark is wrecked.—IE, 48:238-239 (1945).

IV

THE NETTLES

Jean Val Jean as Mansieur l'Mayor—you will remember, in that great work of Victor Hugo's (Les Miserables)—came one day upon some laborers who were very busy pulling up nettles. The nettles were lying there—thrown out to die. The great leader picked up one and said: "This is dead, but it would be well if we knew how to put it to some use. When the nettle is young, the leaves make excellent greens, even when old it has filaments and fibers like hemp and flax. Cloth made from the nettle is worth as much as that made from hemp. Chopped up, the nettle is good for poultry pounded, it is good for horned cattle."

He named some other uses and added, "If we would take a little pain, the nettle would be useful; we neglect it, and it becomes harmful, then we kill it."

He then paused and said: "How much men are like nettles! My friends, remember this, that there are no bad herbs and no bad men; there are only bad cultivators!"

Teaching, Gospela-McKay, David O.TPI think the man or woman who stands before a class to teach the standards of the Church who himself or herself does not live up to those standards is a "bad cultivator."—IE, 47:720-721 (1944).

V

"THANK YOU"

Gratitudea-McKay, David O.TPWhenever we receive a favor or a gift, the least we can do is to express appreciation by saying "thank you." Very often those words seem very feeble in expressing the feeling we have of a favor bestowed.—CR, October 1951, p. 157.

VI

KINDNESS TO ANIMALS

It is a good thing to teach our boys to be kind. A man who was working for me once on the farm came home about sundown, and said, "I have just killed a porcupine over there."

I said, "Why did you kill it?"

"Oh," he said, "just for fun." And I said, "Did you kill it or is it over there suffering?"

"Oh, I killed it." Well, I wondered, so I just took time to cross those two creeks and go over to the little hill. He had not killed it. The poor creature was just stunned; its head was beaten, and it was struggling. What fun can there be in treating dumb animals in that cruel way?—CR, October 1951, pp. 180-181.

VII

WISDOM AND "MONKEY BUSINESS"

This is an incident that occurred in a zoo. It is simple, and some probably may think we should not go to the monkeys for lessons. I think they can teach us something. Sister McKay and I stood one day, I believe it was at San Diego, watching a mother monkey with a newborn babe. She was guarding it, her quick eye watching the other monkeys in the cage; but the little babe was free to do just as it pleased, hopping around, weak in its infancy, getting hold of the bars, starting to climb. When it would reach a certain place, the mother would reach up and bring it back. When it got into a danger point, that mother instinctively guarded it and by action, said, "Back this way." And then the babe was free again, but only within certain limits.

Agencya-McKay, David O.TPI said to Sister McKay, "There is a lesson of life in guiding children. Teach children early in life that they are free to do as they please so long they do not get into danger or interfere with the actions and rights of others. Freedom has its limitations.—CR, September-October 1950, p. 165.

VIII

MAUDLIN SENTIMENT

I am reminded of a circumstance of the Russian woman who felt sympathy; she knew how to sympathize with the poor heroine on the theater stage. This Russian lady sat in her box, comfortable in her furs and silks, and as she looked at the performances she wept in sympathy with the heroine who was suffering imaginary torments; and while that Russian woman was sympathizing with the stage heroine, her own coachman froze to death on the carriage seat outside, because of insufficient clothing. It is not enough to feel; we must act, so that it will benefit somebody.—CR, October 1906, p. 113.

IX

"HIDE YOUR FACE, GEORGE, AND BLUSH"

There are instances in history where little simple acts have expressed the spirit of the entire nation. One comes to my mind now. At one time during the Revolution, General Greene had been defeated; he was alone, penniless, hungry, footsore. He went into an inn, and the proprietor said: "Hello, General Greene! All alone?"

"Yes, alone, hungry, and penniless."

The lady of the house set before him a warm breakfast—plain, but the best she had, and then, shutting the door quietly behind her, she brought and put into the general's hand, a purse.

"There!" she said; "it is all I have, but you are welcome to it; take it."

There was hanging just over the fireplace of that humble inn, the picture of King George III. General Greene arose, turned the picture to the wall, and on the back of it wrote this line: "Hide your face, George, and blush."

Why?

Because that little simple act had within it the expression of the spirit of the Revolution. The spirit of freedom was expressed by that woman in a little deed of service to her country. That is why General Greene said: "Hide your face, George, and blush."

Little Thingsa-McKay, David O.TPSo it may be in this Church; some little act by a deacon, a teacher, a priest, an elder, a seventy, a high priest, an Apostle, or anyone—some little act may manifest a young man's service to his Church and express that loyalty which he feels, which every young man desires to express, and which can best be manifested by service in the work of the Lord.—CR, April 1908, p. 96.

X

"THE RAPIDS ARE BELOW YOU"

I am reminded of an old story that appeared in one of our early schoolbooks. Many of you will remember it. You remember, the author pictures some people sailing down the river towards Niagara Falls, and the man on the shore cries:

"Young men, ahoy, the rapids are below you!"

But they went on laughing and carousing. Later he cried: "Young men, ahoy, the rapids are below you!"

But they heeded not his warning call until they suddenly realized that they were in the midst of the rapids, and with all the power at their command they failed to turn their boat upstream, so shrieking and cursing over they went!

Brotherhooda-McKay, David O.TPWell, it is a very impressive picture. The lesson left an indelible impression upon me, but today it seems incomplete. It is one thing to stand on the shore and cry: "Young men, ahoy, there is danger ahead"; and it is another thing to row into the stream, and, if possible, get into the boat with the young men and by companionship, and by persuasion, by legitimate force, when necessary, turn the boat from the rapids. Too many of us stand on the shore and cry: "Young men, ahoy!" Let us get into their lives, let us touch their personality by our personality, and let them feel that there is something real in this religion; that it is the greatest thing in life, that nothing else can make them live as the true religious life.—CR, October 1920, pp. 41-42.

XI

A GENTLEMAN'S WORD

I like to think of that English gentleman who, finding himself distressed financially, borrowed from a friend, to whom he gave his written note; but before the gentleman received his competence, he was again in financial distress and borrowed from another friend, to whom he gave only his promise. Both these lenders knew when the gentleman received his money, and both called for the return of their money. The first who held the gentleman's note was surprised to hear the gentleman say, "I will pay the second first." The first one protested saying, "I lent you that money first, your lordship."

"Yes, that is true," replied the English gentleman, "but you hold my note. This friend has only my word of honor. I will redeem my promise first."

The first man taking the note from his pocket, tore it into pieces, threw it into the wastebasket, and said, "There, your lordship, I have only your promise."

"Since you place it upon that basis, you shall have your money first."

A mere incident emphasizing the importance that a gentleman places upon his word of honor.—CR, October 1929, pp. 13-14.

XII

THE EMPEROR'S PALACE AND THE CARVER OF IVORY

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPI am reminded of an incident that happened in front of the Japanese emperor's palace in Tokyo. Three or four of us Mormon missionaries were there, and with us a Japanese convert, a carver of ivory, wearing the cloak of the ordinary working man. As we stood there, I noticed the obeisance this Japanese, though a member of the Church, paid the grounds and particularly the palace. I turned to him and said: "Do you know, Brother Watanabe, that you have something which is of more value than all the wealth you are looking at, and something which the emperor cannot have unless he follows the same road that you have followed?"

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TPThe man looked up in surprise to think that he, a humble carver, would have something which was of more value than the emperor's palace or all his possessions. And through the interpreter, Brother Stimpson, he said: "What is it?"

Priesthooda-McKay, David O.TP"Why," I said, "it is the priesthood of the Almighty. You are an elder in the Church of Jesus Christ, and that is of more worth to you than all the wealth you are now looking at."—CR, October 1948, pp. 173-174.

XIII

EYES THAT SEE NOT

Fifteen miles from Vernal, Uintah County, stands a hill over which people walked and rode at intervals for years without seeing anything unusual about it. They noticed two great rocks uniform in size, but to men bent upon pioneer duties they were only rocks. One day a man from the Carnegie Institute walked over the same hill. The nature of the rocks suggested to him that they probably belonged to the Jurassic period of the world's history. He knew that in these strata are sometimes found fossils of huge animals that once roamed over parts of the earth. What were only common rocks to the farmer, the cattleman, and the pioneer were to the trained mind of the scientist, fossilized remains of two vertebrae of a gigantic creature that had been extinct for centuries. In the course of a short time this discoverer had a force of men carefully uncovering these fossilized remains, and the people of the surrounding valley looked on with interest and amazement, as a dinosaur, sixty-five feet long and thirty-five feet high was uncovered. Following indications as he perceived them, this educator in the realm of science, by great effort and expense, unearthed one of the finest specimens perhaps yet discovered. Others have since been unearthed, one of which is on display in the University of Utah, and others are still lying in their original position in the quarry.

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TPSo men go through this life, catching occasional glimpses of a higher, a spiritual world; but unfortunately, they remain satisfied with but a glimpse and refuse to put forth the effort required to uncover the beauties and glories of that spiritual realm. They sense it blindly. Crowded by temporal demands, some there are who lose sight of even the indications. The game of life is fascinating, and when men enter it, they enter to win. To win becomes the sole aim of life. The merchant, for example, wishes to succeed, no matter what it costs, though it be honor itself. The politician (not the statesman) enters the political world to satisfy his ambition, regardless of serving the community or his country. Thus, men lose sight of the high things of life; worldly things crush the spiritual light flickering within the soul. Some follow the will-o-the-wisp of indulgence, of passion, become dupes of an illusion, they soon begin to grovel. Truly as Wordsworth says:

Spiritual versus Temporala-McKay, David O.TP"The world is too much with us; late and soon, Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers. Little we see in nature that is ours; We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon." —RSM, 21:725-726 (1934).

XIV

THE PHENOMENON OF PRE-VISION

A number of years ago President Francis M. Lyman and President B. H. Roberts had attended a quarterly conference at Loa, Wayne County, Utah. In those days traveling was by team and whitetop. The brethren had started early that morning to catch the train at Sigurd—fifty or sixty miles distant. They stopped for breakfast at Koosharem. While they were eating, a very singular incident occurred. A young man, seeing the whitetop, knowing the elders were in the house, dismounted from his horse, entered, and eagerly asked: "How long are you brethren going to stay here?"

"Just long enough to finish our breakfast. Why?" queried Elder Lyman.

"Because I should like to bring my uncle here and have you administer to him."

Before the brethren had finished their breakfast, there entered the living room of the house a man who was led in his physical blindness by his wife and this young, outstanding rancher. As the elders entered the living room, Brother Lyman, in his bighearted way, putting his hand on the man's knee, said: "Well, so you want to be administered to, do you?"

"No, I do not," was the surprising reply.

"Well, then," said President Lyman, "why are you here?"

"Because my wife and my nephew put me in the wagon and brought me here," was his frank statement.

"How long has it been since you lost your sight?" asked President Lyman. The man told him. And Brother Lyman said: "Well, you believe the Lord can heal you, do you not?"

The man answered, "Well, I think he can. I don't know if he will."

There seemed to be an absolute absence of faith so far as the man was concerned.

"Do you belong to the Church?" asked President Lyman.

"No, I do not," was the reply.

"Well, if the Lord heals you, you would be glad to acknowledge his power, should you not?"

"Yes, if he did, I think I should."

Let me tell you at this point now what seemed to me in that instance to be most significant, and then I will finish the story. That young man had seen in a dream or vision the night before two men who had administered to his uncle, and the latter had received his sight through that administration. That is what prompted him to dismount from his horse, and make the request.

President Lyman and President Roberts performed the administration. The man, his wife, and nephew returned to their home. Presidents Lyman and Roberts resumed their journey to Salt Lake City.

Two or three months later, President Lyman was attending a conference in Blackfoot, Idaho. Among those who greeted him, walking unaided, was this man to whom they had administered. "Do you remember me?" the man asked.

President Lyman said, "Yes, and I see you have received your sight."

"Yes, I have," said the man; "I can read a newspaper as well as you can."

During the brief interview that followed, President Lyman remarked: "I remember our conversation—how do you account for your having received your sight?"

"Well," said the skeptic, "I believe that the medicine I was taking had just begun to work."

There was a miracle, but its effect in converting the man to the power of God was nil.

To me a most important phase of the story is the pre-vision of that young rancher, for I know that pre-vision is an actual fact in life, and it was through his faith that the man had been blessed.

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPYou young men who pass through periods of doubt about the reality of the spirit in man, and of the possibility of its being in contact with divine influence, should ponder earnestly on the fact that there is something within you which can become cognizant of happenings or incidents that are entirely beyond the limit of any one or all of your five physical senses.—DNCS, September 12, 1951, p. 2.

XV

INTEGRITY

There is a virtue—I shall call it a principle—which I wish to emphasize as worthy of our thought and increased effort to establish it among men. That principle is integrity. While visiting in one of the stakes of Zion, in a neighboring state to Utah, I listened to one part of a conversation carried over the telephone. The president of the stake was called from the dinner table to the telephone, and this conversation followed—I was told that which I did not hear, so I can give it to you in full:

"Do you know," said the stranger, a non-member of the Church, to the president of the stake, "do you know Mr. So and So?"

"Yes."

"Is he a member of your Church?"

"He is."

"Well, is he in good standing in your Church?"

"Yes."

"All right; thank you. He is here in our office desiring to borrow some money to make an investment. He referred us to you and said he was a member of your Church. If he is in good standing, we will lend him the money."

Oh, that confidence! My heart rejoiced, and it rejoices today that, so far as honesty and integrity are concerned, the Church of Jesus Christ is a light. You and I grieve most deeply when we hear of a member who forgets himself and destroys, by his dishonesty, that confidence.—CR, October 1910, pp. 47-48.

XVI

THE CHURCH AND THE OAK: AN ALLEGORY

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TPI picture the Church as a mighty oak, against which little boys throw mud, covering the bark, and sometimes injuring the leaves; they even use their penknives in an attempt to chop down the tree. At worst, they only riddle a few leaves and besmear the bark. In a few days, the mud is all gone; the rains have washed it off. The life of the oak has pushed out new bark and new leaves; and the mud, which defaced only the outward part, is all gone. Why? Because the life of the oak was untouched, and it had the power within it to throw off those excrescences thrown upon it by thoughtless boys or malicious youths. So it is with the Church—calumny cannot hurt it if it is pure within.—CR, October 1907, p. 60.

XVII

"DANDY": AN IMPULSIVE COLT

Recently I had great pleasure in training a well-bred colt. He had a good disposition, clean, well-rounded eye, was well proportioned, and all in all, a choice equine possession. Under the saddle he was as willing, responsive, and co-operative as a horse could be. He and my dog Scotty were real companions. I liked the way he would go up to something of which he was afraid. He had confidence that if he would do as I bade him he would not be injured.

But Dandy resented restraint. He was ill-contented when tied and would nibble at the tie rope until he was free. He would not run away; he just wanted to be free. Thinking other horses felt the same, he would proceed to untie their ropes. He hated to be confined in the pasture, and if he could find a place in the fence where there was only smooth wire, he would paw the wire carefully with his feet until he could step over to freedom. More than once my neighbors were kind enough to put him back in the field. He learned even to push open the gate. Though his depredations were provoking and sometimes expensive, I admired his ingenuity.

But his curiosity and desire to explore the neighborhood led him and me into trouble. Once on the highway he was hit by an automobile, resulting in a demolished machine, injury to the horse, and slight, though not serious, injury to the driver.

Recovering from that, and still impelled by a feeling of wanderlust, he inspected the fence throughout the entire boundary. He even found the gates wired. So, for awhile we thought we had Dandy secure in the pasture.

One day, however, somebody left the gate unwired. Detecting this, Dandy unlatched it, took Nig, his companion, with him, and together they visited the neighbor's field. They went to an old house used for storage. Dandy's curiosity prompted him to push open the door. There was a sack of grain. What a find! Yes, and what a tragedy! The grain was poisoned bait for rodents! In a few minutes Dandy and Nig were in spasmodic pain, and shortly both were dead.

Youtha-McKay, David O.TPHow like Dandy are many of our youth! They are not bad; they do not even intend to do wrong; but they are impulsive, full of life, full of curiosity, and long to do something. They, too, are restive under restraint, but if they are kept busy, guided carefully and rightly, they prove to be responsive and capable; but if left to wander unguided, they all too frequently find themselves in the environment of temptation and too often are entangled in the snares of evil.—DNCS, February 23, 1946, p. 8.
