David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 38

OUTLOOKS AT RELIGION AND RELIGIOUS PRACTICES

I

A MISSIONARY EXPERIENCE IN SCOTLAND

One gloomy, misty morning a young elder was distributing tracts in Stirling, Scotland. He had been away from his home in Utah only a few months, but he had already encountered the opposition that prejudice and bigotry were hurling against the Church. For the first time in his life he had felt the sting of ostracism. He was in the land of his father's birth, in the home country of his ancestors, as far back as records could trace them. He spoke the same language as those around him. He was somewhat conversant with the history of the old Stirling Castle, with its romances and tragedies. He had read several of Scott's historical novels and could read and quote from Burns' love songs with appreciation. He thought he was the worshiper of the same God as the professing Christians with whom he associated. He was not at a loss, therefore, for material for conversation on topics interesting to Scotchmen when opportunities for conversation presented themselves. Gradually, however, there had crept over him the realization that he and his companion were in no manner a part of the social or religious element of that city.

This ostracism was because of their religion.

Their Church was considered as unwholesome, as something to be despised. Was it? Yet, after all, was it really worth the seeming sacrifices that he, his companion, and thousands of others were making for it? Most surely someone was deceived. Either he was wrong or the people were. They seemed sincere in their opposition to his Church. He was sincere in his advocacy of it. Were they right or was he?

With these thoughts and feelings and many others associated with them, he took his tracts that morning and entered a "close," distributing them from door to door from the ground floor to the top. When he came down, a half dozen or more housewives were assembled at the entrance to the "close." As he passed them, one sneeringly remarked, "Ye can gang awa' hame; ye canna hae ony o' oor lassies!"

Scarcely four months had passed since the sweetest girl in all the world had led him to hope that she would give her hand, as well as her heart, to him upon his return from his mission; so nothing could have been farther from his mind that morning than a desire to win the favor of any other girl. So the woman that sneered was deceived. But her taunt had in it such a vile accusation; viz., that he was there to traffic in the virtue of women and to cover such traffic with the garb of religion!

The most real thing to him in all the world were his own thoughts and feelings, and he knew as he knew nothing else that those women, and all who thought as they, though the number might run into millions, were deceived.

A few days later his companion and he met a minister, who accused them of not being Christians because they believed in the Book of Mormon. Again the elder knew, knew beyond a shadow of doubt, that, in company with all his associates, he accepted Christ and him crucified. The very purpose of his being in Stirling was to bear witness that the living Christ had again spoken to man; to testify that there is no other name given under heaven whereby mankind may be saved.

As he knew his own soul, so he knew that the minister was either deceived or dishonest, in either case, an unsafe guide to the people. That minister's attitude toward his church was typical of the attitude of nearly every minister in the so-called Christian churches.

On that one point, at least, the young elder knew absolutely that those professing Christian leaders were in error and were teaching the people falsehoods.

His familiarity with the New Testament had convinced him that the ministers were not teaching the principles and ordinances of the gospel as Christ and his Apostles taught and practised them; so it was a simple matter for him to decide in his own mind as to who were in error—he and his companion, or, all the rest of the people in Stirling, ministers included!

False accusations thus became a means of clarifying his mind regarding Mormonism and the world as no other experience in his life had clarified it. Study, devotion to duty, and the inspiration of the Lord later made clearer his vision of the glorious principles of salvation and gave him communion with his Friend and Savior, the Redeemer of the world.—MS, 85:24-25 (1923).

II

WHICH, THE CHRISTIAN?

In Adelaide, Australia, there lived a man who had lost his sight. Several years after his affliction came upon him he became converted to the gospel of Jesus Christ as revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith. He was self-supporting, succeeding financially, seemed happy and contented, and was in many ways a remarkable man. His brother-in-law, a minister in the Church of England, refused even to talk to him, on the sole ground that the sightless man was a Latter-day Saint. With the utmost compassion for his brother-in-law, he said one day, "Physically I am blind; but spiritually I know that I see the truth. As my brother-in-law thinks I am spiritually blind, I have kindly asked to lead me into the light, but he has turned against me because I have joined the Church. I understand why he does so, and, therefore, can forgive him for choosing to ignore me."

Measured by the standard of kindly feelings, which one of these men is the true Christian?

Near Newcastle, England, an elder was distributing gospel tracts from door to door. His motives were pure. He sincerely believed that he had a message of vital importance to every person in the world. Important or unimportant, it certainly could do no one any harm. But whether his message did or did not possess virtue, his thoughts and feelings toward his fellow men were in keeping with Christ's teachings regarding man's duty toward his neighbor. Seeing the elder tracting, a gentleman—I shall call him such, though he does not deserve the title—said:

"What are you doing?"

"I am distributing gospel tracts," was the reply.

"Are you a Mormon elder?"

"Yes."

Without the least provocation the man, pale with rage, then raised his cane and assaulted the elder, whose first impulse, naturally, was to knock the offender down, which he could readily have done. However, he controlled himself and received several blows without retaliating. He wisely held his ground, however, and continued his tracting. The would-be defender (?) of Christian principles walked away, his heart still filled with a bitterness made only more intense by his unjustified attack.

Judged by Christ's standard of right thinking, which one of these men is the true Christian?—MS, 85:41 (1923).

III

THE SPIRIT OF SLANDER AND THE SPIRIT OF THE GOSPEL

It is easy to distinguish between the spirit of slander and the spirit of the gospel. I remember an instance in England during my late mission that may illustrate my meaning. Two elders had gone to great expense, for them, in procuring a hall, and in announcing their meeting and distributing literature. Their hopes were high on Sunday morning when, as they approached their hired hall, they saw a goodly number of persons accepting their invitation. One gentleman who was dressed in the garb of a Christian divine approached the hall and was greeted by the elder who was standing at the door. The latter extended his hand, but the minister refused, saying contemptuously, "I did not come here to shake hands with you."

"Very well," said the elder, "you are welcome," and invited him into the hall.

When the elder reported this to me, he said: "I felt somewhat discouraged and gloomy."

I said: "You ought to be very thankful for the experience that came to you that morning. That gentleman misjudged you. You know he misjudged you. You know your sincerity. You know what you had in your heart. You know also that he was wrong in his accusation and in his feelings towards you and your people. Test that spirit and see if you have not more confidence in the work in which you are engaged than you ever had before."—CR, October 1931, pp. 10-11.

IV

THE EFFICACY OF PRAYER

Since childhood it has been very easy for me to believe in the reality of the visions of the Prophet Joseph Smith. What I am going to say may seem very simple to you, but to me it is a heart petal.

Prayera-McKay, David O.TPWhen a very young child in the home of my youth, I was fearful at night. I traced it back to a vivid dream in which two Indians came into the yard. I ran to the house for protection, and one of them shot an arrow and hit me in the back. Only a dream, but I felt that blow, and I was very much frightened, for in the dream they entered the house, a tall one, and a smaller one, and sneered and frightened Mother.

Prayera-McKay, David O.TPI never got over it. Added to that were the fears of my mother, for when Father was away with the herd, or on some mission, Mother would never retire without looking under the bed; so burglars or men who might enter the house and try to take advantage of Mother and the young children were real to me.

Prayera-McKay, David O.TPWhatever the conditions, I was very much frightened. One night I could not sleep, and I fancied I heard noises around the house. Mother was in another room. Thomas E. by my side was sleeping soundly. I became terribly wrought in my feelings, and I decided to pray as my parents had taught me.

Prayera-McKay, David O.TPI thought I could pray only by getting out of bed and kneeling, and that was a terrible test. But I did finally bring myself to get out of bed and kneel and pray to God to protect Mother and the family. And a voice, speaking as clearly to me as mine is to you, said, "Don't be afraid; nothing will hurt you." Where it came from, what it was, I am not saying. You may judge. To me it was a direct answer.

I say it has been easy for me to understand and believe the reality of the visions of the Prophet Joseph. It was easy for me in youth to accept his vision, the appearance of God the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ, to the boy praying. I thought of nothing else. Of course that is real. It was easy for me to believe that Moroni came to him there in the room. Heavenly Beings were real from my babyhood on, and as years came those impressions strengthened by reason and strengthened by the inspiration of God directly to my soul.

I know that those visions were real, and that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, and when we say this, it means that we know that Jesus lives, that Christ is our Redeemer, and that this is his Church. We are merely his representatives. When we accept that, then the reality of God the Father, Father of our spirits, is easy to accept.

These things being real, brethren, we cannot do anything else but try our utmost to do what Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, asks us to do, for he has given us the gospel that bears his name, and in the words of Peter, ... "there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:12.)—CR, October 1951, pp. 182-183.

V

THE REALITY OF THE UNSEEN WORLD

Spirit Worlda-McKay, David O.TPOne day in Salt Lake City a son kissed his mother good morning, took his dinner bucket, and went to City Creek Canyon where he worked. He was a switchman on the train that was carrying logs out of the canyon. Before noon his body was brought back lifeless. The mother was inconsolable. She could not be reconciled to that tragedy—her boy just in his early twenties so suddenly taken away. The funeral was held, and words of consolation were spoken, but she was not consoled. She couldn't understand it.

Spirit Worlda-McKay, David O.TPOne forenoon, so she says, after her husband had gone to his office to attend to his duties as a member of the Presiding Bishopric, she lay in a relaxed state on the bed, still yearning and praying for some consolation. She said that her son appeared and said, "Mother, you needn't worry. That was merely an accident. I gave the signal to the engineer to move on, and as the train started, I jumped for the handle of the freight car, and my foot got caught in a sagebrush, and I fell under the wheel. I went to Father soon after that, but he was so busy in the office I couldn't influence him—I couldn't make any impression upon him, and I tried again. Today I come to you to give you that comfort and tell you that I am happy."

Spirit Worlda-McKay, David O.TPWell, you may not believe it. You may think she imagined it, but you can't make her think so, and you can't make that boy's father think it. I cite it today as an instance of the reality of the existence of intelligence and environment to which you and I are "dead," so to speak, as was this boy's father.—FS, ms., James H. Douglas, Ogden, 1943.

VI

NO MAN CAN SERVE TWO MASTERS

Brethren and sisters, we must choose whom we will serve. I say we cannot go on serving, part of the time, the enemy, and part of the time, the Church. We cannot do this. The Lord has said plainly,

"No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon." (Matt. 6:24.) These words are true; and I believe we should take them as literally as did the Prophet Joseph Smith take the words of James:

"If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, ..." (James 1:5.)

The Prophet believed these words and took them for their meaning. So I believe we should take Christ's words and know that we cannot serve two masters. Let us choose today whom we shall serve.

The truth that we cannot serve two masters is emphasized in Byron's Cain, and I feel to mention it here for emphasis. Cain is tempted by Lucifer; and after the devil has led him on, telling him that the gospel is nothing, that Adam was deceived, that the Lord is only a cruel God, Cain says:

"Wilt thou teach me all things?"

"Aye," says Lucifer, "upon one condition."

Cain: "Name it."

Satan: "That you fall down and worship me, the lord."

Cain: "Thou art not the Lord my father worships?"

Satan: "No."

Cain: "His equal?"

Satan: "No. And have naught in common with Him. No; nor want anything to do with Him. I would be aught above, beneath, I would rather be anything than subject to His power. I dwell apart; yet am I strong, and many there are who follow me, and many yet who shall. Be thou among the first."

Cain answered: "I have never yet bowed to my father's God, though my brother, Abel, oft implores that I should offer sacrifices with him."

Lucifer quickly catches him: "Hast thou not bowed to Him?"

Cain: "Have I not said it? Need I say it? Dost not thy mighty knowledge teach thee that?"

Then these words, and Byron never uttered a greater truth:

Satan: "He who bows not to Him has bowed to me." He who bows not to God has bowed to Lucifer.

"But," says Cain, "I will bow to neither."

"Ne'ertheless," answers the tempter, "thou art my worshiper; he who worships not Him is mine the same."

This truth harmonizes with the scripture. "No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to one, and despise the other." (Ibid., 6:24.)—CR, April 1908, pp. 94-95.

VII

THE PIONEERS—BENEFACTORS OF HUMANITY

Pioneersa-McKay, David O.TPWhen I recently visited Omaha, being a few miles from Florence, I was forcibly reminded of the early experiences of our parents at that place, and at Des Moines, Iowa, then on the frontier. I have heard them tell how they prepared their teams, hitching up a cow with an ox, sometimes a cow with a horse, making ready to take that thousand mile journey; where? Out into the barrenness, out into the wilderness!

Pioneersa-McKay, David O.TPWhat was their purpose? What was the motive? As a prominent educator in Chicago said, the other day: "Not for the golden California, but that they might worship God Almighty according to the dictates of their conscience; and I admire them for it." Such was their motive—to build the Church and to save the principles revealed to man. They had risked all; they had risked life and everything they had and were willing to endure any hardship. Wives walked every step of the way on this long journey, mothers carrying their babes.

Pioneersa-McKay, David O.TPOn the 24th of July, 1847, they were here in this valley. What did they see? You try to picture what they saw. These words will call up the barren picture in the minds of pioneers who are with us today—God bless them and preserve them long with us for what they have done, that we might at least express our appreciation of their devotion to the truth. They saw sagebrush; they heard the howl of the coyote; they saw in the distance the smoke of the Indian fire and the salt sea in the west reflecting the beautiful sunlight; but there was no apparent place for a home. There was nothing inviting; in fact, they had been warned that nothing would grow; a thousand dollars had been offered for the first ear of corn that they would produce. Yet, within a few feet of where we meet today, the prophet of the Lord said, "Here we shall build a house to God."

Pioneersa-McKay, David O.TPNow what do we see? Just look at our city today, its climate modified, its fruit unexcelled, substantial and comfortable homes everywhere, towns and cities flourishing. To whom are we indebted for all this? The people of the Mormon Church, the pioneers of 1847 and of subsequent years. They were builders, colonizers, benefactors to our nation, benefactors to humanity. Did they tear down anything? Did they destroy? Did they find fault? No. They protected themselves, with a motive that they might continue to bless.—CR, April 1909, p. 65.

VIII

THE MEANING OF "THIS IS THE PLACE" MONUMENT

This Is the Place Monumenta-McKay, David O.TPMonuments are links that unite one generation to another. We assemble here today to unveil and dedicate one of the great monuments of the world. In some respects it is most unique and outstanding. It is a monument designed by a sentence.

This Is the Place Monumenta-McKay, David O.TPIn our country we have the Washington Monument, the Lincoln Memorial, the Thomas Jefferson Memorial, the Brigham Young Monument, and others erected to individuals. This monument is designated as "This is the Place" Monument.

This Is the Place Monumenta-McKay, David O.TPEvery sentence or phrase serves two purposes; it denotes a certain thing; it also connotes, sometimes, many things. Abraham Lincoln, for example, denotes a long, tall, angular individual, but his name connotes the preservation of the union and other historical events that are cherished by every true citizen of the United States. Let us consider for a moment or two what the phrase, "This is the place," connotes.

This Is the Place Monumenta-McKay, David O.TPA hundred years ago today the great leader, President Brigham Young, looked over this valley and said: "This is the right place. Drive on." What did he have in mind when he said: "This is the place"?

This Is the Place Monumenta-McKay, David O.TPBy reading the reports of his sermons we find that he had in mind, first, the prophetic utterance of the man whom he loved, the Prophet Joseph, who said the Saints would go to the West, build cities, and become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains.

This Is the Place Monumenta-McKay, David O.TPSecondly, when that great leader uttered the sentence, "This is the place," he had in mind that here they would find a place of refuge and peace.

This Is the Place Monumenta-McKay, David O.TPThirdly, he had in mind that from this center there would radiate to all the world a message of truth, insofar as it would be possible for that little band and those who followed them to declare that truth to the world, to establish brotherhood, peace, and above all, faith in God, our Father.

This Is the Place Monumenta-McKay, David O.TPFourthly, he had in mind to establish in this place worship, industry, education, and mutual service.

This Is the Place Monumenta-McKay, David O.TPRegarding the importance of education, President Young said on one occasion soon after they entered the valley:

This Is the Place Monumenta-McKay, David O.TP"First build your fort and protect yourselves from depredations. As soon as you have built your log house, let a sufficient number of rooms be appropriated for schools, furnished by the best teachers, and give every child among you an opportunity of continuing his education anew and see that he attends to it. That individual who has an opportunity to educate his children and does not, is not worthy to have children. Teach your children the principles of the kingdom that they may grow in righteousness."

This Is the Place Monumenta-McKay, David O.TPFulfilment of prophecy—a place of refuge and peace—a center from which would radiate the message of truth—a place wherein to establish true worship, industry, education, and service—these are some of the thoughts connoted in the mind of Brigham Young when, a century ago, he said: "This is the place!"—IE, 50:573 (1947).

IX

AN OPEN AIR MEETING

An incident that occurred one night on City Road, in old Glasgow, about the last night that I was in the mission field, has been called to mind.

We were met, as we approached the place of meeting, by a motherly woman, whom I had never seen before, and have never seen since, who said, "The minister wi' a' his congregation is here the nicht, to break up your meetin'. Stand close thegither, so he canna get in the circle." And she and some of her friends joined in that circle and helped us keep it.

When the first speaker began to testify to the restoration of the gospel, this alleged minister cried out, "These men are Mormons," and the elder, who at that time was giving his first address in public out in the field, became somewhat confused, said a few more words, and stepped back in the ring. Then this interrupter had the crowd, and among other things said, "These men come from Salt Lake City; they are after your daughters, and they want to take them out there and hitch them to the plow and make them work and make slaves of them."

Well, we called on Brother Leggatt, who was a resident of Glasgow, and he stepped out in the ring and said, "Fellow Townsmen," which gave the lie right at once to the minister's statement that we were all from Salt Lake City, and then Brother Leggatt bore his testimony in an excellent address. Well, that man continued his railing until our meeting was about half over, at which time the crowd began to realize that his heart was filled with animosity, and they silenced him and listened to the message which the elders had to give.—CR, October 1916, pp. 69-70.

X

FACING THE TABERNACLE CONGREGATION

It is always more or less an ordeal for me to face an audience, and particularly a congregation in this historic Tabernacle. I've been in hopes for years that I would outgrow that feeling, but I still think, study, and pray in anticipation; I tremble as I stand before you with the sense of inadequacy to give a timely message as it should be given; and after it's over, worry in self-reproachment for having failed to do justice to the cause. I suppose you brethren have all sensed these same feelings; so I ask for your sympathy, your help this morning. I particularly pray for guidance of the Holy Spirit.—CR, Sept.-Oct. 1949, pp. 116-117.

XI

THE PRIMARY BIRTHDAY PENNIES

Generosity is benevolence in action, and Carlyle says benevolence "is the minister of God." This edifice is the result of true benevolence—one of the most precious of the spiritual attributes of man.

The birthday penny contribution touches every little boy, every little girl who participates. Childhood is being trained in this fundamental spiritual quality every time February comes, and children count their years in pennies for blessing those in need.

I saw an illustration of how real such a contribution is to a child one day at our home in Ogden. I needed some material from the store, looked at my watch, and noted that it was near closing time for business. I asked one of my boys to hurry down town before the stores closed.

As he was a little late returning, I said, "What made you so long returning?"

He answered, "I thought I would run down and back instead of taking the streetcar and save the money because next Sunday is dime Sunday."

Only a little thing, but the boy earned his dime to be one with his classmates in making his class one hundred percent successful in that contribution.

I noticed in the program today a letter from one of the little children here in the hospital. "I like this hospital. I gave my pennies on my birthday to the Primary, and I am glad all the children give theirs so I can come here and get well with the other children. We do so many nice things here."

Benevolence! Generosity!

May the spiritual significance of this reach to the outermost parts of the world. These contributions come from Canada, Mexico, all over the United States, wherever the Church has a branch. And all little children are welcome who need assistance rendered by this hospital. If they can pay, then contributions are received. If they cannot, the children receive the blessings just the same.—DNCS, March 5, 1952, p. 3.

XII

THE PRIMARY HOSPITAL

The Primary Hospital is a blessing to thousands of children in need of medical skill and careful nursing. It is a monument to all who believe in doing gracious deeds to their fellow men.—DNCS, March 5, 1952, p. 3.

XIII

DIVINE AUTHORITY BY DIRECT REVELATION: AN INCIDENT

A young girl came to Sister McKay not long ago and said she was asked to give the fundamental beliefs of our Church, and she said, "Do you know, I was at a loss to do it." We were surprised to hear her say that. No young man or young woman in this Church, in his or her teens, should ever be at a loss to say what the fundamental truths of this so-called Mormonism are.

Let me just illustrate. Suppose young man, young woman, that a person were to ask you to name three, just three distinguishing features of the Church. What should you answer? Every young man or young woman who follows a course of study from the Primary and Sunday School up to the missionary department should be able to answer that and give not only three, but a half dozen, distinguishing features of this Church.

Let me particularize. I was asked that question one time on board a ship that left the northern part of Australia for Singapore. A man and his wife from California met two Mormon elders aboard that vessel, and the woman, after a few minutes' introduction, said, "Would you mind if I ask you a personal question?"

I said, "Certainly not, and I will answer before you ask it. I have only one wife."

"How did you know I was going to ask that?"

"Because that is the false idea that many have regarding Mormonism."

"Then," she said, "if that (meaning plural marriage) is not the fundamental purpose of your religion, what is?"

I said, "We are Christians."

She said, "So are we." Then she gave that question. "What are the distinguishing features of your Church as compared with ours?"

"I will state them briefly," I answered. "The first distinguishing feature of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is divine authority by direct revelation." I hesitated.

"What do you mean?"

Revelationa-McKay, David O.TP"Just that. I do not say 'divine authority.' There are others who claim divine authority. The Roman Catholics claim it direct from Peter. The Greek Orthodox claim it direct from the five Apostles who survived Peter. We claim that that authority was lost during the Dark Ages, as Roger Williams stated in substance when he resigned as pastor of the oldest Baptist Church in America, that he resigned because he did not have the authority to represent the Savior. And there was no man living who had that authority nor can there be until new Apostles are sent for whose coming he said he was waiting. That was one hundred and fifty or more years before the Prophet Joseph said he had received a revelation that the churches had lost their authority, and he was divinely commissioned to organize this Church and given the priesthood by direct descent from our Savior to represent God on earth.

Revelationa-McKay, David O.TP"That is what we mean by divine authority by direct revelation."—DNCS, April 30, 1952, p. 3.

XIV

THE PROSTITUTION OF WORTHY PRINCIPLES

I often find my mind occupied by an ever-recurring thought suggested by a conversation I had recently with some students, more particularly with one student, who came to inquire for guidance and to seek possible help.

This particular young man was very much perturbed in his feelings. He had heard in one of his classes several imputations that seemed to conflict with his ideas of religion. One of the latest, for an illustration, was this: His teacher had said that the principle of "fasting is a relic of asceticism." I immediately asked him if he had ever thought that asceticism as related to fasting might be the prostitution of a worthy principle. He said he had never considered that phase of the question.—CR, April 1932, pp. 61-62.

XV

THREE PARABLES

There are three very remarkable parables recorded by Luke in the fifteenth chapter. They are called the parables of the lost and found. Usually whenever they are referred to, the principles of repentance and forgiveness are emphasized, and the rejoicing over the lost because the lost has been found. To that phase of the parable I am not going to refer tonight, except to say that I think that part of these parables is sometimes misinterpreted or at least misapplied. There is another phase of these parables which appeals to me even more than the rejoicing, and that is what I want to speak about tonight. I desire to refer to the conditions that contribute to their being lost.

The scene is a gathering of publicans and sinners who have assembled, it seems, in quite large numbers to hear the message of Jesus. Standing out are pictured Pharisees and Sadducees who are sneering at the Man of Nazareth who is speaking to these publicans and sinners, and the Pharisees and Sadducees are judging him, I suppose, by the company he is keeping. By the Sadducees, the publicans and sinners are looked upon as lost. To the multitude Jesus speaks three parables. The first, the parable of the lost sheep:

"What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it?" (Luke 15:4.)

I ask you tonight, how did that sheep get lost? He was not rebellious. If you follow the comparison, the lamb was seeking its livelihood in a perfectly legitimate manner, but either stupidly, perhaps unconsciously, it followed the enticement of the field, the prospect of better grass until it got out beyond the fold and was lost.

Successa-McKay, David O.TPSo we have those in the Church, young men and young women, who wander away from the fold in perfectly legitimate ways. They are seeking success, success in business, success in their professions, and before long they become disinterested in Church and finally disconnected from the fold; they have lost track of what true success is, perhaps stupidly, perhaps unconsciously, in some cases, perhaps willingly. They are blind to what constitutes true success.

Successa-McKay, David O.TPJesus gave an apt definition of success, I think, when he spoke of Mary Magdalene, saying, "She hath done what she could." (Mark 14:8.) True success is reaching the level of our best in our association with our fellow men. Many of these wandering away as the lost sheep are seeking success for selfish purposes, not for the benefit of their fellow men. See the difference?

Over twenty years ago we had a truly excellent group of missionaries in the European Mission. I have been interested in watching them during the intervening years. One of these was a brilliant missionary, and he was faithful. He came home, completed his education, and succeeded in obtaining a high position in his profession. For twenty years now he has been following that profession. He is successful in it, but he has gone so far and has so little contact with the flock, the body of the Church, that he hesitates about affiliating himself with it.

There was another missionary who came home about the same time who also started out to succeed, and he has succeeded; he is a prominent businessman in this city, highly successful; but he has always kept in touch with the Church. I think he is a success. He has succeeded in his business, but he has used his means to help the Church of Jesus Christ; he is in the fold. There is no need of striking out in selfishness, thinking you have to leave the Church in order to succeed. In the Church we can ask God's help to guide us.

Guidance, Divinea-McKay, David O.TPYou remember the story of the businessman who went into his private office in the morning and closed the door, and one of his agents came and said to the secretary: "I want to see the manager."

Guidance, Divinea-McKay, David O.TPThe secretary answered: "He is in conference."

Guidance, Divinea-McKay, David O.TP"I have come a long way to see him. I want to see him this morning. I cannot wait."

Guidance, Divinea-McKay, David O.TP"Well, he is in conference."

Guidance, Divinea-McKay, David O.TPThe man arrogantly pushed by the secretary, opened the door of the manager's office, and then quietly closed it, and apologetically said: "I did not know that he is that kind of man."

Guidance, Divinea-McKay, David O.TPSaid the secretary: "I told you that he was in conference."

Guidance, Divinea-McKay, David O.TPThe man was on his knees asking God's aid that day in his business.

I ask our young men at home who are striking out in legitimate enterprises to remember that the true success is not just in achieving that one aim, but in keeping in touch with the organization in which they can serve their fellow men, in which they can live to the level of their best.

The second parable is the parable of the lost coin. A woman lost it, and, looking in vain to find it, called in the neighbors to help her search for it.

In this case the thing lost was not in itself responsible. The one who had been trusted with that coin had, through carelessness or neglect, mislaid it or dropped it. There is a difference. Our charge is not only coins, but also living souls of children, youth, and adults. They are our charges. Some of them may be wandering tonight because of the neglect of the ward teachers whose duty it is to "... watch over the church always, and be with and strengthen them;

"And see that there is no iniquity in the church, neither hardness with each other, neither lying, backbiting, nor evil speaking." (D. & C. 20:53-54.)

Let us see that each one does his duty. Someone may be wandering because of the careless remark of a girl of her age in Mutual (and I have in mind a case), and the president of the Mutual lets her go, fails to follow her next Tuesday night and invite her to come. Another may be lost because of the inactivity of the Sunday School teacher or the indifference of the Sunday School teacher who is satisfied with the fifteen people there that morning, instead of thinking of the fifteen who are wandering because of neglect.

Our responsibility is to keep the trust that God has reposed in us, calling us to guard these precious souls.

The third parable is the prodigal son, the "younger son," we are told, so he was immature in his judgment. He was irking under the restraint, and he rather resented the father's careful, guiding eye. He evidently longed for so-called freedom, wanted, so to speak, to try his wings. So he said, "Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth to me." (Luke 15:12.) The father gave him his portion, and out the lad went.

Here is a case of volition, here is choice, deliberate choice. Here is, in a way, rebellion against authority. And what did he do? He spent his means in riotous living; he wasted his portion with harlots. That is the way they are lost.

Youth who start out to indulge their appetites and passions are on the downward road to apostasy as sure as the sun rises in the east. I do not confine it to youth; any man or woman who starts out on that road of intemperance, of dissolute living will separate himself or herself from the fold as inevitably as darkness follows the day.

"My spirit shall not always strive with man, ..." (Gen. 6-3), says the Lord. His spirit will not dwell in an unclean tabernacle, he has told us. He who tries to live a double life, who does live a double life in violation of his covenants, to quote one author, "is either a knave or a fool." Often he is both, because he himself is using his free agency to gratify his passions, to waste his substance in riotous living, to violate the covenants that he has made in the house of God.

In such cases there is little we can do but warn and plead until the recreant, as the prodigal son, at last "comes to himself." I am simply trying to picture how these three different parables can be applied to our own groups.

I wish I could say to every young man in this Church, that if you would be successful, if you would be happy, if you would conserve your strength, intellectual, physical, and spiritual, you will resist temptation to indulge your appetites and your passions. That is gospel truth—indulgence does not strengthen youth or manhood; restraint and self-control do. That is psychologically sound, because, instead of expending your energy as animals, self-control gives you more power and energy to expend intellectually and spiritually. Chastity strengthens manhood.

He is unwise who starts out as the prodigal son to waste in riotous living the substance which God has given him in physical manhood and intellectuality.

God help us that we as leaders may try to guide those who are wandering away from the flock. God give us power to inspire them with the true ideal of success as contained in another saying of our Savior, "But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you." (Matt. 6:33.)—IE, 48:309-310 (1945).

XVI

THE WAGES OF SIN

The young man sat before me downhearted, self-reproachful, discouraged. Evidently, he had reached that dangerous point in his life when the spirit of abandonment cries out, "O what's the use!" and where the spirit of youth, weakened by indulgence, turns the sharp corner and stumbles and shambles heedlessly, recklessly along the road of indulgence and sin. His voice was somewhat husky, his eye rather lusterless. He looked dejected and sad; nor did his looks belie his feelings. A few years ago, he had faced the future with fond anticipations and bold aspirations. His castles in the air were stately, and his chances of occupying them assured. With youth and all the buoyant energy of young manhood he was fortified, and with glorious opportunities he was favored.

But now he sat, still a youth, with ambition blunted, with hopes crushed though not killed, with energy dissipated, and with his heart heavy in the realization of having failed—sick, self-condemning, sad.

What was the matter, you ask? In answer to that question he himself had said that he lacked "manhood"; by which he meant he had lacked self-mastery. He had started in hope-fulness to build his castles; then temptations came to him; and he had yielded. He had given himself to indulgence and sin and was then and is now reaping the wages thereof. His looks, feelings, demeanor—all bore mute witness to the fact that "... the wages of sin is death." (Rom. 6:23.)

Death, Spiritual, Seconda-McKay, David O.TPDeath in the literal sense means extinction or cessation of life. It also means "spiritual lifelessness" and a failure to respond to one's environment. Death is the opposite of life. It is in reality the result of ignorance of God and of his laws; for knowledge of the only true God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent is eternal life. To the extent that one breaks the law governing physical growth, to that extent one impairs one's health, and thereby deprives oneself of so much opportunity to live.

Death, Spiritual, Seconda-McKay, David O.TPTo violate a law governing intellectual attainment is to weaken to a degree the intellect, and to transgress the laws governing spiritual attainment is to lose to a certain degree spiritual life. "An extreme violation may bring total cessation or death; that is, may make it impossible for the physical man to respond to physical environment. Every little transgression, then, has a tendency to produce, and does to a limited extent produce death."

In Every-day Ethics, sin is defined as a "wilful abandonment of any chosen purpose, it is disloyalty to your own ties, it is your own power used to destroy you. Laziness, selfishness, cowardice, blindness, always hurt you in carrying out that life for which you were meant." Thus we see how the youth to whom we refer had in blindness and weakened will, impaired the only forces he possessed with which to build the sterling character he at one time dreamed himself to become.

We are in a world of inexorable law. If we obey the laws of sin, we reap the reward of sin; if the laws of righteousness, we reap the reward of righteousness. How clearly the Prophet Joseph Smith set forth this truth in the revelation that says, "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—

"And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D. & C. 130:20-21.)

How great, how glorious is the gospel of Jesus Christ that sets forth in clearness and simplicity the laws of life. Mormonism, so-called, embraces all these laws, and is, therefore, truly the philosophy of living. How tragic that end which comes through disobedience to these laws. Such an end is marked by physical debility, heartaches, discouragement, self-condemnation, sadness, abandonment, despair, death; "For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord." (Rom. 6:23.)—MS, 86:664-665 (1924).

XVII

TWO WAYS OF LIFE

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPThere is a most significant story of two boys—one who heeded God's commandment and offered sacrifice, paid his devotion to Deity in accordance with the command of the Lord. The other failed to do it because his heart was centered upon the things of the earth. As a consequence he became grasping and selfish and murderous. He choked his soul with greed. He stifled his spirituality. He became Jealous and envious and finally murdered his brother.

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPIn that simple account of Cain and Abel we find the story of the race. The man who sets his heart upon the things of the world, who does not hesitate to cheat a brother, who will lie for gain, who will steal from his neighbor, or who, by slander, will rob another of his reputation, lives on a low, animal plane of existence, and either stifles his spirituality or permits it to lie dormant. To be thus carnally minded is death. No truer word was ever spoken or written.

Spiritualitya-McKay, David O.TPOn the other hand, the man who tills the soil, garners his fruit, increases his flocks and his herds, having in mind making better the world in which he lives, desiring to contribute to the happiness of his fellows, and who does all things for the glory of God, will, to the extent that he denies himself for these ideals, develop his spirituality. Indeed, only to the extent that he does this, will he rise above the plane of the animal world.—RSM, 28:365 (1941).
