David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 39

ESSAYS FROM EUROPE AT QUARTER CENTURY

I

PERSONS AND PRINCIPLES

In the month of August 1897, among the passengers aboard the S. S. Belgenland, sailing from Philadelphia to Liverpool, was a group of colored people known as "The Fiske Jubilee Singers." Just as the vessel was leaving the harbor, some of the white passengers made slighting remarks about these Negroes. Undoubtedly the taunts reached the ears of some of the singers and wounded their feelings; but they neither showed resentment nor deigned to reply.

However, at a concert given about a week later, one of the sopranos sang most beautifully and impressively a solo that seemed to contain a sufficient answer as well as a gentle rebuke to those who in rudeness had given offense. I do not remember the song; but the chorus was something like this:

"If you want to know a Christian, Just watch his acts and walks; If you want to know a Christian, Just listen how he talks."

Gospel Livinga-McKay, David O.TPThat simple rhyme expresses the true philosophy of practical religion. Of what value are the lofty principles of Christianity if they are not introduced into our daily lives? What good does it do, for example, to preach universal brotherhood, and then to step from the pulpit to the street and rail against and denounce any who should be included in this brotherhood? Race, creed, color, position, training—all contribute to the difficulty of making practical the universal charity taught by Christ and which pseudo-Christians profess to believe; but such profession without the practice only emphasizes the hypocrisy lurking in the heart of the pretender. It is not easy, I know, but the true Christian is he who exemplifies in his "acts," his "walks" and his "talks" that which his tongue says he believes.—MS, 86:72 (1924).

II

THAT REMARKABLE INFLUENCE

Many years have passed since that morning in June when the emigrant ship Amazon lay "broadside-on to the wharf" in the London docks. On that morning, Charles Dickens "went on board their ship to bear testimony against the Mormons if they deserved it," and he "fully believed they would"; but to his "great astonishment, they did not deserve it"; so he concluded his testimony as an "honest witness" by saying: "I went over the Amazon's side, feeling it impossible to deny that, so far, some remarkable influence had produced a remarkable result, which better known influences have often missed." Intervening years have given ample opportunity for the world to study the results of that remarkable influence.

Before this article can appear in the Millennial Star, there shall have been held in various parts of the world, and particularly in the state of Utah, fitting celebrations commemorative of the entrance of the first Pioneer band into the valley of the Great Salt Lake. Some remarkable influence had carried them over a thousand mile pilgrimage, "which," said an English writer in 1852, "has not been paralleled in the history of mankind since Moses led the Israelites from Egypt."

From July 24th, 1847, to June in the early 60's, when Charles Dickens as the Uncommercial Traveller went aboard the Amazon, Mormon emigrants by thousands and tens of thousands, had crossed seas and plains, and "gathered with the Saints" in the Rocky Mountains. Each company—we might almost say with accuracy, each individual—was impelled to take the journey by the same remarkable influence which had actuated the original Pioneers.

This same influence produced such remarkable results among every emigrant ship under control of the Latter-day Saints that "The Select Committee of the House of Commons on emigrant ships for 1864," after having summoned the Mormon agent and passenger-broker before it, "came to the conclusion that no ships under the provisions of the 'Passenger Act' could be depended upon for comfort and security in the same degree as those under his (the Mormon agent's) administration." "The Mormon ship is a family under strong and accepted discipline with every provision for comfort, decorum, and internal peace," they reported.

Testimonya-McKay, David O.TPFrom the day of the organization of the Church, that remarkable influence has impelled men, women, and children who had reached majority, if necessary—and often it has been—to leave comfortable homes and to endure privations and hardships. It has succored them in distress and comforted them in sorrow. It has enabled them to endure the significant shrug and the contemptuous sneer of their one-time friends and associates.

Testimonya-McKay, David O.TPThat remarkable influence gave men and women strength not only to walk a thousand miles but also to pull handcarts on which were piled their scanty supplies of utensils and clothing. It inspired women with unwavering faith in the overruling power of God, as with heartstrings stretched to the breaking point, they stood by open graves on the prairies and saw their husbands, who had succumbed to the rigors of fatigue and starvation, rudely covered with cold and pitiless clay. Elder John Walsh, now a missionary in Great Britain, when but four years of age, buried his little face in the folds of his mother's dress, while his weak and frail body shook with sobs, as he stood fatherless and she husbandless with a babe in her arms, by the side of a grave in which their husband and father found his final rest with nine others who had died the same night!

Testimonya-McKay, David O.TPThat mother is still living still true to the Church, still testifying that some remarkable influence has sustained her and has blessed her and her children. And her son, with a rich experience of three score and ten years, is now testifying to the British nation that remarkable results follow the adherence to that remarkable influence which inspired his parents and tens of thousands of other Englishmen to embrace the gospel of Jesus Christ as restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Testimonya-McKay, David O.TPWhat is this influence which made eight hundred emigrants so orderly and contended; which merited the commendation from a select committee from the House of Commons; which sustained pilgrimages that are scarcely paralleled in the history of mankind; which seems stronger than lovers' vows and mightier even than death?

Testimonya-McKay, David O.TPIt is the living testimony that God lives, that he is verily our Father, that Jesus Christ, the Only Begotten of the Father, is our Lord and Savior, and that the gospel, the "power of God unto salvation," has been restored in this age, through the instrumentality of the boy Prophet Joseph Smith.

Testimonya-McKay, David O.TPBlessed is he who is inspired by this testimony, "... for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven." (Matt. 16:17.)

Testimonya-McKay, David O.TPThis remarkable influence and testimony is the "rock" upon which the Church of Jesus Christ is built.—MS, 86:504-505 (1924).

III

ROBERT BURNS

On January 25, men in every civilized nation will pay tribute to the memory of Robert Burns, who has achieved in the world of poetry an unexcelled distinction. In the art of "singing the soul into song and setting the heart to music" the Scottish bard has no rival. Such a man is truly a "living-light fountain," which it is ever pleasant and profitable to be near, especially during that season when his worldwide admirers are celebrating the anniversary of his birth. His poetry has been described as "pure passion." "Other lyrists are literary at their best; when Burns is literary, he is at his worst. His note falls like the note from the lark, straight from the heart. It is not an imitation of life but life itself running into laughter and tears."

Wherein lies the secret of his spontaneous outburst of song? What elements in his nature entered into his poetry to give it immortality? The creator, ever greater than the thing created, must give part of himself to that which he creates, if he desires it to live, whether it be thoughts, feelings, personality, or being. What qualities of Burns' soul have entered into his poetry to give it such ever increasing life and vigor among men?

In a general way it may be said that a person is governed by his intellect, his emotion, and his will. When these three are strong there is usually found greatness and leadership. When these are weak, there is found mediocrity or a nature unbalanced. With the intellect, we see; with the emotion, we feel; with the will, we guide and control. The truly great as well as the truly educated man possesses the power "to see clearly, to imagine vividly, to think independently, and to will nobly."

Unfortunately, in the case of his will Burns was deficient; or if not deficient, then defiant. This weakness of will, or defiance of the accepted standards of moral conduct, led him into many humiliating experiences and disastrous conditions. For these actions his friends offer neither denial nor palliation. How deeply in his better moments his own soul regretted having yielded to temptations that beset his pathway can be inferred from the letters of apology that followed his indulgences. His open, honest life, however, as well as the divine injunction to judge not," will justify us in "scanning gently" this side of his nature.

But in the ability to think clearly and independently, to imagine vividly, and to sympathize sincerely may be found the secret of Burns' greatness. His power to see clearly places him in the front ranks of the thinking men of the world. This power, it is true, was not evident in the management of his personal affairs, but it is very apparent in his estimate of the false religious and social standards of his time. Cant and hypocrisy he despised. Indignantly he cries out against ministers whose lives were inconsistent with their preaching:

"But I gae mad at their grimaces. Their sighin', cantin', grace-proud faces Their three-mile prayers, and half-mile graces, Their raxin' conscience, Whose greed, revenge, an' pride disgraces Waur than their nonsense."

But sincerity and the true worship that springs therefrom, he admired and praised.

"Compar'd with this, how poor Religion's pride In all the pomp of method, and of art; When men display to congregation's wide Devotion's ev'ry grace, except the heart! The Power, incens'd, the pageant will desert, The pompous strain, the sacerdotal stole; But haply, in some cottage far apart, May hear, well-ples'd, the language of the soul; And in His Book of Life the inmates poor enroll."

How he scores those who are only outwardly righteous, we sense from such poems as "an Address to the Unca Guid," or "Holy Willy's Epitaph," etc.

With charity in his heart for the weaknesses of his fellow men he discerned clearly the effect of social forces and environment upon the lives of those around him.

"I have observed," he said, "in the course of experience with human life that every man—even the worst—has something good about him; though very often nothing else than a happy temperament of constitution inclining him to this or that virtue. For this reason, no man can say in what degree any other person besides himself can be, with strict justice, called wicked. Let any of the strictest character for the regularity of conduct among us examine impartially how many vices he has never been guilty of, not from any care or vigilance, but for want of opportunity, or some accidental circumstances intervening; how many of the weaknesses of mankind he has escaped, because he was out of the line of such temptation; and what often, if not always, weighs more than all the rest, how much he is indebted to the world's good opinion, because the world does not know all; I say, any man who can thus think will scan the failings, nay the faults and crimes of mankind around him, with a brother's eye."

This clear introspective insight reveals the true Burns in the relation to himself and to his fellows. His careful study of man's inhumanity to man led him to summarize his conclusions as follows:

"Then gently scan your brother man, Still gentler sister woman; Tho' they may gang a kennin' wrang, To step aside is human: One point must still be greatly dark The moving why they do it; And just as lamely can ye mark How far perhaps they rue it. Who made the heart, 'tis he alone Decidedly can try us. He knows each chord its various tone, Each spring its various bias; Then at the balance let's be mute, We never can adjust it; What's done we partly can compute, But know not what's resisted."

That he thought independently, even disregardingly of his fellows' opinions, is evident to all who are in the least degree acquainted with his philosophy and his manner of expressing it.

But Burns' greatest power lay in the breadth and depth of his sympathetic soul. From this source his poetry flowed to immortality as from an inexhaustible and over-flowing fountain. In the realm of sympathy with inanimate, as well as with animate nature, Burns is supreme. His poems "To a Daisy" and "To a Mouse" are gems. His sympathy for animate nature has, fortunately for the world, found expression in many individual poems. Hear him say in the "Twa Dogs":

"My heart has been sae fain to see them That I for joy hae barkit wi' them."

Besides this great poem, which is in reality an interpretation of Scottish peasant life, this fundamental trait has impelled him to give, out of the fulness of his emotion, other immortal poems, among which are, "Poor Mailie," "Auld Mare Maggie," "The Wounded Hare," etc. In the stormy winter night he thinks of the "silly" sheep, and the "ourie cattle," and words come "like tears of infinite compassion" as he writes:

"Ilk happin bird, wee helpless thing That in the merry months o' spring Delighted me to hear thee sing What comes o' thee? Where wilt thou cower thy chitterin' wing, And close they ee?"

His sympathy with man brought him in touch with nearly all classes, from the humblest peasant to the leaders in society, in politics, and in literature. He entered, too, the field of political life, and in sympathy "Joined hands with Washington across the Atlantic, and the French Revolutionists across the Channel." His soul responded to the message of the angels that heralded, with the birth of the Savior, "Peace on earth, goodwill toward men." The appreciation of this message is what his soul prayed for when it sang:

"Then let us pray that come it may, As come it will for a' that. That sense an' Worth o'er a' the earth Shall bear the gree an' a' that. For a' that and a' that, It's coming yet for a' that, That man to man, the world o'er, Shall brithers be for a' that."

To pray for power to see things as they are, not as others imagine them to be; to cherish charity in our hearts for our fellow men; to realize that, "next to love, sympathy is the divinest attribute of the human soul," and to manifest it for "all things, both great and small"; to strive by righteous endeavor to hasten the day when men of all nations shall live as brothers—these are some of the ideals of life which should be emphasized when the world commemorates the anniversary of the poet Burns.—MS, 85:56-59 (1923).

IV

THE GOSPEL OF INTELLIGENT EFFORT

One day a group of small boys were swimming. Perhaps it would be more accurate to say, they were learning to swim, for none could take more than a few strokes. Just below them a short distance down the stream was a treacherous hole much beyond their depth. Into this, either through bravado or accident, one daring youngster either plunged or fell. He became helpless to save himself, and for a moment his companions were powerless to aid him. Fortunately, one with presence of mind and quick action, jerked a long stick from a willow fence and threw one end of it to the drowning lad. The latter grasped it, held on tightly, and was saved.

All the boys declared that the venturesome lad owed his life to the boy who furnished the means of rescue.

This is undoubtedly the fact; and yet in spite of the means furnished him, if the lad had not taken advantage of it, if he had not put forth all the personal effort at his command, he would have drowned, notwithstanding the heroic act of his comrade.

Salvationa-McKay, David O.TPIn this old world of ours, children of men are playing, swimming, struggling in the sea of life. There are those who claim that no one will sink and be lost if he will look to Jesus on the shore and say, "I believe." There are others who declare that everyone must by his own efforts swim to the shore or be lost forever. The real truth is that both of these extreme views are incorrect. Christ will not save men who will put forth no effort themselves, any more than the young rescuer on the river bank could have saved the drowning lad if the latter had not seized the means provided him. Neither can man save himself without accepting the means provided by Christ for man's salvation.—MS, 85:760 (1923).

V

CHRISTMAS CUSTOMS

Christmasa-McKay, David O.TPThe most widely commemorated date throughout the lands of Christendom is December 25, on which the followers of Jesus Christ, the Savior of mankind, celebrate his birth. This almost universal celebration is carried on, too, and will probably continue to be carried on indefinitely in future years, notwithstanding the pretty generally accepted fact, now confirmed by revelation, that Jesus was not born on that day, nor even in that month.

Christmasa-McKay, David O.TPThe celebration as we have it today is a combination of Christian worship and the pagan celebration of the winter solstice. The 21st of December is the shortest day of the year. From that time the sun recommences its upward course, announcing that midwinter is passed and spring and summer are approaching.

Christmasa-McKay, David O.TPThe Romans celebrated this change, under the title of "Saturnalia," by universal license and merrymaking. This Roman "festival of Saturn" is really the celebration which was adopted by the early Christians and is now known as Christmas. With it have been accepted also ancient customs and superstitions from other nations.

Christmasa-McKay, David O.TPFor example, the mistletoe bough is a remnant of an old ceremonial rite performed annually by the Druids, by whom the mistletoe was not only held in reverence but also believed to possess wondrous curative powers. The ceremony consisted in the people's marching to the forest and gathering around the oak on which the mistletoe grew. The chief Druid, clothed in white, climbed the tree and with a golden knife cut the plant; another priest standing with outstretched mantle caught it as it fell. Two white bulls brought for the purpose, and sometimes human beings as well, were then sacrificed as a propitiation to the savage god of the Druids.

Christmasa-McKay, David O.TPThe mistletoe cut by the priest was afterwards divided into small portions and distributed among the people, who hung the sprays over their doors to please and to protect their deities during the winter.

Christmasa-McKay, David O.TPThe custom of burning the yule log has been transmitted from Scandinavian ancestors who kindled huge fires to their god Thor.

Christmasa-McKay, David O.TPThe origin of the Christmas tree is not definitely known, but it is believed to have come down to us from the Roman "Saturnalia," having been carried into Germany by the legions of Drusus, whose great exploits established Roman supremacy in Germany about 15 B.C. Thus we see that even the Christmas tree with its glittering pendants and pretty toys antedates the birth of the Savior.

Christmasa-McKay, David O.TPGood old St. Nicholas or "Santa Claus," as the American first christened him, was a real person who lived in Russia about the time that old Diocletian was persecuring the early Christians. It is probable that St. Nicholas was imprisoned by this cruel emperor.

Christmasa-McKay, David O.TPSt. Nicholas had the true spirit of Christmas and went about giving comfort to the people and making children happy. He gave gifts but concealed the identity of the giver. It is a glorious thing to have old St. Nicholas in our hearts and in our homes today, whether he enters the latter through the open door or creeps down the chimney on Christmas eve. To bring happiness to others without seeking personal honor or praise by publishing it is a most commendable virtue.

Christmasa-McKay, David O.TPFestivity and gaiety, the elements in the Roman "Saturnalia," are still features of Christmas; but the dominating spirit of pagan license has been supplanted by the noble impulse and desire to give joy and blessing. The mistletoe bough still hangs in our houses, but the heathen superstitions of sacrificing animals and men to propitiate angry gods has been supplanted by the realization of the significance of Christ's great sacrifice. The yule-log fire that formerly burned out old wrongs and consumed bitter feuds, now glows in the grates of loving homes, where hearts beat in thanksgiving and praise for the sacredness of home ties that bind the family circle. Glittering ornaments and brilliant decorations are still hung upon the Christmas tree, but no images of Bacchus hang thereon, and jolly hymns in which

Christmasa-McKay, David O.TP"They praised the god of wine,

Christmasa-McKay, David O.TPWhose earthen image adorned the pine,"

Christmasa-McKay, David O.TPare replaced by the heavenly anthem, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men." (Luke 2:14.) Good old St. Nicholas has long since gone the way of all mortals, but the joy he experienced in doing kindly deeds is now shared by millions who are learning that true happiness comes only by making others happy—the practical application of the Savior's doctrine of losing one's life to gain it. In short, the Christmas spirit is the Christ spirit, that makes our hearts glow in brotherly love and friendship and prompts us to kind deeds of service.

Christmasa-McKay, David O.TPIt is the spirit of the gospel of Jesus Christ, obedience to which will bring "peace on earth," because it means—good will toward all men.—MS, 85:808-809 (1923).
