David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals: Selections from the Discourses of David O. McKay ( 1953)

CHAPTER 40

THE WORLD VIEW: BRETHREN IN OTHER LANDS

THE GIFT OF INTERPRETATION

Gifts of Goda-McKay, David O.TPTHE GIFT OF INTERPRETATION—The occasion was a conference held at Huntly, New Zealand, a thousand people assembled. Before that time I had spoken through interpreters in China, Hawaii, Holland, and other places, but I felt impressed on that occasion to speak in the English language. In substance I said, "I have never been much of an advocate of the necessity of tongues in our Church, but today I wish I had that gift. But I haven't. However, I am going to speak to you, my brothers and sisters, in my native tongue and pray that you may have the gift of interpretation of tongues. We will ask Brother Stuart Meha who is going to interpret for me, to make notes, and if necessary he may give us a summary of my talk afterwards."

Gifts of Goda-McKay, David O.TPWell, the outpouring of the gift of tongues on that occasion was most remarkable. Following the end of my sermon Brother Sid Christy, who was a student of Brigham Young University, a Maori, who had returned to New Zealand, rushed up and said, "Brother McKay, they got your message!"

Gifts of Goda-McKay, David O.TPWell, I knew they had by the attention and the nodding of their heads during the talk. I said, "I think they have but for the benefit of those who may not have understood or had that gift, we shall have the sermon interpreted."

Gifts of Goda-McKay, David O.TPWhile Brother Meha was interpreting that or giving a summary of it in the Maori language some of the natives, who had understood it, but who did not understand English, arose and corrected him in his interpretations.

Gifts of Goda-McKay, David O.TPPresident George Albert Smith and Brother Rufus K. Hardy visited New Zealand several years after that event, and Brother Hardy, hearing of the event, brought home testimonies of those who were present, and he took the occasion to have those testimonies notarized. So it is the gift of interpretation rather than the gift of tongues, that was remarkable.—DNCS, October 18, 1952, p. 2.

REFLECTIONS FROM THE WORLD TOUR 1920-1921

When we left home, December 4, 1920, we looked forward with no little misgiving and anxiety to the trip ahead of us. It was no simple matter to contemplate traveling to the Orient, thence to the Antipodes, much of that distance to be spent on the water. The distance itself made us realize that we were undertaking a great responsibility. Absence from our loved ones was keenly felt by both, but greater than these two, and other incidental things that made us hesitate about accepting this responsibility, was the realization that we were going on a first visitation to our people to represent the General Authorities. The keen sense of our responsibility adequately to fulfil the desires of President Grant and his counselors and the Twelve who had honored us with that call, made us seek the Lord as I had never sought him before in my life, and I wish to say this afternoon that the promise made by Moses to the Children of Israel just before they crossed the Jordan River into the Promised Land has been fulfilled in our experiences. As we sought the Lord with all our souls, he came to our guidance and assistance.

It may be that the realization of our dependence upon him made more prominent what seems to me to be a deplorable tendency of the world to disregard, even to disown, their relationship to our heavenly Father. It was our privilege to hear educators and other prominent men speak in different places and upon different occasions, and to mingle with different classes of men and women on boats, for we spent a total of five months on the water, sailing in about twenty-three different vessels, every vessel well crowded with all classes of tourists, most of whom were professed Christians. Frequently, we were grieved to note the attitude of apology that these Christian men and women assumed toward God, their Creator, and his Son, Jesus Christ.

I have been in mixed gatherings here in the state and out of the state, in which some men, when speaking of the early pioneers of Utah, would refer in a rather apologetic way to Brigham Young, and on some occasions I have felt that the speakers even hesitated to name him and give him the credit due him in the settlement of this great intermountain commonwealth, and in the founding of institutions that since have become centers of influence and might. Just such an attitude I have seen manifest among so-called Christians when they would begin to talk about God. He did not seem to be real to them. He did not seem to be in very deed their Father in heaven.

Goda-McKay, David O.TPThere is a tendency, it seems to me, among Christian nations to move toward a conception of God very much similar to the conception of the Buddhist who say: "There is no personal God-Creator on whose mercy and good will the universe is dependent. Everything owes its origin and development to its own inherent vitalism, or, what comes to the same, to its own will to live. Human ignorance it is which alone invented a personal God-Creator." The Buddhist utterly rejects the belief in a personal God. So do many in the Christian world. In opposition to this false conception of God, I wish to declare that today I feel as I have never felt before in all my life that God is my Father. He is not just an intangible power, a moral force in the world, but a personal God with creative powers, the Governor of the world, the Director of our souls. I should like to have the young men of Israel feel so close to him that they will approach him daily, not in public alone, but in private.

* * * *

Inspiration was given to us on this trip. That is why I touch this theme.

I want to testify to you that God was with us when we stood beneath that tree in old China when we dedicated that land to preaching of the gospel. My words may not convince you of the fact, but no disputant can convince us that our souls were not filled to overflowing with the Spirit of God on that occasion.

Again the veil was thin between us and departed friends, when we stood in prayer on the side of old Haleakala, the largest extinct volcano in the world, and poured out thanksgiving to God for what he had done for Presidents Joseph F. Smith, George Q. Cannon, Elders Francis A. Hammond, James Hawkins, and their wives, and other missionaries who carried the gospel message to the Hawaiian people.

I knew of his protecting care in the Tongan Islands; for when the vessel was submerged by a mountainous wave, we felt peace and security.

At Papeete, Tahiti, we knew his guiding hand and acknowledged his overruling providence, when replacing our judgment by his inspiration, he moved us to do something which our own judgment had told us not to do, subsequent events proving that the inspiration came in rich abundance in the priesthood meetings with your boys. God bless them whereever they are today, for they are God's servants, as long as they will keep themselves pure and spotless from the sins of the world; and I testify to you that his Spirit is guiding them, magnifying them in their youth, making them a power in preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Again, when among the Samoans, we felt his presence on several occasions, especially in that memorable farewell at Sauniatu. May I take this occasion to say, brethren and sisters, that we are not sufficiently close to the Tahitians, the Maoris, the Tongans, the Samoans, and the Saints in Australia and New Zealand. In distance they are a long way off, and visitations of General Authorities are all too infrequent. They need things which they do not get—sometimes, I think, just because of the great intervening distance; but their hearts are as true and genuine and their faith just as sincere as yours and mine.

Another memorable example of God's guiding hand was experienced when we met Joseph Wilford Booth at the very time and place that we should have met him in order to make our mission to the Armenians successful. He did not know where we were, and we knew not where he was. He was praying that the hope of President Grant, expressed in a letter, might be realized; (for the President of the Church, too, was praying that Brother Booth would meet us and that we three would go to Armenia together); we were praying that we might meet him, so that our mission there would not be a failure; and God answered our prayers. If I narrated the details, most of you, too, would be convinced that there was some power above chance that brought about that meeting.

RESTORATION OF THE JEWS IN PALESTINE. Now, I say that one result of approaching God, our Father, is inspiration. Now, may I take sufficient time to give one circumstance in which the inspiration of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph was fulfilled in part at least, right before our eyes. You will recall the words of Moses as recorded in Deuteronomy:

If they (Israel) "shall corrupt yourselves, and make a graven image, or the likeness of any thing, ...

"I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto ye go over Jordan to possess it; ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall utterly be destroyed.

"... even in the latter days," continues Moses, "if thou turn to the Lord thy God, and shalt be obedient unto his voice;

"... he will not ... forget the covenant of thy fathers which he sware unto them." (Deut. 4:25-26, 30-31.)

You remember also, in the Book of Mormon, which was published before the organization of the Church, that there is a passage referring to the Jews as follows: "Nevertheless, when that day cometh, saith the prophet, that they no more turn aside their hearts against the Holy One of Israel, then will he remember the covenants which he made to their fathers." (1 Nephi 19:15.)

If you will turn to the tenth chapter of Second Nephi, you will see what that promise is, "... they shall be restored in the flesh, upon the earth, unto the lands of their inheritance." (2 Nephi 10:7.)

And another significant remark, that "... the Gentiles shall be great in the eyes of me, saith God, in carrying them forth to the lands of their inheritance." (2 Nephi 10:8.) That prophecy revealed to the Prophet Joseph is very significant in view of current events, in the light of the attitude of the jews toward Christianity, and toward Christ.

A SIGNIFICANT EXPERIENCE IN JERUSALEM. All this, however, I must leave by mere reference and carry you now to Jerusalem on the second day of November 1921. On the previous day, Jerusalem had been all bustle and business. David Street was lined with little shops in which Jews and Mohammedans were carrying on their trade. Little donkeys heavily laden with the goods of commerce were walking up the rough stone steps of David Street. We saw no camels on that street, it being too narrow. Camels were lying down depositing their burdens at Damascus Gate.

On November 1, 1921, Jerusalem was a typically busy oriental city; but on the following day all things were changed.

David Street, so far as business was concerned, was quiet. Shop windows were closed, so were the shops outside of the wall. By the Allenby Hotel every shop window was boarded. No autos stood as usual in front of the hotel ready to carry tourists down to the Dead Sea and to Jericho. Our guide, Michael, a Greek Christian, seemed to radiate a foreboding feeling. I rather jocularly approached him and wondered what was the matter with him. He remained silent, his attitude portending evil, and he indicated to us to be quiet. We had scarcely reached the Jaffa Gate where, by the way, is seen the "eye of the needle," when he broke his silence.

"Don't you see that all business houses are closed?" said he.

"Yes," I replied, "what does it signify?"

"It means," he continued, "that today the Mohammedans and the Christians are uniting in protest against Mr. Balfour's declaration that Palestine shall be set aside as a Jewish State."

Well, it was like a thunderclap from a clear sky. I had not dreamed that there would be opposition to that movement. We had seen the Jews present in the city carrying on their trade evidently in peace, without molestation. We had looked up a few statistics and knew that in 1914 it was estimated that eighty thousand people were in Jerusalem, fifty thousand of whom were Jews, most of whom had come there but recently; for fifty years before that there were only twenty thousand people in Jerusalem all told. Now to hear from our guide, who seemed to know what he was talking about, that the Mohammedans and Christians were opposed to the Jews' coming back, was an astonishment to me.

I haven't time to take you through that day, but I just call your attention to this fact, that at eleven o'clock, when we came back to the street leading to the Jewish quarter, Brother Hugh J. Cannon and I expressed a desire to confer with the Jews regarding the opposition so strongly manifest that day.

"Don't go there," cried Michael.

"Why?" we asked.

"Because there is danger."

"No," I replied, "I think there is no danger."

"If you go there, you go alone," said our guide.

I said: "All right, Michael, here is where you and we part company. We will meet you at two o'clock."

So, alone we went into the Jewish quarter, to hear their side of it. We will never forget that scene! Groups of Jews from foreign countries, Russia, Rumania, and Orthodox Jews, who had been in Jerusalem a number of years talked together in subdued tones. From windows and balconies women peered at us, evidently suspicioning us as spies — children looked from behind shutters, and doorways. We finally found a young Jew who could speak English; and in answer to our question as to what all this meant, he said:

"The Mohammedans and the Christians are uniting in protest against Mr. Balfour's declaration that Palestine shall be set apart as a home for the Jews."

As we walked back, we again passed through a group of British soldiers in full uniform, including steel helmets, muskets in hand, bayonets fixed, guarding the Jews. We knew how necessary their presence was; for, as we had come up David Street we had seen several Jews and two Jewesses, one of whom clasped a baby to her breast, stoned by Mohammedans and so-called Christians, their only offense being that they were Jews, who had come back to their promised land.

As we passed these British soldiers, I said: "Boys, we hope you will keep them (the Moslems) straight."

"Oh, I think we can," answered one of the "Tommies"; and as we went back to our hotel, we commented upon this scene and the significant passage which I have read: "... and the nations of the Gentiles shall be great in the eyes of me, saith God, in carrying them forth to the lands of their inheritance.

"Yea, the kings of the Gentiles shall be nursing fathers unto them, and their queens shall become nursing mothers." (2 Nephi 10:8-9.)

On the tower that now marks the spot of the tower of David, British officers were waving signals over the city, giving orders to keep the peace; armored cars, bearing British soldiers were driven through the streets to subdue the threatened uprising. Notwithstanding these precautions, eight men lost their lives on the streets of Jerusalem that day.

At five o'clock the order was given by Acting Governor General Samuels, the first Jew to rule in Palestine for 1600 years, that no person should be on the street after five o'clock. The order was obeyed absolutely.

We were witnesses that day of the beginning of the fulfilment of that prophecy which refers to the time, now near at hand, when the Jews will "no more turn aside their hearts from the Holy One," and when the Gentiles shall be the means of restoring them to their own land.

IF WE ONLY KNEW THE READINESS OF CHRIST TO HELP. The next day we crossed the Brook Kedron, passed the Garden of Gethsemane, and ascended the Mount of Olives, to the spot, as nearly as we could determine, where Christ stood when he looked at Jerusalem and wept over her. In the light of the opposition to his purposes to which we were witnesses, I thought that he would weep again if he were standing there today. "If thou hadst known," cried he, "even thou, at least in this day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes." Neither do they who are now opposing his purposes know the things which belong unto their peace. "If they only knew!"

I desire to say to the children of Israel today, in these valleys of the mountains, to the boys and girls especially: If you only knew that Christ is ever ready to give you help in time of need, and comfort and strength, you would approach him in purity, simplicity, and faith.—CR, April 1922, pp. 65-69.

"HUI TAU"

Oberammergau has its Passion Play; Salt Lake City, its great annual and semi-annual conferences; and New Zealand, its Hui Tau. The first has awakened international interest; the second, inter-state; and the third, only inter-conference; yet in proportion to the people participating, the third serves a purpose of sufficient importance to give it rank among the significant gatherings of the world.

The Hui Tau is the annual conference of the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in New Zealand. Unlike the other two notable gatherings named, it is not held successively at the same place; but before the close of each conference, the district chosen for the succeeding one is named; thus giving the people so favored one year in which to prepare for this important event.

Members and non-members cooperate in this preparation; for it is a recognized fact that the district in which the Hui Tau is held must bear most of the expense. Suitable grounds must be supplied; outbuildings erected; accommodations for a thousand visitors or more provided; and a sufficient number of women and girls found who will cook, wash dishes, and serve at tables where hungry hundreds will sit three times a day during the entire conference. Besides all this, a considerable sum of money must be forthcoming. Judging from the eagerness shown by residents of different cities to secure the favored decision, these conditions are met without much difficulty.

At 3:30 p.m., Friday, April 22, 1921, President Hugh J. Cannon and I had our first introduction to a Hui Tau. In company with President George S. Taylor, who, with several of his associates, had welcomed us at Wellington, a number of elders, and about eighty Maoris, we had alighted from the train at Huntly Station and were driven immediately by auto across the Waikato River to a little settlement "in the heart of Maoriland." As we neared our destination, we beheld, in an open field on our right, two large tents, and a number of smaller ones, nestling around them. The same scene at home would have been proof sufficient that a three-ringed circus had come to town. And, truly, the tents seemed sufficiently large to house the entire menagerie and army of actors and acrobats that go with this world-wide form of entertainment.

Hundreds of people were already assembled in the open space between us and the two largest tents; and what we saw and participated in during the next two hours contributed to make that day one of the most unique and interesting of this extensive tour.

Sister Taylor, Miss Miriam, and others from the Mission House had joined us. Brother Sid Christy had come bounding to extend greetings, and, fortunately for us, put us at our ease by timely suggestions and explanations. As our party began to walk slowly toward the assembled multitude, our ears were greeted by a shrill cry from a score of women's voices: "Haere Mai! Haere Mai." and other terms of welcome, accompanied by such wild gesticulations, jumping, dancing, and grimacing that, had it not been for the assurances of Brother Christy, I should have thought we were about to be attacked instead of welcomed.

This welcome cry was followed by the Haka or war dance by a dozen men or more in front of the crowd, urged enticingly on by the dancing of two women, one at each end of the row of warriors. How they wriggled and writhed, rolled their eyes until only the whites were visible, lolled their tongues, and made unsightly grimaces! I was fascinated and yet worried because surely some acknowledgment must be made of this most demonstrative welcome.

However, when within a hundred yards of the dancing group, we were told to stand still. The representative of the "king" of the district, an uncle, we were informed, stepped forward, and flourishing a cane (mere) in his hand, and walking briskly forward and back, delivered an impassioned address of welcome. He was followed by the next man in rank, and he by several others, each expressing his joy and gratitude for the visit of those who had traveled so far to meet them.

At this point we should have replied in true Maori fashion; but as the crowd were waiting to shake our hands, it was suggested by our host that they would "accept a Hongi as a gracious reply." And so, beginning with the woman on our left, we clasped hands and pressed noses with the entire assembly!

Even during the first experience we learned that the Hongi varies in a degree and intensity as does our kiss, though perhaps not with the same significance.

As we took our places in the seats provided for us, we saw entering the grounds a group of visiting Maoris.

"Haere Mai! Haere Mai!" again cried the women! And again the gesticulating, dancing, and speech making!

Then we saw the reciprocal performance. At the conclusion of the addresses as mentioned above, both sides remained silent, and all heads were bowed. Soon we heard moans, and we noticed that men and women were crying. It was not make-believe, either, for tears were flowing. This was the Tangi part of the welcome. They were expressing sympathy for those who had lost loved ones during the past year. Following this, the leading man among the visitors, flourishing his cane, responded to the welcome, and told why they had come. He was followed by others, and then the group retired to give place for other groups to follow. Thus the home people welcomed the visitors all through the day!

The next morning, we received evidence, and each succeeding day confirmation that the Hui Tau is a well-disciplined organization. Every person on the grounds was expected to respond with promptness and dispatch to the following signals:

At 6:15 a.m. a clanging bell drove Morpheus to his sunless cave and bade his subjects get up!

At 7 a.m. it called to Karakia, or morning service; at 8 a.m. to Kai, (breakfast); at 10 a.m. to Karakia, or first session of conference; 1 p.m. to Kai, (lunch); 2 p.m. to Karakia, second session of conference; 5 p.m. to Kai, (dinner); 6:30 p.m. to Karakia, evening service; 7 p.m. to Karakia, evening session of conference.

RONGO PAI, OR SCRIPTURE SERVICE

Twice a day as intimated above, everybody excepting the women folk preparing the breakfast, assembled in the large tent, and participated in devotional service, consisting of (1) singing, (2) prayer, (3) repeating in concert passages of scripture, and (4) questions and discussion. The quotations were selected from the Ready References, and chanted in unison. It was significant that only the older Maoris participated in this memory work; the younger ones who joined them read from the book. This is explained by the fact that when the gospel first came among the Maoris, very few could read, so they memorized what was taught them. The chant or song was given as an aid to memory. There were those present who can repeat every passage in the Ready References, under its appropriate subject. The meaning of the passages was made clear and their applicability to the Latter-day work shown during the discussion that followed. It was plainly evident that the Maoris had assembled to learn more of the gospel of Christ and not merely to be entertained.

Following the service, as many as could be seated at the first tables, answered the call to Kai. Under a canopy, fully as large as that in which services were held, were arranged eight long tables each with a seating capacity of forty persons. Four well-organized and thoroughly disciplined corps of women and girls furnished these tables and served the guest, each group taking charge of eighty people at every sitting.

Each group, too, had its own boiler for cooking, its own tanks for dishwashing, and its own cupboards for the dishes, and every plate, cup and saucer, knife, fork, and spoon was accounted for.

Boiled meat, potatoes, spinach, butter, jam, and cheese made the principal eatables; but cake, watermelons, and other fruit and delicacies were also served. Some of the meat and potatoes were prepared in the hangi, that is, cooked in a pit in the good old Maori fashion, except that chains were heated instead of rocks. And we must admit that meat thus cooked is far more tender and delicious than that boiled in the more modern manner.

As the women peeled the potatoes, it seemed by the ton, or washed the dishes, literally by the hundreds, they worked in unison to the rhythm of some song, hummed as gleefully as though they were having a jamboree. Sometimes the young girls having "finished the dishes" would wind up with a bit of the kani kani or hula hula.

How efficient this organization and how effectively it worked may be partly realized when I tell you that during the four and one half days of the Hui Tau approximately ten thousand meals were served! And that, too, without any apparent extraordinary effort!

SLEEPING ACCOMMODATIONS

Some of the best homes in the district were given over entirely to the accommodation of the visitors, Elder Cannon and I each having a room and a bed as comfortable as one could wish. The fifty elders, however, did not fare so well. They slept on mats laid on straw on the floor of the Church. It was truly a community bedroom!

But the greatest and most interesting sleeping apartment was the large assembly tent. Every four feet around its entire circumference constituted a bedroom; and a similar double tier extended from the speaker's stand down the middle to the opposite end. Thus feet to feet hundreds of heads pointed toward the outside and hundreds of others toward the middle of the tent, a passageway being left open all around this combination bedroom and assembly hall; beds remained intact, and were sat upon or reclined upon during each service.

For the convenience of those people who like to sleep in Church, I recommend this combination scheme most highly.

ENTERTAINMENTS

While the religious purpose of the Hui Tau is evident on every hand, and gospel conversations and discussions are carried on with almost every group between meetings, there is no dearth of amusement and legitimate entertainment. Chief among these I think I shall name the Poi Dance as given on two different occasions by fifteen young Maori maidens dressed in native costume. Combining as it does, rhythm, beauty, grace, and skill, the Poi Dance easily ranks among the most beautiful dances in the world. I have never seen any that excel it.

If the Poi is the most beautiful, the Haka is the most thrilling! After seeing this native war dance, one can readily understand how the ancient warriors, aroused to the highest pitch of enthusiasm, if not frenzy, rushed so madly into battle, or stormed with bare hands and naked bodies almost impregnable pas!

We were given a glimpse, too, of the whaka ropiropi; but one of the native brethren suggested that they "go slow on that"; and a "hint to the wise" was in this case "sufficient."

Too much credit cannot be given to the Hui Tau committee composed of all native men, who have so successfully managed these Hui Taus for many years.

Brother William Duncan is chairman, and a more able, loyal Church worker than he is seldom found anywhere in the world! He is a man among men, a worthy example of what Mormonism will do for those who will accept it and live it. He has been ably assisted by four others, equally worthy of commendation and esteem.

This year, the committee was enlarged by the addition of more members.

Though each annual gathering costs between $2500 and $3000, the committee is free from debt and has a fair balance in the bank. Besides this, they have accumulated considerable property, such as tents, a dynamo, electrical appliances, stoves, etc.

Electric lights illuminated the grounds and tents to the entire convenience and delight of all.

But the things mentioned above are only adjuncts to the principal features of this notable gathering! The glory of the Hui Tau is seen and felt in the twelve or fourteen worshiping assemblies, which, during the one recently held, culminated Tuesday forenoon in a wonderfully inspirational priesthood meeting. The earnestness, faith, and devotion of the audience; the manifestation of the inspiration of the Lord upon the speakers, native as well as European, the excellent music, and the confidence, sympathy, and brotherly love that flowed from soul to soul, all combined to make every service a supreme joy.

Not the least remarkable feature of this memorable event was the skill, the intelligence, the accuracy, and the inspiration with which Elder Stewart Meha interpreted the addresses of the visiting brethren. His interpretation was simply marvelous! Truly he was remarkably blessed.

The spirit, intelligence, and earnestness of the threescore elders and lady missionaries were distinct contributions to the success of each session. No more devoted, self-sacrificing men and women can be found anywhere in the world. I could not help thinking how proud and happy the parents and wives of those young men would be if they could have seen these missionaries in the glory of their work as we met them!

Success and long life to the Hui Tau! May each succeeding one be more successful than the last! May its influence extend until it becomes a power not only to cement the love and increase the faith of Church members, as it does even now, but also to break down the barriers erected by the ignorant and vicious to impede the progress of the Church of Jesus Christ.

Our tour of inspections of missions has been replete with many wonderful, interesting, and inspirational experiences; but to date, there are four which stand out like brilliant gems in a coronet, and not the least of these is the Hui Tau in Maoriland. Brother Cannon joins in love to all our friends. (En route to Tonga, May 4, 1921).—IE, 24:769-777 (1920-1921).

AH CHING

"For great and low there's but one test, "Tis that each one shall do his best. Who works with all the strength he can Shall never die in debt to man."

Confucius once said, "All my knowledge is strung on one thread;" and on that "one connecting thread," we learn from his disciple, Tsang Tsu, were hung the principles, self-control and charity to one's neighbor. These are certainly two fundamental elements in character building, without which no man can justly claim true nobility.

I thought I saw the fruits of these two principles exemplified in the life of Ah Ching as I listened to him one day, when he and his wife, his son Arthur, and Telese (Mrs. Arthur Ah Ching), acted as hosts and hostesses to a number of missionaries. That Saturday afternoon and evening, July 4, are numbered among the most pleasant of the many delightful days and nights spent in "dear old"Samoa. Every hour seemed rich in fruition of profitable intercourse and valued friendships or inspirational experiences, not the least interesting of which was Ah Ching's narration of his early life in these islands. I wish my pen could reproduce his accent and his nervous, animated facial expression as he spoke, in his "pidg'n" English mixed with Samoan words, of the trials and reverses and service of those struggling years.

Ah Ching is small of stature, about five feet, five, I should say, and rather lightly built at that. His muscular movement, like his thoughts, indicates a highly nervous temperament. I fancy his temper in his early youth was of the gunpowder type; when touched off, it would go with a flash; and yet, today, I believe he can endure imposition and ignominy, if necessary, as patiently as any of his brethren.

If you were to meet him on the street or could see him move unobstrusively into a rear or side seat of the church, you would think him, if you gave him even a passing thought, one of the most humble of Chinese. I'm not sure that your opinion would change, either, if you chanced to see him in his modest three-roomed house in the rear of his little store in Apia; and yet, if you were to offer him a cashier's check of $50,000 for his property interests, he would undoubtedly smile at you, shake his head, and turn to his busy, unassuming life with a view of adding a few more pounds sterling to his comfortable fortune.

This prosperous little businessman "no can lead," he "no can lite;" but he can "speakee China, and speakee Samoa." He keeps no books and has never kept an account in his business transactions, but he had never purchased an article in his life without paying spot cash for it. He has never "owed a man a penny." He quickly remarked, "If any man no payee me, please himself, me no care."

Now, undoubtedly, in this old workaday, business world, which in many of its aspects seems a long way from the anticipated time when every man will esteem his neighbor as himself and there shall be no rogues to defraud and to steal, an X-ray examination into Ah Ching's business might reveal the fact that not a few men have "pleased themselves" not to "payee" all they owe him. At any rate there was one who deliberately planned to defraud him, and whose dastardly treachery was the means of testing Ah Ching in life's crucible. Had his character not possessed more pure gold than dross, he would perhaps even now be deprived of life or be still wearing the stripes of a condemned felon.

Ah Ching was a young man in his teens when he left Pu Chow, Fukien Province, China, and enlisted as one of the crew of a small vessel sailing for the South Seas. True to his thrifty nature, acquired by heredity and necessity, he saved nearly every penny of his fair wage. Thus after ten years constant service with the ship's company, he had accumulated a thousand pounds sterling or more. A business friend, whom he had met during his not infrequent visits to Apia, induced him to invest his hard-earned savings in a hotel and store, he to furnish the money, his friend to furnish the brains and business acumen required, and the two to divide the profits upon a proportionate basis acceptable to both. Ah Ching invested his money, only to discover in a year or two that he had been robbed of every penny of his hard-earned savings. In certain transfers of the property, it seems his friend had appropriated everything to himself. Trusting Ah Ching couldn't "leadee," couldn't "litee," so he became an unsuspecting victim to the treachery of one to whom he had entrusted practically his life; for "you take one's life, when you take away the means whereby one lives," and up to that time Ah Ching had had but one object and that was to make money, though he had always made it honestly.

When he realized that he had been robbed of all the savings of his young life, when he sensed the villainy of the dishonest scoundrel whom he had called friend, all the fire in his Chinese nature flashed forth and showed him but one more thing for which to live, and that one thing, revenge. He truly wished that his enemy "had forty thousand lives—one was too poor, too weak, to satisfy his revenge."

"He cheatee me all my money: I killee him;" he hissed in his rage, "I sharpee a knife like a lacee," he narrated, indicating the length of the knife by touching with his right hand the elbow of his left arm, which he stretched full length. His knife sharpened, he cried in his agonized rage:

"Me killee him!"

"Something insidee me say, 'No killee him;' I stop; and it say again 'no killee him."

"Then I know God, he helpee me, so I no killee him. I cly, that is all—just cly." (Cry.)

Who can deny that God did "helpee" him in this great crisis of his life? Whether that help sprang from an unsullied conscience or gave strength in a moment of weakness to a will that once more assumed the mastery of a passion, or whether his spirit responded to the promptings of the infinite—the fact remains that his frenzy was overpowered, his spirit subdued, and he just "clied."

It was not an easy matter for Ah Ching to cry "down" to his injured and revengeful spirit; but once he became victor, he felt, though he did not then know, that,

"Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord."

(Romans 12:19.)

It was a real joy to all who heard him relate his experience to see his face light up as he said:

"Me gladee from that day to this."

Truly, the fruits of that spirit are love, joy, and peace.

"Well, how did the man prosper with his stolen money, Brother Ah Ching?" I asked.

"That house he burnee down," he answered, "man in the stleet—all bowed down—nobody likee him—die poor." This intimation that God had avenged his enemy, recalled the lines:

"I know that each sinful action, as sure as the sun brings shade, Is somewhere, sometime punished ahead of him, though the hour be long delayed."

With prospects of success ahead of him, Ah Ching had married a chieftain's daughter. Now they were homeless and penniless, except for the money earned day by day at odd jobs. To add to his difficulty, he had voluntarily proffered support to two of his fellow countrymen, one of whom was sickly and unable to supply the least of his necessities. I do not now recall whether I learned what claim the other man had.

"Were they your relatives?" I inquired knowing the strong ties of family relationship in the Chinese mind.

"No," was his reply, "no lelation—just Chinamen, that's all—needee help, and I give him—I findee wolk sometimee; my woman she takee in washing. Sometimee me have no lice for all (rice), but me givee Chinamen lice alle samee."

Sharing his last kernel of rice with a fellow man in need, and that, too, without any recompense or desire for reward—is not that true service? No doubt the gratitude whispered by the sick and dying man fully repaid Ah Ching for his years of gratuitous food and shelter; but there will be further recompense when one who takes note of all such kindnesses will some day say,

"These deeds shall thy memorial be— Fear not thou didst them unto me."

It is no wonder that the sound of the gospel struck a responsive chord in this humble man's heart—conscientiousness, self-mastery, and service among its principal themes.

His Church record like his life is marked not in words but in deeds. You may know his annual income by his tithes and offerings which are freely and thankfully given as expressions of his gratitude for the manifest goodness of God to him.

His rise from poverty to opulence began about the time that he joined the Church, the turning point being marked in his mind, as undoubtedly it was in reality, by a singular dream that came to him.

"I dleamed one night," he narrated, "that the Lord, he say to me, 'Plenty money in the stleet, why you no pick him up?' Next morning I got up, lookee the stleet—no money. I could see no money in the stleet. Then I thought; I sellee things in stleet, and makee money."

With the little savings he and his wife had hoarded, he purchased by paying cash in full, one case of salmon, one sack of sugar, one gross of matches, five plugs of Samoan tobacco, one hundred pounds of Samoan kava, and 900 pounds of flour. When this was sold, he purchased more. Thus began his little business, which today includes three separate stores, and a bakery, all free from encumbrances, and carrying on a thriving trade.

His faithful wife, who shared his struggles in poverty, lived to share only a part of his prosperity. A year or so after her death he married her sister, who evidently is an excellent helpmeet and companion to him and in whom we thought we could detect the same admirable qualities of womanhood as those elements of manhood which have contributed to the commendable life of her husband. Through her lineage he now holds the title of chief among her people.

Of his sons and daughters, we learned but little. His son Arthur, who is now a partner in the business, was educated in China where his father supported him seven years. He and his wife, Telese, are also members of the Church, and seem to hold the confidence and esteem of the mission authorities and elders who know them. They are certainly as bounteous in their desires to please and to serve others as their father, Ah Ching; for after eighteen or more feasted that afternoon with all the delicacies Samoa produces, all the Sauniatu band boys were feted to their appetites' content.

As we sat in his flower-bedecked home in Tulaele, with evidences of thrift and opulence on every hand, as we thought of the number of men and women whom it is in his power now to bless, as we heard him express his gratitude for what the gospel has brought him and for what it means to him, there passed quickly in my mind, in striking contrast to this scene of success and sweet contentment, a picture of a possible felon's cell with all its associated misery and ignominy.—IE, 24:992-996 (1921).

FAST DAY AND THE MIDDLE EAST: AN INCIDENT IN CHURCH HISTORY

When Brother Hugh J. Cannon and I were visiting the missions of the Church, we were asked to meet the Armenian Saints over in the Near East. Nobody knew definitely their whereabouts, they were so scattered. We had their names, but we could not even pronounce them correctly. During that time, you members at home were asked to hold a special fast day for the benefit of the European Saints, including the Armenians.

Do you remember that you collected $115,000 that one day? Do you remember that Elder J. Wilford Booth was chosen by the Authorities to take part of that over to the Armenian Saints? We were coming west from one side of the world. Brother Booth was traveling east, hoping to meet us. We got a letter in Jerusalem from President Heber J. Grant saying: "Brother Wilford Booth is sent to meet you somewhere with money for relief of the Saints in Armenia."

He sent one copy to Cairo and another to Jerusalem, but he did not know where we would meet. We sent a cable to Brother Whitney in England. He answered, "Brother Booth on his way. Will meet you somewhere."

We sent a cable to the United States Consul in Beirut asking if he had heard from President Booth, and he wired back, "Booth on his way. Whereabouts unknown."

How we met is an interesting and faith-promoting story. The point I am making is that every cent that you contributed in that special fast day was delivered to those Saints in the Near East, without one cent of expense being taken from your contribution—because of the complete organization of the Church.—DNCS, April 30, 1952, p. 3.

FAITHFUL UNTO DEATH: AN IMPORTANT EPISODE

In the bright sunshine of a January forenoon in the year 1924, at a customs house on the coast of old Tyre and Sidon, I last shook hands with my beloved brother and esteemed friend, President Joseph Wilford Booth, of the Armenian mission. Little did I realize, as we bade each other good-bye, that we should never in this life see each other again! That that was our final earthly parting, however, is attested by a cablegram from President John A. Widtsoe, announcing the sudden and wholly unexpected death of Elder Booth on December 5, 1928.

At that farewell, just before I entered the auto bus that was to take me to Haifa, my friend and I embraced each other, and exchanged a mutual "God bless you!" "I'm sorry to have you leave me, Brother McKay," said he, as his eyes, became tear-dimmed, and his countenance became saddened by a shadow of sorrow. That sentence was the nearest to a complaint that I ever heard Elder Booth utter. Through that remark, however, and the look that accompanied it, I caught a glimpse of a noble heart longing for companionship—the companionship and strength of a fellow missionary who could help solve perplexing questions and share the heavy burdens incident and peculiar to that far-off mission. A few minutes, thereafter, I was speeding on my return journey toward England to rejoin the five hundred other elders then laboring in the seven missions of Europe. Brother Booth returned to Aleppo alone, for Elder Earl B. Snell, his only missionary companion, had been honorably released to return home, and no other missionaries had as yet been called to the Armenian mission. Fortunately, President Booth's wife had joined him just ten days before. Back to Sister Booth and to the Saints he loved, he wended his solitary way, to work out, under God's guidance, the destiny of the mission over which he had been called to preside.

More than two years before this parting, President Hugh J. Cannon and I had miraculously met Brother Booth at Haifa, when we were all three on our way to gather and to succor the scattered Armenian Saints. That memorable meeting was about 2 p.m., November 4, 1921. Brother Booth's first desire, following greetings and explanations, was to take us to visit the graves of Elders Adolph Haag and John A. Clark, who sleep in what is known as the German cemetery, just outside Haifa. Later, in Aleppo, we visited the grave of Elder Emil J. Huber, who laid down his life there. Elder Edgar A. Simmons lies buried in Aintab, but we had no opportunity of visiting his resting place. None of us imagined then that President Booth, himself, would also end his earthly labors in that faraway land.

In Volume 12 of The Improvement Era, under the title "Four Heroes Far Away," Brother Booth has written an account of these brethren and their heroic deaths. He, himself, now brings the number to five.

The three of us left Haifa for Beirut, a few hours later, where we stayed that night.

At 2:30 p.m., November 8, 1921, we reached Aintab. The alacrity with which the Saints, who, like hunted hares, were living in caves and ruined houses, became informed of our coming, is still an unexplained mystery to me; but at five p.m. seventy-four grateful people, including some who were not yet Church members, assembled in a fairly commodious place to greet us. Only those who beheld the heartfelt welcome which that people gave President Booth can realize what his return to them meant. One kind woman, whose countenance reflected deep and sincere appreciation, expressed the feeling of all when she said: "For seven years we've been in hell, but today we are in heaven."

That evening it was decided that the members of the Church and their near associates should leave Aintab at the first opportunity. They would have started that night, if possible.

Upon Brother Booth's return to Aleppo, he took up his abode among the refugees and began to make preparations for the exodus from Aintab, eighty miles distant.

What difficulties he encountered in accomplishing this duty, perhaps no one can now realize. There were carts and horses and other transportation facilities to secure. There was permission of a not too-favorable government to obtain. There were winter rains and cold weather to endure, and muddy roads to traverse.

How he was impressed to seek the aid of General De La Mathe of the French army, who issued an order for passports for fifty-three Mormons to come out of Aintab; how Lieutenant A. P. Guitton conveyed President Booth from Aleppo to Aintab, furnishing food, bedding, and protection free of charge; how the little colony packed household furniture and personal belongings on the mule-drawn vehicles that made up the train that started from Aintab to Aleppo on a wet December day; how much of the poor but treasured household articles were abandoned by the roadside to lighten the mud-bedraggled wagons; how the Saints endured the exposure in comparative cheerfulness because they were going to safety; the difficulties of housing them after their arrival in Aleppo—all these experiences, though unpleasant and full of anxiety, were cherished memories, during his lifetime, in the man's mind who alone carried the worry and responsibility of it all! They constitute also a bit of Church history that merits proper recognition and which reflects the great outstanding fact that the intrepid, unselfish missionary, Joseph Wilford Booth, literally gave himself to relieve, comfort, and cheer a people whom he loved.

From November 1921, Elder Booth labored constantly for the alleviation and betterment of the members of the mission over which he presided. For over a year he labored alone. In April 1923, Elder Earl B. Snell joined him, and together they worked diligently in securing more commodious quarters for the colony, in teaching, and in making more effective for good the organizations in the Aleppo branch. In the renovating and the remodeling of the large house rented, these two dauntless missionaries not only directed the efforts of carpenters, masons, plasterers, and cement mixers, but also became themselves workers in these trades.

But the greatest results of this devoted service are seen not in material things but in the development of the members of the branch. To one who saw them in their discouragement and distress in 1921, the change wrought is wonderful. It is true that from a financial standpoint many are still dependent and are yet longing for the day or opportunity to come when they can earn their own livelihood and become permanently assured of being placed beyond the reach of dire want; but in the joy of association in surroundings of safety, in the assurance of proper care and skill in times of sickness; in opportunity for mutual helpfulness and for spiritual growth and enlightenment, the change which was brought about by their mission president is little short of a transformation.

No wonder the people loved him, for he loved them and had demonstrated that love throughout eleven years of faithful service, to which he has since added over seven years more—faithful and ever solicitous, even unto death!

No man in the Church could have been truer to his trust, no one less complaining, no one more hopeful, no one more self-denying, no one more willing to sacrifice personal comforts and convenience to give aid to the poor and unfortunate, no one more ready to give his life for his friends and in the service of his God than was President Joseph Wilford Booth.

I know what fond wishes and fervent prayers he had in his heart as he left me, at the coast of Tyre and Sidon, to return to the little branch at Aleppo. During the nearly five intervening years, he and his faithful wife, Sister Mary R. Booth, have labored unceasingly and uncomplainingly to make real their cherished hopes and desires for the Armenian Mission.

Every day, this faithful, intrepid missionary, following in the footsteps of his Master, "went about doing good." His noble soul was actuated by this high motive even when death called. It was truly with an upright heart that President Booth met this relentless visitor, whose final summons he would answer as he had answered every other worthy call to responsibility, by saying cheerfully and resolutely: "I am ready."

With the passing of President Booth, closes another important and tragic episode in the history of the Church.—IE, 32:179-184 (1929).

A RETURN TO SCOTLAND 1952

McKay, David O., Family ofa-McKay, David O.TPVery few who are present can realize what this moment means to me. With appreciation of your welcome I associate in a reminiscent mood events that have led to my standing before you in the position I now occupy.

McKay, David O., Family ofa-McKay, David O.TPBefore I tell you how thankful I am for the hearty welcome extended to Sister McKay, our son and daughter, and me in Glasgow and in Edinburgh, let me just briefly state that it has been over a hundred years since my grandfather, William McKay, and grandmother, Ellen Oman McKay, left Thurso, Scotland, having become converts to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

McKay, David O., Family ofa-McKay, David O.TPThey settled in Ogden, Utah, and so in the same year did the Powells and the Evans families from Wales. William McKay's second son, David, met a little girl sixteen years of age, Jennette Evans, who became David's wife.

McKay, David O., Family ofa-McKay, David O.TPAbout 1877 William McKay, my grandfather, came back to his native land as a missionary and went up to Wick, Thurso, and Aberdeen, bearing witness that the gospel had been restored and that he knew it to be true.

McKay, David O., Family ofa-McKay, David O.TPAbout 1882, his son David, my father, came over here as a missionary. He, too, labored in Glasgow, Dundee, Aberdeen, and in Thurso, and he was president of the Scottish Conference.

McKay, David O., Family ofa-McKay, David O.TPIn 1897 I was called as a missionary, an unmarried man, young, earnest, and eager as these young missionaries. I was assigned to come to Scotland and labor. After a few months the presidency of the European Mission, then President Rulon S. Wells, James L. McMurrin, and Joseph Parry appointed me president of the Glasgow Conference.

McKay, David O., Family ofa-McKay, David O.TPAn elderly woman in Thurso whom I visited in 1898 was the playmate of my grandmother. She remembered when William McKay and Ellen Oman were married. She remembered when they were baptized, in referring to which she said, "I remember when they dipped them i' the Burn; do you do that noo?" I assured her that we did. "And are ye Willie's grandson? Ach a' ne, ach a' ne, I am gettin' auld!" She felt then as I do tonight, as expressed by Sir Walter Scott:

McKay, David O., Family ofa-McKay, David O.TP"Years rush by as like the wind, We see not whence the eddy comes, Nor whitherward it is tending, And we seem, ourselves, to witness their flight, Without a sense that we are changed. Yet time is beguiling man of his strength As the winds rob the trees of their foliage."

Though time dims our youthfulness and affects the physical body, it cannot touch the spirit. And so, as I look back in reminiscent moods upon these events and many others that have crowded my mind, I stand before you with gratitude in my heart that a humble elder a hundred years ago knocked at a door in Thurso, or really in Janetstown near Thurso, and testified that the gospel of Jesus Christ had been restored. I am thankful that my grandfather and grandmother believed him because that was the beginning of all the events that have happened in the century leading to this moment.

Grateful, am I?—words are too feeble to express my gratitude! Your welcome tonight, your beautiful presents, mean more than just a greeting, mean more than just an expression of friendship and goodwill—they mean a recognition that all of us in the Church have been inspired and led by a high and guiding hand.—DNCS, June 18, 1952, p. 2.

GOSPEL LIGHT IN FINLAND

The text in which the Savior says, "I am the Light of the world," was suggested by the experience we had last evening. For the first time in my life I heard about John's Day. I had seen the midnight sun before—thirty years ago—but I did not know that a whole nation celebrated the time, the night when the sun reaches the farthest point north and starts back south.

I saw the bonfires lighted—even in the rain. Usually rain puts fires out over in the West, but here they burn just the same. We saw a city of four hundred thousand people practically deserted—citizens out celebrating John's Day. I thought how appropriate to pay tribute to the light, and at the same time to express less enthusiasm for darkness.

Six months from now, about December 21, the people particularly above the Arctic Circle will see very little light. They will have plenty of darkness. I learned today, however, that they have electricity, so they have artificial light. But the land generally will be in darkness.

I thought—that is typical of life. Many of us walk in darkness in regard to our judging others; for example, this morning I received three beautiful roses from a sister, and I heard that that good woman is the only member of the Church in her town. And I heard that her neighbors, when they learned that she had joined the Mormons, turned their backs upon her. They had potatoes in her cellar, and they took the potatoes out.

Now, if a person said to you that you had done something wrong, and you had not done something wrong, you would know that that person was misjudging you. That person, so far as you are concerned, is in darkness. You may condemn him if you wish or you may pity him. But you know within your own soul that that person is misjudging you. Your conscience is clear, for it is in the light of truth; and that person is walking in the darkness because he is misled in that misjudgment. And so I would like to say regarding this good sister and others in Finland and in other places who have joined the Church and have been condemned by your neighbors—you remain true to the light that is in your soul, and, as your Savior of old, ask the Lord to forgive those who accuse you wrongfully.

Yes, it is a great thing to celebrate the light. And the great light that the world needs today is the light of Jesus Christ. We may cry, "Peace"; we may legislate for peace; we may have to contend with the enemies of peace; but, my dear brethren and sisters in Finland and all the world, I bear you the testimony that Peter gave to the Sanhedrin when they had imprisoned Peter and John for bearing the same truth. He said, "If we this day be examined of the good deed done to the impotent man, by what means he is made whole;

"Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole.

"... for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:9-10, 12.) Thus the chief Apostle added his testimony that Jesus Christ is the light and Savior of the world.

God bless you, my dear friends. I was happy to see the number who came from way up north, closer to the midnight sun than we are. Well, you have seen the light of day shining for twenty-four hours at a time. May the light of the Savior shine in your hearts forever, and keep alive that testimony you have that the gospel of Jesus Christ is true.—DNCS, July 23, 1952, p. 3.

THE CHURCH IN EUROPE 1952

On May 29, 1952, accompanied by Sister McKay, my son David L., as secretary, and Mildred, his wife, I left for an important mission to Europe.

It is marvelous how much closer in time modern transportation has brought the nations of the earth; for example, Sunday, June 1, at 6:30 in the evening, we left New York. Owing to unfavorable weather conditions, the plane landed at Sydney, Newfoundland, instead of at Gander, and did not leave for Glasgow until Monday, 1:30 a.m. After fifteen hours of actual flying time we were at Prestwich Airport, in Ayrshire, Scotland, and later that same evening, Monday, we participated in the dedication of the first chapel owned by the Church in Scotland.

Wednesday, the evening following, we dedicated another in Edinburgh, and there is a suitable place in Aberdeen now ready for dedication. For these and other chapels in Great Britain, much credit is due to Elder Stayner Richards, who, with his associates, has manifested wisdom and economy.

If I followed my inclinations, I would pause here long enough to tell you of my feelings upon returning to Scotland after twenty-nine years, my latest visit, and after fifty-four years since I labored there as a young, unmarried missionary. What a flood of memories filled my soul as a Mrs. O'Hara, living in the apartment, graciously showed Sister McKay, two elders, and me the old 52 Holmhead Street headquarters of the Scottish Conference fifty-four years ago!

Beginning with the meetings in Scotland, we carried your love and greetings to the approximately 40,000 members of the Church in the ten missions in the nine European countries. June 2 to July 4, they met us in Europe to receive your greetings. July 26, you met us here to receive their thanks. And now, this morning, I express again to you in Zion the loving greetings of the Saints in Europe.

One impression I received right at first, and it became more and more pronounced as we came in contact with people in all walks of life, was a more tolerant attitude than I experienced a half century ago. It was a joy to mingle with intelligent people radiating a spirit of goodwill.

One beneficial result of the tour was a keener realization on the part of members of the Church that they are not detached entities but are in reality part of the Church as a whole. Nearness in time contributed to this feeling, but more especially their meeting one of the Sunday School general superintendency [^1] and a member of the general board of the Primary, [^2] hearing incidents, items of instruction, that happened or were given, as it were, but a week before, awakened a sense of belonging that was satisfying and encourgaging.

Church Membersa-McKay, David O.TPIt was truly a joy and inspiration to see the loyalty and feel the responsiveness of members of the Church in every mission. There was no exception. To greet those eagerly expectant, graciously warmhearted people gave a joy almost inexpressible. We sensed to a small degree, at least, the truth of the saying: "To love and to be loved is the greatest happiness of existence." This was especially true so far as our love for those faithful people is concerned.

I should be remiss, indeed downright unappreciative, if I did not take this occasion to refer appreciatively to the instances of goodwill manifested on this recent presidential tour of the European missions.

Our Church knows full well what it means to be misjudged, scoffed at, and persecuted. It can appreciate, too, in full value, tolerance, and a sense of justice and fair play.

The mission presidencies, missionaries, members of the Church, and their friends were most gracious in their greetings and manifestations of deference to the office of President. Everywhere their welcome was most generous. To all these we shall ever be grateful for the distances they traveled, for the sacrifices they made, for their wholehearted, radiant gladness—all of which contributed so much to the success of a very important mission.

I wish to refer especially to the good will shown by prominent businessmen, representatives of the press, hotel managers, government officials, and others whose interest and courtesy were shown without reserve.

It is unwise to attempt to mention a few because of possibly showing partiality and failing to mention deserving persons, but I will name the Honorable Charles U. Bay, American Ambassador to Norway, who not only by proffered words, "If there is anything I can do for you, please let me know," but also by direct action with the assistance of his undersecretary, Leon Cowles, rendered invaluable service in securing rightful privileges for our missionaries in Norway. He said that was his first official act as ambassador. Other ambassadors and ministers, including Honorable John M. Cabot of Finland and Honorable James C. Dunn of Paris, were equally considerate in proffering help and cooperation. Their courtesy was unbounded.

Others who did not hesitate to inconvenience themselves to render favors were Colonel Tooler and General Wood of the American Army, through whose graciousness, at the intercession of President Stayner Richards and A. Hamer Reiser, special favors were granted to us visitors in attendance at the Queen's Garden Festival at the Buckingham Palace.

I mention appreciatively, also, the service rendered by the Consul General J. D. van Karnebeek, here in the United States, whom we happened to meet before we left, who arranged for a most cordial visit to Her Majesty, Juliana, Queen of the Netherlands.

I wish to mention President Juho K. Paasikiivi of Finland, a dignified, princely gentleman, conference with whom, accompanied by President Henry A. Matis, I shall remember with satisfaction and pleasure. For exceptional courtesies shown by Mr. Sholz, the manager of the Palace Hotel near The Hague, Holland; to passport officials at Berlin, who finding us without visas, gave special considerations and, out of courtesy, obtained the necessary papers without delay, we mention appreciatively.

We are mindful also of the outstanding consideration shown by eleven policemen who were at the Mercedes Palast, at North Berlin, where an audience of twenty-six hundred persons crowded to overcapacity that large theater. How their favorable attitude stood out in contrast with the action of police when some members of the Twelve and others who sit here in this audience this morning were hunted and arrested a half century ago!

I wish to name appreciatively, also, Elder William Zimmer, and two real estate men, Mr. Hans Jordi and Mr. Hermann Schulters, who assisted President Samuel E. Bringhurst in choosing prospective temple sites in Switzerland.

For his having built suitable houses in Berlin, I wish to commend President Walter Stover, whose devotion to the German Saints was outstanding and whose generosity and wisdom will ever be cherished by the thousands whom he blessed. Included in this expression of appreciation are officials who aided President James L. Barker and President Golden L. Woolf in their securing official recognition of the Church in France.

An outstanding feature of our visit in Germany was the attendance of American servicemen. In the West German Mission they gathered as groups that compared favorably with our groups of missionaries. And how proud we were of these choice young men and women, a credit to their parents, to the Church, and to our nation. Whether they participated in concerts or attended to the details of conference, greeted strangers, or looked after the welfare of Saints and investigators, their ability was manifested, their dignity commendable, and their sincerity in their work most outstanding.

Well, fellow workers, all these and a hundred other instances that I might name are evidences of friendship and good will that will contribute to the peaceful relationships that should exist between this country and the free countries of Europe.

I am sorry that I must now sound a note of discouragement, for I cannot refrain from referring to the attitude of selfishness, distrust, and hatred manifest by the leaders of communism. How they hate America and everything American!

They are not only anti-American—they are anti-Christian! By every means possible—newspapers, billboards, documents, radio—they try to inculcate hatred in the hearts of the youth.

By the iron curtain they scheme to keep Western influence out of Russia and prevent Russians from becoming acquainted with the West. A distinguished sociologist once wrote, "Give us the young and we will create a new mind and a new earth in a single generation." That is one aim and purpose of the Russian dictators.

Largely because of their nefarious schemes and false ideologies, civilization is facing a crisis. We are in a period of uncertainty, of international tension. Not infrequently we see manifest among people a feeling of impending crisis in which is fear that the atom bomb might bring to a tragic end presentday civilization. Articles in the daily press and in magazines give unmistakable evidence of this condition. You can pick up any magazine or any daily paper and read such headings as: "Our Democracy in Danger" — "Communism—a New Kind of Threat" — "Foundations of our Republic Threatened" — "The World Cannot Exist Half Slave and Half Free."

These are some I have taken at random.

"Look at the map of the world," says one. "The iron curtain of Soviet communist control has descended over vast areas and over hundreds of millions of people in Eastern Europe and in Asia, since the close of World War II. It is unspeakably tragic that this should be the case, when it need not have been." Another: "We Face a Spiritual War." Then, last: "Red China's War against God."

Jesus Christ, Faith ina-McKay, David O.TPWell, brethren and sisters, let us not despair. A man's comfort in time of ease and peace, as well as in times of stress and danger, will be found in the depths of the sincerity of his belief in an eternal Being, his faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ. Commenting upon the need of sincerity, of faith, one writer once asked this vital question, and I give it to you:

Jesus Christ, Faith ina-McKay, David O.TP"Is Jesus to you only a legendary figure in history; a saint to be painted in the stained glass of Church windows; a sort of sacred fairy not to be approached and hardly to be mentioned by name, or is he still what he was when he was in the flesh—a reality, a man of like passions with ourselves, an elder brother, a guide, a counselor, a comforter, a great voice calling to us out of the past to live nobly, to die bravely, and keep up our courage to the last?"

Jesus Christ, Faith ina-McKay, David O.TPNotwithstanding the threatening conditions that exist in the world today, members of the Church of Jesus Christ need not fear nor be perturbed, if they will but anchor their souls in unchanging truths revealed by our Father in heaven.

If communists attempt to poison the minds of youth, as they are doing, against God the Father and his Beloved Son, if they pervert the gospel of peace and good will, if they continue to sow the seeds of mistrust and hatred, we must more guardedly protect our youth, more militantly instruct them in the principles of the restored gospel, implant in their hearts the truth that "... there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4:12.) Let them realize that without Christ the world is lost.

James L. Gordon is right when he declares: "A cathedral without windows, a face without eyes, a field without flowers, an alphabet without vowels, a continent without rivers, a night without stars, and a sky without a sun—these would not be so sad as a world without a Bible or a soul without Christ."

He is the Son of "God in the Highest" as proclaimed by the heavenly hosts, the Prince of Peace, our Elder Brother, our Redeemer, our Savior.

"His purposes fail not, neither are there any who can stay his hand.

"From eternity to eternity he is the same, and his years never fail.

"For thus saith the Lord—I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto those who fear me, and delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in truth unto the end.

"Great shall be their reward and eternal shall be their glory." (D. & C. 76:3-6.)—DNCS, October 11, 1952, pp. 2-3.

I have an entirely different viewpoint of these countries now than when I went over to Europe before. Today I realize the responsibility of this Church to proclaim the gospel is world-wide, now that the means of transportation and communication are such we are only a day, in time of travel, from the European nations.

The members of our Church in Europe, as in the isles of the sea, sense their importance as members and their responsibility as representatives of the Church in those distant lands. The members of the Church here at home should realize more clearly the loyalty and devotion they owe to their fellow members in Europe.—DNCS, September 6, 1952, p. 1.

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintsa-McKay, David O.TPGod bless the Church. It is world-wide. Its influence should be felt by all nations. May his spirit influence men everywhere and incline their hearts toward good will and peace. May divine guidance be given the priesthood, who hold the responsibility of declaring to an indifferent world the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.—DNCS, October 11, 1952, p. 3.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Elder David Lawrence McKay.
[^2] To attain spiritual response.
