“Building Faith in Christ,” page 12: At the end of the article, Elder Christofferson talks about faith as a principle of action and of power. As a family, consider discussing some challenges you face and goals you can set to overcome them. Choose one goal to work on this week, remembering that with Jesus Christ’s help, we have the power to do all things, according to His will and timing. In an upcoming family home evening, you might want to discuss your family’s progress on the goal you set.

“Sharing the Gospel by Sharing You,” page 16: As you share stories from the article, ask your family to think about friends and family members with whom you could share the gospel. Discuss how to be a friend and listen with love so that when opportunities to bear testimony come, you will be prepared.

“Personal Progress Prayer,” page 58: Read Amalia’s experience about learning to pray both morning and night. Consider reading what Amulek teaches in Alma 34:17–27 about how we should pray. You may want to ask family members what insight these verses give about how and when we should pray. Conclude by bearing your testimony of the power of prayer.

“Missionary Friend,” page 60: After reading the article, consider making a list of upcoming Church activities and meetings that might interest friends of individual family members. You may want to role-play ways to invite friends to one of the activities. Talk about what it means to be a true friend, especially to those who are not members of the Church. Conclude by making a plan to contact the friend and extend the invitation.

The family home evening we remember most fondly was one we held at a difficult time. Due to a change in management, my husband had gone through some challenges at work and felt discouraged.

We decided family home evening that week would be in his honor. Every member of the family wrote him a letter of thanks, saying why we love him and what we hope for him. Then we made an album of photographs of the family at important times, such as anniversaries, marriages, sealings, births, and other events. We wrote a comment by each one, ending each with “And so we are a happy family.” At the close of the evening, my daughter and I sang a Primary song that contains a similar phrase (see “A Happy Family,” Children’s Songbook, 198).

During family home evening we could feel the Savior’s love for us and the love we have for each other.

I am grateful for the inspired commandment to hold family home evening. Obeying it strengthens us, preparing us to be an eternal family.

Kenia Duarte dos Santos, Brazil
