A new feature-packed version of LDS Maps includes a variety of new features that will improve members’ experiences finding stake members, meetinghouses, temples, and other Church facilities.

To access the new LDS Maps, go to LDS.org > Sign In/Tools > Maps. It is available in 16 languages—Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and Swedish.

Some of the new features include household verifications, numerous map display options, better iPad and tablet support, unit boundary maps, the Locate Me feature, and improved print options.

Individuals using the new version can locate LDS places of worship, view driving directions and print them out, and share map links through social media. Also, when signed in with an LDS Account, members can see ward and stake information specific to them and their surrounding areas.

The Liahona and Ensign magazines are asking members to participate in the upcoming general conference, and the general conferences to follow, by submitting conference-related photographs from their local areas immediately after conference occurs. These photographs will be considered for publication in the May and November issues of the magazines.

Members can submit their photographs quickly and easily through LDS.org by going to Resources > Magazines and Manuals (or typing in lds.org/magazine), and then clicking on Submit Your Material in the right column of the magazines landing page.

The Liahona and Ensign pages also have sections titled “Submit Material” where members can access the online forms to submit photos.

Members should review the Image Guidelines before submitting their image to increase the chances of having their photograph accepted. The guidelines under “General Conference Photos” specify the photograph format, quality, and content that magazine editors are looking for, as well as the deadline for conference photograph submissions—10:00 a.m., Salt Lake City time, the Tuesday after general conference.

The Church has made available a new prototype tablet app featuring magazine content. The LDS Liahona app includes the October 2011, November 2011, and May 2012 issues of the magazine—in other words, the Book of Mormon issue and the two most recent general conference issues.

LDS Liahona is available in English, Portuguese, and Spanish and offers a more interactive—even immersive—magazine experience; for instance, users can read the magazine while listening to an audio file of the same text. The app is designed for use on either the Android or Apple platforms.
