Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Clarification of Terms

I have used the term dysfunctional throughout this book because it is a common and generally accepted term that means impaired or abnormal functioning. However, I agree with those experts who point out that families with the kinds of problems described in this book all function in some fashion. They may, for example, alternate periods of dysfunction or chaos with periods of quiet.

Another frequently used term is adult children. It describes individuals who grew up in dysfunctional families. The complete phrase as found in literature on the subject is adult children of dysfunctional families. The expression refers to the fact that such individuals are trapped in negative behavior patterns they developed in childhood as a way of coping with their family situations. Thus, although they are physically mature adults, they can be thought of as children in the sense that they have not matured beyond childhood in some important aspects.

In the second half of the book, I discuss the inner child. You will notice that I often refer to the inner child with the pronouns she and her. I do this because some traits often thought of as particularly feminine are associated with the inner child, including vulnerability and openness to emotions and intuition. These are not exclusively feminine traits, however, and all references to the inner child apply equally to men and women.

You may also notice that stories or statistics in the sections on abuse seem weighted toward females. This is a reflection of two facts. First, women are more often the victims of abuse than men. Second, not as much information is available concerning men and abuse. As you read these sections, please remember that there are male victims as well as female victims, and both are struggling with the same issues. Male victims have the same need for support and healing.

Finally, as you read the book, you may experience a recognition response, signalled by an inner click, an AHA! moment or a shift in awareness. The recognition response is a clear indication that some part of what you are reading is true for you. If that should happen, I encourage you to pursue an understanding of the issue involved and seek the help, should it be necessary, to work it out.
