Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Introduction

Some years ago, the stake president spoke to my ward the Sunday before Christmas. What he told us that day came as a surprise, for it wasn't the expected reflection on the season. He said: "Some of you may have noticed my eyes fill with tears during this service, and you may have concluded they were the result of my being moved by the Christmas message. That is not the case. They were the result of my looking out into your faces and seeing so much pain."

My husband, Gary, and I were among those whose faces did not express the joy of the season. At that time—and for many years thereafter—we were caught in a destructive cycle. The harder we tried to do everything we thought the Church and the gospel required, the less joy, comfort, peace, and family unity we experienced. Feelings of shame and low self-esteem followed. The gospel seemed to be working in other peoples' lives, so why wasn't it working in ours?

Our response was to try harder, to do more, to suppress negative feelings. Sooner or later, we thought, we would do it right. Then everything would be the way it was supposed to be. Our efforts didn't bring us the desired results, however. They didn't address the prime difficulty, which lay in the nature of our family relationships. We didn't know it at the time, but we were what professionals call a dysfunctional family.

In the years since that Christmas Sunday, I have learned that in order to be set free, we need to know certain truths in addition to those set forth in the scriptures—truths specific to our own lives. For example, we who grew up in dysfunctional families or are presently in dysfunctional relationships need to

Â face the truth about the nature of those relationships.

Â learn the truth about the survival techniques and ways of relating to others that we adopted in the past—and what effect they have on our lives in the present.

Â truly experience rather than deny our feelings, those associated with both childhood and present events.

Â make an honest commitment to do the work necessary for healing and growth, both as individuals and as families.

These tasks cannot be ignored, for dysfunction profoundly affects individuals and families. It gives rise to destructive beliefs about the nature of God, man, and relationships, which in turn reinforce destructive behavior patterns. Negative beliefs and behavior patterns both create difficulties in relationships and blunt the individual's ability to understand the Atonement and partake of its transforming power. They thus block spiritual growth.

Judging from my own experience and the experience of others, members of dysfunctional families often do not recognize what is impeding their spiritual progress. They try to solve their problems by putting increased energy into church activities while leaving the underlying causes unaddressed. In this case, the kind of improvement in spirituality and relationships they long for will remain outside their grasp.

However, when new understanding of relationship principles is combined with self-examination, positive changes can occur, not only in family life, but also in spiritual life. For as our understanding of correct relationship principles and our ability to live by them increase, our understanding of gospel principles and our ability to live by them also increase. Understanding the principles of relationships is thus a necessary part of working out our salvation.

My own efforts in this direction took many paths. I read through piles of current literature on dysfunctional families. I attended seminars. I meditated and prayed. I talked to Church leaders and to men and women who had similar problems, many of whom expressed great relief at being able to discuss openly the difficulties they were facing.

As a writer, I felt compelled to put all that I had learned into a meaningful form. "If the Gospel Is True, Why Do I Hurt So Much?" is the result. There is nothing unusual about the information presented in the book—it is a synthesis of the most important messages I gleaned from numerous sources. However, because of the personal (rather than scholarly) nature of the book, I didn't hesitate to interpret what I had learned in the context of my experience as an LDS woman. That is unusual. Although material on dysfunctional families and codependency fills a large space in most bookstores, little has been previously written presenting these issues from an LDS viewpoint.

Many Latter-day Saints living in dysfunctional families were willing not only to share their experiences with me, but also to allow me to include those experiences in the book. I hope this is an early signal that a new openness is developing among us about the realities many face. Such openness need not be feared. It neither attacks the Church nor indicts those experiencing difficulties. As John Bradshaw, leading authority on dysfunctional families, has said, "Everyone is responsible, but no one is to blame." [^1] By taking responsibility for our roles in a painful family system, we take the first step in healing.
