Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Part 1

The Problem

Footnotes

Chapter 1

Confronting the Issue

Nothing is so painful as realizing the gap between what can be and what is. That realization is especially painful in regard to family life. For members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who are experiencing difficult relationships, unresolved conflict, or abuse, it is bitterly painful.

We belong to a church that puts commitment to family second only to commitment to Christ. We have been taught that if we live the principles of the gospel, enter into the ordinances, and keep the outward observances, we will have happy, successful families. Unfortunately, that is not always the case. Faithfully doing Church work, for example, doesn't compensate for lack of knowledge about how relationships work—or lack of effort toward making them work.

When President Benson exhorted Church members to read the Book of Mormon as families and promised them blessings if they would, my husband and I renewed our efforts to get our children together for morning scripture reading. I recall a week when we actually read the Book of Mormon seven days out of seven! However, that accomplishment did not provide us with the tools we needed to understand and resolve our family difficulties. And the fact that we were obedient to President Benson's call, yet failed to improve our situation, added to our burden of sorrow and frustration.

Church members who are striving unsuccessfully to create a "forever family" feel separated from those whose family lives are healthy and happy. They are plagued by grave doubts about themselves and the Church. They listen with heavy hearts to testimonies, to missionary farewell speeches, and to Mother's and Father's Day talks. The words of hope, love, and happiness seem directed to everyone else but them.

Imagine, if you are not one of those suffering because of acute family problems, what it must feel like to be a Church member in the following situations:

1.

The children in Primary are singing "I'm so glad when daddy comes home . . . " Mark sits with his shoulders slumped, swinging his feet back and forth. He doesn't feel like singing along because he isn't glad when his daddy gets home. His daddy is always mad at something. Mark has to be very careful to do everything right because if he doesn't . . .

Mark doesn't like to sing "I Am a Child of God" either, because God hasn't given him parents kind and dear. He often wonders why. Is it because God doesn't love him? Or because he's bad?

2.

Jennifer's Laurel teacher is talking about the joys of marriage and motherhood. The minute she begins, Jennifer focuses on a corner of the ceiling and tunes out. She's heard it all a hundred times before, and frankly she doesn't believe it anymore. She's seen too much conflict between her parents, some of it violent. She doesn't get along with her siblings, either. This happy family stuff, she thinks, is either a big lie, or it's only for some people. I'm obviously not one of them. She has long since given up on the idea of a temple marriage.

3.

Milly bites her lip to keep from crying as she listens to a Relief Society sister tell about how her prayers for a wayward daughter brought the daughter back into the fold of the family and the Church. Milly also has a daughter who has chosen a way of life contrary to the principles of the gospel. Milly has prayed for her daughter night and day for many months. Her heart aches as she wonders why her prayers are not as effectual as those of the other sister.

4.

George has begun to skip his priesthood quorum meetings. He doesn't feel comfortable among the other brethren, who seem to have no difficulty in leading and directing their families as heads of their households. George's wife has never respected his opinions, much less deferred to him as the priesthood holder in the family. His children have followed her example, showing him little respect. Whenever he attempts to present family goals to them, they resist. That makes him angry, and he ends up losing control. He hears over and over that he should be guiding his family toward celestial goals, so the fact that he has had so little success strikes at the root of his self-esteem. He feels he has failed as a husband and a father. He feels as if he is no good to his family or the Church—or even himself.

The fact that members in these and similar situations feel different or less worthy adds another level of pain to already painful circumstances. Some even feel that they are totally to blame for the unhappiness they are experiencing and that they are therefore inadequate. Others entertain grave doubts about their spirituality or the love of God for them. Such feelings are more pronounced if they felt that they were prompted in their choice of a mate but that the choice has led to a life fraught with anguish. As a result, they may become bitter and angry at God. Finding it increasingly difficult to believe that membership in the Church results in a better life, they begin to waver in their testimonies.

Such feelings of separation and doubt make continued Sabbath attendance and participation in Church activities difficult. Attending church is anything but a joyful experience if we are convinced that others would be shocked at what goes on within the walls of our homes. It is anything but a joyful experience if we feel as if we are living a lie—smiling on the outside while filled with anger, overwhelming grief, or depression on the inside.

I am not the only one whose Sunday smile covering everyday grief wore thin and then finally disappeared. No matter where you look, if you look beyond the surface signs, you will find families in pain. You will find them living in your stake, in your ward. Perhaps you visit or home teach them. Perhaps you belong to one of them.

We gain nothing by clinging to the illusion that if we pretend all is well in Zion, it will be so. The time has come for us to acknowledge the difficulties we and many of our fellow Saints are experiencing. The time has come to search for answers to the questions that so many of us ask as we lie awake in the dark:

What went wrong?

How can we make it right?
