Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 2

Where We Are Now

At the end of the movie Raising Arizona, the main character has a dream in which he sees the figures of an old woman and an old man surrounded by their posterity. He says, "It seemed real. It seemed like us, like . . . well, our home. If not Arizona, then a land not too far away, where all parents are strong and wise and capable, and all children are happy and beloved. . . . I don't know. Maybe it was Utah."

That line is good for a laugh—and a few tears. That's the way we wish it were, not only in Utah, but in the stakes of Zion wherever they are. But all is not well in Utah, and all is not well in Zion. More subtle kinds of dysfunction aside, the concern of the brethren over the level of abuse in LDS families is proof enough. One indicator of this concern can be found in the fact that a specific question regarding abuse is now asked in temple recommend interviews. Another is the talks and writings of General Authorities on the subject.

In an article entitled "Unrighteous Dominion," Elder H. Burke Peterson wrote:

The letters and phone calls the Brethren receive from faithful wives and children who are emotionally and physically abused in their homes continue to multiply. . . . Countless heartaches and misshaped lives result from this unrighteous behavior. . . .

It may be relatively mild when expressed as criticism, anger, or feelings of severe frustration. In more extreme cases, however, unrighteous dominion may emerge as verbal, physical, or emotional abuse. Unfortunately, in its less obvious forms, unrighteous dominion is often either ignored or not recognized as such. [^1]

Although Brother Peterson was speaking of men as abusers, his words can also apply to women and even children. In particular, abuse by siblings is often ignored or passed over with comments such as, "That's just the ways kids act at that age," or "It's not unusual for brothers and sisters to squabble."

The last part of the Peterson quotation is of great importance. Some actions and attitudes that we consider normal to family life are actually abusive. Anne L. Horton, assistant professor in Brigham Young University's School of Social Work, has enumerated some of the more subtle forms of abuse. [^2] I have listed them below, along with some additions:

Physical

Â poking, prodding, shoving

Â hair-pulling

Â hard, prolonged tickling

Â intense wrestling

Psychological/emotional

Â name-calling, using sarcasm, making biting comments

Â insulting, yelling, swearing, threatening

Â criticizing

Â manipulating, guilting, shaming, gossiping

Â withholding of affection, attention, or respect

Â withholding of help, making false promises

Â lying, withholding information

Â using money as a lever to get what you want

Â making fun of or rejecting others' thoughts, feelings, or needs

Sexual

Â inappropriate touching, hugging, kissing

Â invading privacy

Â making crude or sexist comments, telling sexual jokes

Â taking inordinate interest in private matters

This is a sobering list, for I believe if readers honestly contemplate it, they will recognize some of their own behaviors.

Abuse is pervasive, as shown by national statistics. In 1989, an estimated 2,400,000 children were reported to have been abused or neglected. This represents a ten percent increase over the reported incidents filed in 1988. [^3] An article in Psychology Today reported that one in six Americans is sexually abused as a child, or twenty-five percent of all females and ten percent of all males. [^4] Other studies put the figure even higher for men. Newsweek reported that there was some form of violence in twenty-five percent of American marriages. [^5]

Members of the Church often feel that because we have the blessing of the restored gospel, we also have—or ought to have—some immunity from the relationship problems faced by the population as a whole, including abuse. However, this does not seem to be the case. Although there are few available statistics relating directly to physical and sexual abuse among the LDS population, the studies that have been done allow us to draw some conclusions.

Projections by the YWCA women's shelter program indicate that in 1991, 57,630 Utah men will assault a domestic partner. In other words, one of ten Utah women will be assaulted by a domestic partner. Furthermore, 144,470 Utah children will witness violence between their parents or between their mothers and partners. Seventy-two thousand will suffer assault as well.

The YWCA statistics also indicate that of the Utah children reared in violent and abusive homes, 65% (approximately 93,650) will marry into abusive family systems. Unless they receive or seek help to break the cycle, they in turn will produce 234,120 children who will be reared in abusive homes, 65% of whom, if the patterns are not altered, will marry into abusive family systems. [^6]

While these statistics do not indicate the number of Latter-day Saints living in Utah who might be affected by domestic violence, the high percentage of Church members in the Utah population (an estimated 77.2% in 1991-1992) makes them pertinent to any discussion on dysfunction in an LDS context.

A study on violence in Utah County that compared results with a national study was also revealing. [^7] According to the research, spanking occurs at a ten percent higher rate in Utah County than the national average (82% national, 93% Utah County). In addition, half of the parents stated that if they saw someone do to their children the sorts of things they themselves did, they would call the police!

These results were echoed in the study "In Search of a Peculiar People: Are Mormons Really Different?" [^8] Statistics from the 1987 National Survey of Families and Households were used to compare LDS families with several other religious groups. Again, the percentages of spanking, slapping, or yelling incidents among Latter-day Saints were slightly, though not significantly, higher. (A possible explanation is the greater number of small children in LDS families than the national average.)

Reference was also made in the above study to an analysis of violence in a Utah sample by Rollins and Oheneba-Sakyi. [^9] That analysis "indicates that spousal violence is slightly more common in Utah than in the United States. Utah households report a little less violence toward children than U.S. households, but violence is more likely among women if they have a college degree, but do not work, or if they have sole responsibility for child care."

On the basis of such studies and her own practice dealing with victims of abuse, Anne Horton concludes that LDS families have the same risk for physical, sexual, or emotional abuse as any other social group. In fact, she estimates that two million Latter-day Saints will have been abused by the year 2000.

There will be other victims too. Family members who witness the incidents can be added to the count. And because abuse victims often in turn abuse others, the number will continue to rise.

If we are to reverse this trend, we must begin to educate ourselves and to develop the systems necessary to offer appropriate help. Now is the time to begin. As Anne Horton remarked in the 1990 BYU Women's Conference, "These topics are not too awful to mention, they are too critical and awful not to mention. Now may not be a comfortable time to solve or face this problem, but it is the only time." [^10]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Ensign, July 1989, 7.
[^2] 2. "The Silent Survivor-Defining Abuse," seminar, 1990 Brigham Young University Women's Conference.
[^3] 3. Fact sheet, National Committee for Prevention of Child Abuse, July 1990.
[^4] 4. Alfie Kohn, "Shattered Innocence," Psychology Today, February 1987, 54.
[^5] 5. "A Tale of Abuse," Newsweek, December 12, 1988, 59.
[^6] 6. YWCA statistics quoted by Representative Wayne Owens in Congressional Update, July 1991.
[^7] 7. Linda Bradley, A Study of Physical Discipline Practices in Relationship to the Legal Definition of Child Abuse: A Study of 100 Utah Valley Families' Discipline Practices, unpublished Master of Social Work research project, Brigham Young University, 1983.
[^8] 8. Tim B. Heaton, Kristen L. Goodman, and Thomas B. Holman, In Search of a Peculiar People: Are Mormons Really Different? unpub. ms., BYU.
[^9] 9. Boyd C. Rollins and Yaw Oheneba-Sakyi, "Physical Violence in Utah Households," unpub. ms., BYU.
[^10] 10. "The Silent Survivor."
