Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 3

Beliefs That Keep Us from Getting Help

Many of us judge our success by how happy our family life is. It doesn't seem to matter what we have accomplished or what acclaim we have received; if our relationships are troubled, we feel as if we have failed. Not surprisingly, then, we want to believe our families are normal, happy, and healthy; that our relationships are free of dysfunction.

The fact is, most of us either have experienced or are experiencing some level of dysfunction in some relationship. We may not recognize it as such, however, especially if it is subtle or if we don't clearly understand what sorts of behavior are dysfunctional. We may actually be tolerating some physical, verbal, or emotional abuse, believing the myth that it is a normal part of family life.

False Measures of Family Success

In addition, we often define family success on the basis of externals. But what makes a family dysfunctional is not always visible to outsiders. Family members may seem to be normal and happy. They may live in a comfortable home. They may be high achievers or leaders in Church and society. They may be all of that, and their families may still be dysfunctional.

Let's take a close look at three typical criteria for success to see how misleading they can be: absence of overt conflict, activity in the Church, and financial and social success.

Absence of conflict. The level of overt conflict alone isn't an accurate measuring stick for dysfunction. When we believe that lack of conflict is an indication of good relationships, we do all we can to avoid or minimize disagreements or fights, thinking that to do so is the way to make our families successful.

If the individual's need for safety, respect, love, and encouragement are met, the presence of conflict per se does not appear to have lasting detrimental effects. Problems are resolved in ways that do not shame the individual or cause him to doubt his worth.

On the other hand, when absence of conflict is made into the measuring stick, the means used to avoid it are often in themselves abusive or manipulative and result in future relationship difficulties. Some examples are acknowledging that a problem exists but refusing to talk about it, denying that a problem exists, making fun of the individual's concerns or fears, and withholding love or approval until the individual conforms to expectations. Those who believe that any means of avoiding open conflict is justified in the effort to build a strong family unit are often unhappily surprised at the results, as was Ann in the following anecdote.

Many times, Ann [^1] heard her mother and father say with pride that they had never had an argument in all their married life. It was true. Differences of opinion, anger, and frustration were never articulated—that was the family rule. When she married, Ann held fast to that rule and avoided talking about negative feelings, believing that the absence of conflict indicated a well-balanced family.

On the surface, her relationship with her husband looked fine, but the resulting lack of communication became so severe and disabling that it eventually led to a divorce. Now Ann is struggling to learn how to acknowledge negative feelings, particularly anger, and to face and work out conflict in an appropriate manner.

Activity in the Church. While activity in the Church does support parents in their goals and contribute to the strength of the family, it is not a guarantee against dysfunction. Members of a dysfunctional family can attend all their meetings, pay tithing, support a missionary, obey the Word of Wisdom, read scriptures regularly, and fill various positions in their ward—and still be at the mercy of destructive relationship patterns. In fact, dysfunctional families often become overly involved in Church activities as a means of avoiding unpleasant family issues. Family members will continue to have problems until they deal with the issues that are causing them pain.

The Webers were a pillar of their ward. A large family, they filled positions of prominence and attended all ward functions. The children were lively yet well-mannered and always well-groomed, and they received all of the expected awards as they passed through the Church organizations. They seemed to others to be good examples of family life.

However, there were problems at home. Brother Weber's parenting style was to give orders to his children, then have his wife see that they were carried out while he busied himself with business or Church work. Sister Weber, who herself was accustomed to receiving a list of "To Do's" from her husband, was unable to stand in as the authority figure in the family. The children routinely took advantage of their father's absence. Brother Weber would then upbraid his wife for not being able to control them. In turn, Sister Weber retaliated against her husband for being put into an unmanageable situation by sabotaging him in several ways, including always being late for important events, never having his shirts ironed when he needed them, and overdrawing the bank account.

Financial and social success. Given the affluence of our country and the emphasis on consumerism, we should not be surprised that many adults fall into the trap of basing their identities upon the goods they accumulate and the status they achieve. Success in worldly terms is extremely important to individuals who have no deep, anchoring sense of self-worth. In such cases, a spacious house with elegant furnishings immaculately kept, a luxury car, state-of-the-art electronic equipment, fashionable clothing, and a social life to match this life-style take on paramount importance. Relationships, even families, become adjuncts, props for the perfect picture.

Brother and Sister Lang were polished and educated. Both had grown up in favorable circumstances and had taken full advantage of the education and experiences offered them as a result. After twenty-five years of marriage, the Langs were living in the kind of home they had dreamed of, and they regularly took vacations to places with exotic names. Their children, all talented and smart, seemed to fit well into the structure of their lives.

However, both Brother and Sister Lang were emotionally remote people. They didn't know how to share their feelings, thoughts, and concerns in a significant way. The conversations they had with their children were more like corporate planning sessions, focused on logistics and problem-solving. Rarely were the children encouraged to talk about what they were experiencing, what they feared, what they hoped. By the time they reached their teenage years, the children no longer wanted to share significant aspects of their lives with their parents—their father and mother had a way of making them feel as if their concerns were "no big deal." Emotions didn't matter. What mattered was that they lived up to the Lang image.

It was a great shock to the Langs when their teenage daughter committed suicide. When asked what might have been bothering their daughter, they couldn't say. In a very real way, she was a stranger to them. They listened with overwhelming grief and guilt as their other children revealed to them things they had never suspected about their daughter's life.

Often, men and women deny or don't recognize their family problems because of their focus on superficial standards of success. Men in particular may say things like, "I don't know what you're talking about when you say we have problems. What problems? I pay the bills. I do my Church work. I don't drink. I don't smoke. I don't go off with the guys on the weekend and leave you alone with the kids. You're the one with the problem. You're never satisfied."

On the other hand, when individuals are aware of family difficulties but are unable to effect positive change, they understandably often take comfort in the successes they achieve elsewhere. They may even put increased energy into jobs, volunteer work, or church work because they receive positive feedback for their efforts.

False Sense of Self-reliance

Quite a few families in pain often stay stuck because they believe in a false notion of self-reliance. They feel that they must always solve their family or personal problems without outside help. This attitude is particularly harmful because it supports the dysfunctional family's tendency to invalidate or reject information coming to them from the outside. Such families are what psychologists call "closed" systems.

The very fact that a dysfunctional family is a closed system precludes change. Unable or unwilling to see from a different viewpoint what is happening to them, they remain convinced that the way they perceive themselves, other family members, and their relationships with each other is correct. They may blame each other for their feelings of anger and pain, thus justifying their reactions. The cycle continues to replay over and over, the family members secure in the belief that they have good reason for their behavior.

In such a situation, input from outside is necessary, whether from counselors, friends, books, marriage retreats, or other sources. But even the suggestion of getting help can be perceived as a threat by family members who fear bringing the truth into the open.

A teenage girl from a troubled family was walking home from her music lesson one day when she noticed a new sign on a building: Family Counseling. She knew instinctively that family counseling was what she and her family needed. When she got home, she told her mother about the new service and suggested they check into it. The mother reacted as if she had been personally attacked, responding so negatively that the girl never brought up the subject again. But even as an adult, the daughter remembered that moment as a lost opportunity for change.

The idea that we can solve our problems on our own has the feeling of hubris about it. Usually used in context of Greek tragedy, hubris refers to impetuous or destructive behavior stemming from arrogance or excessive pride. The outcome is always disastrous in Greek drama and almost was in the following example.

An LDS woman was given an assignment by the Spiritual Living teacher to prepare a short talk on how learning to be self-reliant had helped her solve her family problems. She began her comments by remarking that she didn't think what she had to say was what the teacher wanted. She related that trying to solve the problems she and her family were facing without seeking outside help had led her perilously close to the ruin of her emotional health and the loss of her family.

This woman was born into a large farm family where the father saw sons as free labor and daughters as a waste of time and effort. Her earliest memory of her father was hearing him say that girls were no good and that she should have died at birth.

As can be imagined, hearing such emotionally and verbally abusive statements throughout her life created severe psychological problems that she was unable to resolve on her own. She tried to, however, by attempting to be the perfect Mormon wife and mother—but never dealing directly with the problem itself and never getting help (this kind of effort is described in chapter eleven in the discussion of codependence in LDS society). Doing so brought her family to the brink of disaster. She was only able to heal when she joined a 12-Step program dealing with codependence. It not only helped her understand what was at the root of her difficulties, but it also increased her spirituality by teaching her what it meant to be, as she put it, "God-reliant." That was when she and her family began to heal.

Fear of the Helping Profession

Many Church members also distrust the helping profession. Some seem to feel that those in the profession have rejected religious- or gospel-based values in favor of humanistic values or secular philosophies. This they see as a danger to the unity and strength of both the Church and the family. Those who believe in such sweeping generalizations do not acknowledge the resources available for families with problems, resources that they themselves may need.

Others may object to family members seeking help because they know that a reputable therapist will encourage his clients to express their feelings and decide for themselves what they believe in and what they want. Some adults may see this as a threat to their authority as parents. Some husbands may see it as a threat to their position as head of the household. Some Church leaders may see it as a threat to the position that there is one inviolable, eternal standard of right and wrong.

Any time a family member enters some kind of therapy, the "family boat" is going to be rocked. The status quo will be upset. But that is exactly what closed, dysfunctional families need. The relationships must be changed; otherwise, such families cannot heal themselves. In addition, victims of any kind of abuse will need the help of a trained professional to work through the resulting problems.

The process of choosing a therapist to work with can allay some fears. Most services, like LDS Social Services and health maintenance organizations (HMOs), offer assistance in choosing counselors. Prospective clients should talk to various therapists and some of their current clients before making their choice. This can be done even when insurance coverage limits the choice of therapists to those within a specific group health plan. And if clients find they are uncomfortable with their first choice of therapists, they can always change.

Fear of Admitting Failure

Finally, many people don't seek help because they don't see a problem, even in the face of incontrovertible evidence. To do so would be to admit failure, and that is too painful. Denial seems safer to such people, even though it can have devastating results.

Holly was in grade school when she began wetting herself in class with embarrassing regularity. At the same time, she was also stealing in school, in stores, and in church. Holly's mother, who fielded most of the calls from the teacher and other concerned adults, was committed to getting help for her daughter. But Holly's father resisted. His typical response was "She'll grow out of it." He was also convinced that if Holly was disciplined severely enough, she would stop both behaviors. He persisted in that conviction, despite her lack of progress.

The underlying reason for such denial is shame. If we believe that living the principles of the gospel will result in strong, happy families now and for eternity, family difficulties seem to indicate that something is wrong with us, something that sets us apart from our more successful brothers and sisters. If an unhealthy shame prompts us to hide behind a facade of denial, the problem is compounded. If a healthy shame—a sense of our weakness and need for help—prompts us to seek for solutions, the possibility for healing is opened up.

The true failure, then, lies not in having difficulties but in denying them because of an unhealthy shame. In that case, we not only deny ourselves and our loved ones a chance for progress, we also deny the power of the Atonement, which is the power for change. Seeking help is thus an expression of faith in the sort of creatures we are—children of God—and the sort of creatures we may yet become.

---
Notas:
[^1] Raymond Corsini, Current Psychotherapies (Itasca: F. E. Peacock Publishers, Inc., 1979), 463.
