Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 4

The Family as a System

What is a family?

On the surface, that seems like an easy question to answer, and I suspect that most of us could give a rational definition. However, our understanding of how a family functions is based on feeling rather than logic. It is more subconscious than conscious. Most people don't really know what drives their family as a unit. In fact, focus on the family as a unit or a system is a comparatively recent development.

Prior to the '50s, an individual experiencing difficulties was treated as if his problems existed in isolation. Therapy focused solely on the disturbed child, the suicidal teen, the depressed mother, or the addicted husband. The role of the family itself was rarely called into question.

That began to change when psychologists started to consider the environment of their clients. Alfred Adler was one of the first in the field to believe that a person could not be helped unless he was understood in the context of the family and the society in which he lived. Adler studied children in their homes and schools, as well as in the family education centers that he set up. He emphasized the family group, thus indirectly contributing to the development of family-systems theories.

Probably the most important of these theories is that a family cannot be understood as a simple mathematical equation: father + mother + child + child = family. Rather, the family is best understood in terms of physics.

Let's say, for example, that individual family members are represented as electrical transformers. Their relationship is represented by a power line stretching between each and every other family member. Father and mother form the first connection. When a child is born, two more lines are drawn, one representing the relationship between child and mother and one representing that between child and father. The advent of a second child would create three more connections: child 2—mother, child 2—father, and child 2—child 1. The more children in the family, the more lines.

This system of transformers and power lines can be thought of as an energy grid. The interaction between family members would be the energy constantly moving along the power lines. Each connection or relationship has its own particular level and kind of energy, which affects the energy pattern of the grid as a whole. Perhaps a father and a son have a poor relationship. When conflict sends a surge of negative energy (anger, for example) between them, it also sets in motion a particular pattern of energy flow (reactions, in this case) throughout the entire grid, which affects all family members.

Taking the analogy further, if you were to look at a plan that indicated the placement of several transformers (family members) and the connecting lines (relationships), it wouldn't tell you much. A more useful plan would indicate both the level of energy passing between specific pairs and typical patterns of energy flow throughout the system as a whole. Interaction—the pattern of energy flow between family members—is thus the real defining element of a family.

Survival, the Prime Function

Once a system (whether a family, an organization, or a government) is in place, its prime function becomes survival. If something threatens its survival, members of the system react in a way that will restore balance. In a family system, individuals take on particular roles to keep that balance. They usually do so without being consciously aware of what they are doing or why. The following story illustrates a family system dependent for survival upon having a scapegoat, that is, someone upon whom the dissatisfaction of other family members can be focused.

The Joneses weren't getting along well. Mike was angry and upset at his wife about a long list of things. Pam had a list of grievances toward her husband that was just as long. However, neither one of them talked openly with the other about their grievances, for they didn't feel comfortable about facing their issues directly.

They didn't have time to anyway because their daughter Cindra was causing them a lot of trouble. They spent much of their time every day dealing with Cindra, worrying about her, talking to each other, teachers, and friends about her problems. Their unhappiness with each other was redirected toward this child, whom they felt was the primary source of difficulties in their marriage.

Neither Mike nor Pam had any clue as to the real dynamics of their family situation. In an effort to help Cindra, they took her to a therapist, hoping the therapist could straighten her out. The therapist listened to their story, then suggested that the problem was as much theirs as Cindra's.

They were outraged. They saw no connection between their child's behavior and their relationship. Their relationship wasn't perfect, but it wasn't all that bad!

In the next few sessions, the therapist showed how Cindra was the scapegoat for the Jones family. Her function was to preserve her parents' marriage and thus the family unit. How did she do that? By developing a range of behavioral difficulties that kept her parents focused on her rather than each other. When united by the common goal of dealing with her, they didn't have to deal directly with their own troubled relationship. All the anger and frustration they felt toward each other could be directed toward their problem child.

Luckily for Cindra, the therapist was able to help her understand what was going on. She learned how to separate herself from the family situation, to make decisions based on her own needs, and to take care of herself. This was difficult, since she was still living at home, but she managed.

To the surprise of everyone in the family, as Cindra got better, her little sister seemed to get worse. In fact, she was soon as troubled as Cindra had been. Only the therapist wasn't surprised. She realized that the system the family had established demanded that someone be "the problem" so that an individual rather than the underlying issues would be the focus. When Cindra stopped playing that role, her sister took it over.

You might be asking why anyone would willfully avoid discovering and working on the real issues behind a family's difficulties. In many cases, the avoidance isn't conscious. Those involved honestly do not realize that the person who seems to be the problem is responding to deeper, unresolved issues. They think they are doing what they should in focusing on that individual. In other cases, the avoidance is conscious, based on a fear that articulating the deeper issues will only be "stirring up a can of worms," with disastrous results.

Either way, unresolved issues force individuals into assuming certain roles for the benefit of the family system. Scapegoat is only one example. Other common roles are Hero, Little Mother, and Peacemaker. The Hero is a family member who is idolized or constantly praised to the neglect of others. This focus on the Hero and his accomplishments allows the family to shift attention away from issues that are causing problems. The Little Mother role is taken on by a daughter when the actual mother in the family is not able to fill her function due to illness, psychological problems, addiction, or death. The daughter steps into the void left by mother's absence, taking on much of the burden that rightly belongs to an adult. The Peacemaker, often the third child, tries to defuse conflict whenever it appears, even when the peacemaking is done at his or her expense.

As individuals play out these or other assigned roles, they perpetuate the underlying unhealthy pattern of the family. Ironically, the harder they work to make things better, the more immobilized the family becomes.

When a family member decides to stop playing the assigned role, the system is thrown off balance. This is exactly what is needed, though, because it provides a chance for everyone to relate to each other in different ways. However, other family members typically feel as though that individual is embarking on a destructive course. They can't imagine the family relating in any other way, so they feel that the survival of the family is being threatened. Actually, what is threatened is the survival of the system. The family, if all members are willing, can create a new and healthier system. In most cases, however, the family puts a great deal of pressure on all members to maintain their roles.

Family Systems Are Complex

The reason families can get caught in negative systems of behavior is that the rules and roles governing family behavior are passed down primarily on a subconscious level. We often do not know why we react the way we do. In quieter moments, we may make a resolution that we won't react that way again—but within days or even hours, we're right back where we were before.

Why? Vincent Foley explained it this way, "Family systems are powerful precisely because they 'hook' an individual in his 'guts' more than in his head." [^1] Logic and will-power don't have much to do with family patterns.

In spite of this, people rarely take the time and effort to learn about the dynamics of family living, unless their family is in turmoil. That is dangerous, says Virginia Satir, author of Peoplemaking. She writes:

Family life is something like an iceberg. Most people are aware of only about one-tenth of what is actually going on—the tenth that they can see and hear—and often they think that is all there is. Some suspect that there may be more, but they don't know what it is and have no idea how to find out. Not knowing can set the family on a dangerous course. Just as a sailor's fate depends on knowing about the iceberg under the water, so a family's fate depends on understanding the feelings and needs and patterns that lie beneath everyday things. [^2]

If it is irresponsible to remain in ignorance of the behavior patterns upon which our daily habits of interaction are built, how do we begin discovering them? As a first step, you may wish to answer the questions in each of the categories listed below. Your answers will provide insight into how your family works and the areas where change may be appropriate.

Communication: What can be said and what can't? Are needs and wants directly communicated?

Family rules: What are the family rules concerning money? Punishment? Having fun? Achievement?

Family roles: Who is the peacemaker? Who is the clown? Who is the boss? The caretaker?

Family network (this is the grid of power lines discussed earlier): How do different pairs of family members interact with each other?

Family system—open or closed (this has to do with the availability of information from outside the family): Is new information about issues such as relationships, money, or sex welcome?

For those who wish more information on family patterns, I have listed several sources in the References section of this book.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See, for example, Melodie Beattie, Codependent No More (San Francisco: Harper-Hazelden, 1987), 37-41; Pia Mellody, Facing Codependence: What It Is, Where It Comes from, How It Sabotages Our Lives (San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1989), 3-57.
[^2] In Dennis Wholely, Becoming Your Own Parent: The Solution for Adult Children of Alcoholic and Other Dysfunctional Families (New York: Doubleday, 1988), 34.
