Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 5

The Parameters of Dysfunction

A further understanding of how families operate as systems has come from the work done with alcoholics and other substance abusers and their families. We have come to recognize that an abuser is not the only one with a problem: the entire family has a problem.

Family members, therapists realize, react in an unhealthy way to the stress placed on them by the abuser. They may act as a buffer between the abuser and the consequences of his actions. They may make excuses to his superiors, to other family members, and to friends. They will usually do whatever is necessary to maintain a semblance of normal family life, while at the same time guarding the family against the disaster that threatens them.

Therapists use the term codependents to describe the family members caught up in this unhealthy pattern. They use the term codependency to describe attitudes and behaviors characteristic of these family members.

Codependents have generally become obsessed with other people. They have turned outward so much that, instead of managing and living their own lives, they pour their energies into managing and living other peoples' lives. They may focus on one particular person, on their entire family, or even on a broader group.

Control is an issue for codependents. One woman made a statement that illustrates this perfectly: "I can't stand the fact that I can't make the universe turn for my girls." She says she can't control the people and events that affect her children's lives, yet she still tries to—and gets frustrated and angry when she fails.

Codependents make great employees, for they work hard at doing the right thing. They are very concerned with their image, and they put considerable energy into pleasing people. Managers can get a lot of extra work out of codependents by playing on their need for approval and on their overdeveloped sense of responsibility.

Numerous therapists have identified many of the characteristics typical of codependents. [^1] I have included some of them here. Codependents may

Â focus their energies on others

Â be obsessed with every aspect of others' lives, no matter how minor

Â try to change others to fit their expectations

Â become inordinately upset when events do not progress the way they want them to, even when they are not responsible for the outcome

Â attempt to control events and people by manipulating; guilting; assuming responsibility; threatening; withholding love, support, or information; acting helpless, or becoming ill (yet feel they are at the mercy of people and events)

Â not be able to communicate their own needs clearly

Â be disappointed or angry when others do not respond to their unexpressed needs

Â take on others' emotions, like anger, sorrow, or disappointment, and express them as their own

Â take responsibility for others' problems and attempt to solve them

Â base their self-worth on externals

Â be devastated when others react to them negatively

Â fear making mistakes or looking foolish, so avoid taking risks

Once information about codependency began appearing in popular self-help literature, an interesting phenomenon occurred. People who were seeking help because of issues unrelated to substance abuse saw themselves mirrored in the books they were reading. Victims of physical or sexual abuse saw their own feelings described. Persons responsible for the care of the elderly and terminally ill suddenly felt less alone. Parents and siblings whose lives revolved around a severely handicapped child realized they were not wicked or selfish for having negative thoughts. Women and men whose spouses were rigid and controlling heaved sighs of recognition. Many were relieved to discover that what they were experiencing had a name and that help was available to them.

As a result of the feedback that professionals got from such people, they realized that a broader range of circumstances resulted in dysfunctional relationships than had been previously thought. Charles Whitfield wrote, for example, "Families of alcoholism; physical, emotional, or sexual abuse; mental or physical illness; perfectionism and rigidity; or codependence can fit into the dysfunctional spectrum, depending on the severity." [^2] The categories listed in this statement cover an incredibly broad range. Based on this wider view, family therapists have come to the following conclusions:

Every family is dysfunctional to some degree. While that statement may seem obvious, many perpetuate the myth of perfect families by denying their problems and maintaining their public image. In doing so, they encourage unrealistic expectations in their children, who are often poorly equipped to deal with the realities of marriage and family life. They are greatly relieved when they discover what Earnie Larson states so succinctly: "There are no perfect people; there are no perfect family systems." [^3]

A dysfunctional family doesn't offer needed emotional support. A family may provide for the physical needs of its members and yet be unable to provide those things needed for growth and prosperity: love, acceptance, communication, support, encouragement, and autonomy. In severely dysfunctional families, this is always the case. In families with less severe problems, the lack of emotional support occurs primarily when circumstances are stressful.

Dysfunction leads to compulsive or addictive behavior. When individual growth is not supported or encouraged in a family, its members often turn to compulsive behaviors and addictions as a way of dealing with the pain.

Denial creates more dysfunction. Accepting the fact that a problem exists is the first step toward solving it. Denying that a problem exists not only leaves the initial problem unsolved, it also adds to an already unhealthy situation. John Bradshaw says, "The difference between a functional family and a dysfunctional family is that a functional family will solve its problems. A dysfunctional family will deny the problems and act as if the problems don't exist or will try to create roles that keep the problems frozen in the center of their lives." [^4]

Dysfunction is a social issue. Families reflect the society in which they live. If many families are dysfunctional to some degree, then something in our society contributes to that dysfunction. According to experts, our schools and churches encourage us to think and feel the way authority figures tell us we should think and feel. When we abdicate our right to choose for ourselves, we put ourselves at risk for developing addictive and codependent behaviors.

Dysfunction is a spiritual issue. Finally, dysfunction is a block to both emotional and spiritual growth. It cuts us off from ourselves, from those around us, and from God. Thus, the issues we address when dealing with dysfunction are ultimately spiritual issues. If we are committed to the gospel and to spiritual growth, we must have the courage to face these issues and find ways to deal with them appropriately.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] A feeling of duty produces love. A Feeling of Duty Produces Love For Your Own Good (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1983), 59.
[^2] Hatred can be done away with by forbidding it. Hatred Can Be Done Away with by Forbidding It Miller, 59-60.
[^3] Parents deserve respect because they are parents. Parents Deserve Respect Because They Are Parents
[^4] Obedience makes a child strong. Obedience Makes a Child Strong
