Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 6

Repressive Rules

In the first chapter two questions were raised: What went wrong? and, How can we make it right? In this chapter we will begin to look at some current ideas about what went wrong. They may come as a surprise, because many of us don't look for underlying causes when attempting to solve family problems. We focus on the irritation of the moment. An often-used analogy describes perfectly what we do: we put a bandage on what we think is a surface wound, not realizing that the whole body is suffering from a systemic disease.

The difficulties that many families in our society are experiencing result from the rules that we have used in rearing children. Although there have been numerous enlightened books and classes on child-rearing in recent decades, most of us were reared—and are rearing our children—according to rules dating back to the times when children were property of the head of the household and the father legally held all of the power and all of the rights.

Even though the legal system has instituted many changes leading to a more equitable distribution of rights and power in family units, many of the attitudes and beliefs springing from this time are still in evidence. They have been perpetuated in part by the Judeo-Christian tradition, which holds that the husband is the head of the household in the same manner that Christ is the head of the church. This would not be problematic but for the fact that power is so often misused. Doctrine and Covenants 121:39 contains the statement "It is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, . . . they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion."

Members may not think of this scripture in terms of parenting. They may not realize the destructive nature of the controlling, domineering manner in which they relate to family members. They may think that they are doing what they are supposed to be doing, that is, training up their children in the way they should go. Feeling the heavy burden of parenthood, they may believe that they are justified in using whatever means necessary to teach their child to conform to the expectations of both the larger society and their particular subgroup, in this case, the Mormon culture.

In general, adults parent the way they were parented. Unfortunately, many of the parenting patterns passed on from generation to generation reflect the older, autocratic methods of parenting, much of which is repressive. These repressive parenting patterns stifle the openness, trust, and ability to love that is present in every child, resulting in dysfunction. No wonder that Alice Miller refers to repressive parenting as "poisonous pedagogy." [^1]

"Poisonous pedagogy" involves a set of negative beliefs about relationships and behavior. Children reared repressively assimilate these beliefs, accepting them as valid. Unless they challenge them as adults, the beliefs learned in childhood will form the basis for their actions—conscious or unconscious—throughout their lives. In her book For Your Own Good, Alice Miller enumerates eleven such false beliefs:

Most of us have a limited awareness of how these beliefs inform our parenting because they were transmitted to us more or less indirectly. We carry them in nonverbal forms in our subconscious. They become activated in moments of stress, with the result that we do and say the very things we promised ourselves we as parents would never do or say!

Following are examples of typical parental statements, each of which relates to one of the beliefs stated above. To those of us who grew up hearing similar statements from our parents and other adults, they seem so commonplace that we may be shocked to realize the messages they convey to our children.

"If you do it long enough, you'll get to like it."

We are often taught that if we do what we should, which in this situation is usually what others expect of us, everything will turn out for the best, whether it's taking piano lessons, eating broccoli, or going on a mission. This notion would convince us that we can act in opposition to our thoughts and feelings with the result that our thoughts and feelings will change. This is not usually so, except in cases where there is a desire for a changed attitude. The risk in such an approach is that it can make us feel increasingly angry, resentful, rebellious, with increasingly negative results.

This example also draws upon rule seven, which states that behavior is more important than what the individual really thinks and feels. We sense that who we really are and what we really need aren't important. This leads us to doubt ourselves and encourages us to create a false self that complies with desired behavior.

"Do your chores! Your mother's given you a lot, and it's time you showed her you love her."

All parents want to know that their children love them. In healthy families, that love is frequently expressed in seemingly insignificant, routine ways. In a family where parents are stern and authoritarian, children may not feel particularly loving or grateful. Doing their duty—taking care of chores—may be needful, but it won't create affection if it is missing.

"Don't say you hate your little brother. I know you don't really feel that way."

Though we realize that hate itself can be damaging, the danger in this belief is the stifling of strong emotions. The powerful parent, who believes that strong emotions are harmful (belief nine) and that they can be done away with by simply forbidding them, negates the child's actual emotions. It is a subtle way of belittling emotion, as though the child's feelings are not legitimate. That parent also probably stifles his or her own strong emotions in an attempt to do away with them.

Emotions that have been dammed up exert considerable force, often erupting in misdirected rage. An example of misdirected rage is the mother who yells at her child for leaving his shoes on the floor, when what really upsets her is the chronic lack of communication between her and her husband. However, she doesn't feel that she can express any of her feelings—disappointment, sorrow, frustration, or anger—to her husband, so she tries to squelch them. Eventually, however, the pressure of these stuffed emotions becomes critical, and she again flies into a rage over something entirely unrelated.

"I want to see some respect from you, young man, or you can spend the rest of the evening in your room."

Every one of us was taught that we should respect our elders, particularly our parents, teachers, and others in authority over us. We were taught to address them politely and to do what they asked us to do. We probably did all of these things, though in some cases with reservation or confusion, for not all adults treat children in a manner deserving of respect. Such a belief assumes that authority is independent of accountability. As parents, we would never teach our children that they are not accountable for their actions, yet we ourselves may be separating our actions as parents from their consequences by demanding respect "no matter what."

This belief is especially detrimental when abuse is involved. One teen was emotionally mistreated for years by her mother. She felt no love and offered no respect for the woman. Her father, who had witnessed her mother's behavior on many occasions, still took her mother's side, demanding that the daughter show some respect, saying, "Your mother's a good woman." It was as though the father was saying that the abuse had never taken place at all, leaving the young woman feeling as though she was losing her mind.

"There'll always be someone you have to obey: parents, teachers, adults in general, your boss, the law, church authorities, God. It's a hard lesson, but if you learn now to do what you're told, life will be easier for you."

I'm sure we have all experienced a time when we were told we had to do something, regardless of our reasons for not wanting to. Perhaps we were told, "It's for your own good," and maybe it actually was. Many times parental instructions are given for the safety and well-being of their children. But many times they are also given for the comfort, convenience, well-being, and self-esteem of the parent. Children can frequently sense when that is the case.

I remember hearing about a father who told his young child that he had to learn to obey without question because that was how he would learn to obey his Father in Heaven. Not surprisingly, that same father often asked the child to do things that were inappropriate or very difficult for his age or strength in an attempt to teach obedience. He also made arbitrary decisions about what he would allow his teenagers to do, often denying their requests for no good reason. He justified himself by saying things like "God doesn't always let us do what we want to do. I'm just treating my children the way God treats his children."

We parents (and other adults) are too fallible to require absolute obedience in all things from our children. Besides which, doing so robs them of the freedom to make their own choices as appropriate to their age and development.

Also, obedience for its own sake is not a virtue. When children are brought up in homes requiring strict and immediate obedience, they learn that obedience is the greatest good. They learn to disregard their own thoughts and feelings, which in turn thwarts the development of their conscience. In addition, since they are often not given the opportunity to make decisions on their own, even when appropriate, their ability to do so is seriously stunted. Requiring strict obedience can even be a rather brutal attempt to destroy all that is individualistic about a person.

"Don't get too cocky. 'Pride goeth before a fall.'"

Self-absorption and inordinate focus on personal accomplishments do harm relationships. That is not the issue here, however. In this case, parents can sabotage the confidence, self-esteem, and enthusiasm of their children by such statements.

Sometimes that is exactly the parents' goal. They may honestly think that being too confident is not good for children, for fear that the children will get hurt or fail. Or they may think that it is not in line with the humility spoken of in the scriptures. Or they may fear that it will prompt the children to follow their own vision, rather than do what the family or community expects them to do. Parents who have lived their lives according to others' expectations tend to feel uncomfortable, even angry, if their children do not feel bound to do well in those areas their parents think are important.

"I don't care if you don't like that sweater. You go give Auntie Ellen a kiss and tell her you love it."

Even though the intent of this rule is positive—not to hurt another—such a request puts children in a quandary, for they are asked to tell a lie. While the concept of "white lies" may make some sense to older children and adults, it doesn't to younger children. Although they wouldn't express their feeling in exactly those terms, they sense that they have been asked to compromise their integrity, to be hypocritical.

This rule also incorporates some of rule seven, which states that what you do is more important than what you are. It creates a gap between the inner and outer self, and the child will end up either lying or repressing his or her real feelings to please the parent, or choosing to go against the parental injunction, which puts one in an awkward position.

"You may be depressed, but nobody likes a sourpuss. Go to your room until you can come out with a smile on your face."

As with other parental statements based on repressive rules, these words contain some truth. Consciously choosing to present a cheerful demeanor despite negative feelings can be helpful, if the person also acknowledges his true feelings and resolves the issues relating to them. This requires skills and knowledge that children don't have. Unless the parent helps them with the process, the lesson they may learn from such statements is that their false self is more acceptable than their authentic self.

Many parents motivated even subconsciously by rule seven try to control all aspects of their children's lives, including the way they dress, the grades they get, the friends they choose, the hobbies they have, and the career they pursue. In such cases, the parents are more interested in seeing their children conform to the mental image they have of children than letting them express themselves openly and develop their unique gifts.

"Don't you dare say how you feel to your mother! She would never get over it!"

Such words would lead us to believe that knowing the truth about what is happening in our personal relationships can be dangerous, even fatal. They also reflect rule nine, which states that strong feelings are harmful. In addition, some interpret rule three in such a way that they feel disagreeing with parents would be disrespectful, even when disagreeing would be telling the truth. Such people do not realize that disagreement normally has nothing to do with disrespect or respect. In an argument, however, a person's emotions may lead them to make an illogical link between the two.

"Don't get carried away with your feelings. Calm down and think rationally about it."

Of course there are times, such as in the heat of an argument, when calmness is greatly needed. But negative feelings are not an issue here. Rule nine is aimed at squelching the strong feelings that result from a healthy involvement in life.

For example, the phrase "calm down" is often used when a child (or adult for that matter) is excited about something out of the ordinary, something that doesn't fit parental or spousal expectations, something that may be risky. The intent is to rob the individual of the energy propelling him toward this unwelcome expression of individuality.

I remember the gleam in our oldest daughter's eyes when she excitedly returned to our temporary home in Erkrath, Germany, to announce that she had figured out how to stay another year after the rest of us returned to Minnesota. She was so full of plans, so confident in her ability to take care of herself during this time!

Gary and I, on the other hand, could think of a hundred reasons why returning to Minnesota and attending Macalester College as planned would be better for her. In less than ten minutes, we managed to wipe the smile off her face and dampen the gleam in her eye. After many stormy discussions, we finally realized that she had a viable plan and that delaying her studies another year wouldn't be a tragedy. Too bad we weren't able to let go of our expectations—and fears—long enough to enjoy her excitement in the newfound possibilities.

"You never see me or your father doing that sort of thing! You'd better get your life under control."

A funny thing happens to some people when they become parents: They forget all the silly, dangerous things they ever did. They forget the intense feelings that prompted certain decisions. They forget their mistakes and failures. They no longer admit they are human. They put themselves up as examples for their children—but they don't hold up their authentic selves for show, they tout their false selves. Children who grow up in such homes can develop false selves as well.

Parents who are willing to reveal themselves to their children give them a great gift. They give them examples of what it's like to be human, to hurt, to strive, to triumph, to grieve, to err, to laugh, to love, and even to be outrageous now and then. They give them the freedom to be themselves and to express their uniqueness. How wonderful such a legacy is!

"Don't question what I'm saying. I know what's best for you."

This belief is a clear expression of the notion "Might makes right." In other words, the one who has the power is the one who has all the answers. It is the key to all of the other ten beliefs and the parental behaviors arising from them. When children are rendered powerless by autocratic parents, they learn only how to become autocratic parents themselves. When they become parents, they treat their children as they were treated, which in an odd way allows them to recover their lost power—at the expense of their children's well-being. When we consider that children often cope with abuse by believing that their parent's actions are justified because they deserve to be punished, we can easily see how those same children can grow up feeling justified in their own abusive behaviors—emotional, verbal, physical, or sexual—toward the next generation.

I recently encountered a humorous example of "doing away with hatred by forbidding it." A preschooler screamed "I hate you" at his mother. The mother sharply responded, "You don't." The conversation quickly escalated to an ear-piercing "Yes I do," "No you don't," "Do," "Don't." I doubt that the mother convinced the child that he didn't know his own feelings. But if she tells him so often enough, he could eventually come to believe that she knows his feelings better than he does. Then, when he does have strong feelings about something, he will be ashamed.

In June of 1989, I had a more serious encounter with "poisonous pedagogy." I participated in a week-long ecology camp in the Bohemian forest of Czechoslovakia. Part of the entertainment that week was provided by the Priessental Theater group, a traveling troupe from West Germany. The play they presented was entitled Ratcatcher. Since the ratcatcher in the original legend is called the pied piper in the English translation, I took my seat expecting to see an enjoyable retelling of The Pied Piper of Hamelin. And indeed, that was the way the play began.

The tone changed very quickly, however. The ratcatcher, the one who lured away a whole generation of children, was not a man piping a merry tune. According to the new presentation, which was written by troupe members, the generation of German children born after World War I were led into pain, sorrow, and violence by their own parents—or more precisely, by the repressive rules the parents used in rearing them, and which they in turn used to rear their own children. The ratcatcher, in this case, was "poisonous pedagogy" itself. In comical but more often painful scenes, the effects of what the troupe called "black pedagogy" were shown beginning in the years directly after World War I and continuing through World War II.

The play was an indictment of the societal rules governing Germany during those decades. But larger implications were unavoidable. While the scenes were set in a different time and place, many of them were poignant because the patterns and beliefs were sadly familiar. Ratcatcher was a voice of warning to all. Violence is done to children when they are neither allowed to live their own lives, nor to experience and think about what they see and hear, when authority invalidates their experiences. Unwavering adherence to parental expectations and unthinking obedience to those in authority are seeds of destruction, regardless of where or by whom they are planted.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Healing the Child Within (Deerfield Beach: Health Communications, Inc., 1987), 43.
