Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 8

The Role of Stress

The third common denominator in dysfunctional families is some behavior, attitude, or event that puts particular stress on the family unit. I will refer to these as stressors.

Problems, whether they result from choices or chance, put stress on a family. The family's response will minimize or exacerbate the stress. The healthier family is more likely to adapt to stressful circumstances in ways not harmful. The needs of individual family members for validation, emotional intimacy, and growth will still be met with reasonable consistency.

However, even a healthy family can become dysfunctional if their response to stressful circumstances is such that it stops meeting the emotional and growth needs of individuals. For example, let's say a husband has lost his job. He feels like a failure. In fact, he feels extreme shame. The shame is too painful to acknowledge, so he covers it with anger. The wife tells the children that they must not talk to anyone about what is happening, not even to their father. They must act as if everything is normal. This injunction adds yet more stress, and the children become tense. They are constantly on guard, fearing they will reveal the family secret or do something to elicit their father's rage.

This response to stress may be only temporary, especially if the stress is temporary. Suppose the husband finds a job within a few weeks that can pay the bills. He feels as if an immense burden is lifted from him, for he no longer carries the shame of being a man who can't provide for his family. As his anger dissipates, the tension his wife and children felt lessens. Now that they don't have to tip-toe around the ogre anymore, they begin to laugh and play again. Family life returns to normal patterns of behavior.

In some cases, getting back to normal is not so easy because the event that caused the stress in the first place is irreversible or the condition that caused it is chronic. Perhaps there has been a death or a divorce or a sudden, permanent loss of employment. Perhaps a severely handicapped child has been born into the family. Perhaps a family member has a compulsive or addictive behavior pattern that is increasing in its intensity. Perhaps a parent suffers from a chronic illness such as severe depression or a progressively debilitating disease such as Parkinson's.

When families react to chronic stress in unhealthy ways, they can create a dysfunctional pattern of relating that, if not altered, is perpetuated by the succeeding generations. The three specific stressors I wish to comment on particularly are 1) the marriage partnership, 2) compulsive, addictive, and codependent behaviors, and 3) perfectionism.

The Marriage Partnership

Often, a troubled marriage is the prime stressor.

In our society, young people do not receive adequate information about how a family unit functions. That is not surprising, given the fact that relatively few adults understand it themselves. As a result, most young people contemplating marriage do not understand very much about the attitudes, behaviors, roles, and rules they learned in their own families. They understand even less about the way those factors operate in their loved one's family, to say nothing of how the two sets of rules, roles, and behaviors in combination are influencing their relationship with each other.

The result is that few young people realize that part of the reason they are attracted to each other may be the fact that the ways of interrelating they learned in their respective families are complementary—they feel comfortable with each other. That is not necessarily a plus for the couple. The woman who learned from her mother that being helpless is a positive feminine trait will seek out, perhaps unawares, a man who learned from his father that being in control is a positive masculine trait. When she finds the man who will tell her what to do and take care of her, she will feel a click, an instant sense of familiarity, which she interprets as love. In my novel The Broken Covenant, main character Kathy contemplates what brought her and her husband together. She concludes it was less a matter of love than a matter of compatible neuroses!

A dysfunctional partnership is not necessarily one in which overt conflict is present. Remember the example of Ann, who, following her parents' example, never addressed difficult issues or expressed anger or other negative emotions.

Compulsive, Addictive, and Codependent Behaviors

Compulsive or addictive behaviors are both reactions to stress and stressors. An astonishingly wide range of behaviors fall into this category, including

This list is often surprising. It is difficult to accept the idea that basically positive (or even necessary) activities like eating, exercise, and church work can be addictions. I was surprised myself until I read an advice column that included the list of questions prepared by Alcoholics Anonymous as a test for alcoholism. I found that if I substituted the word food for alcohol and the word eat for drink, I would have had to answer yes to enough questions to be considered an addict. As if that weren't enough, I had the same addictive patterns in regard to compulsive reading, TV-watching, and shopping. They were all activities I used as a way of avoiding pain.

John Bradshaw says we engage in these activities so that we don't know "how lonely, hurt, mad and sad" we really are. He emphasizes the pervasiveness of the problem when he says,"Addiction has become our national lifestyle (or rather deathstyle)." [^1]

A person caught up in compulsive or addictive behavior puts tremendous stress on others in the family. The chronic behavior becomes the central focus of their lives, and they respond to it by developing coping mechanisms. Some typical coping mechanisms are denial, repression of feelings, withdrawal, anger, and addictive behavior. Family members whose lives are focused on the compulsive or addictive behavior of another are called codependents.

The coping mechanisms typical of codependency give the family members some sense of control and help them survive at critical junctures, but they are ultimately destructive. As they become internalized, they affect every part of the individual's life, even when the primary stress (the compulsive/addictive behavior of a family member) is not immediate. For example, adults who grew up in dysfunctional families may still react to people and events with the negative coping patterns they developed as children. (For more about codependency, see chapter 11.)

Perfectionism

Codependents are often perfectionists. They are inordinately concerned more with how things look—with image and results—than with people and processes. Their sense of worth, of safety, and of peace are all dependent on whether things meet the standards they have adopted to please others. Despite the fact that these people are often difficult to be around, they are valued by society, because they are the ones who get things done. They drive themselves and everyone around them toward accomplishment of their goals.

Perfectionists are sometimes so concerned with the image that when something goes wrong, they can't bear to acknowledge it. Whatever the problem—financial difficulties, a teenage pregnancy, the homosexuality of a child, the dishonorable release of a missionary, substance abuse, physical or sexual abuse—it becomes the secret. It is the thing everyone in the family is aware of, but no one talks about. Family members all do their part in maintaining silence, but at great cost. The issue becomes central to the family, with all members stuck in certain roles around it.

Not surprisingly, perfectionists don't often make good parents, for their standards of behavior are difficult to measure up to. However, we should also note that the opposite of rigid, punitive, judgmental parenting can create dysfunction as well. In chaotic families, there are indistinct boundaries and unclear rules. Problems are typically allowed to reach crisis proportions before they are dealt with. Meeting the needs of individuals for emotional satisfaction and growth is certainly not likely in such conditions.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Man's Search for Meaning (New York: Pocket Books, 1959), 158.
