Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 9

Perfectionism in Latter-day Saint Society

Families do not exist in a vacuum. They are part of larger systems, such as organizations or institutions. Those in turn are encompassed by even larger systems, such as ethnic groups, regions, or nations. Each system has a particular way of seeing things. Smaller systems usually accept many of the values expressed by the larger systems to which they belong. They also often put extra emphasis on a particular value accepted by the whole.

For example, the drive to perfect individuals and society is part of our American culture. It is well-expressed in the words of a French healer that were popularized in America by positive-thinking advocates. I learned them from my mother, who learned them from her mother: "Every day in every way I get better and better." The value of perfecting oneself and society is accepted and enlarged upon in LDS culture by the particular beliefs Latter-day Saints hold about the scripture "Be ye therefore perfect" (Matt. 5:48). Many Latter-day Saints feel a greater need to be perfect than their non-LDS neighbors. Unfortunately, their beliefs are largely based on "member teachings," not the teachings of the Church or the gospel, and the results can be destructive, opposite to those desired.

After the appearance of my novel The Broken Covenant, I was often asked why I wrote a book about adultery. The question surprised me because I had not set out to write a book on that theme. To me, the book was about other things, among them the need to take personal responsibility for actions, the destructive results of faulty communication, the power of forgiveness, and the effects of perfectionism. The adultery and its aftermath were plot elements by which those themes were illuminated.

The major theme developed in The Broken Covenant was the effects of perfectionism. The theme was introduced in the following quote, which appears at the front of the book, from Viktor Frankl's Man's Search For Meaning: "I doubt that they [the saints] ever had it in mind to become saints. If that were the case, they would have become perfectionists." [^1]

All Church members are perfectionists, at least according to the first part of Webster's definition: One who believes in the ethical or spiritual perfectibility of mankind. As Latter-day Saints, we seek for nothing less; the perfecting of the Saints is the stated purpose of the restoration of the gospel.

Too often, however, we become perfectionists of the type described in the second part of Webster's definition: One who rejects anything short of perfection as unacceptable. This second definition describes the sort of perfectionism that Viktor Frankl was warning against, for it puts more emphasis on the letter of the law than the spirit, on form rather than content.

We are all caught up in perfectionism to one degree or another. But some who adopt this standard become obsessed by the need to perfect themselves and others around them. They act as if they have forgotten the Atonement, as if they have forgotten that Jesus said, "For I am able to make you holy" (D&C 60:7; italics added), as if they have forgotten that perfection is a state reached in the eternities, not in mortality. Their efforts to force those around them into perfection often result in conflict, estrangement of family members, deep unhappiness, anger, and a sense of futility.

One facet of perfectionism is the need to control outcomes or results. It is the impulse behind repressive rules, which are designed to control outcomes or results in the lives of those around us, particularly children. It is, in human terms, an attempt at quality control.

The need to control springs from beliefs about the nature of man, beliefs that don't really reflect Gospel principles. For example, we may say we believe children to be pure in the sight of God, yet our parenting reflects a deep-rooted sense that it is up to us to make them do what is right. We may force them to go to church when they don't want to. We may manipulate them into taking part in an activity to which we are more committed than they are. We may monitor what they say, what friends they have, and what clothes they buy.

An example that is painful to me even now is what took place when I went shopping with my older daughter for her prom dress one year. We had looked in numerous shops with no luck. Finally, we drove to a mall we rarely patronized, and there she found the dress of her dreams. She looked like a young Grace Kelly in it, cool, elegant, beautiful. It was ice-blue with diagonal shirring on the bodice that came down to a flower of the same fabric at the waist. It was also sleeveless.

Relying on my interpretation of the teachings of the Church on modest dress, I refused to help her pay for it. It was the only dress she had seen in our long search that she liked, but I didn't budge. I forced her to try on others, including a pink dress with off-the-shoulder straps that could be pulled up across the shoulders for a more modest appearance. Since I wouldn't help her buy the blue dress, and since there was no time to look further, she capitulated.

She wore the pink dress to the prom, but it really wasn't very flattering. She knew it. I knew it. It has hung unused in the closet ever since. I still feel a bit sad about it. And I can still hear her argument: "Do you think I'm going to jump in bed just because I'm wearing a sleeveless dress? Can't you trust me to have better judgment than that?" My lack of trust in her judgment wasn't the issue: I was more concerned that her lack of adherence to a particular (but not a crucial) standard would make her a "bad" girl and me an unsuccessful Mormon mother.

Perfectionistic attitudes are fierce yardsticks for judgment. We say we should not judge, yet we often judge members of our church and the community by a pitiless standard of dress and behavior based on cultural opinions and monetary advantage. President Benson's classic address on pride left no doubt that we must cease judging others by externals and, if we must judge, strive to do so as Christ did, by what he saw in the heart. [^2]

I sat in a Sunday School class one day listening to Church members discuss President Benson's talk. They were somewhat unsettled by it. In fact, they were trying to figure out how they could interpret it in such a way that they could feel justified continuing to live their lives in the spirit of competition and judgment. Why was it so hard for them (and for many others) to accept at face value what President Benson said?

It may be because we create a place for ourselves in the world through the process of judgment. We use culturally transmitted criteria to assign ourselves and others certain positions, roles, and importance. To let go of that would be to set ourselves adrift. We have not yet developed the intuition, the insight, or the depth of love required to live the sort of Zion life the prophet's talk exhorted us to live.

Perfectionism as a Stressor

As has already been mentioned, rigid, perfectionistic attitudes can cause dysfunction. Ann Wilson Schaef puts it this way in referring to organized religions in general:

To be perfect, as defined by the institutional church, you not only have to have yourself under control, you also have everything and everyone else under control. Now this makes for an impossible dilemma. Since it is not possible for us to control absolutely our own lives—much less the lives of other people—striving to do so is a prescription for failure. Yet the church expects its members . . . to strive for perfection. If you should be able to and cannot, then you can only be a failure. Failure is depressing and perfectionists are depressed. [^3]

Although most of us would say, "I know that nothing in life is perfect," many of us try very hard to make it so by living according to checklists of shoulds and oughts. Some of us carry the checklists in our heads, others in their daily planners. Whichever way we do it, our lists are extensive, and we typically compile them from several different sources. These sources include our family rules, principles of success as described in magazines and other popular literature, the prevailing culture, and our religion.

The shoulds and oughts we glean from religion include not only the commandments, but also "member teachings." John Turpin uses the term "member teachings" to designate standards of behavior that are not part of the gospel but are transmitted as part of American LDS culture. Some examples are, Good church members are conservative politically. Women are the homemakers (as if men have little part or voice in homemaking). Men should make enough to be the sole support of the household. Women should speak in sweet, soft voices. One Utah woman suggested a humorous example: Real Mormon women in Utah wear pink and blue.

The kinds of shoulds and oughts we have on our checklists differ according to the age and culture in which we live. Whether or not we are conscious of them, they profoundly affect not only our attitudes and behaviors, but also the way we feel about ourselves. In fact, the shoulds and oughts we are not conscious of have perhaps the stronger influence, precisely because we are not aware of them. For this reason, we will continue in the next chapter to look at the checklist.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Breaking the Chains: Understanding Religious Addiction and Religious Abuse (Long Beach: Emmaus Publications, 1989), 100.
[^2] Ezra Taft Benson, "Beware of Pride," Ensign, May 1989, 4-7.
[^3] Co-dependence, Misunderstood-Mistreated (San Francisco: Harper and Row Publishers, Inc., 1986), 75.
