Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 10

Doing the Checklist

Checklists are important. They are, in effect, the maps we use as we negotiate our way through life. They may be as simple as a few mental notes of things we need to do during the day, as practical as a written list of things to do that are checked off as each item is completed, as intangible as a set of internal, unspoken values by which we govern our actions, or as profound as journal entries describing one's goals and hopes for one's life. Not only do they contain information about cultural expectations and acceptable behavior, they also contain family rules and personal and business goals. We couldn't function without them.

However, checklists can also imprison. This is often the case when individuals never question the shoulds and oughts that have come from others, including God and the prophets. They therefore have no sense of having freely chosen them. They experience them as a burden that has been imposed from outside rather than a scheme of life-directing choices coming from inside. When that happens, individuals may either comply with the checklist resentfully or choose to rebel against it.

Of course, young children have no thoughts of questioning the checklists their parents and others give them—they don't even know they are internalizing one of their own. They tend to absorb what they see, hear, and feel—whether good or bad, true or untrue. Then they begin structuring their lives according to what they have absorbed. Only as they mature do they become aware that certain shoulds and oughts really may not be very positive or useful to them. At that point, they begin to question whether what they have learned is really true and right. As they continue to gain in experience, knowledge, and mental powers, they continue to question the checklist in light of the beliefs and values they are developing.

Some adults are disturbed over the idea that children may make up their own minds about important issues. A woman attending a seminar on how to establish Great Books study groups for grade-school children was surprised to learn the program philosophy, which is based on the belief that children can decide for themselves what a story means. In these groups, every opinion is valid, and the teacher does not draw a moral or lead the children to a foregone conclusion. This upset the woman greatly. She simply couldn't imagine letting children arrive at their own conclusions.

Parents who share this kind of thinking get understandably upset when their children—typically teenagers—begin to question what they have been taught. It can be a difficult time for both them and their children. However, in families where the adults do not feel threatened by a challenge to their values and the teenagers are secure in the knowledge that their feelings and thoughts will be validated, this can be a time of discovery and increased bonding for all concerned.

Unfortunately, this period of questioning is not encouraged or even allowed in some families. Teenagers in such a situation feel stifled. They may rebel in self-destructive ways, attempting to create a sense that they direct their own lives rather than that others direct them. Some teenagers may not rebel, taking instead a path of sullen compliance. Still others may cheerfully comply, convinced that their beliefs are exactly the same as their parents' beliefs. (In fact, they may very well be! It is interesting to note that when young people are allowed to question the internal checklist of shoulds and oughts based on parental values, they often discover that the values important to them are quite similar to those of their parents!)

Every individual must at some time or another begin to make his own value judgments and hold them up against the shoulds and oughts to see if that list is still valid for him personally. This process can and usually does last many years. In fact, the individual who examines his life regularly will always to some extent be reviewing his inner map in light of his beliefs and values. It is a positive and empowering activity. If we have (and are) engaged in this sort of internal audit, we have a sense that the checklist/map is one we have chosen. It comes from the inside, not the outside.

Going through this process is important, because there is a significant difference between directing one's life according to freely chosen values and principles and living by a checklist of others' expectations and values. The latter is what I refer to in the title of this chapter, "Doing the Checklist." When we "do the checklist," we use it to judge ourselves and others. We see our worth and our place in society as entirely dependent upon our accomplishing the things on the list.

The destructiveness of this stance is readily seen when the difference between self-worth and self-esteem is clearly drawn. Contrary to some popular usage, self-worth is not synonymous with self-esteem. Self-worth, which has to do with the intrinsic worth of the soul, is not hinged on accomplishment. Nothing we do or don't do can mar or destroy it. We are of value because we are eternal beings, intelligences who existed before the world was and who will have no end. Self-esteem, on the other hand, is a feeling we get when we have accomplished something important to us or to others or when our actions are congruent with our beliefs.

Self-esteem has its basis in image and accomplishment. It is therefore changeable. Self-worth has its basis in our eternal nature and is therefore not changeable.

Many of us who have grown up in dysfunctional families have little or no sense of self-worth. We thus depend on accomplishment to engender a feeling of self-esteem, hoping that it will fill the place made empty by feeling a lack of self-worth. When we are successful in checking off items on our list, we feel good about ourselves. When we fail, we are plunged into despair. Because we lack the stabilizing influence of a deep sense of self-worth, we spend our lives swinging back and forth between these two extremes.

The checklist thus encourages "black-and-white thinking." We can either check an item off, or we can't—it's an either/or situation (which is a logical fallacy called a false dilemma). We lose sight of the fact that for every situation there are more than two alternatives. We leave no room on the list for explanations of extenuating circumstances—we either succeed or we fail. Those caught up in this way of thinking have little sense of life as a process. They do not recognize the many points all along the continuum between success and failure.

Do the Checklist, Or Else!

When our sense of worth and esteem comes from the checklist, we end up putting more emphasis on the points on the list than on other values like trust and love. Not uncommonly, parents driven by perfectionism use force, manipulation, and even physical violence to assure the completion of the list.

Brother and Sister Sylvia decided together that they would accept the prophet's challenge to read the Book of Mormon daily. They decided to read immediately after the evening meal. But not all of their children agreed with this goal, in particular the oldest boy. He began disturbing the scripture-reading session. Brother Sylvia tried to maintain order, but he could see that if things continued the way they were going, the family could not meet their goal.

One particular evening, the son was so disruptive that Brother Sylvia picked him up and bodily threw him into his room. He slammed the door shut, stomped back into the kitchen, and asked another child to continue reading. That child, disturbed by the violence she had just witnessed, refused. The scripture-reading program ended in chaos.

"Doing the checklist" can set up a destructive cycle, as is obvious from the story of the Sylvia family. Father Leo Booth describes this vicious cycle: "In many homes . . . we see a hypocritical lifestyle. The yearning for physical, mental and spiritual perfection is often followed by bouts of anger, violence, and sexual abuse, followed by guilt, remorse and self-pity. Again nothing is said." [^1]

Individuals caught up in this kind of cycle set goals for themselves and their families. They work hard at trying to accomplish them, but they feel as if they are not achieving the success they should. They respond by venting their frustration in abusive behavior, then feeling guilty because they have "lost it."

I believe this cycle is familiar to most if not all of us, for the severity of the mood swings and the way in which the frustration is acted out can range from mild to severe. The true failure has not so much to do with missing our stated goal as with the fact that we have lost sight of the principles that govern relationships: individual worth, freedom to choose, and the power of love to influence for good.

Perfectionism Is Hostile to the Gospel

A perfectionistic system creates dysfunction because it denies individuals the five freedoms Virginia Satir speaks of: the freedom to freely think what one thinks, to feel what one feels, to choose what one wants, to respond to the present as one perceives it, and to decide what one wants to be. It demands a false, people-, and God-pleasing self and thus creates a deep sense of shame. This is another aspect of the unhealthy, or toxic, shame described in chapter seven.

Toxic shame makes a mockery of the Atonement. It makes us feel as if we are what's wrong, as if, deep down inside, we are irrevocably faulty, with no redeeming or redeemable qualities whatever. It makes us feel as if the self that we really are is not and can never be acceptable and would certainly be rejected by both man and God if it were ever revealed. Toxic shame makes us feel unworthy of what we most need: love and acceptance. Most importantly, it cuts us off from feeling the loving, supportive presence of our Heavenly Father.

Perfectionistic systems, whether personal, as in families, or impersonal, as in organizations, often seek to motivate by criticizing, guilting, and shaming, exactly the kind of behaviors that cause toxic shame. Individuals belonging to these systems typically create false selves to protect themselves from the pain of feeling ashamed and unworthy. The false self can be very acceptable to organizations and society in general, for its main function is to please. But because it is a lie by its very nature, it can never be acceptable to our Father in Heaven. For this reason, nothing could be more antagonistic to the gospel of Jesus Christ than perfectionism.

In contrast to this, the gospel teaches that we are children of God, eternal beings of infinite worth. It acknowledges the fact that we will make mistakes, that we sometimes will have negative thoughts and feelings, that we will have desires contrary to the laws and will of God. Nowhere in the scriptures are we told that the solution is to pretend that we don't experience any of the above. In fact, they tell us the exact opposite, that it is important to know ourselves. (See, for example, Ps. 77:6; Prov. 14:8; 20:27; Lam. 3:40.) When we acknowledge what we really think and what we really feel, we are able to base our subsequent actions and decisions on truth. If we do not, we end up basing our actions and decisions on the false self, and spiritual progress and assistance from the Spirit is blocked.

True change in a gospel context is possible because individuals feel accepted and loved by their Father in Heaven. They learn that if they make mistakes, they can repent, and God will forgive and forget those mistakes. Supported by these positive feelings, they are open to new information, which presents them with a wide range of alternatives to their behavior, some of which they might not have been aware of previously. Not only that, because they feel secure in their worth, they feel more capable of making new choices and carrying them through.

It is not unusual, however, for people to prefer to busily polish aspects of their false, people-, and God-pleasing selves, rather than do the work necessary to prepare themselves for deep transforming spiritual change. The crux of that preparation is self-realization—knowing who they really are—and self-realization involves sometimes painful emotional work. However, that task is required of all of us, and the sooner we begin, the sooner we will reap the rewards of increased joy, love, and spirituality.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Peace at any price Co-Dependency-What It Is and How to Reduce It within a Gospel Context, on cassette (Beaverton: Dr. John C. Turpin & Associates, 1989).
