Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 11

Codependence in Latter-day Saint Society

The hidden rules of codependence can manifest themselves in any system, whether a family, an institution, or society itself. LDS society is no exception. John C. Turpin gives an example in his tape Codependency: What It Is and How to Reduce It within a Gospel Context. He quotes an LDS woman who says, "I believe the LDS woman must not be selfish, she must do what's asked, keep smiling (after all, the woman sets the tone in the family), love unconditionally, sacrifice, protect, and at all costs hide the hurt." [^1] Her words paint a perfect picture of codependent attitudes. Another LDS woman was asked by an aunt at a family gathering, "How are you?" But the aunt didn't wait for her response. She said, "Of course you're all right. You have to be."

Naturally, not all LDS women perceive their role in the same way as the women in those examples. For instance, several women I spoke to had never heard the phrase, "The woman sets the tone in the home." Others, including men, had been taught it over and over again not only by teachers in church organizations, but also by articles in national magazines and the family section of newspapers.

Although the attitudes revealed in the woman's words may not seem unusual, you may be surprised at how similar they are to attitudes common among women with alcoholic husbands. Marie Schutt enumerates them in her book Wives of Alcoholics:

When I read this list to a woman in our stake, her eyes filled with tears. She said, "That sounds just like my mother." More than one woman had the same response, for these attitudes are prevalent among us. They are particularly common among women, but many men also hold to them. For that reason, considering the effect they have on our relationships is important.

Peace at Any Price

The woman who believes that she must keep peace in her family pays a heavy price in terms of her own integrity. She always defers to the one holding the power (most often but not always her husband). She doesn't express her true feelings about issues, because to do so might cause trouble. She denies her wants and needs in order to fill others' expectations, regardless of how out-of-line they are. She often allows herself to be emotionally and verbally, if not physically, abused.

The consequences of this attitude are serious. For one thing, the children do not see their parents in helpful parenting models and may learn codependent behavior themselves. For instance, children who do not see their parents resolve differences of opinion or conflict through communication and compromise may not learn how to handle disagreement except by denying it.

For another, adults who force themselves to acquiesce often turn to deadening activities so that they will not feel the pain of denying their own interests or values. A woman might read hundreds of romance novels or eat huge amounts of food. Conversely, she may starve herself as a means of asserting some control over her life. A man might spend all his free time watching sports or detective programs. He might immerse himself in church work, in business, or in a hobby. At the worst, both children and adults in such a family may be victims of escalating emotional and physical abuse.

Maintain the Conspiracy of Silence

The conspiracy of silence refers to keeping a family secret like the loss of employment, an institutionalized family member, mental illness, or an unwanted pregnancy. This rule is most destructive when the secret is abuse, particularly physical or sexual abuse. The conspiracy of silence often creates deep feelings of worthlessness, shame, and helplessness in the victim. It is potentially dangerous and, in the case of abuse, may even be life-threatening. In addition, it creates destructive patterns in other family members who feel compelled to maintain silence.

The conspiracy of silence is both a family rule and a cultural rule. In terms of abuse, the conspiracy of silence primarily affects women and children. These victims of emotional, physical, or sexual abuse often do not feel that they can ask for and receive appropriate help. Although general awareness of abuse issues has increased markedly, most people are highly uncomfortable around victims. They do not want to hear what has happened.

Unfortunately, this feeling also exists among some Church members, even among those holding leadership positions. Because they do not want to know about or are unprepared to deal with such situations, they ignore the signs and/or they discount the stories.

This is illustrated by the experience of "Jane," an LDS woman whose husband was physically abusive. "Jane" told her story in the Exponent II issue on abuse, relating that many of her ward members didn't believe what she told them about her situation. Distressed by their lack of understanding, she searched for possible explanations of their attitudes. She wrote:

I was so confused by this behavior myself that I have read a great deal about what teachers and psychologists call the "search for cognitive consistency." . . .

We all need order in our worlds. We structure that order by setting up categories and putting things in them so that they make sense. . . . Basically what happens is that once we set up our categories and establish an orderly way to organize reality, we have some peace. . . . We are disturbed, however, when information comes along that doesn't fit our sense of peace and order. . . .

If we have a category in our minds for what we see as the behavior of a good LDS person/priesthood-holder and that category doesn't include a place for the possibility of abusive behavior, we take the easiest road and throw out the report of such behavior. [^3]

Another way some people skirt the issue of abuse is to blame the victim. While General Authorities have come out strongly against any kind of abuse in the home, the dynamics of abusive relationships are still not understood very well. And even some educated, enlightened leaders can hold assumptions that prompt them to put the responsibility of the abuse on the victim and to go easy on the abuser.

In one case, a woman was beaten by her husband. She told her bishop, who said, "Stop making him so mad." In another case, a woman had told those in authority over a period of years that she was being abused. They did nothing for her. After one attack, she asked the police to put out a restraining order, barring her husband from the house. They tried to reach him throughout the day but were unable to until evening—they served him with the order in the middle of a church meeting. It was no doubt an excruciating moment for all concerned, but the comment of a church leader revealed that he was more concerned for the public image of both the man himself and the Church in general than for the safety of the woman. He said, "How could you embarrass him so?" (I have included this disturbing story to show how an uninformed response can add a second level of abuse to someone who is already victimized. It is a single example and is not meant to be taken as a reflection of the attitude of stake presidents and bishops in general.)

Not only do others often blame the victim, the victims also very often blame themselves. They feel responsible for their husbands' rages or attacks. They assume, for example, that if they weren't so slow (or clumsy, ineffective, uneducated, disorganized), their husbands would stop hitting them. Such beliefs keep many women in destructive marriages.

To be perfectly clear, the conspiracy of silence is not the same as being careful about when and how you confide personal problems to others, which is an issue of appropriateness. The conspiracy of silence is a collusion between members of a group to ignore something that should be dealt with.

In a story reminiscent of "The Emperor's New Clothes," a group of people sit around the dining-room table, eating a meal. In the middle of the table lies a dead horse. These people eat, drink, and converse as if nothing is wrong, for they have tacitly agreed to ignore the presence of the horse. Someone from outside the group joins them and cries out, "What's going on here! How can you pretend to enjoy your meal when there's a dead horse on the dining-room table?" The others, having agreed to ignore the horse, accuse him of being crazy and go on eating.

Although steps are currently being taken to raise awareness of abuse issues in the Church, it is for some members still very much the dead horse on the dining-room table.

The "Never" Fallacies

Never quit. While the concept of eternal marriage is of paramount importance to us as Church members, we ought to also acknowledge that there is no virtue in staying in a destructive relationship of emotional or verbal abuse. Women and children are not required to put themselves at risk.

The never-quit cultural and codependent rule causes many women and men to feel as if they have no choice but to suffer in a loveless or abusive marriage. This was the situation of Charlotte, as reported by Ellen Goodman. An LDS woman living in Salt Lake City, Charlotte was enduring a marriage in which both her husband and her children continuously devalued her. She wanted things to be different, but she felt helpless to make changes. Goodman wrote:

Charlotte . . . looks at past choices as obligations to endure. She doesn't really believe that she can make a change in the rules or the regulations of her life. In fact, as we talked, she told me I was the first person to ask her whether she was happy since her father had died. . . . Charlotte, when asked by her neighbors if she didn't think she deserved better, replied, "Personally, I don't. I can't think of anything I deserve." [^4]

In many such marriages, improving relationships is not even an option since the other spouse either denies that problems exist or refuses to enter into therapy of any kind. Or, in an example of "black-and-white thinking," the spouse cannot see any choices other than continuing on in the abusive situation or getting a divorce. Whenever one woman tried to bring up issues important to her, her husband's response was "Do you want a divorce?" Of course, she didn't—what she wanted was a better relationship. Her husband's attitude left her with empty hands.

Never discuss feelings. This rule is detrimental to everyone in the family. Children learn to invalidate their emotions, to live the lie that "I'm all right. Everything's cool. We don't have any problems." No one feels free to express themselves honestly. True communication is impossible in such a situation.

Feelings are not right or wrong in and of themselves. They are, rather, indicators of something we need to explore and take care of. They can be a response to some current event or to unresolved issues from the past. When we acknowledge them and express them appropriately, we respond to events in our lives honestly. When we suppress them, we set ourselves up for outbursts of rage or other inappropriate behavior or for depression. We perpetuate the false self. Men often respond to this dictum by working harder, staying busy, or getting depressed. Women often respond to it by getting sick or depressed.

In some families, this rule is expanded to read, Never discuss anything that doesn't fit the family's accepted image. Anything that is out of step with the way the parents want their family to be is simply ignored. The parents do not speak to their children about their problems, even when they are aware of them. Rather, they withdraw their love and support, which makes life even more difficult for the children. They intend for it to be more difficult, hoping by that means to bring their children back into line.

One son was working through a relatively minor issue involving personal worthiness. He had taken the steps necessary to do so but felt that it was appropriate to forego taking the sacrament for a time. His parents noticed this. Instead of asking him in an atmosphere of support and love if they could do anything to help him out, they withdrew into silence.

As a result, they suffered unnecessarily, imagining all sorts of reasons for his failure to partake. They could easily have made a "reality check" by simply asking their son if they could help him with anything. Of course, the young man may not have chosen to go into detail about his situation, but he could have reassured them concerning his efforts to put things right.

He also suffered unnecessarily. Instead of experiencing the outpouring of love and support that might have resulted from such a conversation with his parents, he experienced a withdrawal of love and support. His parents rule of silence prevented him from even bringing up the subject.

Never allow problems to show outside the family. In a healthy family suffering a transient difficulty, keeping up appearances may be a way of moving on. In an unhealthy family, trying to seem normal goes hand in hand with the conspiracy of silence. It keeps the secret. It perpetuates the lie. It freezes the family in pain. The try-to-seem-normal rule says that appearances are reality: If you keep up appearances, everything is okay. Family members often hold to this rule with such vehemence that they become convinced that indeed everything is okay. If one brave individual decides to tell it like it is, the others will probably tell him that he's imagining things. "What do you mean? Everything's going fine. You must be nuts." Such a situation breaks down integrity and breeds hypocrisy.

No wonder therapists and people in recovery programs often call such situations "crazy-making." If you see that the emperor is naked or that there is a dead horse on the dining-room table but everyone tells you that you're mistaken, you might begin to have doubts yourself.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Children of dysfunctional families are not allowed to feel their own emotions or make their own choices. Their parents can't meet their needs. They are emotionally abandoned. Adult children guess at what normal is.
[^3] They thus develop addictive or compulsive behaviors to plug the "hole in the soul." Adult children lie when it would be just as easy to tell the truth.
[^4] They enter into new codependent or dysfunctional relationships in which they recycle the things they learned in their own families about interrelating and dealing with stress. Adult children judge themselves without mercy.
