Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 12

Effects of Dysfunction

The effects of growing up in dysfunctional families are far-reaching. As has been mentioned, family members typically take on rigid roles to meet the demands of the system. In doing so, they abdicate their right to make choices about who and what they want to be. They have difficulty expressing or acknowledging their feelings, thoughts, and needs. Congruence—the state in which one's actions are an expression of one's values—is frequently foreign to them because they may not have any idea what their own values are. They depend on others to tell them what is important and what they should do.

Such individuals usually do not know what normal behavior is like. Because they have never seen models of healthy interaction, they don't know the ways in which husbands and wives can work together, deal with conflict, and be emotionally intimate. They may not know how to make choices between alternatives because they have never believed that they have options to choose from. They do not know how to state what they want because they have invalidated their own wants for so long that they don't even know what they are.

Every Christmas season in hundreds of thousands of houses all across the U.S.A., a codependency drama unfolds. Wives and husbands ask each other what they want for Christmas. The answer is "I don't want anything." Despite cajoling and repeated questioning, the spouses stoutly maintain that there is nothing they desire. They may feel noble and altruistic, thinking that they're not materially minded, but the truth more often is that they have disregarded their wants and needs for so long, they couldn't say what they wanted if they had to!

The flip side can also be true. Adult children may also have excessive demands. Such people have no trouble writing out long lists of what they need and want to "be happy" and "feel loved." The sad truth is that all their efforts are misdirected into making and fulfilling checklists, and they are left still feeling empty. As Dennis Wholely explained, "Adult children never learn to love themselves, and as grown-ups, they are confused, hopeless, and despairing. Adult children do not get positive messages in childhood and often spend a life-time searching for affirmation and validation as adults." [^1]

Not only are the children of an unhealthy family affected, the next generation is affected as well. A person who was reared in such a family may often be drawn to another with whom they can replay or recreate the conditions they grew up in. Why? Because they know what the rules are in those conditions, and they know what is required of them. And they may not know any other way of relating. Oddly, they feel comfortable in dysfunctional relationships.

The scriptures that speak of the sins of the parents being visited upon the children (see Ex. 20:5; 34:7) is clearly applicable to the way dysfunction is passed down through the generations. I have devised the following schematic that illustrates the common sequence of events:

This cycle typically goes on from generation to generation until someone decides, "Enough! The cycle must be broken." The dysfunction continues until someone decides to do the necessary work of healing oneself and encourage his or her children and loved ones to also do so.

Common Adult Children Characteristics

Children of dysfunctional families grow up to be "adult children," a designation that may at first seem to be a contradiction in terms. Such individuals are adult in stature and have adult responsibilities, but their emotional development has been blocked in significant ways. The phrase currently refers to persons who have experienced some sort of dysfunctional family relationships in their childhood.

Janet Woititz lists some of the characteristics of adult children in general. While individuals from healthy homes may see themselves in one or more statements, those from dysfunctional homes will be able to identify with many, if not all, of them.

As you were reading these characteristics, how many caused a recognition response, an "Aha!" or an "Oh, no!"? Sometimes people who grew up in dysfunctional families first recognize the fact when they realize that such lists accurately describe many of their own feelings, attitudes, and behaviors. Something like this is sometimes needed to help those recognize the truth who have minimized or denied the circumstances of their youth, especially if physical or sexual abuse was involved.

In such cases, even when the individuals do finally recognize that they were abused, they may not be able to face the truth or talk about particular incidents. Getting to that point is often a lengthy process that can only be worked through with appropriate support.

The fact that healing can't be accomplished in isolation is reflected in the words of Grete Peterson: "The Savior is the ultimate healer, but that does not mean that there is no pain or that solutions come easily. We need each other to move the healing process along, acknowledging the reality of abuse, and our communal vulnerability begins to move us toward wholeness." [^3] The way we begin the journey "toward wholeness" is the subject of the second part of this book.

---
Notas:
[^1] Children of dysfunctional families are not allowed to feel their own emotions or make their own choices. Their parents can't meet their needs. They are emotionally abandoned. Adult children guess at what normal is.
[^3] They thus develop addictive or compulsive behaviors to plug the "hole in the soul." Adult children lie when it would be just as easy to tell the truth.
