Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Part 2

The Healing Process

Footnotes

Chapter 13

Three Basic Guidelines

If you have seen yourself in some of the previous pages, you may have been impatient to get to this part of the book, the "How to" or "Fix it" section. Before you read further, knowing certain things about what you will be encountering next is important.

For those of us in dysfunctional families, the way we react to dysfunction (and attendant abuse) has influenced how we look at every aspect of the world. It has defined every issue we have, whether in relationships, self-esteem, employment, or any other part of our lives.

Working through these issues is not a one-time thing. It is a lifetime proposition, part of working out our salvation. This may sound discouraging, but giving in to despair only puts us back at the beginning, and starting over and over again is a painful waste of time. A more helpful attitude is to remember that every time we deal with a reoccurrence of a destructive family pattern, our abilities increase, and we come that much closer to establishing a healthier, happier family. Then, as the peaks and valleys of our lives become less severe, life in general will become more pleasant and productive.

Dealing with the issues relating to dysfunction is difficult and emotionally draining. Rarely can an individual undertake the healing process alone. There are several reasons for this:

A. We typically have a great many unacknowledged emotions about our childhood. Acknowledging and releasing them is not likely unless we are working with a therapist or in a group that provides a safe place for us to do so.

B. We have not experienced what healthy relationships can be like, so we need someone to model them and point out what aspects of our family patterns were or are destructive.

C. We need an outside perspective to help us discover what aspects of our thinking patterns keep us stuck in destructive behaviors. We also need help to learn how to restructure family patterns. In addition to therapists, books and classes—those offered through community education or HMOs, for example—can help.

D. If our situations are such that we are in danger, we need help to change it. That may mean seeking shelter, and it may mean taking legal action. We need the support, encouragement, and advice from those who work with abuse issues in order to make the appropriate response.

Since each person's experience is different, the way he or she approaches the healing process will also be different. However, there are some general steps that apply to all. I have outlined them here and presented some activities that support each step. These activities are designed to give you some idea of the process as a whole and to get you started. Many of them can be done on an individual basis, but some sort of support is recommended.

A. Facing the facts—acknowledging the unpleasant events of childhood and their effects.

B. Feeling the feelings—responding to the repressed emotions surrounding childhood abuse.

C. Forgiving—forgiving the child we were for being too to small to protect us, and perhaps forgiving our abuser.

D. Getting help/helping others—learning how to ask for appropriate help, taking action to prevent abuse, and learning how to find strength in helping others.

E. Reconnecting—doing activities that reacquaint us with all aspects of our selves.

F. Reparenting—giving ourselves the things we needed from our parents, but did not receive.

G. Releasing—letting go of negative thought patterns, destructive ways of relating, and unrealistic expectations.

H. Restructuring—learning (perhaps for the first time) the correct principles of interrelating.

J. Creating a daily program—establishing a program that supports these healing activities and attitudes.

The above steps are presented as an effective healing process for those in pain. It is also an effective personal growth process of those who feel generally comfortable with their lives but who wish to make changes in a given area.
