Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 15

Feeling the Feelings

Adult children of dysfunctional families experience a range of strong, oftentimes profoundly disturbing emotions when they begin to confront their past. However, acknowledging and facing those emotions are necessary parts of the healing process. This is not as easy as one might think. Our understanding of emotions and the role they play in our lives is limited. To many people, in fact, they remain a great mystery.

In general, we do not quite know what to do with our emotions. Some feel them but dismiss their importance. Some feel them with the romanticist's excess and assign them too much importance. Some fear feeling them so much that they ignore or discount them. Still others have put so much energy into controlling and repressing their feelings that they no longer are aware of having particular feelings about anything.

These responses show a lack of understanding of the true role emotions play in our lives. They are extremely important, for they teach us much about ourselves, the world around us, and our relationship to other human beings. For instance, positive emotions tell us something is right—we feel joyful, peaceful, content, expansive, loving. Negative emotions tell us something is wrong—we feel fearful, angry, sad, hopeless. They tell us when something needs to be changed, and not necessarily something outside of ourselves, such as another person's behavior. Even our spirituality is based to a degree on emotion: a burning in the bosom, a feeling of peace or love, the sense that something is right for reasons that have nothing to do with logic.

Once we are aware of a negative feeling in regard to a particular circumstance, it is up to us to appropriately express what we feel to the individual(s) concerned. This is a skill that takes some study and practice. We generally do not talk directly to the person we are angry at, for example. We act as if nothing is wrong, then burst into anger at a spouse or child.

A more appropriate response is to address the issue using what psychologists call "I messages." We state what has upset us, how it makes us feel, and what we would like to see changed. When we do so, we acknowledge our feelings and needs positively. Even if the result is not all we want, we gain considerable relief from having expressed ourselves. Often, our greatest need is simply to have our viewpoint acknowledged. When that happens, the power behind the negative emotion dissipates to a great extent.

This process of dealing with emotion can be called "keeping current." We acknowledge emotions as they arise and take appropriate action, whether it is addressing the issue with others or making a change in ourselves. We might think of current emotions—emotions unattached to past pain—as "fresh" or "healthy." The kinds of emotions, however, that we as adult children are dealing with are not fresh or healthy. They are old emotions, long held. They are toxic emotions.

Such destructive emotions got that way through a long process, beginning in our childhood. How many children feel they can tell a parent that they are angry for being emotionally or physically abused? How many can say, "I'm hurt! I don't feel loved?" A junior-high girl ran away from home for just those reasons. When she was discovered and brought back, her parents had a long session with her in the bedroom. They wanted to know why she had run away from home, but she never told them because honest communication had never been encouraged in her home. She feared her parents' reaction if she told the truth.

So as children, we began "stuffing" our feelings, pushing them down inside us, disregarding them, or masking them. But they didn't disappear. Every time a situation similar to the one that caused the original pain occurs, that old pain surfaces, combining with the new. It prompts us to react defensively, usually in a way that hurts either ourselves or others. Typically, no resolution is reached in such situations, for instead of dealing with the issues at hand, we recite our litany of grievances, sometimes going back years! Because nothing is resolved, we are still vulnerable. The only thing that has happened is that our negative emotions have been once more reinforced.

When we keep recycling rather than releasing our negative emotions, we suffer. Some of us turn ourselves into human pressure cookers. As the pressure of our negative emotions rises, we let off steam by lashing out, often toward people and situations unrelated to what is really bothering us. (We may not even know what is really bothering us if we have repressed our feelings and/or blotted out certain memories.) Others of us get sick. We may suffer painful headaches, colitis, or even autoimmune illnesses such as asthma, allergies, and arthritis. We may become chronically depressed. Whatever the outward manifestation, the inward state is the same: we are clogged with emotions that have not been resolved. Emotionally, we have not moved past the events of our childhood.

As we can see, learning how to deal with emotions associated with past events is important. We need to learn how to express them in a manner and in a situation that will ultimately be helpful, not harmful. Unfortunately, people sometimes misunderstand what is meant by feeling and releasing emotions. They take such words as permission to indulge in uncontrolled rage leading to emotionally or physically abusive behavior. This is not what "Feeling the Feelings" is about. Nor is it an invitation to get stuck in emotional excess, which sometimes happens when people become addicted either to the emotions themselves or to the attention they receive when they tell their story.

Feeling the feelings is a freeing stage of the process. Adult children who have worked through it to a certain extent often feel suddenly more open, expansive, even physically lighter. They may also feel a surge of energy. This happens because they are no longer carrying the heavy burden of repressed emotions or using so much of their energy to control their feelings. They are free to direct this newly available energy into other, more satisfying endeavors.

Having set this groundwork, we will now focus on two of the emotions adult children need to work through and work out, anger and grief. Then we will discuss moving toward forgiveness.

Anger

Anger is not a socially acceptable emotion. We are taught to bridle our anger. Men often channel it into aggressive behavior. Women often channel it into more acceptable emotions. For instance, women who were taught not to express anger often cry instead. Given the general lack of experience in handling anger appropriately, it is not surprising that adult children feel threatened when they begin to experience this feeling.

Typically, when they allow themselves to acknowledge their anger, a huge amount of it is unleashed. This is typically true of victims of sexual or physical abuse. "How could you do this to me!" they rage. They frequently feel extremely bitter toward those in authority, for such people represent the adult authority figures who should have protected and nurtured them when they were small.

Victims are often terrified when these powerful emotions begin to surface. They attempt to push them back down, fearful that they and others around them will be destroyed. They describe what they are experiencing with words like "volcano" or "whirlwind." Only in settings and with people they completely trust do they feel safe enough to begin dealing with such strong feelings. Most turn to therapists and groups working with similar issues.

Sometimes acting anger out in nondestructive ways helps—beating a bed with a tennis racquet or smashing empty cans with a baseball bat, for instance. In her seminar "Becoming a Survivor," Lynda N. Driscoll says of her experience dealing with sexual abuse, "You have to be at last angry, enraged at the wrong done to you. We are told often that we shouldn't be angry . . . but I had to get the anger out so I could let love in. Among other things, I spent a lot of time with hot angry tears, yelling and even swearing at my dead father. I even found it helpful, if somewhat hazardous to my reputation, to go into the forest and beat the heck out of dead trees." [^1]

Sometimes writing in a journal or writing letters helps. One pours out all the vitriol in journal passages that may never be read by others or letters that may never be sent. Certainly, victims of any kind of abuse will need to consider carefully whether or not to share such passages or send such letters to their abuser. While confronting abusers can be a helpful and healthy thing to do, such a confrontation—even by means of the written word—must be thought out carefully. In personal confrontations, much consideration must be given as to the setting, the parameters of what will be allowed, and the results desired.

The necessity of feeling emotions puts some adult children in a Catch-22 situation. They have struggled for years to control negative feelings by refusing to acknowledge them. Now they must allow them in all their messiness, ugliness, and heat. The problem seems on the surface to be different for adult children whose own uncontrolled anger and rage have resulted in abusive behavior toward others. But for both groups the task is similar: to identify the issues and the deeper emotions underlying their reactions to certain situations and to learn new, more appropriate forms of behavior.

For those who have repressed their emotions over a long period of time, learning to acknowledge them is not easy. Some may try to avoid doing so by intellectualizing. They say, "Yes, yes, I know what happened. Now let's get on with learning how to deal with it." By which they mean: Tell me what to read, what to say, and how to act. Give me a plan to follow so I won't have to feel. As one adult child put it, "What we want is drive-through therapy."

It won't work. Healing is promoted by finally allowing the full expressions of feelings. Emotional feelings, according to one author, have a pathway much like the neurological pathway that physical feelings have. [^2] When some event initiates them, they begin to flow down the pathway. If allowed to complete their flow, they dissipate to some extent. If they are blocked, they increase in power and have an effect on the physical body as well as the mind. That is why it is important to learn to recognize what emotion we are feeling and stay with it as long as possible. The longer a person can stay with it, allow it, and experience it, the less power it will have when it demands attention later on.

Finally, anger can be used as a source of energy to fuel positive action. At some point in the healing process, victims may direct this energy into an advocacy program, for example. Doing so gives them a sense of power because they have chosen to create something positive from their pain. They become something more than victims—they become survivors.

Two friends of mine spent a night a week answering calls to a sexual abuse hot line. Lynda N. Driscoll, who was quoted earlier in this chapter, is the president of Network against Child Abuse, Inc., and a member of the Utah Task Force on Child Sexual Abuse and the Committee on Ritual Abuse. My sister Nancy Anderson devoted much time and effort in helping me with this book in order to regain a sense of power and to affirm her identity as a strong woman working toward a healthy future.

Grief

Grief, like anger, is an emotion many of us have difficulty dealing with. But grief is—or should be—a part of our emotional life. Why? Because it is the normal response to loss, and our lives are full of losses, large and small. Some of the losses we all feel include loss of youth, dreams, abilities, belief in comforting myths (such as the "happily ever after" and the "parents are perfect" myths), opportunities, friendships, confidence, faith, health, loved ones—to mention only a few. Every loss we feel hurts us, and we must allow ourselves to grieve them.

Instead of grieving our losses at the time they occur, we often steel ourselves against hurt by getting on with life, stoically continuing as we were before. But grief, like anger or any other emotion, does not disappear simply because we choose not to acknowledge it. It accumulates. I once described this phenomenon in the following words:

Mourning has a timetable in the heart tears have a schedule all their own and when they are deferred one must pay interest. This I know. Behind a dam of ancient griefs ignored and little losses never mourned my tears back up, an ever-growing salty reservoir.

Allowing as much of the hurt and grief as we can at the time we experience a loss is the only way to avoid filling the reservoir to the point of overflowing. But that is only the first step. As with anger, spending some time considering what has caused us to feel hurt is also important. Is it the result of unmet expectation? We need to change our expectation or attempt to change something about the situation. Is it the result of the human condition, such as a loss associated with aging? We need to grieve the loss, but then we need to move on by discovering ways to compensate for it and to maintain our joy in life.

These examples point out the two kinds of things we grieve: those we can do something about and those we can't. Regardless of the category, acknowledging the loss and grief allows us to move through it more quickly. Having the empathetic support of those around us can also play an important part.

Unfortunately, some in the Church have the mistaken notion that if a person grieves a loss—especially the loss of a loved one—it indicates that they are lacking in faith. Such individuals don't really understand the words in Ecclesiastes 3:1 and 4, which tell us: "To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven: . . . a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance." Because of this attitude, they do not know how to perform one of the important tasks of a baptized member of the Church, to mourn with those who mourn and comfort those who stand in need of comfort. (See Mosiah 18:9; see also chapter 17, "Getting Help/Giving Help.")

In one ward a young man lost his father to a heart attack. The death came without any warning, and the young man was devastated. Every time he tried to express his grief to members of his ward, he was cut off in midsentence with the assurance that his father was in heaven and that he would surely see him again. He wanted to say, "Yes, I know all that. But I miss my dad, and it hurts!" He had such a difficult time working through his grief in a ward where others denied it that he finally sought solace from friends outside the Church. These friends were willing to allow him to experience his appropriate season of grief.

Victims of abuse—and I include in this category anyone who grew up in a dysfunctional family—need to have their appropriate season of grief. They have much to grieve. They grieve for their lost selves, for the child who was never allowed to have a childhood. They weep over lost time, ruined relationships, unrealized potential. They grieve the life that was a lie. Their tears are justified: they have suffered terrible losses. One man struggling with these issues said, "I just feel so sad all the time."

This kind of grieving doesn't usually take place until individuals have to some extent worked through their anger, for sorrow seems to occupy a strata below the anger. In addition, it has its own differing layers, as do all our emotions.

One woman, for example, felt that she had dealt successfully with the dysfunction in her own family. She had faced the fact that her mother had been abusive and her father had been absent. She had even gone so far as to confront her mother. During this time, she experienced a lot of anger and old pain. Her therapy sessions were exhausting: she would come home from them and go directly to bed. But after a time, she felt as though she had gotten through the worst of it.

Several years later, an odd thing began to happen. Every so often, the Negro spiritual "Sometimes I Feel Like a Motherless Child" would pop into her mind. She would be buying groceries or washing dishes, and there the song would be. She felt some sorrow whenever it came to mind, but she thought that was just because the song was sad. She never focused on the feeling long enough to discover the real source.

Then one day, realization broke through. She was a motherless child! A wail broke from her lips as another, deeper level of grief opened up.

It was a shattering experience, but grief that is expressed is healthy grief, while (to use the contrast already established) grief that is unacknowledged is toxic grief. However, if a person becomes overwhelmed by their grief and feelings of helplessness and hopelessness, they may need some assistance to move beyond them. We need to walk through the valley of grief, not camp in it.

Forgiveness

Trying to move directly from recognition of past events to forgiveness is not unusual for adult children, either because they do not want to deal with the pain of the other steps or because, as one person said, "I want to get on with my life." Those who attempt it, however, remain vulnerable to the old patterns of dysfunction, for the pressure of unacknowledged feelings and their effects on current relationships will still be strong. Furthermore, complete, long-lasting forgiveness can be given only when a person really knows what needs to be forgiven. The temptation to jump into forgiveness can be great, especially when the victim is encouraged to do so by family, friends, and Church leaders. However, one must first put him- or herself into a position to forgive.

The process that adult children go through as they attempt to resolve the issues relating to dysfunction is rarely understood by those around them. Family and friends see only the pain and the disruption of normal life, and they are often threatened by the emotional roller coaster the adult child is riding. They do not know what to do, but they feel that they must do something.

In an attempt to be helpful, they often say things like, "Why can't you get on with your life?" "You're just hurting yourself by not forgiving." "Can't you just forgive and forget?" "Don't you believe in the Atonement?" "Why can't you let it go?" But as one adult child succinctly put it, "Forgiveness has its own agenda, and intellectual forgiveness is not the goal."

Forgiveness is necessary, of course, but not the kind others might be looking for, the kind that says, "Okay, that's all done. Now we can go on with our lives." Forgiveness does not mean shoring up the status quo.

Whom must victims forgive? It may come as a surprise that victims must first forgive themselves—the child or adult they were when the abuse was taking place. What for? For being vulnerable. For being unable to protect themselves. For not shouting "No!" In the case of some victims of long-term sexual abuse, for having had a pleasurable response. This forgiveness of self becomes possible only as adult children learn to put the blame directly where it belongs, on the abuser. When they can do that, they no longer condemn themselves for being powerless.

Adult children must also forgive themselves for taking on all kinds of unhealthy behaviors to survive. They begin to do so as they realize that their behaviors were the only way they could cope with what was happening to them at the time. When they can validate the child they were by saying, "You did what you had to. You're a survivor," they feel more able to choose for themselves new, healthy survival techniques.

Must the adult child forgive the abuser? Some professionals say that the healing process can go on without doing so. In fact, making a conscious decision not to immediately forgive can be a way of acknowledging the pain of the self who was abused. It assures the inner child that the horribleness of the act(s) against her has been realized and that her pain will not be ignored again. It assures her that her needs will come before the need of the family to "get back to normal" or the need of the abuser to know that he or she has been forgiven.

Two legitimate needs of the victim may in fact preclude a "normalization" of relationships: the need for safety and the need for justice. If the abuser refuses to admit to the abuse, or admits it but puts the blame on the victim, or will continue it, the victim is justified in choosing to sever the relationship. In less difficult cases, the victim may choose to maintain contact under clearly outlined conditions. Either way, the victim has, as far as possible, made the important step of taking responsibility for his or her safety.

While such choices may disturb family members, the victim's need for justice may lead to an even more disturbing choice: to press charges against the abuser. Physical and sexual abuse are crimes. Initiating appropriate legal action can help the victim get over the feeling of somehow being to blame. It can also restore to the victim a sense of power after years of feeling powerless.

Such actions seem to have little to do with forgiveness. In fact, they may seem to be rather vindictive. However, they can become important aspects of a victim's healing process, and thus they may bring the victim closer to being ultimately able to forgive. Intellectual forgiveness offered as an act of will is not true forgiveness. True forgiveness is a gift of the heart—of the healing, if not healed, heart.

Once Again, with Feeling

In the process of working through powerful and complex emotions, individuals may feel loving and forgiving one day and angry the next. They should not add to their burdens by feeling guilty about an apparent relapse. It is typical of the healing process. Even when adult children reach a plateau of peace in their healing and think, "Wheeew! I'm glad that's over," it probably isn't over.

Actually, the healing process may never be completely over. After many weeks or months of experiencing peace and growth, an incident may occur that brings all of the issues back into the fore. When that happens, adult children may experience denial, anger, sorrow, and the need to forgive themselves and others all over again.

The way we react when confronting problems related to our dysfunctional patterns will either move us upward or downward on the growth spiral.

Will this mean that they have failed in some way? No. All individuals have certain issues that crop up periodically throughout life. Will it mean they are stuck on a treadmill? Not necessarily. Instead of thinking of it as a circle going around and around, one survivor describes it as a spiral going upward. She occasionally experiences the same feelings all over again, but each time she deals with them on a different, higher level and from a position of greater strength. And each time she successfully handles them, she grows even more.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Peoplemaking, 17.
[^2] In Wholely, 216.
