Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 16

Dysfunction and Spiritual Identity

As they take the first tentative steps into their inner landscape, many adult children of dysfunctional families question whether they will find anything inside beyond their rage and grief. They may feel as if nothing is there but a black void. Or, that if something is there, it will be bad or worthless. Their fears are fed by some religious and psychological viewpoints that teach that man is naturally prone to evil and that the rational mind must be in control over the untrustworthy, irrational, emotional subconscious mind.

Belief in the gospel can be a sustaining force and an anchor for those in this situation. For some, however, basic gospel principles and teachings have been called into question as a result of their experiences. Examining how they feel about these issues can help move the process along.

Our Eternal Identity

Adult children who are Church members may say that all people are children of God, but in actuality they often exclude themselves when they say it. The things that are most basic to their being—individual perception, thoughts, feelings, desires, and choices—have been rejected, denied, or sharply curtailed. First, their parents or other adults have shamed them when they expressed themselves. Over a period of time, they may even have developed a parental voice in their head that continued to shame them. Because they learned to see their inner self as bad and their normal needs as inappropriate, they may have grave doubts about themselves. They fear who they are and what they would become if not controlled, and they have the same fears regarding their spouses and their children.

Those who were abused as children have a specially difficult time feeling good about themselves. They often rationalize their parent's behavior by coming to the conclusion that they deserved abuse because they were bad or they "asked for it."

A fifty-year-old man stood at his parents' graves, tears in his eyes. This man had been the victim of severe abuse all through his childhood until he left home after graduating from high school. A younger brother who had witnessed the abuse noticed the tears and remarked, "How have you managed to forgive Dad for what he did to you?"

The man looked puzzled. "What do I have to forgive him for? I deserved it. I was a slow learner. He did what he had to do to teach me what I needed to know." Thirty-two years after leaving home, this man still believed that something faulty in himself warranted the abuse. He has taken on the responsibility for it, thus absolving his deceased father and allowing his love for his father to remain intact.

Psychologist Virginia Satir makes the assertion that no child is intentionally bad. He is either trying to fill a need in the only way he knows how, responding inappropriately because of poor communication, or acting out his role in the family system. In addition, he may also be suffering from some sort of chemical imbalance or neurological problem. Punishing him for his actions does not promote change; it only teaches him to react violently when he is angry. It also makes him feel devalued. [^1]

Having been devalued, adult children conclude that they are guilty or bad. Their shame is so profound, they can't imagine that God would love them or that they are of worth. It may be of some help to adult children to review what scriptures say about who and what we are.

The scriptures tell us our eternal essence is intelligence, or the light of truth. In Doctrine & Covenants 93:29, we read, "Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be."

What can neither be created nor made cannot be destroyed. The light of truth remains in an individual—is that individual in an eternal sense—regardless of what he does in the course of his evolution. It may be deeply buried, that is true, but it doesn't cease to exist. Therein lies the intrinsic and eternal worth of every soul.

In addition, each individual has been gifted with the light of Christ. John 1:9-10 tells us that "[Christ] was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. He was in the world, . . . and the world knew him not." The fact that the majority of the people on the earth are not aware of the light of Christ within them doesn't change the fact that it is there. Its presence is the reason Christ could also say, "For, behold, the kingdom of God is within you." (Luke 17:21.)

From these scriptures, we can conclude that if we courageously explore those parts of ourselves that we have ignored or even denied, we will encounter a self of eternal worth. Beyond that, we will encounter the light of Christ and the kingdom of God.

Trust in God

Trusting in God can sometimes be difficult even for those of us who have a sense of our eternal identities. Although we know much about the nature of God, our relationship to him is based on faith, and negative images of who and what God is can weaken that faith. Sometimes the image of God as created by the teachings of our parents or other adults has been more threatening than comforting. If that image has persisted into adulthood, it makes us somewhat wary of putting ourselves in his hands.

Those who have (or had) a difficult relationship with their earthly father are also often reluctant to approach God because of the image of God as father. If their earthly father was never pleased, or was abusive or absent, they may fear that their heavenly father is the same. Their fear of being rejected, hurt, or abandoned by God prompts them to create barriers between him and themselves in the misguided belief that those barriers will be a protection.

Trust in a benign God. Women who are or were victims of sexual abuse can have a particularly hard time with this issue because of the anger they feel toward men. They are often angry not only at the abuser, but also at men in general. In addition, if they reported the abuse but nothing was done, they may feel mistrust toward most if not all men in authority.

These feelings can easily carry over into their relationship to God unless they do some work exploring their idea of who God is and can separate him from the men who have hurt them. One victim laughed when her therapist told her, "You don't trust men, not even God." She laughed because she was shocked. She was shocked because it was true. Feeling a great need for some kind of connection with their Heavenly Mother is not unusual for victims, for they see her as accepting and nurturing.

Trust in God's love for us as we are. Adult children often do not believe that God loves them as they are; they believe he will love them only when they have become what he wants them to become. They fear that he will punish them for what they believe are weak, wicked, or unworthy thoughts. And while they often feel angry with God, they fear that if they express their anger, he will either retaliate or be destroyed.

God will not be destroyed by our negative feelings, our doubts, or our poor choices. We do not have to hide them from him—in fact, we cannot hide them from him. When we try, we only succeed in hiding them from ourselves, thus creating blocks to our own progression. God isn't interested in our false, people-pleasing, and God-placating self. On the other hand, when we trust in the unconditional love of God for us as we are, we feel free to acknowledge our perceptions, thoughts, feelings, wants, and choices—all of them, whether they are "nice" or not.

This is very important, for putting a lot of energy into repressing negative feelings impairs our ability to feel in general. This includes our ability to feel the burning in the bosom, the peace, the promptings, the comfort, and the love of God for us that the scriptures speak so often of.

In one case, a priesthood holder was burdened with feelings of being angry, used, and hopeless. He dealt with them by boxing them away and "putting his shoulder to the wheel"—doing what he was supposed to do. But his negative feelings were strong, and he had to clamp down hard to keep them from surfacing. In the process, he clamped down on emotions in general. He became unable to experience simple happiness in daily life, to find enjoyment in his activities, or to feel his love for his family and theirs for him. His spirituality suffered as well, for he no longer felt the love of God for him, the sweetness of testimonies borne, or the manifestations of the Spirit in him.

Fear of pain and uncertainty about the outcome keep this man and others in similar situations from doing the very thing that will reconnect them with the feelings that make life worthwhile. When we open ourselves to emotions in general, we also open ourselves to the feelings of joy, love, contentment, and spirituality that we long to experience.

Trust in the mission of Christ. Sadly, many Latter-day Saints who grew up in dysfunctional believe in the Atonement as a principle without believing in it as a power that can change their lives. "That's true for other people but not for me" is often the thought that plagues them. They do not feel that they deserve the love of others, much less the love of Christ as reflected by the Atonement.

In addition, adult children are determinedly self-reliant. They believe that they are responsible for everything, that it is all up to them. They often find it difficult to let go of this attitude and accept the gift that Christ offers to all. When they are able to do so, however, they experience enormous relief, for they finally understand that they do not have to carry their burdens alone.

The 12-step programs, such as those available through Alcoholics Anonymous and Incest Survivors Anonymous, understand both these issues. Participants in them begin by admitting that they are powerless over the difficulties in their lives (alcohol, abuse, perfectionism, chronic illness) and that their lives have become unmanageable. They then work toward developing faith in a "power" greater than themselves, and they turn their lives over to the care of God.

Trust in the principle of agency. Members of unhealthy families have little experience in exercising agency, that is, making a choice based on their own convictions and values. They are often denied experiences that would inform their choices. They are pressured into assuming roles that support the system. They thus have no sense of being able to choose for themselves.

To choose is to exercise power. In the middle of all the uncertainty and turmoil that often accompany change, adult children can begin to make choices about what they want, what they think, what they believe. In order to do so, adult children must learn to ask themselves, "What do I really want?" They must begin to make choices on the basis of what their needs are, not on the expectations of others. For instance, they learn how to say no to a request they are unable or unwilling to comply with. This can be a big step, if as codependents their need to please has often taken precedence over their personal well-being. The ability to make choices is an eternal principle, and it is their right.

And if you can't trust in these things? Often, the only thing adult children trust in is their pain. The pain itself, when it becomes intolerable, is what motivates them to do the work of change. Earnie Larson says, "Recovery starts with enough pain that no matter what it takes, you're willing to get out of the hurt." [^2] And, as the saying goes, "The only way out of pain is through it."

If you are at that point, finding a therapist or a group you feel comfortable with and a program that seems valuable to you is important. Then, if you can trust nothing else, trust the program. Trust that doing the work, bit by bit, day after day, will lead to healing, peace, and love.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "The Abuse of Women," 3.
[^2] Judy Dushku, "Bishop, Please Believe My Story," Exponent II, 14, no. 1 (1987): 8.
