Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 17

Getting Help/Giving Help

Typically, we seek help only when our lives become too painful for us to continue as they are. When we reach that point, there are several avenues through which we can find the support we need. We can

A. Get a referral from our bishop to the local LDS Social Services representative.

B. Talk to our family physician and get a referral from him.

C. Get a referral to a therapist in our HMO. This is not a quick process, but it is often the most affordable.

D. Get the name of a therapist from someone whose opinion we value or from someone who has had a successful experience with therapy.

E. Check with our local hospital concerning program offerings.

F. Attend meetings of one of the 12-step programs. Some of these are Alcoholics Anonymous, Incest Survivors Anonymous, Overeaters Anonymous, Emotions Anonymous, or Adult Children of Dysfunctional Families. Local chapter offices should be listed in the phone book.

Attending a weekly session or group does much to further the process of dealing with dysfunction and abuse. However, the six days between meetings can be difficult to get through. We also need specific support from our families, friends, and church groups during that time. We often do not know what we need or how to ask for it, though. In addition, our loved ones probably do not know what we need or how to provide it.

The issues surrounding dysfunction, particularly abuse, are complex, and the needs of those who have experienced dysfunction are equally complex. Both adult children and those closest to them need to learn all they can about the subject. The following suggestions offer a starting point from which concerned individuals can move toward understanding the issues.

Check Your Assumptions

All of us—both men and women, both victims and others who are concerned—need to check our assumptions, because the kinds of biases and attitudes that allow abnormal family interaction or violence against the weak are often hidden. We err if we assume that the well-informed and socially enlightened are free of societal biases against either perpetrators or victims. Assuming that the victims themselves are free of such biases and myths is also a mistake. Victims especially need to check their assumptions, since those assumptions may be what is keeping them in abusive situations.

The following questions can serve to increase awareness of our own biases, if honestly answered.

Do you think that

Â what happens inside a family's home is nobody's business but their own?

Â some things are better left unsaid?

Â there is nothing wrong with withholding information from family members?

Â withholding financial support or love is a good way to motivate spouse or child to fill expectations?

Â withholding needed help can be a good motivational tool?

Â withholding physical affection is an appropriate response to anger or disappointment?

Â traditional roles of women and men are to be held to without deviation?

Â men should carry the entire burden of supporting and guiding their family?

Â men who show emotion are weak?

Â real men are never needy?

Â morality is a matter of black and white with no grey in between?

Â you are always right?

Â it is more important to be right or justified than it is to express love and extend support?

Â children must be made to "toe the line," by strong discipline when necessary?

Â children who do not live according to your values should be cut off from contact with the family until they comply?

Â emotions get in the way of doing what needs to be done?

Â the best way to handle emotions is to ignore them?

Â some level of abuse in families can be tolerated as normal?

Â violence and abuse would be avoided in families if the spouse and children would do what they're asked to do?

Â abuse between siblings is part of growing up?

Â verbal and/or physical abuse in the school yard, in neighborhood groups, or even in church groups is something children just have to learn to deal with?

Â accusations of abuse must always be handled without going "outside the system" (i.e., the Church)?

Â girls who have been sexually abused seduced their abuser in some way?

Â women who are raped asked for it?

Â males are rarely victims of sexual abuse?

Â boys who have been sexually abused are in danger of developing homosexual tendencies?

Â victims of sexual abuse (male or female) need to repent?

Â keeping a marriage intact is more important than responding to an accusation of abuse?

Â having a temple marriage obligates you to stay with an abusive spouse?

Â addressing abuse issues in your family or ward is inappropriate?

Â physical intimacy is a right within marriage, regardless of whether there are difficulties in other areas?

Â giving youth appropriate information about their sexuality is dangerous?

Â counseling is not necessary to deal with tough family problems?

Do you tend to

Â talk to a third person about something that is bothering you rather than to the person involved?

Â put others' needs before your own?

Â avoid conflict whenever possible by walking away?

Â minimize the reality of abuse by using less ugly words like "domestic trouble," "getting physical," and "getting carried away?"

Â excuse the abuser's behavior because of everything he or she has to deal with?

You may have experienced a strong reaction when reading these questions. You may have become angry or felt great grief. You may have felt some of the questions were inappropriate. Whatever your response, please take the time to honestly assess your answers to these questions. They may serve to indicate areas in which you hold to some myths about abuse or some beliefs about parenting and relationships that can result in abusive behavior or in tolerating abusive behavior toward oneself or others. For some, they may have made the dysfunctional or abusive nature of a current relationship clear. If that is true in your case, you may wish to turn to the appendix, "What Next?"

The rise in abuse cases throughout the country will continue unless each of us roots out of our thought patterns assumptions that perpetuate myths about abuse. As it was put in one of the abuse sessions at the 1990 BYU Women's Conference, when we perpetuate myths about abuse, we become perpetrators.

The next two sections of this chapter deal specifically with the needs of abuse victims. They address the extreme manifestation of dysfunction. By the time individuals finally seek help, the abuse they have been experiencing—perhaps for years—has escalated to the point that they can no longer tolerate it. Their need for appropriate help is urgent.

Because of the dramatic rise in abuse cases, we cannot discount the possibility that we ourselves, someone in our extended family, or someone in our circle of friends may either become victims or may be approached by a victim for help. Would we know what to do if that were the case? Would our reactions really help, or would they add to the pain of the victim? The following guidelines indicate some of the issues we may very well have to deal with.

Suggestions on Helping Victims

Believe the victim's words. This is particularly important, since it takes enormous courage for a victim to speak out after long years of silence. If their story is discounted or disbelieved, they typically retreat back into silence. Months or years may pass before they gain the courage to again speak the truth.

The fact is that few people want to believe victims. Accepting their story as truth is too painful, so listeners often find their own way to make it less horrible. Some discount what they hear. "Jane," who told her story in the Exponent II issue on abuse, related that some in whom she confided dismissed what she told them by saying she was overly emotional and dramatic. [^1]

Others attempt to make the abuse seem less awful by not using the strong words that express exactly what it is. But rape is rape, not something else. Battering is battering, not "getting a little physical."

Do some who cry "Abuse!" lie? Some. But only some. And even trained therapists and counselors are not always able to make a judgment call with complete confidence in such cases. One doctor with experience in the field says having a "willing suspension of disbelief" when women or children report sexual abuse is critical. Judy Dushku summarizes the doctor's position in this way:

After many years of wrestling with this [issue], he felt that it was most appropriate to lean towards accepting the stories of the women and children. Why? He explained that it was because of the far greater potential for life-long damaging and scarring that comes from a victim daring to report abuse and not being believed. Many children who are abused try only once to tell their story. If they are not believed, they retreat into guilt and self-destructive modes that often never heal. They never regain the courage or positive self-image to try again. When this happens, there is very little hope for later healing. Because not being believed at that crucial time is so critical, the risk of an error in judgment being made is too great. So although admitting the wrong choice can hurt an innocent father, this doctor had decided that he would believe a woman or child accusing a husband/father of incest or other sexual abuse. [^2]

Gain understanding. Common sense does not go very far in understanding the dynamics of what is happening in an abusive relationship, the effects of abuse on the victim and other family members, and the process the victim needs to go through to regain a healthy sense of personhood.

The importance of informing yourself cannot be overstressed, whether you are the victim or a family member. In either case, you have a lot of issues that will, sooner or later, come to the surface and demand attention. You will find that asking for or offering appropriate support is much easier if you understand the feelings and behaviors inherent in the process.

If you are a family member, you will need to begin your own process because you undoubtedly have issues of your own to deal with. (Remember how dysfunction affects the whole family unit, generation after generation.) Sometimes the very best gift you can give to a victim—and to yourself—is to do your own emotional work.

Allow everyone the time they need. Dealing with abuse issues takes time, a lot of it. Don't rush the process. If you are the victim, gently and lovingly allow yourself the time you need to work through the difficult emotions you are experiencing. If you are a concerned friend or family member, respect the victim's need for time. Don't pressure them by asking well-meaning but tactless questions such as, "Aren't you getting over this yet? How come it's taking so long?"

Remember also that even when all concerned feel they are ready to go forward again, events can trigger a whole new round of pain, anger, and grief. Trying to put these emotions out of mind does not make them go away. Acknowledge that they need to be recognized and dealt with perhaps many times, so that the victim can minimize feelings of anger and guilt at having to go through it all over again.

Offer your simple presence. If an abuse victim trusts you enough to reveal his or her circumstances to you, don't give in to the temptation to try to solve everything or to be a caretaker—a codependent. Victims are not asking you to "make it better." You can't. Even those in helping organizations can't "make it better." The most they can do is intervene when necessary and support as needed. Therefore, your simple presence is the greatest gift you can give a victim.

It is not easy to listen to someone in pain without feeling as though you have to make some response or identify with the pain. You may be flooded with strong emotions, especially if you are a victim yourself. Don't allow your emotions to get out of proportion. Remember your boundaries: You are not the victim in this case.

There are incidents, however, when individuals first recognize that they were abused when they hear someone else's story. In such cases, emotions in response to the story are very strong and frightening.

If you feel a great deal of anger at what you are hearing, use it constructively. For instance, become an advocate for victims. Take training and volunteer to man a hot line. Inform yourself and teach others what you have learned.

However, if you find that you are becoming overwhelmed emotionally or reacting in a codependent manner, it may be appropriate for you to help the victim find another support person. Explain that you love and care for him or her, but that your own situation requires giving support in a way that is healthy for you both.

When Priesthood Authority Is Involved

Victims of abuse who turn to priesthood authority for help have special needs. Because telling their story to those in authority can be difficult, they approach a meeting with their bishop or stake president with anxiety. Often they have wavered for a considerable time before gaining enough courage to even make the appointment.

Talking about their problems is particularly difficult for women who are being abused by their husbands, especially if those husbands are priesthood holders who have callings of some significance in the Church hierarchy. Recognizing this difficulty, some leaders have found it helpful to designate a woman as liaison between themselves and the victims. Having a woman liaison allows victims to speak openly to someone with whom they feel more comfortable.

When abuse victims seek priesthood guidance, they do so with the fervent prayer that something will be done to alter their situation. Their worst fear is that the response will be, "He's a good man (or woman). He (or she) may be having some difficulties right now. Let's hold on and see what happens." The real danger in such situations is that the victims might return to a situation in which they are at risk.

In addition, victims of every age and either sex are in great need of having their self-worth reaffirmed. They need to know that regardless of what has happened to them, their Father in Heaven has not ceased to love them. Victims of sexual abuse in particular need the reassurance that they are "still clean in the eyes of God and others." [^3]

When someone in a family is abusive, the whole family needs help. A bishop who is aware of appropriate services available through Church agencies—as well as city and county agencies—can refer both the victim and other family members to helping organizations.

Some situations are beyond that relatively simple solution, however. Assault is a crime. Although legal action may be distasteful to all involved, there are times when it is the most appropriate response. Women who have taken legal steps often feel that other ward members look upon them with disapproval, which the members express through insensitive comments, in lack of understanding, or in lack of loving support.

The attitude of priesthood authorities in such instances can be influential in creating and maintaining the necessary climate of support. But while the priesthood has a significant role to play in helping dysfunctional families, the severity of the problem is such that all members must do what is necessary to increase their awareness.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "The Abuse of Women," 3.
[^2] Judy Dushku, "Bishop, Please Believe My Story," Exponent II, 14, no. 1 (1987): 8.
[^3] B. Kent Harrison, comp. "LDS Church Statements, Quotes, and References on Abuse," April 1990, 1.
