Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 18

Healing: The Task of Life

During our earthly life, we are separated to one extent or another from our eternal nature by the veil. We are also separated from our brothers and sisters, not being of one mind and one heart, and we are separated from our Father in Heaven. Overcoming these separations is our prime task; helping others overcome them is our mission. Regardless of the shape our individual lives take, the task and mission at the core is the same.

We cannot make significant progress in this direction unless we attend to the wounds of a dysfunctional childhood or a dysfunctional relationship. We have hidden behind a barrier intended to protect us from hurt, only to discover that it contributes to the perpetuation of the separation. The false self, as has been noted, is yet another layer removed from our true spiritual identity. (See charts, pages 51, 72.) We are never able to connect with others meaningfully until we begin to connect with our true selves.

Recognizing our woundedness and taking the steps toward healing that are within our power form the essence of what we are called to do. When we begin to heal, we become more sensitive to things spiritual. We feel an inner need to communicate with our Savior and our Father. We feel the change of heart spoken of in the scriptures. We then are in a position to take advantage of the Atonement, the greater healing that was the mission of the Savior.

As we are healed, the Spirit's influence moves us to reach out with healing hands to others. The change we feel in ourselves is felt by them. One by one, changed lives change other lives. This transformation is what lies at the core of the gospel: we become new creatures.

New Ways of Knowing

Although scripture has many stories of individuals who undergo this change as the result of one dramatic experience, for most of us the change comes slowly. And it begins with a shift not only in what we think—but also in the way we think. The healing activities suggested in a wide range of popular medical and psychological literature involve quite different mental processes than many people are used to working with. These ways of thinking and knowing are associated with right-brain activity.

Left-brain thinking is sequential, analytical, rational, objective, literal, and detail oriented. The scientific method, based on left-brain thinking, is the accepted way of arriving at truth. We measure, weigh, take apart, and record tangible features. We come to conclusions through logic. Our culture validates, encourages, and teaches this type of thinking.

Right-brain thinking, on the other hand, is simultaneous and visual; that is, we might "see" or understand the whole of a concept at once. It searches for patterns and seeks an overview rather than focusing on details. It is synthetical, meaning that it connects elements together rather than examines them separately or even takes them apart. It is intuitive: it makes "leaps of faith," "jumps to conclusions," and arrives at understanding without benefit of logic. It is subjective, based on the way an individual feels about something—knowing through feelings. In addition, through the right brain we gain access to ideas and information from the vast subconscious, that part of us we rarely make deliberate effort to access.

Children utilize their right-brain functions when they are young. They learn by seeing and hearing, not by reading, applying logic, or analyzing. They trust their instincts. They are open to intuition. They relish creative activities and are unconcerned with how the results are received.

Then they start school, where they learn over the years that only certain ways of doing things or seeing things are valid. They are taught that logic and the scientific method form the basis for human progress, that subjective opinion is only valid in certain limited areas, and that a whole can be best understood by analyzing its parts. They are rarely taught the two ways of thinking, the circumstances in which each is most appropriately used, and the skill of alternating between them in a complementary manner.

It isn't surprising, then, that both our education system and popular wisdom reject the validity of subjective response. For example, an art critic might deride the statement, "I don't know much about art, but I know what I like," even though art evaluation is partly subjective. Actually, because an individual's subjective response is honest, it is also valid regardless of how uneducated it may be.

Dysfunctional families also reject the validity of subjective response. Children in such families frequently learn to keep their opinions to themselves, the same way they learn to keep their feelings hidden. They do so because the adults in their lives are controlling and critical.

Children internalize the parental voices they hear. It is important that they do so, for in their early years those voices exercise a controlling and protecting influence. The parental voices children from healthy families internalize are nurturing and affirming as well as critical. The voices adult children have internalized are almost exclusively critical.

Adult children thus end up with particularly harsh internal critics and editors. These critics and editors are enemies of the right brain. Under the influence of internal censure, adult children reject impulses, intuition, or creative thoughts, often automatically. They may reject them so quickly that they may not even be aware of them, for the right brain is nonaggressive and does not persist in the face of rejection.

Adult children may also consciously reject the thoughts originating in the right brain because they do not trust them. Such thoughts lie outside the rational, controlled ways of thinking and experiencing the world, and adult children spend much of their lives controlling themselves and others. Doing otherwise thus goes against the grain. Once such ways of thinking and feeling are accepted, however, right-brain ways of knowing can be used to reestablish communication with our inner selves.

The Divided Self

As mentioned, the right brain is the link between our conscious and subconscious minds. It is also the link between our egos and the part of self that is eternal, that lived with a heavenly being in the premortal life. Writers who work with adult children refer to different levels of self, such as the inner child, wise one, inner guide, or higher parent. I am aware that these terms may sound like "psychobabble" to some, but it is possible to fit them into a gospel context.

The inner child. The inner child can be thought of as that innocent self that came directly from the presence of God. Living with repressive parenting rules, stressors, and shame caused her to retreat for protection behind a false front. But she is still there, and the tender, immediate knowledge she had of her Heavenly Father is still intact.

The inner-child aspect of our nature has the capacity for unconditional love. She also has the capacity for spontaneity, a willingness to risk, the courage to try and try again. She is the keeper of the sense of humor. She has an open connection to the creative urge.

If the emotional and growth needs of the inner child were not met, she has been blocked in her development. She has become needy, hurt, and hungry. She feels threatened when events occur similar to painful situations of the past. She does not trust people. She perceives the world as a scary, unsafe place.

We don't get the benefit of the positive aspects of the inner child if she is still wounded. If we do try to make connection without addressing her issues, she will object, rather strenuously. There is no child that can throw a tantrum like the neglected inner child. On the other hand, there is no child that can bring joy into our lives like the inner child, if we protect and nurture her.

The higher parent. As has been mentioned, the parental voice internalized by children of dysfunctional families is very critical, more often destructive than nurturing. In addition, few of us were parented the way we wanted to be. As part of healing, we seek the love and affirmation we missed and still yearn for. We seek them from others, but the most important and reliable source is within, our higher parent.

Visualizing the higher parent is a way of personalizing the part of our adult self that is capable of unconditional love. Our inner parent can profoundly fill the emotional needs of both our adult self and our inner child, for he knows far more about what is required and the best way to provide it. In fact, with the exception of our heavenly parents, our inner parent is the most reliable source of nurturance available to us, if we consistently take the time to connect with him.

The inner guide or wise one. Most people have had the experience of suddenly knowing the solution to some problem or the decision that must be made in a difficult situation. They refer to such incidents as hunches or intuition. Wise one or inner guide refer to the part of self from which such knowledge comes. They describe our spirit consciousness, which still remembers the truths learned in the premortal existence and which has access to what might be termed universal knowledge.

When we work at establishing a connection with our inner guide, we are actively and directly seeking knowledge that comes through alternate ways of knowing, such as intuition, ways of knowing more valid in some circumstances than logic or scientific method.

Luke 17:21 tells us, "The kingdom of God is within you." That is a difficult concept for many people to grasp since they rarely take time to be aware of what is going on in the various levels of their inner selves. But the words are not merely a figure of speech. They reflect an important spiritual reality. The aspects of our nature described in this section are part of that spiritual reality. Taking the time to know them, and thereby ourselves, well and truly is not an indulgence; it is part of the path by which we enter that kingdom.
