Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 19

The Four Rs

The four steps in the healing process we've talked about so far give a good general idea of the basic elements in each person's search for wholeness. To review, they are (1) facing the facts about our childhood, (2) feeling the feelings we have denied, in some cases for years, (3) dealing with the issue of forgiveness as is appropriate to the situation, and (4) learning how to get and give appropriate help.

These first steps, as has been mentioned, are not completed in a one-time effort. As events in our present life bring up issues of the past, we find it necessary to go through them again. This is to be expected and is not a detriment to the process as a whole.

However, some adult children become stuck on this level. They find some payoff in treading the same ground over and over. Perhaps they become addicted to the heightened emotions. Perhaps they fear the kind of substantial change required in the next steps. Whatever the reasons, some do not make real progress despite attending groups, getting therapy, and reading numerous books. They become intellectually knowledgeable about dysfunction without doing the emotional work. As a phrase commonly used in 12-step programs puts it: They talk the talk, but they don't walk the walk.

One way to ensure that we do not get stuck is to do some of the activities designed to change our thought and behavior patterns. They fall into categories I call the four Rs: reconnecting, reparenting, releasing, and restructuring.

What follows is an introduction to these concepts and the kinds of tasks leading to change that are typical of each. You may choose to do some of the activities as they are described here. Or you may use the information in searching out classes, groups, or books that work with a specific area in depth.

Reconnecting

Reconnecting with our divided selves is accomplished through a variety of right-brain activities such as visualization and journal-writing.

Visualization. Visualization is the process by which we allow images from our right brain or our subconscious into our conscious minds. Typically, we begin with a relaxation technique, which puts us in a calm and receptive frame of mind. We then move on to the visualization itself, which in this instance is designed to support the goal of reconnecting. We might visualize our inner child, for example, and carry on a conversation with her. We might ask her what she needs from us and offer her the comfort she has been longing for. If we need guidance in some area, we might visualize our higher parent and ask for advice.

This inner dialogue is quite different from the normal conversations we have with ourselves on a daily basis. The images and information we receive in this process come from our subconscious, which is a vast storehouse of information we are not consciously aware of. In addition, listening to and relying on the inner self (as in meditation or prayer) also seems to be a part of connecting with the Spirit, and thus gives us access to the source of universal truth. For these reasons, directions that we receive in this manner are quite different from the conclusions we might arrive at using a rational thought process.

Journal writing. The kind of journal one writes as a reconnecting activity is not the kind that becomes a part of family history. It is a private, as opposed to a public, journal—what one journal-writer refers to as a "burn-at-my-death" journal, in which anything and everything goes. The kind of journal-writing we do in such a book is therefore quite cathartic. By putting our feelings into words we not only understand them better, we can more easily let go of them.

If a piece of blank paper is intimidating, you might want to try timed writing. Set your kitchen timer for five minutes and write until it rings. Once you start, don't stop no matter how clumsy your words seem to you. Rarely does a session end without some positive effect. If you need to have a starting point, give yourself a topic such as your earliest memories or emotionally significant events relating to one of your particular issues.

Reparenting

Reparenting activities are designed to give us what we wanted from our parents but didn't get. As part of growing up and healing, we learn to provide for ourselves what we need, rather than wait for someone else to provide it for us.

Affirmations. Affirmations are a powerful way to reparent. Adult children may never have heard parental statements that affirmed their worth, such as "I like you," "I'm glad you're here," "You're nice to be around," "You have a place in this home." Statements like these tell us that we are worthy of love and respect just because we are human beings. When we say something affirmative, we give that message to the inner child, who is hungry to hear them.

We can make affirmations in several different ways. They are particularly powerful when combined with visualization, for then we connect a visual image with the positive statement. For example, the affirmation "I am lovable and loving" may be thought or spoken while imagining ourselves responding to a situation in a lovable and loving way. Visualizing an affirming event we always wished had happened, such as hearing a parent say, "I love you," is also powerful.

Affirmations can be written as well. For example, we can write our own bill of rights, including such statements as "I have the right to be happy" and "I have the right to make mistakes." Or we can affirm our worth by writing ourselves permission slips allowing us to have fun and enjoy life, even though we aren't perfect: "I, Carroll Morris, give myself permission to play, even if the wash isn't caught up."

Sometimes we may get frustrated or even angry that we have to do these things for ourselves. We wish that someone else would notice our needs and take care of us! But continuing to hope that others—parents, spouses, or even children—will do so is a sad waste of time, especially for adult children whose parents may never have dealt with the dysfunction in the family. The fact is, no one, not even the best parents, can fill all our emotional needs. Coming to grips with that fact is sad. We grieve over the loss of the myth that others can make us happy. But recognizing the loss, processing it, and moving on to take care of ourselves are major aspects of healing.

Self-care. Most of us don't really know what nurturing ourselves means. Some of us confuse nurturing with self-indulgence. Indulgence makes us feel good for the moment. Nurturing makes us feel good on a deeper and more enduring level. For example, a man who snuggles under the covers for another five minutes when he is already late for an important appointment isn't nurturing himself, he's indulging himself. A more appropriate response would be for him to get up early so he could eat a good breakfast, get dressed without rushing, and arrive at work with time enough to prepare mentally for the meeting ahead. The latter choice would reflect appropriate self-care.

While some of us confuse self-indulgence with nurturing, others believe that self-care is indulgence. They believe that taking a nap when they are tired is indulgence, that taking the time to exercise, read, play, or pursue a favorite hobby is indulgence. They thus deny themselves the sort of activities that are enriching.

In the process of reparenting, we learn to nurture and care for the tender, vulnerable self within. We respond to the needs of the inner child for comfort and reassurance, play, spontaneity, excitement, and humor. As part of our healing, we learn to laugh again. We also learn to better recognize and take care of our physical needs.

Releasing

An important part of changing the way we think about things is learning to let go of attitudes and behaviors that create barriers between us and others. That process is called releasing.

A critical step toward releasing is learning to think about our expectations differently. Expectations are the shoulds and oughts from our list that we project upon others. They are the things we think we must do and others must do for us to feel okay. For example, a person might expect that his or her children must be smart, thin, popular and that they should serve missions. The spouse must be good-looking, successful, and well-thought-of. The lawn must be green, the house, clean. If we learn to think of these and other must-haves as preferences, we find it easier to let go of perfectionistic standards that may be making us and our loved ones unhappy.

As we begin letting go of expectations, we find it easier to release other attitudes and behaviors, such as judging, fixing, controlling, and manipulating. However, since much of our parenting may be based on these attitudes and behaviors, we may at first feel that we are abdicating our role as parents. That is not the case, however. We do not cease loving and supporting those around us when we let go. Rather, we cease trying to fix them—to solve all their problems the way we think they should be solved.

Remembering the popular Serenity Prayer can help us let go of things that are not in our power to change: "Lord, grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, the courage to change the things I can, and the wisdom to know the difference."

Restructuring

Once we have done some work with reconnecting, reparenting, and releasing, we begin to sense the need for a new structure of thought and action that supports the work we have already accomplished. In restructuring, we examine our old speech and thought patterns, then work toward replacing them with new, more appropriate speech and thought patterns. The process includes some of the following points (these are popular topics in continuing-education classes, personal-growth seminars, and self-help books):

Clarifying values: Deciding what things are important to us, what we want out of life and in our relationships.

Creating proper boundaries: Learning to differentiate between our opinions, feelings, and problems and the opinions, feelings, and problems that really belong to others.

Changing the way we talk to others: Learning appropriate ways of communicating what we think, feel, and want. Learning how to say no.

Changing the way we talk to ourselves: Learning how to combat negative self-talk. Restructuring our thoughts in more positive patterns.

Doing any of these restructuring activities is impossible without developing a life-style based on awareness. We need to become more aware of what we are feeling and thinking at any given moment; we need to be more aware of the result we want out of a situation. Only then can we make appropriate decisions on how to act.

The process of becoming aware of what we do and why we do it is a process of spiritual growth. Unconscious patterns (natural-man responses) are a block to spirituality. The more we become aware of our negative thoughts and behavior patterns, the more we become able to choose actions that are Christlike.
