Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Chapter 20

Creating a Daily Program

Once adult children have worked through some of the emotional issues of dysfunction and taken steps toward reconnection, reparenting, releasing, and restructuring, they often feel ready to move on with their lives. They know that they aren't really finished with those issues, but they have gained some measure of peace. They want to reenter the flow of normal life and progress from healing to growth.

Adult children find that devising and working some sort of daily program helps keep them clear and current as they move back into life. This is critical if they are to avoid falling into the patterns from the past that enslaved them. The daily program can either be one they have devised themselves, incorporating what they have learned about dysfunction and the needs of adult children, or it can be one adopted from a helping organization such as a 12-step group.

It is important to note that following a daily program is different from "doing the checklist," because the program has been chosen, not imposed. And the elements are supportive of the individual's desire for growth, not the system's desire for status quo.

Unfortunately, the kinds of daily programs that many Church members struggling with dysfunction create for themselves often focus on increased activity as a way of dealing with personal pain. They rely on will power and rigid control to solve problems or to deal with compulsive/addictive behavior. Sometimes well-meaning local leaders reinforce this tendency. Lacking an understanding of the complexities of dysfunction, they have counseled those in pain to go home, read their scriptures, say their prayers, try to love their spouse, and serve someone else more needy. While every one of those suggestions has value, they do not address the issues that cause dysfunction.

A personal program designed to keep us moving in the right direction will include activities supporting each of the following issues of adult children:

Â living in the now

Â increasing spirituality

Â providing self-care

Â dealing with addictive/compulsive behavior

Â improving our relationships

Living in the Now

How many of us spend our lives living either in the future or in the past? We either worry about what may happen or we agonize over what has happened. In either case, we replay a scenario over and over, concocting alternate versions. We can get so caught up in this that we lose sight of the only part of our life that is real, and that is this moment.

Living in the now requires that we be honest about what we think, feel, and want and that we allow others to be honest also. Living in the now means that we focus on what is, not what if. We cease blaming others for our actions or emotions and take responsibility for our choices. By doing so, we set down the burden of past events and the desire for future recompense or retribution.

When we live in the now, we do not put off repentance or forgiveness, for we understand that there is only one proper time for them: this very moment. Guilt and the desire for revenge are thus not carried over from one moment into the next. I have the feeling that those who are aware, who are focused and committed enough to repent and forgive in the second that sin or insult occurs, come as close to achieving perfection in this life as possible.

Meditation is a practice that helps us to live in the now by teaching us how to keep our thoughts focused. Meditation is simple yet hard. One effective approach is to begin by sitting in a comfortable posture and consciously quieting your body. Focus on the rhythm of your breathing. Observe the activities of your mind. It can be a real education! You'll be amazed at the range of things your mind will come up with. Some will have to do with your tasks of the day or your plans for the week. Others will be tied into what is happening in your relationships. Still others will be old, old companions, thoughts that have been with you off and on for many years. Such thoughts will keep you engaged on the natural-man level. When you are feeling fearful, worried, guilty, or ashamed, there is no room in your consciousness for anything else.

Your first impulse as you watch your thoughts will probably be to change them in some way. That is not necessary. All that is necessary is to be aware of your thoughts, to acknowledge them—and then let them pass by without investing any energy into them. Others will follow in an unending parade. In fact, it has been said that "meditation is just one insult after another."

There is one caution for abuse victims, however. The thoughts or pictures coming into your mind may concern events that you are incapable of dealing with on your own. If they become too disturbing, you can stop the process by bringing yourself back to the present and opening your eyes.

Meditation gives us a clear understanding of the working of our minds. It allows us to acknowledge the issues we have held onto for years. It gives us the chance to observe dispassionately—and then let go. In addition, meditation strengthens our ability to be a detached witness or observer, which will help us to maintain a neutral stance in the middle of a family drama or during other negative patterns of behavior.

Increasing Spirituality

Meditation can also help us increase our spirituality. When we meditate regularly, the mind becomes quiet. We are then in a state conducive to receiving the promptings of the Holy Spirit. In fact, meditating regularly can be viewed as evidence of our desire for spiritual experiences, because by doing so, we invite them into our lives.

President David O. McKay wrote, "Meditation is one of the most secret, most sacred doors through which we pass into the presence of the Lord." [^1] Church programs tend to emphasize the practical, rational aspects of the gospel rather than the mystical and contemplative aspects. Thus, it is critical for members to have some sort of daily practice that will encourage them, as the Lord said, to "be still and know that I am God" (D&C 101:16). In the quiet space created by consistent meditation, tapping into our essential selves, our eternal selves is possible. Coming closer to the light of Christ within us is also possible. Meditation indicates our desire for spiritual experiences by making a place for them in our lives.

Much of the work of developing and increasing spirituality rests with the individual. Each must put forth effort to read scriptures, pray, fast, and serve. However, the organization of the Church provides important support. For example, one of the primary purposes of attending sacrament meeting is to worship the Father and the Son. Sunday School classes cover the Standard Works each four years, giving us the opportunity to read, ponder, and discuss the scriptures. Fast-and-testimony meetings provide an opportunity to draw nearer to the Spirit, to help those in need, and to express our gratitude to our Heavenly Father. More importantly, the organized Church gives us access to priesthood blessings and gospel ordinances.

It should be mentioned that this approach to church activity differs substantively from the perfectionistic, checklist-oriented approach. In this case, the Church and its programs are seen as means, not as ends in themselves. Activity in the Church is then our aid to growth, not (as it can be) a way of being so busy that the real issues don't have to be faced.

Balance is the key. The structure and support offered by the Church is important, and we need to take advantage of them. But they can't take the place of the inner, solitary work of developing spirituality.

Providing the Nurture and Self-care We Need

Our daily program needs to include taking some time for ourselves—and the first thing we need to do during that time is discover what we need! Do we feel tired? We need to rest. Do we feel lonely? We need someone to give us a hug. Do we feel that people are taking advantage of us? We need to state our feelings clearly and indicate what we would like to see happen. Whether our needs are physical, emotional, or spiritual, awareness is the first step toward getting them filled.

Some of our needs we can fill ourselves. We are the only ones who can make sure we eat properly and get enough exercise and sleep. We are the only ones who can say no when we are feeling overwhelmed. We are the only ones who can make sure we have proper medical and dental care.

But there are other needs that are associated with relationships. In those cases, it is up to us to express those needs clearly and tell the person involved how we would like him or her to respond. This is true whether the situation involves a family member, a coworker, or our Church calling. Our needs often go unmet when we expect those around us to guess at what they are. They may still go unmet—but we have no control over that. All we have control over is our own response to our own needs.

My husband, Gary, and I have our wedding anniversary in late May. Since it is typically an extremely busy time of year for us, there have been many times when we could not do much more to celebrate than exchange cards and have a nice meal together. As our twentieth anniversary approached, however, I realized that I wanted a special celebration. I dropped a few hints to Gary, but I had no idea whether he would act on them. Then one afternoon I went for a walk with a good friend of mine. Our whole time together was spent discussing the fiasco of her wedding anniversary, which had recently come and gone. I realized then that if I was really serious about wanting to observe our anniversary with some special activity, I would have to express my expectations clearly rather than hinting and hoping! The result was a lovely occasion that we both remember fondly.

Taking care of ourselves shows that we care for ourselves. A clear signal that we have slipped into feelings of worthlessness or have reverted to codependence is behavior that runs counter to our own well-being. In that case, we may need to get back in touch with ourselves by reprocessing some of the issues we discovered when working with the 4 Rs.

We not only need to take care of the adult self, we need to make sure the inner child is receiving the nurturing she needs. Moving on with our lives does not mean that we give her a pat on the head and send her to play in the sandbox by herself. We need to go play with her. In fact, maintaining connection with the inner child is absolutely critical. If we do the work of reconnecting, only to turn our backs on that part of self, we will be back to where we started. Actually, we will be in a worse position, for our inner child will not trust us when we make overtures again.

Remaining open, current, and clear when our inner child is angry is impossible, and making connections with our spiritual self when she is demanding attention is also difficult. When we nurture ourselves, that is, when we take time to do things we deeply enjoy or that satisfy some of our needs, we also nourish the inner child.

Dealing with Addictive/Compulsive Behavior

Most of us from dysfunctional families have some sort of compulsive or addictive behaviors. As part of a program for getting and staying healthy, we need to make a commitment to managing or eliminating our addiction. This requires that we be honest about what it is, especially if it is an "acceptable" addiction such as working, jogging, reading, or fixing.

The cycle of indulgence leads to shame, which leads to more indulgence. In the case of substance abuse or compulsive behavior, a commitment to abstinence helps to break that cycle. Of course, it isn't as easy as saying, "I'm not going to do that anymore." If it were, no one would have a problem with addictions. In addition, abstinence is not necessarily the solution when one is addicted to something that is destructive only when carried to extremes or done compulsively, such as eating or exercising.

The kind of support offered by group therapy or a 12-step program is indispensable. Kicking an addiction is generally not a do-it-yourself project. 12-step programs help in other ways beyond directly addressing the addictive behavior. They address many codependency issues and help participants develop trust in God. One LDS woman remarked, "I go to my 12-step meeting to be spiritually fed."

Improving Our Relationships

The relationship issues of adult children do not go away. We must keep working with the issues that have kept us from being truly intimate. That means we continue to be aware of the fears and ghosts from the past that inhibit us.

Improving our relationships with others. It is vital that we continue to be clear about what feels good to us, what we need, and what we won't accept in terms of behavior from others who are important to us, whether family member, sweetheart, or friend. In addition, we need to invest the time and energy necessary into maintaining relationships. Two ways of doing that are being present for others when they need us and asking forgiveness of them when appropriate.

Improving ourselves. We can improve our skills in areas of interest. We can use our imagination to stretch our minds. We can take nonthreatening risks and try something new.

Reaching out to others. As we begin to heal, we realize what a wonderful gift has been granted us. Our desire to reach out to others, to serve them in whatever way we can increases. Reaching out is a way for victims of physical and sexual abuse to empower themselves. They can take a stance against abuse in their personal life, speak to groups on abuse, man hot lines, or help other victims go through the grief stages that they themselves have experienced. They thus encourage the healing of others who are wounded.

However, it bears reiterating that we must also be aware of our limitations. If we feel ourselves being drawn into a codependent relationship or if some of our own issues are resurfacing strongly, it is a good idea to help the individual find another "buddy" or support person.

Having a daily program helps us to keep current, to keep our emotional pathways unclogged and our spirits unburdened. It keeps us focused on the tasks that help us maintain balance. It moves us forward by encouraging us to engage in growth-promoting activities. If we slacken or feel ourselves slipping, we know what to do, because we have learned during our healing process what works for us. And if a particular part of our program stops working for any reason, we change it by finding new activities that support our interests and goals. It is, after all, our program.

---
Notas:
[^1] "Consciousness of God: Supreme Goal of Life," Improvement Era, June 1967, 80.
