Carroll Hofeling Morris, If the Gospel Is True, Then Why Do I Hurt So Much? Help for Dysfunctional Latter-day Saint Families ( 1991)

Following the Vision

Chapter one of this book begins with the words, "Nothing is so painful as realizing the gap between what can be and what is. That realization is especially painful in regard to family life." It is especially painful because much of what gives our lives meaning is bound up in relationships, family relationships in particular. We yearn and strive for the sweetness that unconditional love and peace offer. But many of us have not been entirely successful in our efforts.

The changes that we long for come as we confront beliefs and attitudes that have kept us stuck in negative, destructive behaviors and as we work at changing them. We find, however, that change does not come all at once: We take one step forward and two back; we fail, but we try again. In the process we learn ways of relating that bring more positive results.

What keeps us going when we're not making the kind of progress we wish for? A clear vision of what we really want in our lives and in our relationships. In his "Making Things Happen" seminars, therapist Roger Allen encourages participants to find their own inner vision and make a commitment to live by it. [^1] Held to over time, a true commitment to such an inner vision becomes more compelling than past patterns and justifications.

Inner vision has the power to help us change our attitudes and behaviors because it comes from that part of us sensitive to things of the Spirit. Our longings are always for something better, our struggle is always upward. Even when we experience contentment, enjoyment, and everyday happiness, we sense that there is yet something more. An impulse inherent in our natures as children of God prompts us to reach upward even beyond happiness to joy—the kind of joy that is spoken of in the scriptures, the kind that comes when we fulfill the nature of our being, which is godliness.

Those moments when we are able to transcend our past patterns and act from love give us a taste of that joy. They reinforce our vision and imbue us with the strength to continue our quest.

And it is of utmost importance that we do continue, for the work we do will have an effect not only on us personally, but also on our families now, in the future, and in the eternities. Viewed this way, the work of healing dysfunctional relationships is clearly and essentially a spiritual endeavor. More than that, it is a spiritual necessity. The gospel of Jesus Christ and the principles of family relationships point in the same direction. They are not in conflict with each other.

In spite of that fact, some turn away from the Church in their search for healing. They have been so wounded by certain member teachings and LDS societal pre- and proscriptions, or they have so little faith that the gospel can help them heal, that they no longer feel able to continue as active members. This is unfortunate, for the gospel gives us a strong and sure foundation upon which to stand while we make the first uncertain forays in the direction of healing. At a time when we are forced to examine and question many aspects of our lives, it provides a much-needed anchor.

Gospel-based Principles of Relationships

From the scriptures we know that the highest principles governing relationships are eternal worth, the freedom to choose, and the power of love to influence for good. These principles also govern healing. Although they have been discussed previously, they are important enough to merit a short restatement here.

Eternal worth. Intelligence, the very stuff that forms our essence, cannot be created or made. It is coeternal with God (see D&C 93:29). It is light and truth. It is, in fact, the glory of God (see D&C 93:36). We then, in our pure state, contribute to God's glory. No wonder he enjoins us to "Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God" (D&C 18:10).

Eternal worth thus springs not from accomplishment, but from being, from our very essence as eternal entities. This knowledge forms the bedrock upon which we can stand when buffeted by questions that cut to the core of our existence.

The freedom to choose. The freedom to choose is one of the rules of creation upon which this world was based. According to Doctrine and Covenants 93:30, intelligence is "independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself. . . . Otherwise there is no existence." In addition, we read in Helaman 14:30, "Ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold, God hath given unto you a knowledge and he hath made you free."

Our ability to choose is mitigated by our circumstances, however. The combined influence of environment, health, education, genetic makeup, and other factors limits our arena of choice. Yet within that arena we can choose in favor of faith, health, wholeness, and love. As we continue to make appropriate choices and act upon them, the arena becomes ever larger. The ability to choose is thus an integral part of the growth process.

It is so important, in fact, that God himself supports us so that we may "live and move and do according to [our] own will" (Mosiah 2:21). He does so, even when we choose to act in opposition to his will. This is a powerful indication of the importance of agency. It has equally powerful implication for the way we conduct ourselves in our relationships. It teaches us that there is no place in the eternal scheme of things for the use of force, coercion, manipulation, or any other means of making someone act against his will to fill someone's expectations. What do we use instead? The power of love.

The power of love. The scriptures tell us that "no power or influence can or ought to be maintained . . . , only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; . . . reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved . . . ; that he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death" (D&C 121:41-44).

Love is the most powerful force in the universe. The statement sounds trite, but scripture and the experiences of seekers throughout the centuries support it. The single greatest commandment is to love God, others, and ourselves (see Matt. 22:37-39; John 13:34), for love is a great power in the service of good. Love can transform. Love can heal.

Dostoyevsky had a vision of the power of love to heal and transform. He wrote: "I have seen it, seen it, and the living image of it has filled my soul forever. In one day, one hour, everything could be arranged at once! The chief thing is to love." [^2]

So many of us seek to change ourselves and others by negative means. We cajole. We bribe. We criticize and condemn. We manipulate and control. None of these results in permanent change for the better. In fact, they create an atmosphere of fear, which limits rather than encourages growth. On the other hand, unconditional love creates an atmosphere in which the soul can expand. When we are free of fear, we can see more clearly. New avenues of action open up, new choices present themselves.

As we begin to take our first steps toward healing, we think of these principles primarily in regard to their effect on us personally. But as we continue to progress, we begin to see that they must apply to all. This realization forces us to take a critical look at the way we relate to our families, friends, and colleagues, and beyond that to how we relate to the cashier, the driver in front of us, and stranger on the street. We begin to ask ourselves some of the following questions:

Â Do I see others as stereotypes of certain attributes or as individuals of eternal worth?

Â Do I allow those around me the freedom to make their own choices, or do I try to force my preferences on them by controlling or manipulative behavior?

Â Do I seek first to love others, or do I attempt first to change them into something I deem lovable?

In the eternities, relationships—including those in eternal families and celestial society—will be built upon these principles. The family that strives, however imperfectly, to implement them will reflect to some degree what is possible in the eternities.

Gospel-based Principles of Healing

Not only does the gospel teach principles of human relationships, it teaches principles of healing. The essence of the gospel is healing, or the Atonement. The gospel provides the necessary tools of faith, repentance, and the gift of the Holy Ghost to heal the separation resulting from the Fall.

How do these tools contribute to healing? Faith in the mission of Christ allows us to hope, and that hope gives us the courage to get up each morning and try again, sometimes in the face of seemingly insurmountable obstacles. The process of repentance gives us a way to harness the power of the Atonement and deal appropriately with guilt. It frees us of guilt's burden, opening us to the mercy and love of God, and encouraging us to be merciful and loving to others. The gift of the Holy Ghost blesses us with an ever-present guide who will teach, direct, and bring to remembrance things once learned at the feet of God.

The ordinances of the gospel provide us the means by which we bring the power of these principles into our lives. Baptism gives us the opportunity to enter into the path of healing through a covenant with our Father in Heaven. Partaking of the sacrament thoughtfully and worthily brings the power of the Spirit into our lives on a regular basis. It also helps us to remain humble and receptive. Receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands creates a unique relationship between the individual and this member of the Godhead.

The institution of the Church offers us the opportunity to enter into these ordinances. It provides us a forum in which to actualize our spirituality. It provides programs that support our personal and family goals and a social structure in which our chosen way of life is validated. Whatever difficulties individuals face, even including difficulties arising from member teachings or LDS cultural values, they can be addressed and worked through within the context of the gospel and the Church.

Transcendent Living

The hope that the gospel gives us all is that through our own efforts, the guidance of the Spirit, the power of the Atonement, and the love of God, we will be able to transcend the natural-man behaviors that have bound us in sorrow.

What will our lives look like when we begin to approach that state? Probably not much different from the way they look now. We will still have to earn a living, keep our homes clean and repaired, go shopping, cook meals and clean up afterward, do the washing, care for others, and fill our Church callings. Such a life will feel different, however, for our actions will be motivated by trust in the mission of Christ, the principle of agency, the worth of souls, and love of God, self, and others.

Transcendent living is in some aspects harder than simply following the checklist. It requires us to be highly sensitive to ourselves and to the Spirit. It requires us to take the time for whatever practices keep us grounded or rooted in love and in Jesus Christ (see Eph. 3:17; Col. 2:7). As we strive to do those things, love will teach us a new way to live.

In The Broken Covenant, Kathy, who is at last on her way to recovery, says, "Love's imperatives are internal, and the Spirit is teaching me what those imperatives are." [^3] It is my conviction that healing our dysfunctional relationships will bring us closer to this transcendent ideal, closer to living the law of love and ultimately closer to Zion: to being of one heart and one mind.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Roger Kallen and Randy K. Hardman, Making Things Happen, on cassette (Aurora: Human Development Institute, Inc., 1989).
[^2] Fyodor Dostoyevsky, as quoted in Marilyn Ferguson, The Aquarian Conspiracy (Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, Inc., 1980), 402.
[^3] Carroll Hofeling Morris, The Broken Covenant (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1985).
