The Hill Cumorah, where the Plates of the Book of Mormon were Concealed by Moroni and afterwards Delivered by him to Joseph Smith.--Some Valuable History Pertaining to this Thrice-named Hill.

A beautiful picture of the Hill Cumorah is presented on the opposite page. The hill is situated in the northwestern part of New York, about thirty miles south of Rochester. It is also near the New York Central Railroad, and only three and a half miles from Palmyra station to the south, and on the Canandaigua turnpike.

This noted hill has been three times named and by three distinct and great nations. For particulars concerning its historical importance we begin our study in the year 1823. At that time there was found in the side of this historic hill, by an obscure boy, a number of gold plates. These plates were very ingeniously concealed in a stone box and, bearing a record and being now translated, supply us with all the earlier information contained on them.

There is a vast amount of valuable history pertaining to this hill, which is far more picturesque than the hills which surround it. There is an extensive valley on the east, as well as one on the west side of the hill, where the turnpike runs south, passing through the town of Manchester in the rear of the hill about two miles. Manchester, as well as the Hill Cumorah, is situated in the township of Manchester. The most prominent view of the hill is its north front. It extends south nearly a mile, where it terminates into a more level plateau, which is occupied as an agricultural district. From the highest point of the hill, which is the northern end, where the writer has stood a number of times, is one of the most lovely sights imaginable. To the east is the New York Central Railroad, about four miles north is a most lovely town named Palmyra, and two miles northwest is where the father of Joseph Smith located a farm when the latter was only twelve years of age. Finally, the whole country surrounding the hill from the most elevated spot, as far as the natural vision can grasp, is indeed a most charming scene of farms, orchards, houses, barns and rolling hills, with occasional forests, and in the proper season, fields of golden grain, barns well-filled, orchard trees laden with apples, peaches and pears, with here and there patches of strawberries, raspberries, blackberries, cherries, currants and garden vegetables in variety. All of these beautiful scenes have engraven upon my mind a picture which defies the artist's brush to place on canvas.

[Image: The Hill Cumorah.]

The first name given to this hill (and by a lost nation who left the Tower of Babel 2000 B.C.) was Ramah, as found in their history, page 606, new edition. This history is called the Book of Mormon, and this portion is written by a historian named Ether.

It was named the second time by an entirely different people, and called Cumorah, as found on page 559, new edition, of the same book, by the historian whose name was Mormon.

The third name is Bible Hill, or Mormon Hill, and was given in the year 1829.

Having studied the history of these lost nations, I felt very much inclined to gratify the desires awakened in my bosom to visit the place. Impelled by these aspiration, I undertook the journey and soon found myself at a pleasant and commodious hotel in Palmyra.

Early on a summer's morning in the year 1870, after a gentle shower during the night, with just sufficient rainfall to lay the dust, I set out to walk to the hill. Never can I forget the lovely scenery of that lonely but interesting walk down the most excellent Canandaigua turnpike. Among the objects passed on the way was the former home of Joseph Smith, and the very old and comely schoolhouse where he learned some of his early lessons.

Arriving near the object of my morning's walk, I set bout inquiring for the Hill Cumorah. But not one could I find in all the country round who could give me the desired information; until one, and the right one too, who was made to comprehend my mind and wish, said, "Is it Mormon Hill that you want, or what is more familiarly known among us in this country as 'Bible Hill,' where old Joe Smith found the Mormon Bible? Is it this place you wish to find?"

Having answered affirmatively the question, I was not only enabled, by my friend's direction, to learn the third and last name given to this hill, but to find myself standing upon the summit of one of the most interesting objects of my 100,000 miles' travel. It appeared more like a dream than a stern reality. Could it be possible that here was the identical spot of ground where stood a being who had lived in the fourth century, some fourteen hundred and fifty years prior to my occupying this position? Indeed, it was verily true. But, oh! the wonderful contrast between the two views, and the changes of scenery in that time! Now a beautiful landscape: such a one as delights the vision, until the mind becomes swallowed up and absorbed in deep reflection. There are beauties of hills and dales, orchards and farms, lawns and gardens on every side, more especially to the north, east and west. Just for a moment cast your eye on the engraving, which is the one of my choice, exhibiting, as it does, a north front, and to my mind the most lovely view of all. There are differing pictures of this hill, some real and some imaginary. The one presented is from a painting made from a photograph which Apostle F. D. Richards had taken while on a visit to this historic hill and country.

Some cows and other additions have been made to the picture, such as the carriage conveying the visitors along the roadway by the fence, to the house, where the owner of the hill and surroundings lives. But the main features of the hill are true representations of it, so much so that J. W. Fox, Jr., also Bishop G. H. Taylor, both of whom visited the place some years before, say it is the best picture of it that they have ever seen presented.

Brother Edward Hold, of South Jordan Ward had a vision of the hill (similar to the one the prophet Joseph Smith had), and described it very minutely before seeing the picture of it. He said, just above where he saw a portion of the top of the stone box there was a tree, and upon this point I interrogated him closely, stating that only two years previous Bishop Black, Brother Andrew Jenson and I had visited the spot of ground, and there was no tree there; but he insisted that there was a tree just above the stone box, a clumpy tree, for he saw one there. It became necessary for an explanation before he should see the picture.

At the period of discovery of the gold plates, there stood upon the side of the hill, about fifteen feet above where the stone box had so long reposed, a lone, solitary, sugar maple tree, and there continued to grow until twenty-two years ago, just as described by Brother Holt, who was so highly favored of God as to see the whole scene in a vision or dream.

What made Brother Holt's vision all the more deeply interesting to me was that in 1871 I had enjoyed the great privilege and pleasure of visiting the hill in person, and of seeing the very identical spot of ground where Mormon concealed the stone box and its precious records and where Moroni, his son, finished the writing and sealed up these records. But there was no tree standing there as was described in the vision, for it had been cut down shortly before and was lying on the ground, not having as yet been removed. It was a clumpy sort of a tree, about two feet in diameter. For a long time it had stood there like a solitary sentinel guarding the sacred spot which contained the book that was to shape the destinies of thousands upon thousands of the human race, and people the heavens with the true sons and daughters of God. I have always regretted the removal of that tree, for it was a conspicuous mark on the northwest point of the now almost treeless hill. After satisfying Brother Hold as to the absence of the tree, which he had seen in his vision, he very readily recognized the painting as being a correct and accurate representation of the deeply interesting Hill Cumorah as he had seen it in his vision forty years before.

Brother Holt, with respect to his vision, stated that he "had retired to bed, after reading the Book of Mormon, and that he had entertained some doubts regarding the vision Joseph Smith had of the hill, and of his finding the stone box containing the plates. But the vision which he had himself received concerning the matter served to remove every shadow of a doubt from his mind, for all future time. In the last chapter, written by Moroni just before closing or sealing up the box, he engraved upon the plates the following words: "And I seal up these records, after I have spoken a few words, by way of exhortation, unto you; behold, I would exhort you, that when ye shall read these things, if it be wisdom in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things. I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you." Brother Holt, as well as hundreds of others, can testify that these words are true and in consonance with the words of Jesus Christ himself, "Ask and it shall be given unto you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you," and also in accordance with the words of James, who says, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him," but "let him ask in faith, nothing wavering."

The boy Joseph did not ask in vain, neither will any other person ask in vain who asks in faith for the word of the Lord faileth not but endureth forever. My guide who accompanied me on my visit in 1871, pointed out to me many places of interest, and also entertained me hospitably at his table, where a number of harvesters had assembled. The covered carriage represented in the picture is conveying our party on my second visit to the house in which we all dined together, which is situated to the left of the painting. The dinner party to me was highly interesting, and all the more so as we sat conversing about the things of God right in the shadow of the Hill Cumorah. All spoke freely, and asked many questions, which I felt it a great pleasure to answer. They were anxious to hear something of the spread of the work since the gold plates were discovered in that remarkable hill, and I very gladly gratified them with a short account of the rise and progress of this "marvelous work and a wonder," from the day the angel visited Cumorah and gave the plates to Joseph, the boy-prophet, down to the present time, when the work has gathered into its cause some two hundred and fifty thousand Saints, and founded the Territory of Utah in the west. The conclusion come to by this party of harvesters was that the subject of our conversation was indeed a "marvellous work and wonder." Still, like many other time-servers and worldly-wise people, they felt their spirits weakening within them, and they exclaimed, "But Mormonism is so very unpopular!"

"Yes," I replied, "it has been so since the Jews and Gentiles murdered the Chief Shepherd."

Our pleasant entertainment and agreeable conversation here terminated, after bearing my testimony to the divinity of the restored gospel, and to the fact that more than fourteen hundred years ago the gold plates, that contained the same, were sealed up and deposited in this very hill, destined to come forth and revolutionize the world, in these latter days. Cordially bidding good-day to my hospitable host, I proceeded on my way, and found an old gentleman who lived west of the hill and who was quite agreeable and conversational on the subject of my visit to Cumorah. He was well-acquainted with some of the history of the coming forth of the book which was to "speak out of the ground," although spiritually, he did not seem to have greatly benefited by this "marvelous work and a wonder." Still, from him I gleaned some useful information. He pointed out the spot of ground where the stone box was placed, near the summit, and on the west side of the point of the hill. He likewise stated that soon after the rumor so widely spread regarding "Joe" Smith finding a gold bible, that there was great excitement throughout the whole country, and that it was about this time the Rochester Company located and searched for hidden treasure.

Questioning him closely he stated that he had seen some good-sized flat stones that had rolled down and lay near the bottom of the hill. This had occurred after the contents of the box had been removed and these stones were doubtless the ones that formerly composed the box. I felt a strong desire to see these ancient relics and told him I would be much pleased to have him inform me where they were to be found. He stated that they had long since been taken away. He further said that he knew "Joe" Smith as a "money digger" and a "visionary man" and Martin Harris as an honest reliable farmer. Joseph in his history says that he worked in a mine for Mr. Stowel, hunting for hidden treasures, at fourteen dollars per month, hence his name as a money-digger. I then inquired if he ever knew Joseph Smith to be convicted of crime. He replied that he had not known him as having been convicted. The surrounding scenery, which embraced a young grove of beech, sugar maple, hickory, oak, bass-wood, etc., covering about five acres of ground, was very beautiful. The grove is about 200 yards southwest of where the plates were found. There was a fine, well-cultivated field of grain on the hillside. My loquacious guide showed me another and much deeper cavity made on the east side of the hill by the above-named Rochester treasure seekers, a company of prospectors. They said that science aided by mineral rods did not lie and that most assuredly there were rich treasures concealed in the hill, and they were determined to have them. But with all their science and laborious excavations they failed to get a glimpse of the coveted treasures and returned to their homes if not richer, at least it is to be hoped wiser men, for the only results of their efforts were the holes they left on the hillside. Notwithstanding this, there are strong and feasible reasons for believing that there is abundance of treasure hid up in Cumorah, but it is guarded by the hand of the Lord and none shall ever possess it until made known in the due time of the Lord. The great and mighty nation of the Jaredites, having departed from God and shed the blood of the prophets, became divided into bloodthirsty factions, who waged relentless and merciless wars against each other for many years; finally, after millions were slain, they arrayed themselves into two mighty opposing armies and mutually agreed to give each other four years in which to gather their entire forces of men, women and children around Ramah, and there make one last appalling death struggle for victory, but so well were these colossal armies matched in numbers, valor, fury and hatred that they continued to fight day after day till both sides were completely destroyed from the face of the land. One man of all these great and mighty armies alone remained alive. Ere they begin the dreadful carnage, they made excavations and hid up in Ramah their immense treasures.

The Lord again peopled the land and they too became haughty and lifted up in the pride of their hearts, renounced God and slew his prophets, and division, war and bloodshed again filled the land with horror. Once more were immense hosts arrayed into two great armies, the one called the Nephites, the other the Lamanites, and strange to say they also marshalled their forces, and undertook to make one last death struggle for victory or death. The battle ceased when the Nephites were destroyed, and again millions lay dead upon the fatal ground. The Jaredites' Ramah was the Nephites' Cumorah, and their ashes commingle and repose in death. Ere this last horrid conflict commenced, they, too, hid their untold treasures in this HIll Cumorah, and it was said by President Young at Farmington, Davis Co., Utah, June 17, 1877, just two months and twelve days before his death:

"There were a great many treasures hid up by the Nephites. * * * I lived right in the country where the plates were found from which the Book of Mormon was translated, and I know a great many things pertaining to that country. I believe I will take the liberty to tell you of another circumstance that will be as marvelous as anything can be. This is an incident in the life of Oliver Cowdery, but he did not take the liberty of telling such things in meeting as I take. I tell these things to you, and I have a motive for doing so. I want to carry them to the ears of my brethren and sisters, and the children also, that they may grow to an understanding of some things that seem to be entirely hidden from the human family. Oliver Cowdery went with the Prophet Joseph when he deposited these plates. Joseph did not translate all of the plates: there was a portion of these sealed which you can learn from the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. When Joseph got the plates, the angel instructed him to carry them back to the Hill Cumorah, which he did. Oliver says that when Joseph and Oliver went there, the hill opened, and they walked into a cave, in which there was a large and spacious room. * * * They laid the plates on a table; it was a large table that stood in the room. Under this table there was a pile of plates as much as two feet high, and there were altogether in this room more plates than probably many wagon loads; they were piled up in the corners and along the walls. * * * I tell you this as coming not only from Oliver Cowdery, but others who were familiar with it. * * * I relate this to you, and I want you to understand it. I take this liberty of referring to these things so that they will not be forgotten and lost.

"Carlos Smith was a young man of as much veracity as any young man we had, and he was a witness to these things. Samuel Smith saw some things, Hyrum saw a good many things, but Joseph was the leader. Now, you may think I am unwise in publicly telling these things, thinking perhaps I should preserve them in my own breast; but such is not my mind. I would like the people called Latter-day Saints to understand some little things with regard to the workings and dealings of the Lord with his people here upon the earth."--Journal of Discourses, Vol. 19, p. 36.

It was likewise stated to me by David Whitmer in the year 1877 that Oliver Cowdery told him that the Prophet Joseph and himself had seen this room and that it was filled with treasure, and on a table therein were the breastplate and the sword of Laban, as well as the portion of gold plates not yet translated, and that these plates were bound by three small gold rings, and would also be translated, as was the first portion in the days of Joseph. When they are translated much useful information will be brought to light. But till that day arrives, no Rochester adventurers shall ever see them or the treasures, although science and mineral rods testify that they are there. At the proper time when greed, selfishness and corruption shall cease to reign in the hearts of the people, these vast hoards of hidden treasure shall be brought forth to be used for the cause and kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Changing the scene once more another prophet, whose name was Mormon, stood on the summit of this hill. At that time a great and fierce battle was fought. After the conclusion of the battle, which occurred about 1472 years ago, Mormon's grief was expressed on this heart-rending and doleful scene as found on page 560 of their history in the Book of Mormon. We will here again refer to the great battle of the Lamanites and Nephites:

"And when they had gone through and hewn down all my people save it  were twenty and four of us, (among whom was my son Moroni) and we  having survived the dead of our people, did behold on the morrow, * * *  from the top of the hill Cumorah, the ten thousand of my people who  were hewn down, being led in the front by me. And we also beheld the  ten thousand of my people who were led by my son Moroni." (Mormon  6:11-12)

And other generals are named who led each their ten thousand until we reach the enormous number of two hundred and thirty thousand men, with their wives and children, who were strewn around this most marvelous hill:

"And their flesh, and bones, and blood lay upon the face of the earth,  * * * to moulder upon the land, and to crumble and to return to their  mother earth. And my soul was rent with anguish, because of the slain  of my people, and I cried: O ye fair ones, how could ye have departed  from the ways of the Lord! O ye fair ones, how could ye have rejected  that Jesus, who stood with open arms to receive you! Behold, if  ye had not done this, ye would not have fallen. But behold, ye are  fallen, and I mourn your loss. O ye fair sons and daughters, ye  fathers and mothers, ye husbands and wives, ye fair ones, how is it  that ye could have fallen! But behold, ye are gone, and my sorrows  cannot bring your return. And the day soon cometh that your mortal  must put on immortality, and these bodies which are now mouldering in  corruption must soon become incorruptible bodies; and then ye must  stand before the judgment seat of Christ, to be judged according to  your works; and if it so be that ye are righteous, then are ye blessed  with your fathers who have gone before you. O that ye had repented  before this great destruction had come upon you. But behold, ye are  gone, and the Father of heaven knoweth your state, and He doeth with  you according to His justice and mercy."

Before leaving the prophet Mormon standing on the hill in his  lamentation, let us still extend the vision over the great  battlefield, calling to mind that the 230,000 men were all soldiers,  then were their wives, mothers, fathers, brothers and sisters, which  we will multiply by five, making 1,150,000 souls; then extend the  vision over and around the enemy's camp, and at least double the  number of slain, increasing the sad scene to the enormous total of  2,300,000 souls. Only for a moment imagine that we see the camp just  before that great battle: twenty-three camps each of 10,000, with a  general at their head, would be required for the 230,000 soldiers.

While I was standing upon this same spot of ground about three years  ago, my mind contrasted the various changes of the present with the  past and I fancied that I could review, as did Mormon, the sad and  gloomy picture of his time, 1472 years ago.

The fathers of those who fell around this historic hill came from  Jerusalem 600 years B.C. They were warned of God to flee from the  land, because of the terrible calamities that were about to befall the  inhabitants of that once Holy City, for killing the prophets of God  and for their wickedness.

The decrees of God were fulfilled in the destruction of the  inhabitants of Jerusalem, after they crucified the Saviour and his  disciples, and became fully ripe in iniquity. But 600 years before  these disasters, the colony, who were directed by revelation, crossed  the sea, landing in South America, building up cities, migrating  northward, and leaving in their tracks northward many cities, temples,  massive walls, and fortifications, some of which have been discovered  by Catherwood and Stevens, as well as by many other historians; and  new discoveries are still being brought to light. Among the many  remarkable ruined aboriginal cities of the continent of America,  Palenque is one of the most noted. It is situated on the Rio Chacamas,  a branch of the great river Usumasinta, on the borders of Yucatan. It  is in latitude 17 degrees 30 minutes north, longitude 92 degrees 25  minutes west. In this old city of ruins is a temple--no doubt one of  the Nephite temples. The picture shows it as restored from the relics  that are left. It is built of stone and is at the base 310 feet long,  180 feet deep, and 25 feet high. Ranges of stone steps 30 feet broad  lead up to it, flanked with gigantic statues nine feet high, carved  in stone. There are numerous hieroglyphics engraven but considerably  defaced.

[Image: Palenque Restored.]

The Book of Mormon speaks of many temples and cities which were built  by the people of this time, and no doubt this is one of them in  ruins. But who is there that is able to tell the story of those mound  builders, excepting their own revealed history?

It must be remembered that this last nation, called Nephites, became  a very numerous people, and their history, which they were commanded  of the Lord to keep on thin plates of gold, informs us that while  they lived lives of purity, serving God prayerfully, they prospered  exceedingly.

The precious metals abounded on this new and promised land, so  beautifully described by the ancient prophet Moses. This man of God,  just before his death, blessed the children of Israel, and of Joseph,  he said:

"Blessed of the Lord be this land, for the precious things of heaven,  for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath, and for the  precious fruits brought forth by the sun, and for the precious things  put forth by the moon, and for the chief things of the ancient  mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting hills, and for  the precious things of the earth and fulness thereof, and for the good  will of him that dwelt in the bush let the blessing come upon the head  of Joseph, and upon the top of the head of him that was separated  from his brethren. His glory is like the firstling of his bullock,  and his horns are like the horns of unicorns: with them he shall push  the people together to the ends of the earth: and they are the ten  thousands of Ephraim, and the thousands of Manasseh."

Now, if we can successfully establish this continent of America as being the land spoken of by Moses--which is verily true--then we shall find not only those lost nations but the present generation dwelling on this land abounding in the good things found even in the lasting hills, and a choice land above all others.

As evidence I will introduce the words of our famed patriarch, Father Jacob:

"Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose  branches [children] run over the wall [the ocean]. The archers have  sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him, but his bow abode  in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands  of the mighty God of Jacob; from thence is the Shepherd, the stone of  Israel. Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by  the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above,  blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts,  and of the womb: The blessings of thy father have prevailed above  the blessings of my progenitors [Abraham and Isaac, whose land was  Jerusalem] unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills [Rocky  Mountains;] they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of  the head of him that was separate from his brethren [which was Joseph,  sold by his brethren into Egypt]."

Father Lehi and his son Nephi and others, just before crossing the sea, or wall of waters, to this choice land of Jacob, searched the records which were brought from Jerusalem and these are the words which they found recorded:

"And my father Lehi also found upon the plates of brass, a genealogy  of his fathers; wherefore he knew that he was a descendant of Joseph,  yea, even that Joseph who was the son of Jacob, who was sold into  Egypt, and who was preserved by the hand of the Lord, that he might  preserve his father, Jacob, and all his household from perishing with  famine. And they were also led out of captivity and out of the land of  Egypt, by that same God who had preserved them. And thus my Father,  Lehi, did discover the genealogy of his fathers."

While Father Lehi and those who were with him encamped on the borders of the Red Sea, by a command of the Lord the sons of Lehi returned to Jerusalem and succeeded in bringing Ishmael (a righteous Israelite of the "tribe of Ephraim") with his five marriageable daughters, to join the colony. They finally emigrated to America, literally fulfilling the words of Jacob with regard to Joseph's promised inheritance of the choice land that was to reach to the everlasting hills. By this new acquisition, the sons of Lehi were provided with wives, and that, too, of Ephraimitish blood, making the remnants of their line, who were discovered in the year 1492 by Christopher Columbus, of the lineage of Ephraim and Manassah, whose descendants are the American Indians. Thus are we provided with a history which every one should read and become acquainted with the origin of the natives of America, and find an explanation of the ruins found in North, South and Central America. Their history, translated from the gold plates, is now called the Book of Mormon. This book also gives a brief account of a previous nation, which left the Tower of Babel 2,000 years B. C., landing near the Gulf of California. They were 344 days in crossing the ocean. In process of time, they emigrated northward and finally became a great nation and people.

Here follows a few words as recorded in their history on page 571, chapter first, thirty-third verse:

"Jared came forth with his brother and their families, with some  others and their families, from the great Tower, at the time the Lord  confounded the language of the people and swore in his wrath that they  should be scattered upon all the face of the earth."

In addition to these words we will add the seventh and eighth verses of the eleventh chapter of Genesis:

"Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they  may not understand one another's speech. So the Lord scattered them  abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth."

I think America is a pretty large portion of the earth, and comes in for its share of people. According to the word of the Lord the people were scattered. Those who wish to follow this colony closely can read their history as found in the Book of Mormon until they had built up cities, etc., which have been and are being constantly discovered. In process of time they numbered about 15,000,000 people and became rich, wicked and ripe for destruction.

At one time a fierce battle was fought near where Buffalo, N. Y., now stands, wherein two million were lying strewn upon the earth, slain in battle and no one to bury them, till the stench drove them southward to the Hill Ramah, which was called Cumorah by the Nephite race. A contract was entered into between Kings Coriantumr and Shiz, giving Coriantumr four years to gather together all who were on the side of Coriantumr, and all for King Shiz were gathered together unto his camp. Ether has recorded in the Book of Mormon that:

"The army of Coriantumr did pitch their tents by the hill Ramah. And  it was that same hill where my Father Mormon did hide up the records  unto the Lord, which were sacred. * * * When they were all gathered  together, every one to the army which he would, with their wives and  their children, both men, women and children being armed with weapons  of war, having shields, and breast-plates, and head-plates, and being  clothed after the manner of war, they did march forth one against the  other to battle; and they fought all that day, and conquered not, and  when it was night they were weary, and retired to their camps; and  after they had retired to their camps, they took up a howling and a  lamentation for the loss of their people who were slain; their howling  and lamentation did rend the air exceedingly."

A continuation of this lamentable slaughter, with weeping and howling, was kept up for six successive days, till only thirty-two of the people of Shiz and twenty-seven of Coriantumr's were left, and on the seventh day Coriantumr with his twenty-seven retreated, which gave the opposing King Shiz fresh courage. He said, "I will slay Coriantumr or perish by the sword," and indeed his words were fulfilled after a severe battle, in which all were slain, excepting King Shiz, who had fallen faint and weak, and Coriantumr, who leaned upon his sword to rest, after which he smote off the head of Shiz and fell to the ground as if he was dead. Here the history leaves this, the only survivor of those two mighty armies, around this historic Hill Cumorah, thus bringing to pass the words of the prophet Ether, who prophecied to King Coriantumr that unless he and his people should repent, every one of them should be slain except himself and he should live to see a strange people possess the land and be buried by them. Now, in order to verify the prophet's words, I will refer you to the book of Omni, Book of Mormon, which says:

"And Coriantumr was discovered by the people of Zarahemla; and he  dwelt with them for the space of nine moons" (months).

Coriantumr, weak, wounded and alone, had to wend his way about 3,000 miles to Zarahemla, where he remained until his death and was buried by this strange people.

Thus ended two great nations around this historic hill, in fulfillment of God's word, as found in the Book of Mormon, page 474:

"Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it  [and this will apply to all people in every age] shall be free from  bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven,  if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ. I  will forgive thee and thy brethren of their sins, but thou shalt not  sin any more, for ye shall remember that my spirit shall not always  strive with man; wherefore if ye will sin until ye are fully ripe, ye  shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord."

This has been fulfilled to the very letter with both nations.
