Richard E. Bennett, We'll Find the Place: The Mormon Exodus 1846-1848 ( 1997)

xiiiPREFACE

xiiiIn this, the 150th anniversary of the exodus of the Latter-day Saints from Nauvoo, Illinois, to the shores of the Great Salt Lake in the Great Basin of the Rocky Mountains, it is fitting that a new religious history be attempted of that unforgettable chapter in American history. The trails and details, the chronologies and genealogies of that trek have been told and retold so many times and by so many gifted writers that one might think there is nothing noteworthy left to say. Such worthy predecessors as Hubert H. Bancroft, Andrew Jenson, B. H. Roberts, Preston Nibley, Dale Morgan, and more recently Wallace Stegner, Leonard J. Arrington, and Stanley Kimball have each contributed to our appreciation of the history and meaning of the exodus, of the gathering to Zion, and of America's modern Moses—Brigham Young. The story has also been widely heralded in song and poetry, in art and drama. And well it should be, for the coming of Brigham Young and his band of faithful followers was a defining moment in the history of Mormonism, of the state of Utah, and of America.

xiiiEach new generation, however, must wend its own way across the landscape of history and see and feel for itself what previous generations of writers saw and interpreted for their own time and place. While so much has been written, the surprise is that so much of the story has never been told. New manuscript sources continue to come to light, demanding not only a retelling but also a reinterpretation.

xivThis work, I submit, is not so much a study of the trail or of the trek but of a religious exodus of one of the 19th century's most persecuted and despised groups of religionists—the Latter-day Saints—who were bound neither for Oregon nor for California but either for survival or extinction. This was not just another march westward "across the wide Missouri" in fulfilment of America's Manifest Destiny; rather, it was a destiny in motion yet to be made manifest, for it was not at all certain that this enterprise of Joseph Smith Jr.—The Church of Jesus of Christ of Latter-day Saints—would ever survive to live a new day. The story of the Mormon exodus is that of a religion in torment desperately seeking to save itself from persecution, to rid itself of its own detractors and obstructionists, and to find itself in some unknown valley "far away in the West." It was Mormonism in the raw and on the move—forging a new identity while seeking a safe refuge in the tops of "the everlasting hills."

xivMissing in most earlier studies, for all their worth, is that peculiar yet essential combination of contemporary uncertainty amidst uncompromising conviction, the immediate risk of the moment, the fears and doubts of a faithful people wondering where they were going and whether or not they would survive the getting there. These 12,000 sick and bedraggled believers would either make it to wherever their new and untested leader took them or they would perish by the thousands in the wilderness and abandon their faith in a misspent expenditure of religious conviction.

xivThis work focuses on the original Pioneer Camp of 1847: on the leadership discussions and debates along the way, the march from Winter Quarters to the Great Basin, the earliest settlements in the valley, the Emigration Camp of the summer of 1847, and the return to Winter Quarters in late 1847. It ends in October 1848 with the first conference of the Church in the Salt Lake Valley. While some of my colleagues encouraged me to cover the entire migration era from 1847 to 1896, I deliberately chose to focus on only the 1846 to 1848 period. I did not select so restrictive a study because the later years were any less important, but because this less-than-two-year period served as the foundation to all that came after. Furthermore, much of what happened in these first two years has never been fully told or amply analyzed. In one sense, the exodus was over in 1848, just as the migrations began.

One cannot help but ponder on the many "what ifs" of this movement. What would have happened, for instance, if a suitable resting place had not been found or if the crops had failed in advance of the tide of oncoming emigrants? Or if the U.S. Army, as rumored, had interrupted their leaving before it began? And if Brigham Young had lost the confidence of his people or died of the Rocky Mountain fever that laid him so low at the very moment of discovery, what then? Either Brigham Young and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles would make it or Mormonism would likely go down. The ante was up. The Church was in flight, and in the absence of a certain tomorrow all that was left was the talent and inspiration of its leaders and the faith of its followers against the panorama of the great American desert.

xvIt was, then, as Brigham Young put it, "for the salvation of the Church" that they moved west. It was an enforced risk of enormous consequence, while detractors and defectors sat back in scornful glee. For Mormonism was now moving out of the way, finally—out of the encroaching circles of persecution and misunderstanding and into the scorching sun of a sagebrush wilderness. The miracle of the exodus may be less the finding of a place and more the following of so many people to a new nowhere. The past thematic of a "This Is the Place" must include a wider vision, a view of "This Is the People" and "This Is Their Faith."

xvHyppolite Taine, a French intellectual of the 1860s, gave tribute to their march in almost romantic terms:

xvSince the exodus of the Israelites there is no example of so great a religious emigration executed across such great spaces in spite of such obstacles, by so great a number of men, with so much order, obedience, courage, patience, and devotion. . . . But the mainspring of this great will was faith. Without it men would not have done such things. These exiles thought that they were founding the city of God, the metropolis of mankind. They considered themselves the renovators of the world. Let us remember our youth, and with what force an idea . . . merely by the fact that it seems good and true to us hurls us forward despite natural egotism, daily weaknesses, habits that we have contracted, surrounding prejudices, and accumulated obstacles! We don't know of what we are capable. [^1]

xvAnd so, at this precipice in Mormon history, this story begins.

The writing of Mormon history is often a no-win situation, even for one who believes deeply, as I do, in the divine origin and purposes of this Church. Wallace Stegner once referred to it as a "swamp" where apologists are seldom gratified and antagonists rarely satisfied. For some, there is never enough promotion of faith; for others, there is far too little of fact. Well aware of these pitfalls, I am nonetheless certain of a growing body of readers, a questioning, searching audience, Mormon and otherwise, who is increasingly anxious to see Mormon history in the light of its own trials, mistakes, and successes and to draw their own conclusions. Rooted in primary manuscript and original documentation, this work aims at historical integrity and fairness, to let the participants speak for themselves, to tell a true story, and to provide a sound basis for my interpretations. Although some may argue with those interpretations, I trust that none will find occasion to doubt the sources or the accounts.

xviSome try to dismiss the relevancy of history in today's obsession with presentism. Certainly there are modern problems and challenges on all sides. Nevertheless, most readers understand that Mormonism has ever had a love affair with its past. It has ever been a priority for the Church to keep an accurate history and to learn of "things which have been, things which are, and things which must shortly come to pass."

xviOn the very eve of their pioneer departure, Church leaders assured themselves and future historians of the central place of that history and of the archival record. "Dr. [Willard] Richards spoke of the bushels of papers now in his possession that are not now filed," wrote the Pioneer Camp clerk while paraphrasing a dialogue of Church leaders on the topic,

xviand of the need of a place to gather them and arrange them for future history. A man must have his mind free who writes a history that is to last for time and through all eternity, and not bothered with other cares.[W[ilford] Woodruff says this is a subject that will benefit the whole Church and Kingdom of God. When I heard Joseph [Smith] speak I could not rest until I had written it down in black and white. . . . The people ought to keep a strict eye upon the historian. I feel deeply interested in the books out of which I am to be judged. It is the duty of [the] High Council to let the Dr. have a box to put the papers in, to find wood, beef, etc. This is to be a book of books. I rejoice that we have a ready writer. Let the Dr. go to work and save the Church history. [^2]

Having neither been assigned, cajoled, nor commissioned to write this work, nor discouraged or dissuaded from its undertaking, I sense keenly the responsibility of exploring a history so reverently held by so many descendants of the early pioneers and by so many Latter-day Saints. I do not argue that I am better qualified than some others for such an undertaking, but I have prepared myself.

xviiAs a child of 10, in company with family and relatives, I made my first trip across America on the Mormon Trail from Palmyra to Salt Lake City in 1956. It left an indelible impression on my mind. Later as a graduate student at Brigham Young University, I began researching and writing Mormon history. If Professor Marvin Hill taught me how to research Mormon history, it was Leonard J. Arrington, dean of modern Mormon historiography, who showed me how to love and appreciate it.

xviiIn 1987 I published the immediate predecessor of this work, Mormons at the Missouri, 1846-1852: "And Should We Die" (an outgrowth of my dissertation), with the University of Oklahoma Press. That award-winning work—a comprehensive study of the forced expulsion from Nauvoo, the march across Iowa in the spring of 1846, and the encampment in Winter Quarters on the banks of the Missouri River near present day Omaha—is the forerunner of this present work. Although chapters one and two rely on my earlier work, much new material has been added. Nevertheless, the serious reader will want to study that earlier work before embarking on this more recent and equally ambitious investigation.

xviiFor ease of reading, since there are so many quotations included in this study and since the original spellings are often phonetically based and distracting, I have taken the liberty of correcting the spelling in almost every case. I have, however, retained the original grammar, style, and sentence structure. Every reasonable effort has been made to give full, accurate citations and credit to depositories.

As a professional historian, archivist, and librarian, I am particularly sensitive to the invaluable assistance of my peers and colleagues at many sister institutions. First of all, I must credit my own institution—the University of Manitoba—for providing me with both the research study leave necessary and many of the secondary research materials required to provide context to the work. Of all the other agencies rich in manuscript material, first and foremost is the Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Salt Lake City, Utah, with its vast archives of diaries, journals, and correspondence. Special thanks are in order to its staff, particularly Richard Turley, Steve Sorenson, Jim Kimball, Ron Watt, Randall Dixon, and Linda Haslem. Helpful in providing photographs were Bill Slaughter of the LDS Church Historical Department and Ron Read of the LDS Museum of Church History and Art.

xviiiI wish also to commend the staff at the following institutions: the Manuscript Division of the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C.; the Marriott Library at the University of Utah; the Harold B. Lee Library at Brigham Young University; the Missouri Historical Society and St. Louis Mercantile Association Library in St. Louis, Missouri; the Library and Archives of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints in Independence, Missouri; the Oregon Historical Society in Portland, Oregon; the Bancroft Library at the Berkeley campus of the University of California; the Utah State Historical Society; Special Collections and Archives at Utah State University; the New York Public Library; the Free Public Library in Council Bluffs, Iowa; the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Yale University; and finally, and less importantly, the Huntington Library in San Marino, California.

xviiiI wish also to thank the following institutions for their significant financial assistance in the form of research grants: the University of Manitoba and the Canadian Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council; the Religious Studies Center at Brigham Young University; the Charles Redd Center at Brigham Young University; the American Philosophical Society of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; and the Huntington Library, which granted me a Visiting Senior Fellowship.

xviiiSpecial thanks are in order to the publishers of this work, Deseret Book Company in Salt Lake City. Jay Parry, editor and project manager; Doreen McKnight, copy editor; Ron Stucki, designer; and Patricia Parkinson, typographer; and others on the Deseret Book staff provided invaluable assistance, suggestions, guidance, and support from the review right through to the delightful production of the book.

xviiiI have also enjoyed the valued help of good research assistants. Kevin Pinkney, Mark Ashurst-McGee, John Hartvigsen, and Harvard Heath have each made significant contributions to this work. My wife, Pat, has not only put up with me in this task, but has also been a valuable research assistant in her own right, at least as much as a family of five children has allowed her to be. Indeed, I owe enormous gratitude to her and every member of my family. I also owe a permanent debt to my mother and father, who had a profound influence for good on my life and thought, and to my brother, Gary, who nurtured within me an early love of Church history.

xixWhile so many have assisted me, I alone am responsible for the content and interpretations that characterize this work. I trust that it will be a lasting credit to them all.

xixNOTES

xix1. "Taine's Essay on the Mormons," trans. Austin E. Fife, in Pacific Historical Review 31, no. 1 (Feb. 1962): 60.

xix2. Journal of Willard Richards, 17 Dec. 1846, LDS Church Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Church Office Building, 50 E. North Temple Street, Salt Lake City, Utah; cited hereafter as LDS Church Archives.
