Richard E. Bennett, We'll Find the Place: The Mormon Exodus 1846-1848 ( 1997)

1 INTRODUCTION

1 Late in the afternoon of 27 June 1844 in the obscure town of Carthage in southwest Illinois, Joseph Smith Jr., founding prophet and President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and his loyal brother Hyrum were martyred by assassins' gunfire. Their road from Palmyra, New York, through Kirtland, Ohio, and Independence, Missouri, to Nauvoo, Illinois, had finally brought them to this inglorious end. Many concluded it was also the end of Mormonism.

1 So thought at least one Boston reader upon first learning of the Carthage carnage. "There is a report that Joe Smith, the Mormon Prophet, and his brother, have been murdered while in gaol under the protection of the Governor of the State, by a band of ruffians. . . . Gov. [Thomas S.] Ford, with his 60 men, has retired to Quincy, to give his orders to the surrounding counties to muster their forces. Warsaw, Carthage, Augusta and even Hannibal are in fear and commotion. So much for Mormonism!!!" [^1]

1 Such sentiments were not, however, universally shared. Some other observers, such as the editor of the New York Tribune, though critical of the Latter-day Saint's beliefs and practices, predicted their survival and future progress. "What will become of Mormonism now?" he queried.

Joseph Smith is dead—probably butchered in cold blood while a secure prisoner, and without the power, even if he had the will, to Brigham Young offer provocation for violence, but Mormonism has not died with him. Gross and monstrous as the delusions and perhaps abominations practiced in the name of that faith, yet it is a vital, living thing. Men and women, made of the same flesh and blood, and actuated by similar sensations and passions as Protestants, Catholics, Mahometans, or whatever creed or worship the sun shines upon, do actually believe in this Mormonism; are content to live and die by it; to yield up worldly wealth, domestic ties and the strong bonds of native land for it, and thus feeling and thus believing, to their dimmed and distorted spiritual vision, Joe Smith is as much the martyr hero as any whose shadow has ever fallen upon the world. [^2]

2 Yet if Mormonism was to survive, it would have to pay an even heavier price than the loss of its founder—a toll measured in the suffering and death of hundreds of Latter-day Saints soon to be driven out of Nauvoo, their City of Joseph, in quest of some new home far away in the West.

2 Sixteen months passed between that forlorn afternoon in Carthage in 1844 and the fateful day in Nauvoo in early February 1846 when Brigham Young, the 44-year-old interim leader of the Church by right of his position as senior member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, began leading his people on a perilous pilgrimage westward across the Mississippi River. Threatened, persecuted, and ultimately driven by armed and angry men, "Brother Brigham," as he was commonly called, knew that for the salvation of the Church the only way left was out: rather die in the wilderness than be slaughtered in the streets of their own city.

The musket balls that pierced the Prophet were really aimed at the heart of Mormonism, and Brigham Young knew it. For reasons still debated by historians, with Joseph Smith gone the Latter-day Saints themselves became the target. Nothing short of a mass exodus, unlike anything yet seen in American religious history, would answer the frenzied tenor of the time. Either they quit the state peacefully and go somewhere—anywhere—else, or vigilante groups would take the law into their own hands and drive these undesirables out. Fearful of mounting opposition and of increasing numbers of attempts on his own life, and worried about the rumored possibility of an advancing U.S. Army to hedge up their way, Brigham set his direction west, flintlike, no matter what the cost. He bent his energies toward preparing the people by establishing firm leadership over the Church, securing the allegiance of his followers, completing construction of the Nauvoo temple, and buying whatever time he could from their enemies in order to accommodate the safe and orderly departure of his people.

In addition to these external threats, the more subtle, disruptive, and potentially most damaging blows might well come from within. It was a time that tested the allegiance and faith of every Latter-day Saint in and out of Nauvoo. With their prophet dead and their city and possessions soon to be abandoned for some unidentified new Zion a thousand miles or more away, and with new and emerging doctrines untested and unexplained, some were beginning to have second thoughts. To underestimate these concerns, particularly among the scattered membership outside of Nauvoo, is to misrepresent history.

4 The writing, then, was on the wall. The persecution was intense and the deadlines were firm. And defection was already happening at a faster rate than most wanted to admit. Clearly they had reached a crisis. And the solutions would not be easy. Consequently for the cause of Zion and "for the salvation of the Church," several things would now have to happen.

4 GET OUT!

4 It is a sad and deplorable fact of history that the Latter-day Saints had been a hounded and a harried people. From the inception of the Church in Palmyra, New York, in April 1830, its fate had been one of misunderstanding, overzealousness, persecution, and expulsion. Kirtland, Ohio, endured only slightly longer than Independence, Missouri, the location site revealed in Mormon scripture as their future and ultimate Zion and gathering place. [^3] Driven out of Independence in 1834, the Latter-day Saints sought refuge in surrounding Missouri counties, ever hopeful of a final return to their "center stake of Zion." But Missouri would have none of it, with Governor Lilburn W. Boggs enacting his infamous "extermination order" in 1838, a proclamation that attempted to legitimize the pain and persecution, death and destruction of an entire religious community. [^4] What followed was mob action that drove the Latter-day Saints back east to Illinois, imprisoned their leaders, and would surely have ended the life of Joseph Smith then had it not been for men like Alexander W. Doniphan, David R. Atchison, and other respectable Missouri citizens who stoutly resisted the current wave of lawlessness and ruthless disorder.

4 With nowhere else for these refugees to go, the residents of Quincy, Illinois, and surrounding towns graciously opened their homes and their hearts to a wounded and wearied people. Their tender kindness and hospitality opened the door to the resettlement of thousands of Latter-day Saints at Commerce, Illinois, a few miles north of Quincy on the banks of the Mississippi River. Here, at what became Nauvoo, they built a new home and resting place.

5Nauvoo also provided opportunities for the Latter-day Saints to acquaint themselves with Joseph Smith and to learn more about his teachings on the nature of God, on mankind's filial relationship to Him, on the purpose of life, and on the mission of the Church. And it was in Nauvoo that they became acquainted with the temple covenants, ordinances, and worship characteristic of their newfound faith. The citizens of the city combined in sacrifice to build a temple so high and so grand that many flocked to this frontier town just to gaze on the spectacle: one of the largest, most beautiful buildings west of the Appalachians dominating the peaceful western Illinois landscape. [^5]

5The story of Nauvoo, "the City Beautiful," includes both triumph and tragedy. The city's very success determined its ultimate ruin. On a positive note, it provided a breathing space after the tragic persecutions in Missouri, a building time in which numerous recent American, British, and Canadian converts could come together, shoulder to shoulder, for the first time. Nauvoo became home, a place to build and a time to heal.

5How such a once promising dream soured so suddenly and decidedly into a terrifying nightmare is the tragedy of the time. The city's spectacular surge in population, from a handful of outcasts in the spring of 1839 to almost 15,000 merely six years later, transformed the local social and economic landscape, giving the new move-ins political and economic influence—even dominance—undreamed of earlier by the local citizenry. Nauvoo grew so quickly and rose to such political power that the locals wondered if those they had once befriended would come to dominate their lives.

5Many residents of Hancock County were as unprepared for Nauvoo's meteoric rise as were the newcomers themselves. The settlement that was once welcomed with a measure of relief became a large and rapidly growing city, bigger than any other north of St. Louis, Missouri. The once prevailing sense of sympathy gradually deteriorated into suspicion, economic jealousy, distrust, and fear, bordering on hysteria.

The expulsion of the Latter-day Saints also resulted from misunderstanding and miscommunication, and those frontier elements of lawlessness, religious bigotry, political instability, and economic jealousy that earlier incited so many Missourians to war against the Mormons. That unruly spirit of unchecked violence, bordering on mob rule, later spilled into Illinois, further contaminating relationships and poisoning whatever prospects of peaceful coexistence may once have existed.

6Neither were the Mormons without blame. Not all were "saints," and enough were of the baser sort to fan some of the rising tensions. The liberal provisions of the Nauvoo city charter gave the city wide-sweeping legal and even military powers. Evidence shows that some fugitives from justice may have been taking secret refuge in Nauvoo, clearly an irritant to surrounding communities. [^6] These antagonisms, coupled with the intrigue of certain disaffected members and leaders who had become disillusioned with Joseph Smith, made serious trouble inevitable.

6Furthermore, Brigham Young and his fellow leaders had come to understand the developing doctrines and teachings of their new religion well enough to know that it had become incompatible with frontier America. Theirs had become a theocratic state in a democratic republic. It saw itself as the restored Church of Jesus Christ and the only true and living church—within an evolving pluralistic society increasingly suspicious of such claims. And several of its new social practices, especially plural marriage, confronted the established order. No, if they were to survive and escape a pending catastrophe, the only way was out!

6By October 1845, Hancock County residents were spelling out in one public resolution after another that either the Saints must leave the following spring or they would take the law into their own hands. The Quincy Convention of October passed several resolutions to that effect, demanding a complete withdrawal by the following May. [^7] Just days later, the Carthage Convention, made up of concerned citizens from several surrounding counties and including many of the most bitter enemies of Joseph Smith and his followers, took an even more hostile stance. It called for the establishment of a local militia that would, in the expected case that the Mormons could not meet the Quincy Committee's deadline, force them out by bayonet and cannon. [^8]

But if they were to go they would leave behind a curse on the land that had rejected them and a reiteration and prediction of divine retribution. From the beginning, Latter-day Saint scripture had told of coming calamities prior to the Second Coming of Christ and of pestilence on a sinful world. As early as March 1829, one of Joseph Smith's revelations had warned of "a desolating scourge [that] shall go forth among the inhabitants of the earth, and shall continue to be poured out from time to time, if they repent not, until the earth is empty, and the inhabitants thereof are consumed away and utterly destroyed by the brightness of my coming." [^9]

7Applying such dire divine warnings to their immediate conditions, the Latter-day Saints surely felt America must suffer the consequence of its inaction at the very moment of their severest trials. This theme of collective hurt, of almost Old Testament-style wrath on their enemies, was a carryover from their earlier Missouri persecutions, a negative corollary to the doctrine of establishing Zion, but came to the fore shortly after the martyrdom, reaching a crescendo by the time they left Nauvoo. Their diaries are replete with condemnation, warnings, and the expectation of almost imminent premillennial judgment and wrath.

7Wrote Brigham before leaving Winter Quarters for the West:

7The whispering of the Spirit to us have invariably been of the same import, to depart, to go hence, to flee into the mountains, to retire to our strongholds that we may be secure in the visitation of the Judgments that must pass upon this land, that is crimsoned with the blood of Martyrs; and that we may be hid, as it were, in the clefts of the rocks, and in the hollows of the land of the Great Jehova, while the guilty land of our fathers is purifying by the overwhelming scourge. [^10]

7Writer after writer picked up on Brigham's point until it became almost a tenet of their faith. As Wilford Woodruff, another Apostle, wrote at the end of 1847:["[We] have made a journey more than one thousand miles to the Rocky Mountains, and sought out a place for a city, a stake of Zion, and a temple of the Lord that the Saints may have a place to flee to while the indignation of the Lord passeth over the nation that hath driven them out." [^11]

7FIND A NEW ZION

Fundamental to understanding the dynamics of Mormonism is the concept of place. As with the ancient Israelites (with whom their revelations compared themselves) and their exodus from Egypt to a promised land, the gathering again to a "New Jerusalem," a new Zion or a "new promised land" is intimate to the very soul of Latter-day Saint theology. As early as 1830, Joseph Smith's revelations had called for a gathering into one place, "even a land of promise, a land flowing with milk and honey, upon which there shall be no curse when the Lord cometh. And I will give it unto you for the land of your inheritance, if you seek it with all your hearts. And this shall be my covenant with you, ye shall have it for the land of your inheritance, and for the inheritance of your children forever." [^12] In part this was to prepare for the premillennial return of Christ and in part to govern and prepare the people for the inevitable building up of the kingdom of God on the earth.

8This fundamental belief in the establishment of a temporal and spiritual Zion, of a new Jerusalem and of a chosen and chastened people, explains their earlier compulsion and overriding expectation to settle at Independence, Missouri, "in the borders of the Lamanites" [Indians]—the revealed "center stake of Zion"—in the very teeth of opposition and persecution. So much of their earliest energies had been expended to reach that goal and to "be planted in the land of Zion."

8The bitter fact that such a Zion was not "redeemed" or established in Missouri, with all the deep and lingering disappointments of having not achieved it, did not deter many Latter-day Saints from continuing the quest. After all, God would try His people and Missouri had been but the "beginning" of the gathering. (D&C 84:4.)

8Yet the dilemma remained the place. If Kirtland had been prelude to the Missouri effort, Nauvoo was postlude to it and a temporary, if remarkable, substitute. To return to Missouri now was out of the question. And to retain the doctrine of Zion and to believe in a new transplanted location for it in a far away western wilderness once again "in the borders of the Lamanites" would require constant instruction and careful conviction. What would happen after Nauvoo—and, equally important, where it would happen—would inevitably call for a necessary postponement of the revealed ideal and center gathering place without surrendering the conviction that they were still moving in the right direction. If they could not now return to the original Zion, they would then carry the dream—and the doctrine—with them to a new interim gathering place.

8And it would have to be found soon! Until such a new place was established and a new standard erected, the gathering impulse would invariably be postponed and the rate of defection would increase among its membership. Until and unless such a new Zion was located, the Church was in jeopardy.

They were seeking neither the congenial valleys of Oregon nor the sunkissed coasts of California, but a place unsought and unclaimed by the advancing tide of overland emigrants, a place where neither the laws of the United States nor the sanctions of other religions could prevent them from freely living their religion. It must be a place of refuge that would insure protection, isolation, good health, and ample provision for a self-sustaining people, a rapidly growing young American religion desperately trying to find its way. In time it might take its place within a larger community and be part of a broader administration, but for now and for the foreseeable future, it needed time and place and freedom to develop on its own. As with the earlier Puritans who came to America in quest of religious freedom and preserving their ideals, the Latter-day Saints had to discover their own "city on a hill," a light and a nursery to their far-flung membership.

9"Concerning the travels of the Saints westward," said Brigham to his followers at Mt. Pisgah, Iowa, in the winter of '47:

9This is a subject that has long attracted our attention and concerning which we have thought and felt deeply and well we might; for situated as the Church of Jesus Christ is, and has been, for a considerable length of time, the only human hope or prospect of her salvation, has appeared to rest on the removal of the Saints from a land of oppression and violence to some more congenial clime. [^13]

9Their Rocky Mountain plan probably owed much to Joseph Smith, a point Brigham knew full well. Remembered John Pulsipher: "Pres. Brigham Young said that Joseph Smith said in Nauvoo that the Devil had drove this people out of the pan—not into the fire but on the hearth. And if He ever give us another shove, we would go into the middle of the floor." [^14] While some have argued otherwise, compelling evidence indicates that late in Joseph Smith's life, he had begun to look to the Rocky Mountains as the probable place of temporary refuge. Governor Ford, in an 1845 letter, indicated that he had been "informed by Gen. Joseph Smith last summer that he contemplated a removal west; and from what I learned from him and others at that time I think if he had lived he would have begun to move in the matter before this time." [^15]

Neither was there ever any serious doubt as to where they were going. In fact their destination, at least in general terms, never was a question. "It must be somewhere in the Great Basin," noted one recorder after another in their diaries and letters. "With regard to our location," wrote Brigham from Shoal Creek in eastern Iowa Territory to Orson Hyde, a fellow Apostle stationed back in Nauvoo, "it will be over the mountains, but to define the exact spot we cannot at present. We shall fit out a company of Pioneers and start them from the Missouri River to put in crops and that the rest of the camps will follow as circumstances will allow." [^16]

10To assume that the Latter-day Saints had no idea where they were going, as some have concluded, leaves far too much to fate or disorganization. It is true that many of the rank and file were unaware of their precise destination. "All the material possessions we are transporting west," wrote Lorenzo Dow Young, "we are transporting . . . in two wagons . . . and our place of destination we know not." Others, like Clara Decker Young, spoke of it as an "uncertain pilgrimage." But what they lacked in precision they made up for in direction—it would have to be some valley in the Great Basin. [^17]

10The further west they traveled, the more precise their understanding of their intended location became, as more talks and discussions, advice and counsel inevitably focused on the topic. By the time they reached the Missouri River, leaders were already talking openly of the "Bear River valley, great basin, or salt lake." [^18] In a proposed letter to the President of the United States, James K. Polk, Brigham declared unequivocally that their journey "shall end in a location west of the Rocky Mountains, and within the Basin of the Great Salt Lake or Bear River Valley, as soon as circumstances shall permit." [^19] As Brigham indicated in a February 1847 letter, "It must be somewhere in the Great Basin, we have no doubt." [^20]

10Nevertheless, they had no intention of broadcasting their destination, and for good reasons. Prudence dictated that they speak about the subject in a general, even oblique, manner. There was awful fear that their Missouri enemies might disrupt their march. And there was concern that powerful senators, like Mormon-hating Thomas Benton, might influence Washington—then in the throes of settling the Oregon question with England and about to go to war with Mexico over California—to send in an army to obstruct their way. The government might wonder at the intentions of a wounded and persecuted people moving en masse amidst a troubled Indian population to some ill-defined homeland "beyond the states." By keeping them all guessing, the Latter-day Saints walked a fine line between intervention and invitation. Perhaps they could yet be allies of an American Manifest Destiny while fulfilling their own.

11A NEW GOVERNMENT AND A NEW PROPHET

11Ever since Carthage, the loss of a prophet-leader and, with him, the presiding quorum of the First Presidency had been a hindrance to the stability and growth of the Church. Confusion replaced confidence in the hearts of many as they waited to see whom to follow. They needed not only a new president, but more to the point, a prophet, as much as they had ever esteemed Joseph Smith as one.

11The subtle corollary to this was the restoration of the conviction in the people generally that God had neither abandoned nor condemned His people since the martyrdom and that a legitimate and credible successor could still be called. The longer the time between prophet-leaders, just as with locations, the more exposed and weakened was the faith. Fully as important as finding a new home, then, was the need to call and ordain a new "Prophet, Seer, and Revelator" and organize a new First Presidency.

11Although most members at Nauvoo and throughout the Church generally (which in 1846 totaled some 34,000 scattered throughout the East, the upper South, Canada, and England [^21]) were leaning toward following Brigham Young and the Quorum of the Twelve, which man should eventually obtain the presidency was still unclear. [^22]

11The first to claim the mantle of leadership was Sidney Rigdon, Joseph Smith's longtime counselor in the First Presidency. Once a confidant of the prophet, a wonderful speaker and impressive scriptorian, Rigdon returned to Nauvoo in 1844 and declared a vision he had received concerning his role as "guardian" and "spokesman" over the leaderless flock. Rigdon explained that "he was the identical man that the ancient prophets had sung about, wrote and rejoiced over." [^23]

11In the minds of most, however, Rigdon had lost the confidence of the rank and file and had been away too long to be seriously considered. [^24] Nonetheless, Sidney Rigdon might have been successful had it not been for the return of several of the Apostles from their recent campaigns in the East. In the famous meeting of 8 August 1844 in the temple grove, Brigham dismantled Rigdon's claims in a most compelling and convincing matter and called for public support of the Quorum of the Twelve. Rigdon never recovered from his failure, excommunication, and public humiliation and left Nauvoo for good on 10 September. Disheartened, if not disoriented, Rigdon's later halfhearted attempts at organizing a new church in Pennsylvania met with failure. [^25]

12Meanwhile, William Parker was using peepstones and impersonating leaders to induce acceptance of his claims. [^26] Several others, including Lyman Wight, that "wild ram of the mountains" who in March 1845 had led a company of 150 souls to southern Texas on a mission to find a new settlement that he claimed had been authorized by Joseph, maintained—as did others—that the rightful heir to the presidency was Joseph Smith's oldest son, Joseph Smith III, who was then only thirteen years old. [^27]

12By early 1846, however, these claims paled to relative insignificance compared to that of James J. Strang. Born in Cayuga County, New York, in 1813, Strang possessed a strong desire for reading and at an unusually early age exhibited a keen ability as a writer and debater. Argumentative, if not combative, by nature, at the age of 21 he commenced the study of law and two years later, in 1836, entered into a law practice in Chatauqua County, New York. Though married later that same year, his restlessness led him to travel all over the eastern states, returning in 1838. Later he and his family moved west to Burlington, Wisconsin, where he again practiced law. While visiting in Ottawa, Illinois, early in 1844 he first heard the preaching of Joseph Smith and was almost immediately baptized. Soon after his ordination as an elder in early March, he abandoned the bar for the pulpit, giving his newfound religion virtually his entire attention. [^28]

12The colorfully charismatic Strang persuaded many that he was Joseph's legitimate successor. To prove it, he publicly proclaimed a letter dated 18 June in which Joseph Smith, just days before his death, supposedly had ordained him president with instructions to remove and reestablish the Church in Wisconsin. Expert with the pen and the press, Strang soon published revelations, claimed the discovery and translation of another book of ancient scripture ("The Book of the Law of the Lord"), laid claim to the powers of prophet and seer, and established a church in Spring Prairie, Wisconsin, which was soon renamed Voree (signifying "Garden of Peace"). Of no less significance, he organized a new First Presidency consisting of himself, John C. Bennett, and George J. Adams. [^29]

Throughout 1846 and 1847 "Strangism" was a serious contender and, for many, a very real alternative to Brigham's efforts to reestablish the Church westward. Several other well-known Nauvoo personalities went over to Strang's side, including William Smith, Apostle and patriarch to the Church and brother to Joseph; Apostle John E. Page; William Marks, former Nauvoo stake president; and William McLellin. And with them came many of their followers. Wrote one admirer of John E. Page: "The only conclusion I can draw from the circumstances of your being at Voree and being an apostle there is that you have received that testimony you required. If so I wish you to write to me all the particulars." [^30]

13 James J. Strang

13Why Strang made inroads is readily understandable. Contrasted dramatically with Brigham's pragmatic approach and rather stern bearing were Strang's charm and colorful personality, which reminded some of Joseph Smith. Others took comfort in his support of the Book of Mormon and other Latter-day Saint scripture. His particular genius, however, centered in his enormous self-confidence and unbridled ambition, his persuasive speaking and writing abilities, his opportunistic sense of timing, and his uncanny ability to capitalize on the fear and discontent among the people.

13There can be little doubt that many felt confused, disillusioned, and adrift since Carthage. "I was a member of the Church for four years," wrote one Quincy resident, "and for the first two years I enjoyed religion . . . but alas, those blessings, those gifts and outpourings of the Spirit of God have taken, as it were, the wings of the morning and fled. Darkness seems to fill the minds of the people." [^31] John E. Page put it this way: "In the absence of the first presidency I have looked on the Church as being like a clock without weights, or a watch without a main spring. All stops till they are restored." [^32] One Asa Curtis, wondering why the Church was stalling so long to reorganize itself, spoke in behalf of seventeen other members of the Armada branch when he wrote: "We are all anxious to know the truth and would be glad of any information on the subject. Truth is what we want." [^33]

13That same sense of longing was even more aptly described in the following letter from a Swiss convert then living in Madison, Wisconsin:

At the death of the Prophet, I was completely at a loss who should be the true successor and leader of God's Church and accordingly stood still to see and hear. Evident it was to me that twelve travelling apostles could never assume and constitute the first presidential triune. . . . So afterwards was I led to believe that Sidney Rigdon had a right to the claim, and acknowledged him as such, so far as he was the only surviving officer of that high tribunal. . . . I soon became convinced that some thing in the affair was not right. . . . So we were nearly all wandering in the dark. [^34]

14Strang sensed not merely the vacuum of leadership but also the intense longing for a new prophet-leader. Acting to fill the void almost simultaneously with Brigham's departure from Nauvoo, he formally claimed ownership of the church, established a new First Presidency, staked out his claim for divine appointment, and initiated a far-reaching missionary effort directly aimed at Mormon branches in the U.S. and England—and with almost immediate results, particularly in areas outside of Nauvoo.

14This May 1846 letter from a longtime convert, a sister from Wisconsin, is indicative of the mind-set of some members outside of Nauvoo:

14I heard that the Prophet and all the Saints at Nauvoo and from all parts of the earth were going to California and my family were opposed being gathered with the saints or I should have been willing to go to the ends of the earth . . . but when I heard that the saints had all gone I felt completely discouraged and what to do I knew not. When to my astonishment, I received two numbers of the Voree Herald and found Bro. Joseph's letter in which I found God's choice of a Prophet through the mouth of a Prophet according to revelation. . . . I think a body travelling without a head will make poor steerage as a church without a prophet. I have always had implicit confidence in the Twelve in their respective calling but the arm cannot be the head. [^35]

14Strang's sudden appeal stemmed from his quick action in restoring a new church leadership and declaring himself Joseph Smith's true successor. "Now I have heard of no one claiming the appointment," wrote a new convert in Philadelphia,

in accordance with the law of God, as written unto us, excepting yourself. But on the contrary, Brigham Young has told the people that there never would be another appointed to the Church in Joseph's stead, but that the Twelve were to preside over and dictate the affairs of the Church in all the world. Thus we see the head is cut off, the eyes, the ears, and the mouth are gone! The body is left, but it can neither see, hear, nor speak neither can it receive nourishment, and according to the laws of nature it must die . . . suffice it to say "A Church without a Prophet, is not the Church for me; It has no head to lead it, in it I would not be." [^36]

15Strang's success also owed much to rising tensions, misunderstandings, and renunciations of the new and developing practice of plural marriage. Though practiced on a small scale by several leaders since 1843, polygamy had been publicly denied, mainly out of fear of inciting public hostility. [^37] While some were opposed to it on theological and moral grounds, others found it hard to reconcile private performance with its public denial. [^38] The following letter from one longtime Mormon missionary is illustrative of the attitude of many:

15I have baptized scores and hundreds but I have never been to Nauvoo . . . and since Brother Joseph fell a martyr I have had some difficulty in reconciling myself to some of the movements of the Twelve and their authority to head the Church. They assumed a place and an office in the Church that never was conferred on them by revelation. In the second place the spiritual wife system. Third place—emigrating to California and in short not carrying out Joseph's measures. I have been waiting and looking for a prophet to come forth and set things in order in the Church. That time has arrived to the great joy of most all the Saints in this section . . . hundreds will flock to the great ensign that is lifted up in Zion. [^39]

15At best, plural marriage was misunderstood, but it was often also maligned and condemned, to the benefit of men like Strang. Brigham himself recognized that it was "like handling edge tools" in the garden—sharp, cutting, and potentially as divisive among the Latter-day Saints as it was misunderstood and condemned by their enemies. Such a practice required far better explanation, as well as sanction and careful control, by the leadership of the Church. And until such leadership was clarified, the practice could run unchecked and become a lightning rod of discontent besmirching the reputation of the Church and the faith of its members.

Meanwhile Strang's missionaries lost little time in spreading the word, in and around Nauvoo, back East, and, with less success, in England. "I was determined at all hazards to go to the wilderness with the Church," wrote one Benjamin Chapman,

16but having had a dream of the gathering of the Saints to your place three months before I heard of your claims. But I could not understand it until Bro. Moses Smith came to Nauvoo with the 1st no. of the Voree Herald. With some difficulty I borrowed one and read and to my utter astonishment I could not reject one word of it, for my heart was so rejoiced that the Great God had fulfilled his word in appointing a man through our beloved Joseph to fill his place when he was taken. So you see that I go for the man that has the tools (oracles, Urim and Thummim). For I know that the first President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints must have those things or he cannot be a Seer and a Translator. [^40]

16Strang's use of the printed word in the form of pamphlets, broadsides, and issues of the Voree Herald beginning in December 1845 was well received among many troubled, information-starved listeners, especially in the absence of a Nauvoo paper. "I have understood that you published a periodical," wrote one would-be follower. "If such be the case, I would be glad if you would send me one of each number already published." [^41] And from a woman in Wayne County, New York: "I feel very thankful to you for sending me the Herald although I have not sent the pay for them until now, as I have no other means of getting information from God's people." [^42] And from Cincinnati came further evidence of Strang's successful use of the printed word. "On the reception of the first number of the Voree Herald the parties became united. And I think there is neither a man or woman in the place for [Sidney] Rigdon. The branch now meets together in union. And there are but one or two persons that I know of who are in favor of the California expedition." [^43]

16Though the Herald had only a handful of subscribers to its first issue, one thousand copies were printed and circulated vigorously by defenders and missionaries of Strang's nascent cause. [^44]

16According to the records, entire branches were moving over to Strang's banner. Consider these minutes of the Knoxville, Illinois, Branch of 17 May 1846:

All for Strang as the first President of the Church. [The Twelve] had taken great advantage claiming their own measures to be measures of Joseph and Hyrum by which means thousands were made to believe a lie representing that Joseph and Hyrum had received all those abominations by way of revelations direct from the Lord by which means they were enabled to make the Saints believe some of the most unholy principles ever invented by man. . . . They declared the branch free and independent from all obligations exclusively belonging to the western expedition and declared a public renunciation to the Twelve and all their wicked and secret abominations. [^45]

17Jonas Putnam of Augusta, Iowa, wrote that "many of the church are wholly giving up the ship entirely and others are very restless not knowing the right way and want to find it. So it is with us. Strang has given some good revelations, if they were true, but time will soon tell the story." [^46]

17The Voree prophet also benefited for the most understandable of reasons. Many were simply too sick or infirm or too old to embark on a migration so grand as the one Brigham had in mind. Some wondered whether, if they did manage to go, they would ever see their families again. And for those in part-member families, how many could leave their husbands or wives and children not knowing when, or if, they might ever return? Moreover, the expense of such an enterprise was daunting and for many, totally out of the question. Besides, it was too dangerous and too fraught with uncertainty. No, a sizeable minority gave Strang the benefit of the doubt, at least temporarily, and considered following him to a more convenient gathering place.

17Despite all of Strang's posturing, however, the overwhelming majority, certainly in Nauvoo and arguably elsewhere, were preparing to follow the Quorum of the Twelve into the American West, if not immediately then certainly later. Many could not accept Strang's choice of lieutenants, like John C. Bennett and George G. Adams, whom many in Nauvoo had come to detest and distrust. "There are some things that look very dark against you," complained one woman of Strang. "I cannot understand how a prophet of the Lord can take such a man as John C. Bennett for a bosom friend and counsellor when you so well know what his character has been in all times past. . . . How can you condemn others for what you approve in him?" [^47]

Obviously most paid heed to the warnings and arguments of Brigham about Strang in a letter he wrote to outside communities just days before leaving for the West. "I feel it my duty as a watchman," he began,

18to apprize you of some circumstances relating to the matter. . . . I wish to show you that his pretended revelations or letter from Joseph Smith is a base and wicked forgery, and that the man who wrote it is a wicked liar. . . . Is it not surprisingly strange that Joseph Smith should appoint a man to succeed him in the presidency of the church some seven or ten days before his death and yet not tell it to the High Council, nor to any of the authorities of the church, neither to any man living on the earth? . . .

18

18Joseph Smith . . . would not act as president of the church in any general conference without first taking the vote of the people, and of the quorums separately. This is coming in by the door. . . . And he that climbed up any other way, the same is a thief and a robber. If Mr. Strang had received his appointment from Joseph, why did he not come here upon the death of Joseph and take charge of the Church and lead them to Voree? Because his own guilty heart would not let him come near the furnace of trial.

18Brigham concluded his four-page letter by saying, "I say unto you beloved brethren, that Joseph Smith never wrote or caused to be written Strang's letter of appointment. It is a lie, a forgery, a snare. And let this testimony be had in remembrance before God." [^48] Just days before leaving Nauvoo, Brigham listened to Moses Smith preach in Strang's favor at a meeting in the temple. After hearing Smith out, Brigham said "he would make no comment but simply asked the people if they heard the voice of the Good Shepherd in what had been advanced and when `No' resounded all over the house it was proposed that Moses Smith be cut off from the Church which was carried unanimously." [^49]

18However, the many accounts and the fact that Strang's claims had to be refuted in letter and in public are evidence enough to show that for a brief moment, and for a minority of the Saints, the Voree Prophet had cast a long enough shadow over Brigham's plans to cause more than the occasional over-the-shoulder glance in times to come.

18A TRIED AND A CHASTENED PEOPLE

A careful reading of Latter-day Saint scripture and doctrine, the kind Brigham obviously gave it, indicated that the root cause of their troubles was neither Methodist nor Missourian but had come from those within their own ranks. They believed, or at least their revelations so declared it, that the fundamental reason they had failed to establish Zion in Independence or a successful resettlement in Nauvoo was their own pride and disobedience to divine counsel. God would have a humble, a united, and a chastened people—"a righteous people, without spot and blameless." [^50]

19As early as 1833, when Joseph Smith was struggling to establish the Church in Independence, Missouri, their revelations had declared that Zion, the gathering of the "pure in heart," could only be established through good conduct and obedience.

19Behold, I say unto you, there were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires among them; therefore by these things they polluted their inheritances.

19

19They were slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord their God; therefore, the Lord their God is slow to hearken unto their prayers, to answer them in the day of their trouble. [^51]

19Later, after the failure at Independence, their own scripture condemned them.

19Behold, I say unto you, were it not for the transgressions of my people, speaking concerning the church and not individuals, they might have been redeemed even now.

19

19But behold, they have not learned to be obedient to the things which I required at their hands, but are full of all manner of evil, and do not impart of their substance, as becometh saints, to the poor and afflicted among them;

19

19And are not united according to the union required by the law of the celestial kingdom. . . .

19

19And my people must needs be chastened until they learn obedience, if it must needs be, by the things which they suffer. . . .

19

19Therefore, in consequence of the transgressions of my people, it is expedient in me that mine elders should wait for a little season for the redemption of Zion. [^52]

Brigham seemed never to tire of reminding his people that the Latter-day Saints, as trustees of the restored gospel, must be tried and purified. The 900-mile march of over 200 armed Latter-day Saints under the leadership of Joseph Smith from Kirtland, Ohio, to Jackson County, Missouri, in the spring of 1834—Zion's Camp in which Brigham and many other future Church leaders also participated—had failed in its ultimate purpose of lessening persecutions and reclaiming Independence. It fell short, however, not for military or political reasons but because of the criticisms, infighting, and disbelief of many within its ranks. [^53]

20This was no idle talk or mere theological platitude. It must be understood at the outset that Brigham would attribute their success, or failure, in the impending exodus to their collective unity and obedience, or lack thereof. His sermons, his counsels and exhortations, and those of his closest lieutenants all reveal this underlying conviction that came to permeate the thinking of so many leaders and pioneer followers. They would find their place if they would follow their God!

20A COVENANT PEOPLE

20Central to the plan of exodus was the place of the temple, that enduring religious symbol of a covenant-making people. From almost the beginning, temple-building was representative of the faith of the Latter-day Saints. In fact, they saw it as an obligation and divine appointment. "Therefore, I command you to build a house unto me, for the gathering together of my saints, that they may worship me." [^54] Consequently they had marked off temple sites in Independence and, later, in Far West, Missouri. They had actually erected such a structure in Kirtland, Ohio. And in Nauvoo, they built again a "House of the Lord" in which to worship God and commit to living as a chosen people.

20The final chapter in Nauvoo, in fact, was the completion of the temple. Had it been completed sooner, the exodus would have begun that much earlier. Wrote one young Nauvoo mother during that busy summer of 1845: "The temple progresses finely; the roof is nearly shingled; the frame work of the steeple is nearly as high from the roof up as the body of the Temple. . . . We hear the laborers sing and shout as they raise the timbers." [^55] Brigham later admitted, "The main and only cause of our tarrying so long, was to give the brethren those blessings in the Temple, for which they have labored so diligently and faithfully to build, and as soon as it was prepared, we labored incessantly almost night and day to wait on them until a few days prior to our departure." [^56]

Between 10 December and late January 1846, the Quorum of the Twelve oversaw three weeks of intensive temple ordinance work in which at least 5,500 and perhaps as many as 8,000 members received their endowments (a sacred ordinance of spiritual blessings based on personal covenants) and participated in such other temple ordinances as eternal marriage and baptism for the dead. The sacred nature and origin of the endowment is beyond the scope and purpose of this work, yet there can be no minimizing the importance the people placed on this temple ordinance. Since its introduction in 1842, the opportunity to receive their endowments became a compelling reason to finish the temple and explains, in part, why they stayed as long as they did in a condemned city. [^57]

21It was also in the temple that Brigham forged his famous "Nauvoo Covenant," by which the more wealthy and well-provisioned believers promised to do all they could to help in bringing the many hundreds, if not thousands, of poor and less advantaged—a covenant he would tenaciously hold his people to fulfil time and time again in the trying months ahead. [^58] During most of the fall and winter of 1845 to 1846, Nauvoo witnessed the construction of 2,000 wagons, the gathering of supplies, and the organization of advance companies of wagon trains. Most everyone was anxious to save themselves and their belongings. Ironically, the city never was so alive as it was after the sentence of desertion had been passed on it. [^59]

21Thus, the Saints would go as a covenant people. And even if their wilderness circumstances prevented the erection of a new temple for a period of time, there would at least be a place and provision for it in their future home.

21AFFORDABILITY

21It was one thing to get out of Nauvoo and find a new Rocky Mountain home with all their faith and practices intact; it was quite another to pay the enormous costs of transporting so many people, in the poorest of conditions, such vast distances. For several families to make the overland trip to California and Oregon often required selling virtually every possession to pay for teams and wagons, supplies and provisions. To transplant an entire people, many of whom were facing personal bankruptcy in the collapse of Nauvoo real estate, would strain the imagination, creativity, and forethought of the best of leaders.

Where, indeed, would the money come from? Certainly there was little public sympathy for their cause. And Joseph Smith's personal estate, whatever was left in it, was soon tied up in claims and counterclaims. [^60] Most of the immigrant converts from Europe, albeit skilled tradesmen, had found little work in and around Nauvoo except in building the temple. The Church, on the eve of its westward gamble, was in no position to underwrite or bankroll the costs of the pending enterprise.

22Consequently, the solutions had to come from the personal sacrifices of the people, both in Nauvoo and elsewhere, in the payment of tithes and offerings; from the sale of Church properties, including the very temple they were still constructing; from begging missions to the American public; and from negotiating whatever contracts possible with governments near or far for services rendered as they moved west.

22As for tithing income from the people, most in Nauvoo were either looking for work or underemployed. Many were in poverty. To further complicate matters, tithing receipts from England were in jeopardy of being lost to an immigration scheme that would require the closest attention of senior Church leaders at the precise moment they could ill afford to be away. And the few who had money could only be expected to sacrifice so much for the cause.

22Meanwhile, property values in Nauvoo were already in steep decline as potential buyers chose to bide their time for a more favorable moment. The ability to realize funds from the sale of Church properties was damaged by the same downward spiral in real estate prices that affected private properties. And as for public support, could they really expect the United States government and the American public to come to their aid when it was their avowed purpose to quit the country and move west?

22From the moment they made the decision to go west, they must have known that it was a daring and a costly proposition with absolutely no financial promise of resolution and fulfilment.

22PROCLAIM THE WORD

There was one final requirement for the success of their exodus plan, and it had everything to do with proclaiming their desired achievement. The news had to be communicated to the scattered membership as quickly as possible by letter, by printed circular, by official proclamation, by missionary, by public celebration—by every means possible. Their ability to publish had been disrupted when Nauvoo's Times and Seasons press closed down. They did not print a paper at Winter Quarters until 1849 (The Frontier Guardian) and at Salt Lake City until 1852 (The Deseret News). Only the Millennial Star, the official organ of the Church in England, was operative throughout this period, and it had only limited distribution on the American side of the Atlantic. Until the Church could publish its own story, its detractors filled the void and used the power of the press to full advantage.

23In review, the Latter-day Saints had little choice but to quit Nauvoo and America and find a new safe place suitable for growth and sustenance, accessible to all and affordable to as many who desired to go. No less important was the matter of a new prophet-leader and a new First Presidency to send a clear signal and set in order the teachings and developing practices of this evolving new religion. Furthermore, they would find their place only to the degree they were a humble and an obedient people, tried in the furnace of their afflictions. Likewise they had to take their temples with them, at least their covenants and expectations of a new temple-centered home. Finally, they needed to communicate their achievement and spread the word near and far.

23Nauvoo, a city under siege, began its exodus in the darkness of a cold February night, when portions of the vanguard companies began crossing the Mississippi River westward. Those who could not go in the initial company of the Twelve followed in the weeks and months to come. Eventually only scattered latecomers, sick, and wounded were left to follow as best they could during the later months of 1846—many at the barrel of a cannon or the point of a bayonet.

23While many wept at the inexplicable tragedy of it all, others chose deliberately to wear a happier face. "How can I go without you?" inquired Irene Hascall of her non-supportive parents in New England.

23Or how can you stay behind? . . . Do not worry anything about it, there will be some way. I suppose father would not like to travel across the Rocky Mountains but I should think he might like it real well for he can hunt all the way. I think probably they will cross the Rocky Mountains to a healthier climate. What good times we will have journeying and pitching our tents like the Israelites. [^61]

Within a relatively brief time, although none too short for those bent on hounding out the last residents, Nauvoo, once the City Beautiful, became a memory, a vacant expression of a departed faith, a victim of a Defense of Nauvoo, by C. C. A. Christensen clouded circumstance in Illinois history that still begs description and understanding.

24Early in September 1846 the city was attacked, and for seven days a "Spartan Band" of about 100 Mormons and "new citizens" held off an attacking force of over 1,500 heavily armed men. Finally, recognizing the painfully obvious, the defenders signed an "article of accommodation, treaty and agreement" with the Quincy Committee. As Daniel H. Wells reminded them: "What interests have the Saints to expect from its defense? Our interests are not identified with it, but in getting away from it. Who could urge the propriety of exposing life to defend a place for the purpose of vacating it?" [^62]

The invaders showed little respect for the treaty. Parties of armed men roamed the city, ordering families out in two hours or other such short notice. The sick were treated with cruelty in many instances, and families were molested while burying their dead. Many went from house to house tearing up floors, destroying property, and plundering cow yards, pig pens, hen roosts, and bee stands. On 18 September, an unidentified preacher ascended the temple tower and proclaimed with a loud voice: "Peace, Peace, Peace to the inhabitants of the Earth, now the Mormons are driven." [^63] The temple stood for another two years until destroyed by an arsonist's torch and an angel's tornado, but not before reminding all who came that for one brief, shining moment, it had represented the hopes and dreams of these peculiar people.

25The story of the exodus begins, then, with this farewell to a deserted Nauvoo, as well described in 1848 in the journal of a Nauvoo visitor:

25Next morning we went over to Nauvoo and spent 4 or 5 hours in surveying the Mormon city and the celebrated Mormon temple. The site of Nauvoo is one of the most beautiful in all the western country as well as in the country immediately surrounding. Before the Mormons left the city contained 12 to 15,000 inhabitants. . . . The temple of which so much has been said and written stands at the highest point of land in the city about 150 or 200' above the river . . . [and] at a distance it has the appearance of an immense church. . . . On ascending to the top one of the most grand and charming prospects meets the eye. The country on the east is an immense prairie and has once been peopled by the Mormons. But everything about the place is dull and stagnant. There are less than 2000 people now in the place. [^64]

25Three hundred miles and a thousand deaths to the west, Nauvoo residents in exile were struggling for a new home and a new life. "Here we are exiled from the United States," wrote Isaac Haight, "without a home, dwelling in tents and wagons exposed to the inclemency of the weather. We are even like the saints of old having no abiding city but we are wanderers and pilgrims on the earth but we count the present sufferings not worthy to be compared with the glory that is to be revealed to his Saints." [^65]

25NOTES

28 John C. Bennett, a former counselor in the First Presidency to Joseph Smith and former mayor of Nauvoo, was a clever opportunist with grandiose schemes. "Do you intend to have me in my original place in the First Presidency?" he wrote in March 1846 to Strang.

28"I am willing to acknowledge you and sustain you as President, chief, first in all things, with Elder George J. Adams as an equal councilor, but I am not willing now, nor will I ever be, to yield supremacy to ignorant men simply because they are reputed pious. No one doubts your talent, and let me repeat again, have you chief men, vigorous, energetic and intellectual. Napoleon's councillors were great generals and statesmen, and they made him great—tho' he was, like yourself, great himself" (John C. Bennett to Strang, 24 Mar. 1846, Strang Papers).

28Bennett, who disgraced himself in Nauvoo through immoral misconduct, saw in Strang's appointment a way to regain influence and reclaim his reputation while attacking his critics. Judge Adams, for similar reasons, had also lost favor among the Latter-day Saints.

---
Notas:
[^5] For good accounts of the history of Nauvoo see the following works: Joseph Smith Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (1973), especially vols. 3-5 [cited hereafter as History of the Church]; B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. (1930), esp. vols. 2-3 [cited hereafter as Comprehensive History of the Church]; Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (1965); and David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (1974).
[^19] Journal History of the Church, 9 Aug. 1846. This is a well-known and excellent resource available at the LDS Church Historical Department, consisting of scrapbook-like entries from private journals, letters, various writings of all kinds, newspaper clippings, and so on, compiled by date by former Assistant Church Historian, Andrew Jenson; cited hereafter as Journal History.
[^28] The definitive works on the history of the Mormon Battalion are Frank Alfred Golder, The March of the Mormon Battalion from Council Bluffs to California (1928); Daniel Tyler, A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion to the Mexican War 1846-1847 (1969); John F. Yurtinus, "A Ram in the Thicket: The Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1975); and Norma Baldwin Ricketts, The Mormon Battalion: U.S. Army of the West, 1846-1848 (1996). See also Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 50-67.
[^29] The best study of Strang still remains Milo Quaife, The Kingdom of Saint James: A Narrative of the Mormons (1930). The most recent reinterpretation is Roger Van Noord's King of Beaver Island: The Life and Assassination of James Jesse Strang (1988). See also Doyle C. Fitzpatrick, The King Strang Story (1970); Richard E. Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 1846-1852: "And Should We Die . . ." (1987), 18-20; The Diary of James J. Strang, ed. Mark A. Strang (1961); William D. Russell, "King James Strang: Joseph Smith's Successor," in The Restoration Movement: Essays in Mormon History, ed. F. Mark McKiernan, Alma R. Blair, and Paul M. Edwards (1973), 231-56. Strang later removed his followers to Beaver Island in northern Lake Michigan, where his settlement realized only modest success.
[^43] Little has been written about the costs of the original departures, although much is available on the costs involved in later migrations. This is particularly true of the Perpetual Emigration Fund and the financing of Mormon emigrant companies to Salt Lake City up until at least 1869 and the completion of the transcontinental rail-road. See Leonard J. Arrington's pathbreaking study, Great Basin Kingdom: An Economic History of the Latter-day Saints 1830-1900 (1958), 77-79.
[^55] For the exact wording of this "Memorial to the Queen for the Relief, by Emigration of a Portion of Her Poor Subjects," see J. B. Munro, "Mormon Colonization Scheme for Vancouver Island," Washington Historical Quarterly, 25, no. 3 (July 1934): 278-85. For a thorough and responsible study on British emigration, see Taylor, Expectations Westward, 18-47.
[^58] The Nauvoo Covenant resembled very closely the earlier Missouri Covenant of 1839, when Brigham Young at Far West, Missouri, proposed "that we this day enter into a covenant to . . . never desert the poor who are worthy, till they shall be out of the reach of the exterminating order of General [John B.] Clark." Some 214 men signed the covenant to assist others "to the utmost of our abilities." (History of the Church, 3:250-54).
