Richard E. Bennett, We'll Find the Place: The Mormon Exodus 1846-1848 ( 1997)

31"IT WOULD TAKE YEARS TO REACH THE MOUNTAINS"

31Across Iowa and the Enforced Winter Quarters

31In a few days I start with my brethren, the Twelve, and as many more as can get ready as pioneers to find the place where a stake of Zion shall be located over the mountains, leaving all our families at this place [Winter Quarters], with the anticipation of returning here to winter and taking our families over one year hence. [^1]

Journey across IowaHC31So wrote Brigham Young in late March 1847, just days before setting out from the Missouri River toward the Rocky Mountains. Simple and direct though this statement was, it had taken months of deliberation, debate, and even divine revelation to make it so. The Latter-day Saint's plan of exodus was late in arriving in its final form and was refined only in the final few days leading up to their inevitable march. The purpose of this chapter is to review those events that brought them to the Missouri from their Nauvoo home on the Mississippi and postponed their march to the mountains until the spring of 1847.

Journey across IowaHCIt all was to have happened in 1846. The fundamental reason Brigham and his Company of the Twelve quit Nauvoo in the bitter cold of February 1846 was to allow sufficient time for an express company of "expert men" and pioneers to reach the better climes of a safe Rocky Mountain Zion later that summer, in time to put in crops both there and at selected way stations along the trail. Once the decision to leave Nauvoo for good had been made, it became their overriding imperative and Brigham's personal passion to find their new home as quickly as possible. The longer the membership lay stretched out tenuously from river to river and from bluff to bluff, the more exposed it would be to sickness, death, criticism, and defection. He seemed to never tire of saying that the one and only reason they would make such a perilous exodus was "for the salvation of the Church." [^2]

Journey across IowaHC32With good late winter weather and cold solid ground they believed they could make it across Iowa Territory and reach the Missouri, only 300 miles away, in four to six weeks at even the moderate rate of seven and a half miles per day. After that they would establish one or two way stations or farm acreages at Council Bluffs or Grand Island and perhaps another near Fort Laramie. Meanwhile, that much-talked-about "express company of pioneers" of some 300 or more men, freed from the daily cares of camp life, would then make it "over the mountains" to some valley of the Great Basin in ample time to secure their new mountain home "far away in the West." This was their plan.

Journey across IowaHC32The rest of the Saints would come on as health and strength, provisions and teams would permit. Those who could not leave in February would do so at intervals during the late spring and early summer to reach any one of the proposed farming stations. Others might have to go to St. Louis and other Missouri River towns by steamboat. And finally a trio of hand-picked negotiators, the Nauvoo Trustees, would stay behind to sell off as many Church and private properties as possible, and at as fair a price as the deteriorating market would allow, to help meet the daunting costs of emigration.

Journey across IowaHC32Between 4 February and 1 March, 1,800 people crowded into makeshift quarters at their Sugar Creek staging ground across the river and just a few miles into Iowa Territory, almost in sight of their Nauvoo homes. These constituted the vanguard company, the Company of the Twelve or "Camp of Israel," who would pioneer the way across Iowa as quickly as possible before sending an express company over the Rocky Mountains later that summer.

Journey across IowaHC32Some, like George Whitaker, remembered their time of departure with fondness. "We could see grouped all around the camp fires, men, women and children" he wrote.

33Helen Mar Kimball Whitney

Journey across IowaHC33Some were singing, some were dancing, some were playing music; everyone seemed full of life and joy. We felt as though we had been released from bondage and were free. . . . After singing we had prayers, every family in camp doing the same . . . that He would bless us with health and strength and that He would lead us and guide us to the place of our destination. . . . The men put down their beds in the tent on the wet ground. The women and children slept in the wagons. . . . At day break when we got up, the whole camp was astir in making fires and getting breakfast and preparing for our day's journey. [^3]

Journey across IowaHC33Others were far less glowing in their wintry record-keeping. "The snow had to be cleaned away to pitch the tents, and our beds were made upon the frozen ground," remembered Helen Mar Kimball Whitney, young wife of Horace K. Whitney. "We were not blessed with a stove in our tent that night and it was impossible to get warm by the campfire; so that night I laid nothing off, not even my hood or josie." She admitted that

Journey across IowaHC33in that first exodus there was such a great desire among the people and such a determination to emigrate with the first company that there were hundreds started without the necessary outfit. They could neither procure sufficient teams nor provisions, which retarded our progress, and was the cause of a greater amount of suffering than there would otherwise have been. And my father [Heber C. Kimball], in speaking of it, said, under the circumstances it would take years to reach the mountains. [^4]

Journey across IowaHCThe initial 1846 over-the-mountain plan died a very slow and frustrating death, and all because of heaven and earth or, rather, rain and mud. While normally it should have taken only five to six weeks to reach the Missouri River, instead it took over three and a half months. Delayed Slogging through Iowa several weeks, until early in March, in leaving their Sugar Creek encampment, the inadequately provisioned, overly populated companies soon sank to their wagon bottoms in one of the earliest, wettest springs in Iowa history. From the head forks of the Madison River, fifteen miles east of Grand River, Brigham wrote Orson Hyde: "It may not be uninteresting to you to hear a letter of our situation and calculations. You have heard of a great mud hole which reaches from Nauvoo nearly to this place. We have at length got through it and find ourselves once more on dry land." [^5]

34"WE WILL NOT CROSS THE MOUNTAINS"

Journey across IowaHC34Such good news, however, was premature, for the rains continued; within days the terrain had once again turned into a traveler's nightmare, a quagmire with creek levels eight, ten, even twelve feet higher than normal. Too wet for open fires and camp cooking and much too muddy for even a mile or two of travel, many must have wondered whose prayers were being answered.

Journey across IowaHCHad it not ended in the suffering and death of hundreds of weakened, sickly followers later that year, their situation was almost comical. "But don't think for a moment brethren, that we are cast down or discouraged," Brigham said to Wilford Woodruff and Orson Hyde in his characteristic upbeat manner. "No! We are the happiest fellows you ever saw in the world. We have not the least desire to return back into Egypt." [^6]

Journey across IowaHC35But as they suffered and slid across Iowa, time became the disquieting factor. The nonstop rainfall, sudden melting snows, and swollen creeks—all combined against them. And as bad as things were in March, they worsened in April. "We were strung along clear across Iowa," wrote one emigrant, "and such roads, from one rod to a mile in width on those bottomless prairies. When the turf would hold the wagons up, it was OK, but there might be a dozen or more all sunk in the mud at once, a short distance apart." [^7]

Journey across IowaHC35The journal entries of William Huntington are instructive:

Journey across IowaHC35April 9: Never did as many of the Church spend so disagreeable and miserable a night together before—it was very cold with high wind and hard rain all night and no fire, mud knee deep around our tents, ground filled with and nearly covered with water—while our teams has little or nothing to eat—one cow chilled to death.

35

Journey across IowaHC35April 10: Same scenes of suffering continued high wind, cold and rain—teams sent back after the wagons left in the mud—wind blew down tents and turned over Bro. Farles [?] buggy—at 4 o'clock P.M. began to snow and froze hard during the night.

35

Journey across IowaHC35May 5: That night it rained in torrents all night, and the morning the streams were higher than we had seen them before and soon received intelligence from Grand River that roads were impassable for loaded teams and plowing had ceased. Everything is dubious for the Saints. In the afternoon came a great storm of wind, hail and rain which swelled the streams to a hitherto unknown degree and carried off our bridge. [^8]

Journey across IowaHC35The rain affected more than the roads. "That portion between Nauvoo and Garden Grove [was] the darkest in my memory," Helen Mar Kimball Whitney later recalled.

Journey across IowaHCDuring that time our sea biscuits, crackers, parched corn meal, etc. which were among the luxuries, molded, until finally they were fed out to our horses and cattle. At the beginning of the journey the crackers went very well to eat dry, but I'll never forget the first time I saw a meal made out of sea biscuit broken into milk. I had called at Uncle Brigham's tent . . . where he was just taking some for dinner and he invited me to have a bowl; but I declined, with thanks, and a feeling of wonder how he could relish it. When it came to sitting down daily to milk and water porridge and crackers in it, it became so nauseous that hunger could not tempt me to eat it.

Journey across IowaHC36She concluded: "Some of the strongest, who were more exposed, became prostrated with fever and ague, etc. before arriving at the Chariton River." [^9]

Journey across IowaHC36Come the first water-logged day of spring, Helen's husband, Horace K. Whitney, could only say, "Oh, what dismal days those were!" [^10]

Journey across IowaHC36Brigham's dream of securing a new resting place was drowning in the mudflats of Iowa. It may have been a church on the move, but in Iowa it mired in the mud, and the situation quickly became untenable. He was learning the hard way that he may have been able to flee his enemies but he could not get ahead of his people.

Journey across IowaHC36Little wonder he began to vent his rising frustrations at the bedeviling circumstances which enveloped them. "When we commenced to prepare for our exodus," he wrote,

Journey across IowaHC36we were encouraged with the offer of teams, etc. for our benefit but when we left with some 1,800 souls . . . we also found that great company almost destitute of provision and after feeding and nourishing and nursing them as a mother does her infant till the last breast is sucked dry, we will give them a good farm, send their teams back to Nauvoo, bless them and leave them. [^11]

Journey across IowaHC36By early April it became obvious that their original plan had to be revised. First, the summer way station once planned for Council Bluffs and Grand Island had to be moved eastward to hastily found clearings in south-central Iowa that they called Garden Grove and, further westward, Mt. Pisgah. Like it or not, the most poorly provisioned, as well as some of the better prepared, would have to remain at one of the farms to plant crops and prepare a refuge for the thousands yet to come. Then a much smaller, more mobile Company of the Twelve would be free to move ahead. Speaking at outdoor Sunday services at Garden Grove on 26 April, Brigham said:

Journey across IowaHCWe have set out to find a land and a resting place where we can serve the Lord in peace. We will leave some here because they cannot go farther at present. They can stay here for a season and recruit, and by and by pack up and come on, while we go a little farther and lengthen out the cords and build a few more stakes, and so continue on until we can gather all the saints, and plant them in a place where we can build the House of the Lord in the tops of the mountains. [^12]

Journey across IowaHC37 Hosea Stout, bodyguard and overall camp chief of police, noted in his diary of 29 April that at Garden Grove, not quite halfway across Iowa Territory, "it was determined now to send 100 men without any families across the mountains in time to put in as early a crop as possible and to this end Brother Orson Pratt made a report of the amount of things necessary for a fit out for one hundred." [^13]

Journey across IowaHC37Brigham's tone turned more critical as their delay became longer. "When the removal westward was in contemplation at Nauvoo," he said, "had the brethren submitted to our counsel and brought their teams and means and authorized me to do as the spirit and wisdom of the Lord directed with them, then we could have outfitted a company of men that were not encumbered with large families and sent them over the mountains to put in crops and build houses." He continued:

Journey across IowaHC37Instead of taking this course the Saints have crowded on us all the while, and have completely tied our hands by importuning and saying: `Do not leave us behind. Wherever you go, we want to go and be with you,' and thus our hands and feet have been bound which has caused our delay to the present time, and now hundreds at Nauvoo are continually praying and importuning with the Lord that they may overtake us and be with us, and just so it is with the saints here. They are afraid to let us go on and leave them behind, forgetting that they had covenanted to help the poor away at the sacrifice of all their property. [^14]

Journey across IowaHCMountain men, overlanders, and the Mormons themselves well knew that the latest safe date for leaving the Missouri River in time to cross the Rockies before the mountain snows was early- to mid-June and only then with adequate supplies and ample provisions. So it should come as no surprise to learn that three weeks after the above-mentioned Garden Grove outburst, with the lead companies only 37 miles further west at their next farm station at Mt. Pisgah, that their leader sounded even more critical. "If the brethren will continue to tie our hands so that we cannot find a resting Camp at Keokuk, Iowa, by Frederick Piercy place, our enemies will inquire `Where is Zion?' Don't know. `And where is your Gospel?' You have none." [^15]

38Meanwhile, James Strang was having a field day at Brigham's expense and continued to do so as long as the Saints lay scattered and exposed across an open prairie with no home in sight. "But did not Joseph contrive the California scheme a little before his death," he asked in a March 1846 article.

38No, nor at any other time. He contrived a scheme for 25 men without families to take a mission among the Indians and take measures for establishing a stake among them at which they could have the Gospel preached and be taught in the arts of civilization. Quite another thing from taking out thousands of women and children to perish by famine, flood and Indian war. [^16]

38

38"If they ever reach California," he later wrote in his Voree Herald,

38

their dependence must be partly upon slow travel and partly upon miracle—but chiefly upon the latter. . . . Any person who may visit the `Camp of Israel' and is in possession of the common necessities of life, will leave it better satisfied with his condition in life. If the Mormons do not suffer some before they reach California we are not gifted with the spirit of prophecy. [^17]

39In the summer of 1846 Strang announced a new revelation concerning the future of his church and the westward traveling Latter-day Saints. "Trouble not yourselves any more concerning those who have been driven out of my city and gone into the wilderness," it began.

39For in the day that they fled to the wilderness where I had not told them to go and were cast out of my holy city, which they had polluted, and from their habitations round about; even in that very day were they rejected of me. For with much long suffering and patience had I waited on them and warned them and sent my servants unto them; and they would not return unto me . . . and therein have I judged them with grievous sickness and sore judgments; therefore are they utterly cast out. [^18]

Journey across IowaHC39By early June, still several days east of Council Bluffs, although finally enjoying the dry warm weather that had eluded them since leaving Nauvoo, Brigham "told the Saints they were hedging up their own way by the course they were pursuing" and "he could safely prophesy that the Saints would not cross the mountains this season, and that is what many of the brethren wish—they would rather go to hell than be left behind." [^19]

Journey across IowaHC39His final harangue on the topic came after it had become obvious that the 1846 exodus to the Rockies had been all but forfeited. "We will not cross the Mountains as soon as we anticipated," he admitted. "But I will not find fault. I will let God do that. . . . I can tell the brethren what they were doing . . . they have hedged up their own way by praying continually saying I am poor, I have done all I could for the church . . . and all the devils between this and the nethermost part of hell are acting in concert with their prayers." [^20]

Journey across IowaHC39On 2 June 1846 the camp, now numbering over 500 wagons, having left several hundred behind at both Garden Grove and Mt. Pisgah, rolled out in the direction of Council Bluffs on dry land, determined to reach the Missouri. "I stopped my carriage on the top of a rolling prairie and I had [a] most splendid view," recorded Wilford Woodruff just west of Mt. Pisgah.

Journey across IowaHCI could stand and gaze to the east, west, north, and south and behold the Saints pouring out and gathering like clouds from the hills and dales, grove and prairie with their teams, wagons, flocks, and herds by hundreds and thousands as it were until it looked like the movements of a great nation. [^21]

Journey across IowaHC40They finally reached the Missouri River on 14 June. Their trek across Iowa had taken them sixteen weeks, three times as long as anyone had expected, and had cost them not merely provisions, time, and energy, but almost every hope of reaching the mountains that year.

Journey across IowaHC40In retrospect, some might wonder if Brigham may not have been as upset with himself as he was with his people. Surely he had many days to reconsider their hasty Nauvoo departure. Many more Saints should have been told to stay back until the wet part of spring had passed and to come on in May. No doubt their route plans might have been better formulated. Yet none could have foreseen the terrible weather that invariably wrecked their plans. And except for isolated instances, his people were still with him and their course still firmly set.

40"BY THE RIVERS OF BABYLON WE SAT DOWN AND WEPT"

40In stark contrast to the estimated 2,700 other Oregon and California emigrants of 1846 that had long since started west along the Platte River trail, the Mormons presented a dazed and desperate spectacle. Exhausted, ill-provisioned, unwelcomed, and scattered across a wilderness of three hundred miles, 12,000 to 15,000 Latter-day Saints camped in peril. Some were still trying to get out of Nauvoo. Many without provisions were back at Sugar Creek and nearby eastern Iowa settlements. Hundreds more toiled to put in crops at Garden Grove and Mt. Pisgah. And the advance companies looked out on the Indian lands of the Missouri valley at Council Bluffs where there were no settlements, no crops to harvest, and little time to regroup. It was all but too late for even the most fully provisioned and rested to head west. And they still feared they would be barred from their westward exodus by their Missouri enemies, by Indian attacks, or by that rumored U.S. Army wary of Mormon intentions among Indian peoples already unhappy and distrustful of Washington.

Mormon BattalionHCJust hours before making contact with Captain James Allen of the U.S. Army—having heard rumors that Major R. B. Mitchell, Indian Agent at Enlistment of the Mormon Battalion, by C. B. Hancock Council Bluffs, had requested government troops to keep the peace and prevent the Mormons from allying with the Council Bluffs Indians—Brigham made one last chance at exodus. He instructed his newly-arrived pioneers to "report themselves and be enrolled in a company as one would be selected to go over the mountains and put in seed; for he was aware that all that men and hell could invent to hedge up the way of the camp would be hatched up." [^22]

Mormon BattalionHC41"It is for the salvation of the church," he once again reminded William Huntington, "that a pioneer company start immediately and we call upon all the saints at Mt. Pisgah and within call to listen to our delegates, learn the particulars from them and help them without delay." [^23] The record then states:

Mormon BattalionHC41Pres. Young moved that we all go over the mountains, leaving our families, which was sustained by unanimous vote.

41

Mormon BattalionHC41Pres. Young asked who would volunteer to leave their families and go over the mountains; scores voted.

41

Mormon BattalionHCPres. Young said: If the church is blown to the four winds and never gathered again, remember—I have told you, how, when and where to gather, and if you do not go now, remember and bear me witness in the day of judgment.

42

Mormon BattalionHC42When God tells a man what to do, he admits of no argument, and I want no arguments, and if they will go, I will warrant them safety in so doing. [^24]

Mormon BattalionHC42Stephen W. Kearny's Army of the West was, in fact, in the region in full force, but instead of preventing the Mormons, it came petitioning them.

Mormon BattalionHC42Although Washington had successfully enlisted sufficient numbers of cavalry regiments in such far western states as Illinois and Missouri, Kearny's critical need was for more infantry—foot soldiers from frontier regions who could step march into the intended areas of military action as quickly as possible. For all their expressions of wrath against Washington for its reluctance to mitigate their sufferings in Missouri and Illinois, the Mormons were in the right place: the direct line of fire in Washington's fight with Mexico. Better to have them as allies than as uncertain supporters in regions not yet part of the United States. [^25]

Mormon BattalionHC42Although many considered Kearny's invitation as a ploy, a government trick to deflect and deter the Mormon march westward, Brigham and those closest to him viewed it as divine assistance, if not intervention, a propitious culmination of secret negotiations in Washington by Jesse C. Little and other Mormon emissaries for any kind of government contracts—fort construction, mail delivery, map making, or trail development—to help finance their migration costs.

Mormon BattalionHC42As early as 26 January, Little had received his appointment from Church leaders in Nauvoo to travel to Washington and "if our government shall offer any facilities for emigrating to the Western coast, embrace these facilities, if possible." [^26] From there, he was to go on to Philadelphia and once again meet with Thomas L. Kane, their single most influential friend and advocate in government's inner circles. Son of Elisha Kane, a leading Pennsylvania judge and highly placed supporter of the Democratic party, Kane had the ear and the sympathy of administration officials, elected representatives and senators, and even of President Polk. Kane used his influence liberally to resist the anti-Mormon criticisms of Thomas Benton and other senators from the western states and to plead passionately their cause. More than any other man, Kane was responsible for the call of the Mormon Battalion. [^27]

Mormon BattalionHC43By 2 July, after no small amount of encouragement, promises, and assurances—in what really was a display of Brigham's spirited leadership—enough men had enlisted, albeit reluctantly, to make possible a new wilderness battalion. Distrustful of government intentions and fearful of leaving wives, families, and sweethearts in an unknown wilderness on an uncertain exodus, some 500 men agreed to go only on conditions that their leaders provide for and protect their loved ones, that their pay of $16 per month per enlistee be retrieved and brought back to help not only their own families but the covenant poor generally, and that they be led by their own officers as much as possible. Armed with these assurances and the long stock barreled rifles of the U.S. Army, the Mormon Battalion began its famous 2,000-mile march to the Pacific via the Santa Fe Trail, leaving the Mormon camps seriously weakened in numbers but significantly strengthened in influence. [^28]

43To celebrate the moment, a farewell ball was held with William Pitt's brass band furnishing the music. "A more merry dancing soul I have never seen, though the company went without refreshments," wrote Kane, who had come all the way from Washington to confer with the Mormon leaders.

43Dancing continued until the sun dipped below the Omaha hills. Silence was called, and a well cultivated mezzo-soprano voice, belonging to a young lady with fair face and dark eyes, gave with quartet accompaniment a little song . . . touching to all earthly wanderers.

43"By the rivers of Babylon we sat down and wept. We wept when we remembered Zion." [^29]

43In return for raising a battalion for the American cause, Brigham Young extracted written pledges from Captain Allen to allow the Latter-day Saints to settle not only in the Pottawattamie lands on the east bank of the Missouri River but, more surprisingly, also in Indian countries west of the Missouri.

President Young asked the captain if an officer enlisting men in Indian lands had not a right to say to their families, "You can stay till your husbands return." Allen replied that as a representative of the President of the United States he could act until "he notified the President, who might ratify his engagements, or indemnify for damage; the President might give permission to travel through the Indian country and stop whenever and wherever circumstances required." [^30]

44Wanting to settle as many as possible on the west bank of the Missouri and to get their vast cattle herds ahead of them to help ensure a speedier departure in the spring, when ferrying the swollen river would be more difficult, camp leaders accepted Allen's recommendation to settle at Grand Island, some sixty miles west on the Platte River. "There is a salt spring at the head of the island, where buffalo resort, and we can make our own salt. Thither we want to go without delay, with all the teams of the camp, unload from five hundred to one thousand of the wagons to return immediately to Nauvoo, Garden Grove, etc. and before spring carry to the Platte every poor but honest soul that has not the means to go." [^31]

44The Grand Island plan was short-lived, however. For one thing, just to ferry so many people, cattle, and other animals across the Missouri would take weeks, if not months. For another, scouts had located ideal pasture lands and rush bottoms up the Missouri River a few miles, which would do just as well, if not better, than Grand Island. Recent word out of the Platte country was that the Pawnee and Sioux were again at war and that Grand Island might turn into a battle zone between them. [^32] Also, well-stocked Missouri merchants and farmsteads to the south could prove helpful through the coming winter. Finally, their plan to build a flour mill, complete with millstones and casting, would fare better closer to water transportation.

44Some of their leading scouts—particularly the independent-minded George Miller and his assistant, James Emmett—were bent on exploring up the Platte or Niobrara Rivers as far west as Fort Laramie in order to identify the best route to the Rockies. [^33] "The people was at liberty," wrote Heber C. Kimball, "to choose whether to go over the mountains with Br. [George] Miller, to go to Grand Island, or to go back on the other side [of] the river. The most of them was for going with Miller." [^34]

Consequently, by early August the Council of the Twelve had taken into consideration the propriety of wintering on the Missouri and had concluded to settle on either side of the Missouri River in the Council Bluffs region. [^35] "We are satisfied," wrote Brigham Young to George Miller, who was then taking settlement not among the Pawnees as instructed but among the Poncas on the Niobrara River some 60 miles northwest of the main camp, "that it will be impolitic for any company to attempt to cross the mountains this fall." [^36]

Camp of the PoorHC45There was also bad news coming from Nauvoo: hundreds were being driven out without time for adequate preparation and provision. The Carthage Convention had made good on its promise to expel, by mob force, the few Latter-day Saints still left in Nauvoo along with any new residents in town. The "Battle of Nauvoo" in mid-September included rifle and cannon fire; by 17 September, Nauvoo's defenders had no choice but to surrender to an overwhelming force of at least 1,500 armed men intent on expelling the population. The result was near pandemonium, with the citizens in their sick and weakened condition sheltering in hastily erected bivouacs across the river in Montrose, Iowa.

Camp of the PoorHC45"In every part of the city," one impartial observer recorded,

Camp of the PoorHC45scenes of destitution, misery and woe met the eye. Families were hurrying away from their homes, without a shelter, without means of conveyance, without tents, money, or a day's provision, with as much of their household stuff as they could carry in their hands. Sick men and women were carried upon their beds, weary mothers with helpless babes dying in their arms hurried away—all fleeing they scarcely knew or cared whither, so it was from their enemies, whom they feared more than the waves of the Mississippi, or the heat and hunger and lingering life and dreaded death of the prairies in which they were about to be cast. The ferry boats were crowded, and the river bank was lined with anxious fugitives, sadly awaiting their turn to pass over and take up their solitary march to the wilderness. [^37]

Camp of the PoorHC45Such disturbing, though not entirely surprising, news could not have come at a more trying moment for the advance companies of pioneers, who were themselves struggling against time and nature to erect temporary settlements at Winter Quarters and across the Missouri River in the Council Bluffs regions of western Iowa. Nevertheless, in keeping with their promise to help bring on the poor and the less advantaged, and regardless of their own personal circumstances, many freed up their teams and wagons to send back to Montrose and other settlements where their relatives and friends languished behind.

Camp of the PoorHCOn 21 July 1846, the Council of the Twelve Apostles had organized the "Pottawattamie High Council" among the settlers on the west side of the Missouri River. Among its many responsibilities, this council was directed "to use all means in your power to have all the poor saints brought from Nauvoo and locate them here for the winter, or at either of the farms back as circumstances and your best judgement may dictate." [^38]

Camp of the PoorHC46On the very day the Battle of Nauvoo broke out, several volunteered to leave Winter Quarters and return to Nauvoo with teams "to bring up the poor Saints" as soon as their hay was cut, their lots surveyed, and cabins erected for their own immediate families. Orville M. Allen was appointed foreman of the first such relief company. Said Brigham Young in his call for help:

Camp of the PoorHC46I have felt sensibly there was a good deal of suffering among the saints in Nauvoo, as there has been amongst us, but the Lord God who has fed us all the day long, has his care still over us and when the saints are chastened enough, it will cease. I have never believed the Lord would suffer a general massacre of this people by a mob. If ten thousand men were to come against us, and no other way was open for our deliverance, the earth would swallow them up. [^39]

Camp of the PoorHC46In addition to Allen, James Murdock set out to travel the 327 miles back across Iowa with scores of spare teams of horses and mules; his instructions were to save as many as possible.

Camp of the PoorHC46Their missions of mercy stand tall in the annals of Mormon and Iowa history. On 7 October, Allen reached the "misery camps" at Montrose, where he found over 300 men, women, and children huddled in makeshift shelters, subsisting on boiled and parched corn and river water. Some had died; others were falling victim to exposure and to typhus and other fevers. Allen soon gathered up a company of 157 souls in 28 wagons.

Camp of the PoorHC46Such unhappy conditions set the stage for an incident that many saw as nothing less than miraculous. Thomas Bullock, official clerk to the Quorum of the Twelve and suffering with a sick family of his own at Montrose, recorded the following:

Camp of the PoorHCThis morning we had a direct manifestation of the mercy and goodness of God. A large, or rather several large flocks of quails, flew into camp. Some fell on the wagons, some under, some on the breakfast tables. The boys and the brethren ran about after them and caught them alive with their hands. Men who were not in the church marvelled at the sight. . . . The boys caught about twenty alive. . . . Every man, woman and child had quails to eat for their dinner and after dinner the flocks increased in size. . . . The quails flew around the camp, many delighted in it. Then all the flock would rise, fly around our camp again a few rods off and then would alight again and close to the camp. This was repeated more than half a dozen times. [^40]

Camp of the PoorHC47Meanwhile, close behind, Murdock's rescue company finished what Allen had begun, bringing all that remained out of the poor camps of Nauvoo. [^41]

47Their plan to cross the mountains in 1846 was finally surrendered, a victim to nature's intransigence, their own undue haste and inadequate preparations, Hancock County's atrocities, and Washington's invitations. Yet if they could not reach their new mountain home that season, they had at least forged an opportunity to rest and regroup in the wilderness and to find the time and means to prosecute their relentless migration come spring. Zion would rest for a season.

47"OUR OBJECT IS TO GET MEANS TO ASSIST AWAY"—FINANCING THE COSTS OF EXODUS

47The costs of moving so many people so far would be enormous and would strain every budget, collectively and individually. Consequently, the Quorum of the Twelve decided on four critical strategies to raise the necessary income to make their journey possible. The first was to raise as much money as possible from the tithes and offerings of the membership everywhere. [^42] The second was for the Church to advance to families, the poor especially, the necessary funds (almost always in the form of a wagon and teams), which were to be reimbursed later from the sale of their private Nauvoo properties and in future donations. The third was to petition governments near and far for as much assistance as possible. The fourth was to sell off valuable Church properties. [^43]

The Carthage killings had wrought a complicated and devastating effect on Church finances. Joseph Smith had left no will and had seldom distinguished between his efforts to provide for his family and to help the new members flocking into the city. He had used his own personal credit to finance most of the original Church property purchases in Nauvoo and to fund various Nauvoo business dealings. At the time of his death, he was at least $70,000 in debt, mainly because of the slow rate of property repayments and other business challenges. His application for bankruptcy was denied and the question remained unresolved at the time of his death. The issue of ownership and obligation became a point of ceaseless irritation between his widow, Emma Smith, and Brigham Young. Each would claim the assets to pay their respective obligations. Neither won because property values soon declined to near zero, but the issue would sear for a century, unresolved and unforgiven. [^44]

48A full accounting of the financial state of the Church on the eve of the exodus is impossible to reconstruct, considering the scattered nature, scarcity, and confidentiality of extant records. But enough has survived to give more than a passing glance at such things. In Nauvoo members paid four kinds of tithing: cash, labor, in kind, and property. Those who made more contributed more. For instance, one member paid $500 cash in tithing toward the cost of outfitting the ship Brooklyn, in which Sam Brannan and hundreds of Saints sailed in the spring of 1846 from New York City to Yerba Buena, California. Another, one of Nauvoo's wealthier citizens, later contributed an amount double that above, also in tithing. On the other hand, one poor woman gave 10 knots of stocking yarn, value $.50, also one pair of stockings, and one pair of socks in tithing for value in kind donation of $1.37. [^45]

48Labor tithing—donating one day of work in ten—was contributed by those constructing the temple and was calculated at a differential rate depending on their particular expertise or craft. Even after death their contributions were recorded, as shown in the following entry:

48Received of Moses Horn three days labor at eight and a half shillings per day = $3.00. As per A. P. Rockwood's timebook. In full on his tithing to the time of his death, which occurred on the 14th day of March 1845 whilst working on the stone quarry. His death was occasioned by the fall of a small piece of rock about the size of a hen's egg, which was forced into the air by the blast, and at the same time he was sixteen rods and one foot from the place of the blast. This happened at twenty minutes past three o'clock in the afternoon, and he expired the same evening at five minutes before six o'clock P.M. He had been a member of the Church about one year, and was greatly lamented [by] his widow and three children. [^46]

49Many others contributed tithing in the materials most in need by the pioneer camps, such as compasses, oats, horses, cattle, wagons, atlases, watches, and rifles.

49Those paying property tithing did so in one of two ways: by deeding over a tenth of their total owned acreages or by paying in cash, in kind, or in land-clearing labor as a repayment to the Church, which had given or sold them properties.

49In addition to tithing contributions, some consecrated an additional amount—mostly in response to the call for extra help to get the pioneers away. One gentleman, for instance, gave four kegs of powder, 13,600 percussion caps, and gold at an appraised value of $438.18. [^47]

49Whatever the method, between January and mid-June 1846, members in Nauvoo contributed a sum of $32,867.62 in tithing and consecration funds, of which only 13 percent or $4,284 was in cash or drafts made payable at banks and merchant houses in St. Louis or other river cities. If one can assume that during the previous five years contributions had been made at a rate proportional to the city's growing population, one might argue that several hundred thousands had been contributed to the Church. If the cost of constructing the temple can be set at approximately $200,000, then it is obvious little was left over in Church coffers to fund a massive emigration of people. [^48]

49The largest concentration of available tithing funds should have come from the British Isles, where by 1846 an estimated 10,000 people had converted. [^49] Having been instructed to postpone any further emigration until a new settlement was found, the British Saints should have made a welcomed contribution. On 16 July 1846—the very day the last company of the Mormon Battalion left Council Bluffs and when it was all but certain that an 1846 dash to the mountains was out of the question—Orson Hyde, John Taylor, and Parley Pratt, three of the Apostles, left for England to set in order a deteriorating situation and to return with as much in tithes and offerings as possible before the pioneers' planned departure for the West the following mid-March. While there they were also instructed to explore the possibility of a rumored government plan to underwrite the costs of sending thousands of penniless immigrants to Vancouver Island. Such a plan, its proponents argued, would lessen crowded conditions in London as well as lay firmer British claim to an Oregon Territory now attracting the attention of increasing numbers of American settlers. [^50]

50Wilford Woodruff, presiding officer over the Church in Britain in 1845, had reported earlier on the unsavory state of affairs in London. "I have been a speckled bird and stranger among them," he lamented, "until it has caused me tears and sorrow by day and night. I have grown old under it." In a tone of self-deprecation for not having attended to the problem earlier, Woodruff continued:

50Brother [Reuben] Hedlock continued to carry on business his own way, without consulting me in scarcely anything unless I dragged it out of him and knowing it was my place and duty to understand what was going on I inquired into matters until in several instances he insulted me in the office and manifested much anger in the midst of considerable company, and I quit the room. . . . He has manifested a spirit to gain all the influence possible. . . . Taking all things into consideration I do not think things will go right until Bro. Hedlock is called home and transfers the business into my hands. [^51]

50The trio left Council Bluffs on 31 July on a whirlwind trip that astonishes the modern reader for its ambitious and almost impossible schedule—a clear indication of their financial exigency. They arrived in Liverpool on 3 October and "found that money was daily coming into [a] Joint Stock Co. and that it was received by a set of men who ate and drank it up and squandered it away about as fast as it came in." Orson Hyde and John Taylor continued their report as follows: "The poor saints are lying up their pennies, their sixpence, their shillings etc. and remitting it to the Joint Stock Co. thinking that they were paying their passages to America. . . . They were much confused at our sudden appearance there, yet they attempted to put the fair side out, but unfortunately for them, they had no fair side to turn out, turn which way they would." [^52]

Soon afterward they discharged Reuben Hedlock, Thomas Ward, and other local leaders for operating a fraudulent Joint Stock Society designed to sell members shares in a false migration company. Of the 1,640 pounds raised by the society, in what many thought to be tithing donations, 1,418 pounds had gone into the coffers of the company, most of which ended up in the private hands of its directors. [^53] Little was left over to contribute to the cause of Zion. After traveling all over the British Isles setting in order the various conferences and branches of the Church, canvasing for funds, and collecting tithes, the three Apostles realized a net gain of only 469 sovereigns—some $2,500—a sum that Taylor brought back with him to Winter Quarters the following spring (see chapter 2). [^54]

51In support of the Vancouver Island plan, early in 1847 the Mormon leaders added their own names and those of hundreds of other British Saints to a petition—signed by more than 13,000 and measuring 168 feet long—that was laid at Queen Victoria's throne in hopes that the British treasury could be persuaded to sponsor wide-scale migration to the western shores of Rupert's Land. Her Majesty's government, however, was in no position to set such a costly precedent and promptly refused the request. [^55]

51The second element of their financial plan—advancing Church funds as tithing credits—moved forward while Nauvoo wagon wrights, between August 1845 and the end of January 1846, built some 2,000 wagons in preparation for the trek west. Patterned after the Santa Fe, or Joseph Murphy, wagons then being constructed in St. Louis, the "Mormon wagon" featured the same characteristics that differentiated other western wagons from their Pennsylvania forerunner—the famed Conestoga wagon. The Conestoga's floor was higher in the front and back than in the middle, and its ends sloped outward at the top. Its narrow body and small front wheels ill-suited the Conestoga for the rigors of high plains freighting.

51Joseph Murphy, a wagonmaster for 14 years before coming to St. Louis in 1841, fashioned his new "monster freight wagon" as Henry Walker described it, with a bed 16 feet long and 6 feet high covered by strong canvas and with rear wheels 7 feet in diameter. It became the standard freight wagon of westering America. The typical emigrant wagon was soon patterned after it, though smaller in size, with beds 9 to 10 feet long, sides 2 feet high, and running wheels 5 to 9 feet in diameter. [^56] The Mormon wagon was virtually identical to the Murphy wagon, though not often with the bright green sides of the St. Louis wagons. An often-seen adaptation for the Saints was a special bar on the back to hold small trees and saplings. [^57]

51In May of 1847 Joseph Murphy was selling his wagons at $65 to $75 each, depending on weight and size. [^58] If the cost of a Nauvoo wagon was comparable (and considering the relative isolation of Nauvoo and the scarcity of wood, canvas, tar, and other supplies, the costs could not have been anything less), then the cost of constructing 2,000 Church wagons would have been no less than $140,000. For the individual, a reasonably good wagon with yoke, oxen, and harness cost $120. [^59]

52All across Iowa and beyond, many Latter-day Saints (perhaps the majority)—who were unable to dispose of their properties in an evacuated, depressed Nauvoo market—were encouraged to use Church wagons, with the explicit understanding that they either return them on request or pay back in money or in kind from the net proceeds of any future sale of their Nauvoo property. Brigham instructed the Nauvoo Trustees, soon after his departure from Nauvoo, on how to credit members' use of Church teams:

52Whenever you make sale of the property of any individual which has or may be committed to your charge for that purpose, and receive oxen, horses, mules, cows, beeves, sheep, goods, cash or any other articles in payment to make a perfect entry of those identical articles, and when you shall furnish any individual with an outfit with any of those articles, or from any church funds which are or may be in your possession, that you also make a full entry with perfect description of the same and forward us a copy . . . this course strictly adhered to will cut off much occasion of difficulty and hard feelings among the Brethren hereafter. [^60]

52Until they did so, they could be asked to surrender them—as did William Huntington—at any time for the benefit of those with even less provisions following on behind. Wrote Huntington: "There I had one of the most severe trials I ever had—expecting that on Monday morning my goods and family to be left on the ground and by the charity of others to be helped up to the arm [Garden Grove], as I had no team of my own, having in Nauvoo, according to council given my house and lot into the hands of the Trustees in Trust by Deed, according to the covenant of the whole Church at October [1845] conference that we would do all we could to help the Church away." [^61]

The securing of adequate provisions was the responsibility of the individual family. The minimal cost of outfitting a family was $100. "I much doubt $500 would fit out a family of five persons with all the essentials," wrote William Pickett. [^62] At the time, a general laborer earned $1 per day, a mechanic $1.50 to $2.00. Furthermore, work was seasonal for most laborers. "A man with not a very large family, may, during the spring and summer, with strict economy, lay by a portion of his earnings, but he must be lucky, indeed, who does not find it necessary during the following winter, to spend all he has saved, together with all he can make, until spring comes again." [^63]

53Their hasty winter departure, their relative poverty, and their inability to sell their properties account for so many leaving Nauvoo with insufficient provisions for the westward trek. "Adequate" meant a year's provisions, a well-built wagon, a dependable team of oxen or horses, some milk cows, 1000 pounds of flour, 100 pounds of sugar, farming and mechanical tools, cooking utensils, sufficient seeds, summer and winter clothing, a musket, and other necessities. [^64] To afford it, while moving west many took jobs for a fortnight at a time in the eastern Iowa countryside, working as farmhands, building fences and barns, and playing concerts in obscure eastern Iowa hamlets as part of William Pitt's brass band, all the while impeding the forward march of the camp.

53Because those in the wagons were using up Church resources as fast, if not faster, as they were contributing to them, Brigham had to look elsewhere. An ambitious request to the general membership throughout the United States and Canada and a general subscription from the public would have to wait until the fall and winter when more manpower would be available. (See chapter 11.) In the meantime, letters were sent in search of tithes and donations to places everywhere where large numbers of members were congregating. Joseph L. Heywood, for instance, was in St. Louis in October 1846, "for the purpose of soliciting aid for our destitute brethren and sisters." [^65]

53If the tithes and sacrifices of the people were insufficient to meet all the costs, then might not governments help? Such explains the remarkable round of negotiations that resulted in the Mormon Battalion, an invitation that can no longer be seen as an imposition on a wounded and wearied people as much as it was a generated invitation stemming from the Church itself. Not only were enlistees paid cash up-front at enlistment, but they were also promised $22,000 clothing allowance for boots, blankets, hats, and other necessities. Much of this money, though certainly not all of it, was transferred to the Church to help meet the overall migration costs.

The men gave their leaders and Jesse Little several hundred dollars to aid them on their missions and a total of $5,835 for their families back at the Bluffs. Parley P. Pratt was selected to return with John D. Lee with the money, arriving back at the Missouri on 11 August. [^66] Choosing "to march barefoot and without uniforms the boys have been liberal to us," wrote Orson Hyde in a letter dispatched with the returning Pratt. "We send you the papers of the respective companies containing the amount each man has sent and for whom it is intended. We have pledged our sacred honors that the money shall be safely conveyed to their families. . . . Now all we have to say is to put it into the hands of the proper persons." [^67]

54The Battalion moneys proved a godsend to the Latter-day Saints in a time of great need, but also posed a difficult challenge, particularly the fair and equitable distribution of such funds. Brigham tried to balance the need to protect and preserve the health and interests of the Battalion families with the needs of the entire pioneer camp, many of whom languished in poverty and difficulty. Despite the fact that bishops were called to care for small wards of pioneers—the first such use of bishops on a ward basis—and to tend to the welfare needs of Battalion families and others, misunderstandings and contentions were bound to arise. But at least the funds were available to pool their resources and to send Bishop Newel K. Whitney and others to St. Louis "to get such things as we want to carry over the mountains." There they could buy needed supplies and bulk foodstuffs at wholesale prices for the camps at Council Bluffs and elsewhere. [^68]

54Although the British Empire could not be persuaded to assist them, perhaps additional help could come from the United States. Once again Jesse C. Little made his way back East to negotiate quietly for additional government assistance and contracts. Almost anything would have been welcome—help build one or more of a proposed line of forts and supply stations along the Oregon Trail, conduct scientific expeditions, or even carry mail. However, much to everyone's chagrin, Little came away empty handed. [^69]

54Their fourth and final hope for financial relief lay back in Nauvoo, where whatever real wealth the Church still had remained locked up in the declining real estate values of the temple lot and town properties. Long before the pioneers had crossed Iowa, even before they had escaped Nauvoo, Brigham had decided to sell both the Nauvoo and Kirtland temples and other cherished properties in order to obtain the needed funds. Evidence suggests that he fully expected the completion of that sale long before they reached the Missouri.

As early as December 1845, the Council of the Twelve entered into serious negotiations with the Roman Catholic Bishop of Chicago to sell the Nauvoo temple as a Catholic college. In a series of secret meetings in the upper room of the temple, Reverend W. Hamilton of Springfield and Reverend Mr. Tucker of Quincy asked if the 48-room temple could be suitable for a college. Tucker said they might want many of the surrounding properties as well, because Nauvoo could become "a fine gathering spot" for Catholic immigrants coming to America from Europe via New Orleans and the Mississippi River. Brigham agreed, saying, "the Nauvoo properties would be valued at one half the going price in the western country. He then further stated their reasoning: `Our object is to get means to assist away the poor—there are hundreds of families who are poor—looking to us and we want to get means to sustain the poor, who have been robbed of their all.' " [^70]

55Reverend Tucker, impressed with the potential of the temple and the layout of the city for their purposes, left Nauvoo confident that "he had men in St. Louis and New York who could easily raise the money," but unsure if he could finish the deal in time to meet the seller's timetable. "The time is so short," he concluded. [^71]

55All across Iowa Brigham clung to the hope that the temple would sell soon enough, before any estoppel or other legal impediment by Emma Smith, Strang, or any other could hedge up the way. Orson Hyde, writing in late April 1846 from Nauvoo, referred to "a conditional offer for the Temple" from Catholic interests and "it is believed we can get $200,000. . . . He also wishes to purchase much other property." [^72]

55That there was trepidation, even among the Twelve, at selling off the jewel in their crown is obvious. "We have felt much anxiety on that subject," admitted Apostle George A. Smith on 26 April, "until we all agreed in council not to sell it last winter. But if you in your wisdom should think it best to sell the same to help the poor in the present emergency we frankly concur notwithstanding we feel opposed to a Methodist congregation ever listening to a mob Priest in that holy Place; but are willing to sacrifice our feelings at times for the good of the Saints." [^73]

55Two days later, the Council met at Garden Grove and the subject of the temple was again taken into consideration. The conclusion of their deliberations was "that inasmuch as we were driven from our inheritances and homes and from the temple that all sales of our property were but forced sales done for the purpose of keeping a poor people from perishing and that we would be justified by our Heavenly Father in so doing." [^74]

On 29 April at Garden Grove the Twelve determined to instruct the Trustees at Nauvoo to sell both temples "for the simple reason that we were going so far away that they will not be of any service to us and the money was needed to help the poor away from among the Gentiles." [^75] The very next day, 30 April 1846, the Council of the Twelve authorized Orson Hyde and Wilford Woodruff to complete the sale of the temple for $200,000 and to bring $25,000 of the proceeds immediately to the camp, then in central Iowa. [^76]

56However, the sale of the temple to Catholic interests, or to any other party, never materialized. If the asking price was not problematic, the deteriorating social conditions certainly were. Hancock County violence, the rising tide of persecution, and the fear of possible fire and destruction all negated any realistic chance of sale. Besides, with property values plummeting, the astute buyer would bide his time. [^77]

56There was more to selling the temple than finances. The evidence shows that Strang was eyeing it for his own purposes. He could count no greater coup than to take possession of the Nauvoo Temple. Simply possessing it would greatly strengthen his claim to legitimacy and succession.

56William Smith, who had defected from the Church, encouraged Strang to "go for it" in order "to help keep up the spirit of interest in the place and help keep possession." He went on: "I still notice that the apostates in Nauvoo are trying every art and tact possible to sell the Church property . . . Nauvoo Temple for sale, Kirtland Temple for sale. How it looks to barter the Lord's property. Perhaps you had best [take] notice a little of this in the Herald." [^78]

56Smith's suggestion obviously took effect: in a September article Strang refused to recognize the Nauvoo Trustees as successors to Joseph Smith or in any way representative of a First Presidency. They cannot "set up any pretense to title to the Temple, or any other Church property" he wrote in his newspaper. "All we ask of the Brighamites is that they will not burn the Temple down and lay it to the mob. We will risk the legal right." [^79]

56Later, at their October 1846 conference,

56resolutions were passed unanimously protesting against the sale of the temples at Nauvoo and Kirtland and expressing the opinion that the men who profess to be trustees in trust at Nauvoo are not legally in office and have no right to convey title to any property of the Church. We caution all men against purchasing church property of them. [^80]

57Crossing the Missouri River, by C. C. A. Christensen

57Although nothing came of Strang's effort to acquire the temple, it was a concern in the trustees' ongoing efforts to sell.

57Realizing that a late-season dash over the mountains was no longer a viable alternative and casting about for a large site to winter his people, Brigham used his newfound temporary leverage with the federal government to wrest reluctant permission for them to stay temporarily on both sides of the Missouri River at Council Bluffs. The land on the west bank, today northern Omaha (Florence), Nebraska, was then territory granted by the U.S. government to the dispossessed tribes of Otoe and Omaha Indians, who were sandwiched between the Sioux Indians on the north and the Pawnee on the south and west. For as long as the Mormons occupied the west bank of the Missouri, a claim ever opposed by the Office of Indian Affairs, they were unwitting arbitrators of intertribal Indian conflicts and offered protection to those tribes in greatest peril.

57"AS JONAH'S GOURD"—THE CITY OF WINTER QUARTERS

Settlement at Winter QuartersHCWinter Quarters began as a city in the wilderness, a ragged Nauvoo transplanted from the eastern banks of the Mississippi to the western slopes of the Missouri, a people hounded amidst a people driven, both hated castoffs of an American society unwilling to accept either of their claims to a future. The tragic irony was that the Latter-day Saints were safer in the upper Missouri wilderness amidst so-called "savages" than they ever were among "civilized" peoples back in Missouri and Illinois.

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC58Before year's end Winter Quarters grew, in Brigham's own words, "as Jonah's gourd." By the end of December, 4,000 people lived in Nebraska's first city, occupying 700 log houses, huts, caves, and hovels. Another 3,000 were settling down in various small groups around Council Bluffs in western Iowa Territory, and another 2000 to 3000 took up winter shelter back in Mt. Pisgah, Garden Grove, and other smaller Iowa communities as far back as Bentonsport and Farmington. More than 1,500 took winter refuge in St. Louis, Missouri, and in other river towns. "Modern Israel," scattered over 10,000 square miles, lay tired and exhausted, making for winter, waiting for spring.

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC58One woman, writing to her family back East, gave this description of Winter Quarters and an insight into her own faith:

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC58Our people have built an excellent grist mill here; it cost some thousands of dollars, but does first rate business. I should like to tell you how many hundred houses we have in our city but have not lately ascertained . . . about 800. . . . Some are very good log houses, and others about the medium sort, and many poor indeed, but better than none. The land is far from being level here but the hills are really beautiful, far more so to me, than the level land could be. If you could sail up the River and take a peep at our place, you would say it was romantic and grand notwithstanding the log huts. [^81]

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC58The wintry exodus, their general lack of provisions and especially of fruits and vegetables, the inadequate medical treatment, the exposed Missouri River habitation, and the poor-camp refugees from the Nauvoo War—it was all bound to catch up with them sooner or later. A deadly scourge soon began to ravage the settlement. While some downplay the tragic story of suffering at Winter Quarters, overwhelming evidence shows the Saints were perishing in epidemic numbers. Their weakened and exposed condition made many vulnerable to the malaria-like sicknesses of such a river region as well as to scurvy and other diseases of malnutrition.

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC59Lorenzo Snow, a future President of the Church, described the tragic scenes at Mt. Pisgah this way:

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC59The latter part of July and August witnessed a general and almost universal scene of sickness throughout Pisgah. Well persons could not be found to take care of the sick; it was indeed a distressing scene. A great number of deaths occurred and it was very often very difficult to get their bodies decently interred. In one or two instances bodies were put into the ground without any coffin or box. Scarcely a family escaped sickness and very few where death did not make an inroad. A general spirit of lamentation and sorrow pervaded. [^82]

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC59And the scene at Mt. Pisgah repeated itself everywhere else along the trails. By the end of 1846 at least six hundred had died, with hundreds more the following year. Lorenzo Brown, after bidding adieu to Winter Quarters in 1848, spoke of "the burial ground where hundreds of Saints have found a final resting place and to judge of its appearance," he remarked, "is large enough for the town to have been settled for at least twenty years or more." [^83]

59 James Strang had been right when he predicted many would never reach their destination, but he miscalculated the depth of their commitment and of their devotion to their wilderness leader. "Our president don't stick [balk] at anything that tends to advance the gathering of Israel, or promote the cause of Zion in these last days," wrote Thomas Bullock, clerk to the Twelve. "He sleeps with one eye open and one foot out of bed, and when anything is wanted, he is on hand and his councilors are all of one heart with him in all things." [^84]

Scattered and sick and still uncertain of where they were going, the Latter-day Saints faced an uncertain winter and an unknown future. Not surprisingly, several hundred left to follow Strang or some other leader, while others opted for a new life in Iowa's prime farmland. Their numbers, however, were relatively small. If one reads the journals and letters of those who stayed the course, one senses the enduring faith and abiding commitment of these people to their cause. "You wanted to know what we waited to move for," wrote Sidney Tanner to his parents, brothers, and sisters. "It was to go to a land of freedom where we could enjoy the peace of society and our liberty. We did not want to live in [a] country where there was no peace, no liberty and its citizens [were] not allowed their rights." [^85]

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC60In looking back on the frustrations of 1846, all had reason to ponder on an eventful year, a year of rupture and departure, delay and disappointment. Rather than ascend the mountains, they had barely reached another river. Free of their antagonists, some were falling with disease. Others were leaving. All were hurting. No one knew where they would go or how.

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC60Despite the interruption of raising a battalion and surrendering several hundred of their most able-bodied men, and notwithstanding the need to build a new city while fending off plague and death, their energies remained committed to the pending journey. Winter Quarters and all its companion Iowa settlements would never be anything but temporary waiting places, springboards to springtime action. Their future yet lay to the West.

60NOTES

62"At such stopping points they may entrench themselves with such stockade works or other fortifications as may be necessary for their protection and defence against the Indians. This during the pleasure of the President of the United States" (see Journal History, 16 July 1846). An earlier authorization to stay at Council Bluffs had been extended on 10 July.

62It is interesting to note that such local high councils, as directed by the governing Council of the Twelve, had been established at Garden Grove and at Mt. Pisgah and would soon be on the western side of the Missouri River (i.e., the Winter Quarters High Council). Each was given the authority to administer in both "temporal and spiritual matters" under the direction of the Twelve.

63Between 1840, when the first emigrating converts sailed to America, and the end of 1845 the total British migration was approximately 6,000, many of whom came to Nauvoo and its environs. After the settlement of the Church in the Great Basin, it is conservatively estimated that between 1848 and 1860 some 22,700 British Saints emigrated to America (see P. A. M. Taylor, Expectations Westward: The Mormons and the Emigration of Their British Converts in the Nineteenth Century [1965], 19-20, 43-48). See also Richard L. Jensen, "Transplanted to Zion: The Impact of British Latter-day Saint Immigration upon Nauvoo," BYU Studies 31, no. 1 (Winter 1991): 77-87.

63Orson Hyde, at a tent meeting with the rest of the Twelve on the west side of the Missouri on 24 July 1846, "enquired what appropriation would be asked of the British Parliament in peopling Vancouver's island. Pres. Brigham Young replied, a certain number of acres to each immigrant" (Journal History, 24 July 1846).

64The Murphy wagon must be considered in three parts—bed, top, and running gear. The bed or wooden box was usually nine to ten feet long and four feet wide, with two-foot sides. The bed was usually caulked for protection against river crossing seepage. Many people built a false floor, a foot or so from the bottom of the box, for use in storing supplies.

64The top or cover was of waterproof canvas and the five or six bows supporting it were made of bent hickory. Flaps at the front and a "puckering-string" at the back allowed opening and closing. Inside the wagon, an adult could stand upright along the middle line.

64The running gear consisted of large wooden wheels with iron tires (the front wheels smaller than those in the rear to allow for greater maneuverability); tongue or pole axletrees, front and rear; brake beam and bolsters (George R. Stewart, The California Trail: An Epic with Many Heroes [1962], 108-10). See also George Shumway, et al., Conestoga Wagon 1750-1850: Freight Carrier for 100 Years of America's Westward Expansion (1964), 155-59.

"Prepare good strong two or four horse wagons; crooked or frame beds; obtain good stout oxen, say from five to seven years or eight old. . . . A tent with necessary tent poles, and iron pins to fasten it down. Provide—say fifty pounds of bacon . . . to the person, and about two hundred pounds of breadstuff to each person, large and small. . . . A sack of coffee to each family, and a due proportion of sugar—dried fruit, beans, a good supply of hogs lard, and plenty of soap; the last article is important. Rosin and tallow make the best article for greasing your wagon wheels, and a good jack-screw is highly necessary. . . . Bring a number of good milch cows. . . . Bring a large cedar churn, with iron hoops, and plenty of milk vessels. You will need salt, say a bushel to each family. . . . A good rifle, powder, lead and caps, pistols if you choose. . . . A small supply of medicine is highly necessary. . . . Provide plenty of good warm clothing and bedding, . . . cookery vessels, such as a family needs in the States, are the best to bring. . . . Start with a good supply of shoes or coarse boots, and any goods you bring for clothing, let them be woolen" (Lilburn W. Boggs, "Route to the Pacific," as published in the St. Louis Weekly Reveille, 22 May 1848, on file at the Missouri Historical Society).

---
Notas:
[^5] For good accounts of the history of Nauvoo see the following works: Joseph Smith Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (1973), especially vols. 3-5 [cited hereafter as History of the Church]; B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. (1930), esp. vols. 2-3 [cited hereafter as Comprehensive History of the Church]; Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (1965); and David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (1974).
[^19] Journal History of the Church, 9 Aug. 1846. This is a well-known and excellent resource available at the LDS Church Historical Department, consisting of scrapbook-like entries from private journals, letters, various writings of all kinds, newspaper clippings, and so on, compiled by date by former Assistant Church Historian, Andrew Jenson; cited hereafter as Journal History.
[^23] Journal of Nelson Wheeler Whipple, 25 Feb. 1846, LDS Church Archives. "We thus kept a sharp look out for them for we knew as they had slain Joseph and Hyrum so they would slay Brigham, Heber, and the Twelve if they could."
[^28] The definitive works on the history of the Mormon Battalion are Frank Alfred Golder, The March of the Mormon Battalion from Council Bluffs to California (1928); Daniel Tyler, A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion to the Mexican War 1846-1847 (1969); John F. Yurtinus, "A Ram in the Thicket: The Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1975); and Norma Baldwin Ricketts, The Mormon Battalion: U.S. Army of the West, 1846-1848 (1996). See also Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 50-67.
[^29] The best study of Strang still remains Milo Quaife, The Kingdom of Saint James: A Narrative of the Mormons (1930). The most recent reinterpretation is Roger Van Noord's King of Beaver Island: The Life and Assassination of James Jesse Strang (1988). See also Doyle C. Fitzpatrick, The King Strang Story (1970); Richard E. Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 1846-1852: "And Should We Die . . ." (1987), 18-20; The Diary of James J. Strang, ed. Mark A. Strang (1961); William D. Russell, "King James Strang: Joseph Smith's Successor," in The Restoration Movement: Essays in Mormon History, ed. F. Mark McKiernan, Alma R. Blair, and Paul M. Edwards (1973), 231-56. Strang later removed his followers to Beaver Island in northern Lake Michigan, where his settlement realized only modest success.
[^31] Autobiography of Pioneer John Brown, 1820-1896, arr. John Zimmerman Brown (1941), 72-73. See also Jenson, "Day by Day," Deseret News, 31 May 1947. Lay and Crosby later died in California. Flake lived in Salt Lake City for most of his life, dying in Idaho Falls in 1903 at the age of 75.
[^42] Journal of Willard Richards, 14 Mar. 1847. It is interesting to note that in the dreams which Brigham Young said he had of Joseph Smith while preparing for the exodus, Joseph "stepped toward me, and looking very earnestly, yet pleasantly, said `Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. . . . Tell the brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it'" (Journal History, 23 Feb. 1847).
[^43] Little has been written about the costs of the original departures, although much is available on the costs involved in later migrations. This is particularly true of the Perpetual Emigration Fund and the financing of Mormon emigrant companies to Salt Lake City up until at least 1869 and the completion of the transcontinental rail-road. See Leonard J. Arrington's pathbreaking study, Great Basin Kingdom: An Economic History of the Latter-day Saints 1830-1900 (1958), 77-79.
[^55] For the exact wording of this "Memorial to the Queen for the Relief, by Emigration of a Portion of Her Poor Subjects," see J. B. Munro, "Mormon Colonization Scheme for Vancouver Island," Washington Historical Quarterly, 25, no. 3 (July 1934): 278-85. For a thorough and responsible study on British emigration, see Taylor, Expectations Westward, 18-47.
[^58] The Nauvoo Covenant resembled very closely the earlier Missouri Covenant of 1839, when Brigham Young at Far West, Missouri, proposed "that we this day enter into a covenant to . . . never desert the poor who are worthy, till they shall be out of the reach of the exterminating order of General [John B.] Clark." Some 214 men signed the covenant to assist others "to the utmost of our abilities." (History of the Church, 3:250-54).
[^61] Samuel Taylor argues in his controversial book The Kingdom or Nothing: The Life of John Taylor, Militant Mormon (1976) that both Taylor and Pratt had married plural wives during their return voyages, which was further cause of Brigham's unhappiness. If such was indeed the case, it only represented the conviction in fellow apostles' minds that they were all equal in authority, while underscoring Brigham's concern that until a new First Presidency was established, regulation of this and other practices was virtually impossible to control.
[^82] Journal of Lorenzo Snow, Summer 1846, LDS Church Archives. For more on the topic of death at Winter Quarters, see Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 131-47.
