Richard E. Bennett, We'll Find the Place: The Mormon Exodus 1846-1848 ( 1997)

95"A GREAT AMERICAN DESERT"

95Here was an immense wilderness of arid plains, rugged mountains, and burning deserts, to be crossed before you reached Oregon or California. [^1]

95The well-traveled reader of the late 20th century may find it difficult to identify with the uncertainties, perils, and personal sacrifices characteristic of a mid-19th century march across the vast trans-Mississippi west, which Stephen H. Long termed the Great American Desert. [^2] Overland immigrants were risking their fortunes and their very lives on a journey to an unseen new somewhere. Some went on to fortune and a new life; others turned back or died in the attempt.

95For Brigham Young and the Latter-day Saint pioneers, even more was at stake. The future of the Church was in danger if they were routed by Indians or by Missouri discontents, especially if the leadership were killed, or if they were unable to find a suitable place. This was not a group of individuals bent on fulfilling their personal needs and dreams as much as it was an organization making an expression of faith. The destiny of the Church would go in those wagons, in queen bee fashion, in search of a distant hive. Nothing was certain.

Also uncertain was what would happen to the hundreds of families planning to start their trip in May if the advance company were to fail in its objective: Salvation or starvation? Discovery or dissolution? For them all there were a thousand questions and very few answers. And the ante was up as never before.

96The purpose of this chapter is to review briefly the changing dynamics of the American West on the eve of the Mormon departure, to evaluate the dangers and risks, and to try to recreate the tenor of the time.

96THE ENDING OF AN ERA

96As the vanguard companies rolled west, they saw several wagons laden with fur belonging to Peter B. Sarpy, longtime trader of the American Fur Company, en route from the Pawnee hunting grounds to his post at Bellevue, near Council Bluffs. [^3] Though trade for deer, buffalo, raccoon, and other skins endured for a few more years, Sarpy's wagons symbolized the twilight of an era—a symbolic exit from a colorful stage, for years dominated by the Spanish, French and British fur companies, and mountain men.

96By 1847 the great fur trade era in the western wilds of North America was in steep decline after a half century when furs had defined the history and economy of the American West. It had been the fur trader, as historian Ray Billington put it, who had

96spied out the secrets of all the West, plotted the course of its rivers, discovered the passes through its mountains, and prepared the way for settlers by breaking down Indian self-sufficiency. No single group contributed more to the conquest of the trans-Mississippi region than those eager profit seekers. [^4]

##MESSAGE KEY MISSING: '-'#-97Though the Spanish had been trading with the Plains Indians since before 1700, the fur trade era in American history began in earnest the moment President Thomas Jefferson signed the Louisiana Purchase in 1804. This compact with Napoleon, in one stroke of a pen, doubled the land mass of America by adding the area from the A New Map of Texas, Oregon and California (1846), by S. Augustus Mitchell Mississippi Valley to the Rocky Mountains. The subsequent expedition of Meriwether Lewis and William Clark in 1805-1806 to the mouth of the Columbia River and back to St. Louis proved the existence of navigable waterways to the great Northwest and thus the viability of a profitable fur trade with Europe.

##MESSAGE KEY MISSING: '-'#-97Within a year of the return of Lewis and Clark, Manuel Lisa, a Spanish explorer turned American trader, set out on the first of his many fur-trading expeditions up the Missouri to the Yellowstone River. Lisa was directly responsible for the establishment of the short-lived St. Louis Missouri Fur Company, soon reorganized in 1814 as the Missouri Fur Company. At a time when the two great Canadian rivals—the Hudson's Bay Company and the Northwest Company—were jockeying for control among native tribes all across Prince Rupert's Land (western Canada) and south into the yet illdefined American northwest, Lisa was instrumental in preventing the Plains Indians from aligning themselves with the expanding British and French-Canadian interests.

##MESSAGE KEY MISSING: '-'#-97But mismanagement, undercapitalization, and Indian hostility, especially among the Blackfoot and the Sioux, spelled the demise of Lisa's enterprise. In its wake, Jacob Astor's American Fur Company, begun in 1808, planned a series of forts across the West to capture the fur trade and dominate markets of the Far East, halting his aggressive Canadian rivals in the process. His famous post on the Columbia, Astoria, was a blatant challenge that American interests would take on any and all competitors.

##MESSAGE KEY MISSING: '-'#-97The War of 1812 interrupted the American challenge, however. For a generation the Canadians dominated, especially after the merger of the Hudson's Bay and Northwest Companies in 1821 under the brilliant administration of Governor George Simpson and such able superintendents as John McLoughlin. In turn, McLoughlin hired a team of intrepid explorers and traders, including the man who discovered the Great Salt Lake in 1825—Peter Skene Ogden.

Henry Ashley, founder of the new Rocky Mountain Company, chose new tactics and new territories. Rather than erect a series of forts that would only irritate the natives and invite attack, and rather than rely on Indians who were better hunters than trappers anyway, Ashley hit on a new idea—the rendezvous system. The plan called for his own trappers to ply the high mountain streams for beaver in the safer central Rockies, cache or seclude their winnings, and then, heavily laden, rendezvous once or twice a year at a downstream site with caravans from St. Louis. At such spirited gatherings, pelts and skins would be exchanged for presents, guns, powder, flour, clothing, and more to trade with the tribes. Jedediah Smith, Thomas Fitzpatrick, James Bridger, Milton Sublette, and Robert Campbell, names now synonymous with the Rocky Mountain West, were just some of the mountain men who made the new system succeed. Rendezvous sites they set up included Fort Pierre and Fort William (later renamed Fort Laramie).

99Jedediah Smith, perhaps the most famous of all fur trappers, joined Ashley in 1822. A legend in his own time, this "Knight of the Buckskin" opened the first two overland routes to California—from South Pass to Los Angeles and from the San Joaquin through central Nevada to the Great Salt Lake. He was the first to travel the Pacific coast from San Diego to the Columbia and drew the first maps of the central Rockies and of the Great Basin. Killed in 1831 at the age of 32 by Comanche warriors, Jedediah Smith remains a human monument to the era of the Mountain man. [^5] In 1834 the Rocky Mountain Company sold its interests to the American Fur Company, which soon dominated the American fur trade through its monopoly on trappers, steamboats, and the liquor trade among the natives.

99By the 1840s, with European prices for beaver hats and fur-trimmed outerwear declining, and with the number of fur-bearing animals diminishing, the fur trade was in clear decline—just as the era of overland migrations was beginning in earnest. Courageous missionaries, such as Marcus Whitman and his wife, Narcissa, had made it all the way to Oregon's Willamette Valley, signaling a grand new country open for settlement. The subsequent rise in "Oregon Fever" throughout the Missouri and Mississippi Valleys was directly proportional to the business collapse or "Panic of 1837." This economic disaster, coupled with poor transportation networks and inadequate living quarters in frontier communities, motivated many farmers in Illinois, Missouri, and other western states to head to Oregon for a new life.

Colonel John C. Fremont, that "Pathfinder of the West," embarked on his famous explorations of the Rocky Mountain West in 1842. In 1843 and 1844 he pushed on to Oregon and California in search of passageways through the West, exploring the Platte River Valley, the Sweetwater, and other routes. In immediate demand, his detailed summaries were studied by almost every overland company after 1842. In 1842 the migration was only a trickle, but a thousand followed in 1843 and another three thousand in The Rocky Mountains, by A. C. Warren 1845, greatly strengthening America's claim to Oregon in the face of McLoughlin's benign opposition. Facing the reality of a strong and vigorous American settlement, Britain agreed to sign the Oregon treaty in June 1846, securing for the United States the 49th parallel for a northern boundary. Manifest Destiny was in the air and the West was America's to own.

100Meanwhile, in the Southwest, the Spanish influence had been on the wane for decades. Mexico had declared its independence from Spain in 1821. Shortly thereafter the famous Santa Fe Trail opened the Southwest from St. Louis to Santa Fe. Etienne Provost is still regarded as one of the foremost traders and explorers of the area. In 1845, Texas declared its independence from Mexico, becoming its own republic for a short time before affiliating with the Union. Within a year, the U.S. and Mexico were at war; the Americans hoisted the Stars and Stripes over New Mexico in March 1847 and over California by that summer.

Overridden and then overlooked, scorned and then scattered in the rising rush of American migration were the many Indian tribes east of the Mississippi—the Choctaw, Cherokee, Sauk and Fox, Chippewa, Iowa, Ponca, Omaha, and others. These were removed from their homelands and forced to live within the ill-defined borders of the Great American Desert and to fend for themselves against indigenous native populations and oncoming settlers. Such enforced deportation fanned bitter warfare, sickness, and disease. Some of the Plains tribes, particularly the Sioux, blamed the fur trappers and the new emigrants for the outbreak of a devastating smallpox epidemic in 1837, a scourge that wiped out some 15,000 Sioux and many in other tribes. They also blamed the fur companies for establishing the ruinous liquor trade, for introducing overland emigration with its damage to the Platte and other river valleys, and for the decline of the buffalo on the great plains.

101As early as 1841 the Ogalala Sioux warned D. E. White and other emigrant parties not to pass through their lands. The threat of hostilities became so grave by 1845 that President Polk dispatched Colonel Stephen W. Kearny up the Platte with a large company of dragoons to quiet the tribes and to threaten retaliation for any attack on emigrant trains. And in 1847, Marcus and Narcissa Whitman and several others were killed in an Indian uprising in Oregon. The Latter-day Saints were about to enter an American West where the culture and economy were in rapid transformation and where the Indian tribes were increasingly defensive, restless, and volatile, themselves an unwitting party to the coming tide of American Manifest Destiny. [^6]

101A LAND UNKNOWN

101The dangers and risks of an overland migration in 19th-century America cannot be overestimated. Merrill J. Mattes, one of America's most respected historians of the westward migrations, measured the cost of overland travel:

Here was an immense wilderness of arid plains, rugged mountains, and burning deserts, to be crossed before you reached Oregon or California. Aside from thirst and starvation, there were other perils lurking to strike down the emigrants—drownings at river crossings, getting run over by wagon wheels, caught in a stampede of oxen or trampled by onrushing buffalo, killed—or worse, yet, captured—by by Indians, afflicted with Asiatic cholera, smallpox, mumps, measles, or scurvy, getting stabbed or shot by a fellow emigrant, or more often accidentally shooting yourself through carelessness or dying from fatigue and exposure.

102Mattes concluded that between 1845 and 1870, as many as 10,000 emigrants lost their lives: an average of five graves every mile. [^7]

102The most obvious intimidating factor and an absolute barrier to thousands was geography—first a desert, then a mountainous wall. Since Zebulon M. Pike's early expeditions of 1806-1807 through present day Kansas, Colorado, Texas, New Mexico, and beyond, Americans had been reading about vast "internal deserts" stretching between the Missouri and the Pacific. Lamenting the aridity of the area, the lack of plant production and the barren soils, Pike compared the region to the "sandy deserts of Africa . . . on which not a speck of vegetable matter existed." [^8] In 1819, E. Dana observed in his book, Geographical Sketches on the Western Country, that the whole prairie region "is a wild waste, in a manner devoid of wood or water." [^9]

102This concept of a desert wasteland gained even wider credibility in the writings of Stephen H. Long, who had led a well-appointed expedition westward from Council Bluffs along the Platte River Valley in 1819-1820. His four-month tour of the plains, the most exhaustive scientific expedition up until that time, led him to conclude that the entire region was "a Great American Desert," inhospitable, uninhabitable, and an absolute barrier to civilization. [^10] The domain of the wolf, the rattlesnake, and the Indian, the American West was a fearful and uninviting wilderness.

By the 1840s, however, it was becoming more well-known that crossing the plains was not impossible. In fact, the Platte River Valley probably afforded the most direct route west to the Pacific. Furthermore, explorers had indicated that the north bank of the Platte River was likely the most desirable route. The first fur traders of record to use the north bank route were four men led by Thomas Fitzpatrick in 1824 on their way east from South Pass. Missionaries, including the Whitmans and Eliza Spalding, followed the same route in 1835 and 1836. However, in 1847 the only acceptable maps of the region were Augustine S. Mitchell's and John C. Fremont's, both of which left large areas uncharted and were particularly deficient in distance calculations. That the Mormons would utilize the work of both cartographers is obvious; seeking to improve on them became one of their primary objectives.

103Nothing in their experience with American geography, not even the Alleghenies or the rugged Appalachians, could have adequately prepared the pioneers for the sheer heights and depths of the Rocky Mountains. One wrong step and a wagon team could meet with instant disaster. Winter could come on early and unexpectedly in the high altitudes. Word of just such a disaster—the ill-fated Donner party—had already reached the Missouri River by February 1847. This group chose the southern or Hastings Cutoff route (see chapter 7) through the Great Basin and over the high Sierra, and then met with tragedy, death, and terror late in the fall of 1846.

103"MORMON STORIES"

103Of even greater concern to the Latter-day Saints than desert or mountain was the possibility of armed conflict along the way. They knew they were not the only ones preparing to head west that fateful spring of 1847. Scores of other companies were preparing for their own journeys west from various jumping-off places further south along the Missouri River. [^11] Mormons and Gentiles would have to share the Platte River road all the way west, although the Latter-day Saints planned to use the less-traveled north bank route and get a good jump on the coming spring migrations. John D. Unruh, in his classic study of westward migration, estimates that as many as 4,450 headed west in 1847, the largest annual migration up to that time. [^12]

103Bound more for the green valleys of Oregon than for the yet-to-be-discovered gold mines of California, most of the other 1847 overlanders hailed from Illinois and Missouri. One of the year's largest trains, the "Chicago company" headed by Thomas Cox and Joel Palmer, boasted 99 wagons, 400 persons, and a wide assortment of professionals, tradesmen, and common laborers. "I think that camp was a good average of the pioneers of 1847," remembered Ralph C. Geer at a later reunion of his Oregon pioneer associates.

We had preachers with their bibles and psalm books, doctors with their medicine chests, lawyers with their law books, school teachers, . . . merchants with their goods, nurserymen with their trees and seeds, stockmen with their fine horses and cattle, millers, millmen, millwrights, wheelwrights, carpenters, cabinet makers with their chest of tools, blacksmiths with anvils, bellows, hammers and tongs ready and willing to do all kinds of repairing at any time and place, gunsmiths and silversmiths with their fine tools, tailors . . ., shoemakers with the lasts, awls, hammers and bristles, saddlers with their tools, dressmakers and milliners with their needles, thimbles and patterns, . . . and . . . farmers with and without families . . .; all determined to go to Oregon. [^13]

104However, many also carried with them a suspicious and nagging fear of Mormon leaders and their intentions, particularly of their rumored alliances with western Indian tribes in order to wreak havoc on the plains. Wrote G. M. Goddard in Clay County, Missouri, in May 1846: "There is a great deal of excitement here about the [Mexican] war, as we are near the frontier. The people are afraid of the Mormons and Indians. The Mormons are persuading the Indians to embrace their doctrines and then use them to annoy the Missourians." [^14]

104Many such rumors circulated widely and in vivid detail, colorful enough to scare any would-be traveler. One particularly notable story then making the rounds was that

104a party of Mormons in spangled crimson robes of office headed by one in black velvet and silver, had been teaching a Jewish pow-wow to the medicine men of the Sauks and Foxes. Another averred that they were going about in buffalo robe, short frocks, imitative of the costume of Saint John, preaching baptism and the existence of the Kingdom of Heaven among the Ioways. To believe one report, ammunition and whisky had been received by the Indian braves at the hand of an elder with a flowing white beard, who spoke Indian, he alleged, because he had the gift of tongues, this as far north as the country of the Yanketon Sioux. According to another . . . the Mormons had distributed the scarlet uniforms of H.B.M.'s [Her British Majesty's] servants among the Pottawattamies and had carried into the country twelve pieces of brass cannons, which were counted by a traveller as they were rafted across the east fork of Grand River. [^15]

Since 1832, Mormon efforts to establish their Zion headquarters at Independence, Missouri (a major Oregon Trail departure site on the Missouri River), and their simultaneous attempts to convert the Indians (in Book of Mormon parlance, the Lamanites, descendants of ancient Israel) had been misinterpreted and misunderstood, even among Latter-day Saints themselves. Volumes have been written on the failure of that enterprise and on the subsequent years of bloodshed between a rough and tumble frontier population set on resisting Mormon migration and expelling the Indians and a zealous religious people determined to fulfil prophecy. [^16] The line of misunderstanding and violence stretched all the way from the massacre at Haun's Mill to the door of Carthage Jail six years later. Hatred and fear still filled the air and cast a pall of suspicion and animosity over their respective westward movements.

105The forced exodus from Nauvoo had spawned a whirlwind of speculation and distrust. Edwin Bryant, while waiting at Independence in May 1846 for his company's departure, wrote of "the various rumors connected with the several expeditions. One of these," he later recorded,

105was that five thousand Mormons were crossing, or had crossed, the Kansas river; that they marched with ten brass fieldpieces, and that every man of the party was armed with a rifle, a bowie-knife, and a brace of large revolving pistols. It was declared that they were inveterately hostile to the emigrant parties; and when the latter came up to the Mormons, they intended to attack and murder them, and appropriate to themselves their property. [^17]

105Francis Parkman, a well-known writer of his day on a fact-finding mission among the Plains Indians in 1846, further fanned the fires of apprehension. "At St. Joseph's," he said, "the prevailing impression was, that these were Mormons, 2300 in number, and a great alarm was excited in consequence. The people of Illinois and Missouri," he continued,

105who composed by far the greater part of the emigrants, have never been on the best terms with the "Latter Day Saints"; and it is notorious throughout the country how much blood has been spilt in their feuds. . . . No one could predict what would be the result when large armed bodies of these fanatics should encounter the most impetuous and reckless of their old enemies on the broad prairie, far beyond the reach of law or military force. [^18]

Even neutral travelers soon picked up on the anti-Mormon rhetoric of the time. Phebe Stanton, while on the road just east of St. Joseph, Missouri, in early May 1847 noticed that "there is a great deal said about the Mormons. They say they have gone on and joined three tribes of Indians," she recounted in a letter to her sisters,

106and are going to cut us all off. They are raising a company of volunteers, and 300 have volunteered to go and guard us through. . . . We are asked a great many times if we are Mormons. When we tell them `no' they say `I know you are, but you won't own it. Your wagons look like it.' And then they will say, `I hope you are not; for their road is marked with stolen property and all manner of wickedness.' We could not get any kind of accommodations if we were known to be Mormons. Some would tell us the Mormons will rob you before you get half way through; but we are not afraid of them. We tell them there is a great deal done on their credit. [^19]

106It was significant how little authentic intelligence was available about the Latter-day Saints, which led to such falsehoods and rumors.

106Spawning many such suspicions were the writings of Mormon apostates and defectors—a small number of disenchanted, yet vocal, men and women—who taught that Mormon doctrine and temple rites went beyond reclaiming the Indian to the point of condemning America and its leaders. Such a theory of a Mormon conspiracy against America was influenced by the feelings of many that they had been betrayed by their political leaders, although most were loathe to denounce the Constitution, which they had always accepted and revered.

106In one particularly acidic anti-Mormon pamphlet, published in 1847, Increase McGee Van Dusen gave vent to such accusations. "The Mormon Bible claims to be the Indians' record," he wrote.

106And they are told this American land is legally theirs, and that the whites have an unlawful possession, and the Indians are finally to drive off the whites and possess their father's land. We are told that this ceremony [temple endowment] is the commencement of the Law of God and the laws of the land are no more binding on us, but we must at present submit for want of strength and power; but after strengthening ourselves and getting our own people, the American Indians, with us, by the same initiation, we shall have power eventually to effect the final overthrow of this whole nation by their secret stratagem. [^20]

107The Latter-day Saints themselves, or at least some of them, were convinced that Joseph Smith and other leaders had been murdered by a ruthless, godless, bigoted, and degenerate people who would one day suffer the overflowing scourge of divine retribution (see Introduction). Wilford Woodruff, in an outdoor sermon designed to dissuade desertion from Winter Quarters in January 1847, remarked as follows:

107If there was any under the sound of his voice who felt as if the journey was too great for them, or the trials too hard for them to endure, his advice to such would be to go into their waggons and . . . pray the Lord to take away their lives and grant them a burial with the Saints . . . and when the servants of God should return to the places where they had buried their dead, in the morn of the Resurrection, and sound the Trumpet that should shake the earth and call them from their slumbering tombs, then they would receive a resurrection and come forth. Whereas if they should go into Missouri and be buried there, he did not know who would [take] the trouble to go there and hunt them up for they would never once think that a Saint of God would be buried there. [^21]

107 John Pulsipher, still smarting from Governor Lilburn W. Boggs's Mormon extermination order of nine years before, was even more critical: "The inhabitants of Missouri are an indolent, filthy race of human beings. . . . They have possession of one of the choicest lands in the world, yet they have no spirit of enterprise—no desire to make buildings which are considered convenient and comfortable for civilized and enlightened people." [^22]

107The antagonism many Latter-day Saints felt toward their once beloved America cannot be denied. Some could never be convinced, even by their own leaders, that the call for the Mormon Battalion was not a sinister plot by a United States government bent on destroying them. Others believed America, and most certainly Missouri and Illinois, were involved in a blatant conspiracy to destroy their religion. As the first pioneer wagon teams rolled far enough west to be out of sight of the Missouri River, then the border of America, one pioneer recorded these feelings: "We came in sight of the waters of the Elkhorn. On casting my eyes back, the vision of them could not reach the Land of the Gentiles which [I] related to some that were travelling by, whereupon they shouted `Glory Hallelujah' to the top of their voices." [^23]

Notwithstanding all the rumors, the innuendoes, and the criticisms of the disaffected, it was never the intention, private or public, of the Latter-day Saints to ally themselves with the Indians and wreak havoc on Independence or on any other town or country. Though men such as Alpheus Cutler and a few other second-level leaders eventually split with Brigham Young over his denunciation of such a possible development, Brigham, while allowing many to blow off steam against their native land, never seriously entertained the idea of warring with Indian tribes against American wagons or against Missouri. They had no doctrinal provision, no intention, and no military might to do so. [^24]

108Although the Mormons' intended home lay outside the advancing boundaries of America, their alienation was more a matter of geography and religious freedom than of any doctrinally supported hatred of the United States. Let them say and think what they will, reasoned the shrewd Mormon leader. Their plan was to keep their detractors off guard long enough to negotiate as many concessions and treaties as possible without risking military intervention. This policy eventually secured his people and their Zion within America but on their own terms.

108THE WOUNDED PRIDE OF THE PAWNEE

108The Mormons were as fearful of the Indians as anyone else that spring of 1847—and with ample reason. Their proposed line of march from the Elkhorn to the Platte led right through the heartland of the Pawnee, who for centuries had dominated the eastern Platte regions. Lewis and Clark had estimated that the Great Pawnee nation numbered at least 10,000. The Commissioner of Indian Affairs had reported in 1843 that there were 12,500 Pawnees and 25,000 Sioux. [^25] Showing slightly more interest in farming than did the other tribes, the Pawnee were growing beans, corn, melons, and tobacco with mixed results. Their primary interest still lay with the buffalo hunt, a wandering treasure to which they laid almost exclusive claim. At least twice yearly their best warriors left their villages and traveled up the Platte in search of the buffalo. Expert horsemen, the Pawnee were arguably the best hunters of the Plains. [^26]

The Latter-day Saints were probably unaware that a century before the Pawnee had annihilated an entire Spanish regiment of some 60 soldiers under the command of Lt. Col. Pedro de Villasur. Just where and why the conflict occurred remains a mystery, but the Spaniards, on a march from New Mexico into French territory in search of the fabled silver mines of the Missouri, were destroyed. It was, as one scholar has noted, "the worst defeat Spain ever suffered in battle against Plains Indians." [^27]

109The Pawnee remained the terror of the eastern Plains up until the Medicine Arrow fight in 1829, in which the Pawnee killed an entire war party of Cheyenne near the forks of the Platte some 200 miles west and captured their sacred medicine arrows.

109For reasons yet unclear, the Medicine Arrow fight drew the attention of the Teton Sioux to the Pawnee and began an increasingly savage, unremitting warfare between the two tribes. At first the two tribes seemed at rough parity, with first one tribe and then the other loudly celebrating a victory. One overland writer described a Pawnee victory dance:

109We found out that there was to be a great war dance that night by the Pawnee Indians, as they had been successful in a battle with the Sioux and had carried off a number of scalps and wished to celebrate the victory. . . . When that dance was started, if ever a boy wished he was somewhere else, I was certainly that boy. I was certain we would all be killed. I do not think anyone could describe that performance so that one could realize what it looked like. There must have been 300 or 400 jumping, writhing, yelling and twisting and waving those Sioux scalps which were held on the end of sticks about four feet long. [^28]

109But most celebrations went the other way around. The proud Sioux, in all their tribal varieties, were a "restless, roving active people, numerous and brave, difficult of restraint and careless of consequences." [^29] By 1832 the Pawnees had been so badly mauled by the Sioux that they were compelled to abandon the Loup Fork country for new villages south of the Platte. But the United States government, fearful that they would attack fur trading companies and the increasing numbers of westbound travelers using the south bank Platte road, induced the Pawnee to return to the Loup Fork with a promise of protection. This pledge was on paper only, however, for in 1839 the Sioux returned to kill at least another 110 Pawnee while their warriors were away on a hunting expedition. As late as June 1845, the Sioux attacked the Pawnee village at Loup Fork and killed scores of women and children. [^30] Just weeks after the Mormon pioneer camp passed through their territory, the Pawnee were again attacked by the Teton Sioux, with further loss of life and property.

110The Sioux continued to make senseless sport of warring on the other tribes. By 1851, the Omaha had so suffered from both illness and the Sioux that they could enlist barely 80 warriors. [^31] And for the next 25 years, the Pawnee were victimized year after year. As late as 1873, a war party of 1000 Sioux attacked a relatively helpless Pawnee camp, killing over 100 men, women, and children. "The wounded, dead and dying women and helpless children were thrown into a heap and burned in a most barbarous manner possible." [^32]

110Clearly the greatest threats to native life on the prairies were disease (particularly smallpox), alcohol and its attendant ills, and intertribal warfare. According to one noted authority, during this period many more Plains Indians "were killed by other Indians in intertribal wars than by white soldiers or civilians. . . . Had each of the tribes of this region continued to stand alone, fighting all neighboring tribes, it is probable that many of the smaller tribes . . . would have been exterminated." [^33]

110So the Pawnee were agitated and defensive, fearful of the Sioux, distrustful of Washington, and in no mood to put up with wanton destruction of the buffalo by careless passersby. Although the Pawnee and most other tribes were not prone to murderous attacks on passing wagon trains (only 362 emigrants were killed by Indian attacks during the entire period from 1840 to 1850), [^34] the potential for conflict had definitely increased. The tension had so increased that, by order of President Polk, in 1845 Kearny was dispatched west at the head of a column of 300 United States dragoons to intimidate the Indian warriors and to guard various emigrant companies all the way west to South Pass. "I think it was a good act of President Polk," commented one emigrant in 1845, "as we believe it came very timely as the Indians are getting very jealous of the whites, believing as they say the whites will surround them and take all their country from them, but while the dragoons are in the neighborhood there is nothing to be feared from them." [^35]

110However, more important to the cause of peace than a show of force were the artful negotiations of Thomas Fitzpatrick, an Indian agent and the most trusted white arbitrator and peacemaker among the various Plains Indian tribes. His efforts kept 1847 from being a year of bloodshed among a score of emigrant trains.

Though there had been agents among the tribes immediately west of the Missouri for several years, prior to 1846 no agency had existed among the tribes of the far western plains. But in that year, the Upper Platte and Arkansas region was given agency designation, and Thomas Fitzpatrick became its first agent. For 25 years Fitzpatrick, whom the Indians called Broken Hand, had been one of the West's outstanding fur traders and guides. He joined Ashley's enterprise in 1822 or 1823, and by the early 1840s was generally acknowledged as the most famous guide in the West, held in high regard by both Indian and emigrant. He possessed an uncanny ability to understand the Indian psyche and to defuse potentially explosive conditions. [^36] Using his enormous influence among the Indians, in late 1846 he began moving from village to village throughout the vast territory from Fort Laramie and Bent's Fort in the west to the Missouri River on the east, talking with chiefs to allay their resentment of the annual migrations. Because of his work, Indian depredations in 1847 and 1848, at least throughout the Platte River Valley, were limited principally to horse stealing. [^37] The year 1847 seems to have been, as one noted scholar has concluded, "a dull year on the Upper Platte." [^38]

111Brigham Young and his followers could not have picked a better year to travel the Indian country.

111NOTES

112

112#1842 #125 #1845 #2,760 #1848 #1,700

Parkman, in his colorful literary style, was as instrumental in extolling the cultures and virtues of the Ogalala Sioux as he was in condemning the Mormon ways and beliefs. His book, The Oregon Trail, went through nine editions in his own lifetime and many more since, even though Parkman traveled only a few miles west of Fort Laramie. When referring to the departure of the Mississippi Saints from Pueblo in early 1847 (see chapter 6), Parkman wrote: "After remaining with them an hour we rode back to our camp, happy that the settlements had been delivered from the presence of such blind and desperate fanatics" (page 279).

113Though the Mormons and Missourians were quick to castigate and defame one another, they had freely traded together along the western frontier. Scores of Latter-day Saints left Winter Quarters and found temporary work in western Missouri farms and villages. And Missouri merchants were more than pleased to trade with Mormon overlanders. For more on this topic, see Richard Bennett, "Mormons and Missourians: The Uneasy Truce," The Midwest Review, second series 9 (Spring 1992): 12-21.

113For more sympathetic studies of Cutler, see the writings of Danny L. Jorgensen, a descendant. His "Cutler's Camp at the Big Grove on Silver Creek (Iowa), 1847-1853" and given at the Annual Meeting of the Mormon History Association, 23 May 1997, may soon be published.

113There is evidence to show that Cutler later regretted his leaving the Church, being influenced by lesser men. "I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, and I know that Brigham Young is his legal successor and I always did. But the trouble with me was I wanted to lead and could not be led" (Reminiscences of Abraham A. Kimball, 22).

113Ample evidence shows, however, Latter-day Saint belief that if America were to be scourged, it would eventually be done by the displaced and wounded Indian tribes acting on their own accord. As "to the sufferings of the gentiles when the Lamanites go forth," Eliza R. Snow wrote in her diary after conferring with others on the coming calamity, "language cannot describe the scene" (Journal of Eliza R. Snow, 1 June 1847, LDS Church Archives).

113

114#Poncas #800

114("Report of the Commission of Indian Affairs," 28th Congress, 1st Session, vol. 1, serial 431, Senate Documents, 277-78).

114Another observer noted: "The Pawnee [is] a nation of four tribal units bound together by ties of blood and language and custom and religion" (Addison E. Sheldon, "The North Brothers and the Pawnee Nation," Nebraska History Magazine 15, no. 4 [Oct.-Dec. 1934]: 299).

115 John C. Fremont credits Fitzpatrick's skill as negotiator for saving the lives of many emigrants from almost certain destruction at the hands of various western tribes. His "name and high reputation are familiar to all who interest themselves in the history of this country" (Expeditions of FrÃ©mont, 1:222-23).

---
Notas:
[^5] For good accounts of the history of Nauvoo see the following works: Joseph Smith Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (1973), especially vols. 3-5 [cited hereafter as History of the Church]; B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. (1930), esp. vols. 2-3 [cited hereafter as Comprehensive History of the Church]; Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (1965); and David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (1974).
[^19] Journal History of the Church, 9 Aug. 1846. This is a well-known and excellent resource available at the LDS Church Historical Department, consisting of scrapbook-like entries from private journals, letters, various writings of all kinds, newspaper clippings, and so on, compiled by date by former Assistant Church Historian, Andrew Jenson; cited hereafter as Journal History.
[^23] Journal of Nelson Wheeler Whipple, 25 Feb. 1846, LDS Church Archives. "We thus kept a sharp look out for them for we knew as they had slain Joseph and Hyrum so they would slay Brigham, Heber, and the Twelve if they could."
[^28] The definitive works on the history of the Mormon Battalion are Frank Alfred Golder, The March of the Mormon Battalion from Council Bluffs to California (1928); Daniel Tyler, A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion to the Mexican War 1846-1847 (1969); John F. Yurtinus, "A Ram in the Thicket: The Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1975); and Norma Baldwin Ricketts, The Mormon Battalion: U.S. Army of the West, 1846-1848 (1996). See also Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 50-67.
[^29] The best study of Strang still remains Milo Quaife, The Kingdom of Saint James: A Narrative of the Mormons (1930). The most recent reinterpretation is Roger Van Noord's King of Beaver Island: The Life and Assassination of James Jesse Strang (1988). See also Doyle C. Fitzpatrick, The King Strang Story (1970); Richard E. Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 1846-1852: "And Should We Die . . ." (1987), 18-20; The Diary of James J. Strang, ed. Mark A. Strang (1961); William D. Russell, "King James Strang: Joseph Smith's Successor," in The Restoration Movement: Essays in Mormon History, ed. F. Mark McKiernan, Alma R. Blair, and Paul M. Edwards (1973), 231-56. Strang later removed his followers to Beaver Island in northern Lake Michigan, where his settlement realized only modest success.
[^31] Autobiography of Pioneer John Brown, 1820-1896, arr. John Zimmerman Brown (1941), 72-73. See also Jenson, "Day by Day," Deseret News, 31 May 1947. Lay and Crosby later died in California. Flake lived in Salt Lake City for most of his life, dying in Idaho Falls in 1903 at the age of 75.
