Richard E. Bennett, We'll Find the Place: The Mormon Exodus 1846-1848 ( 1997)

116WAGONS WEST

116From the Elkhorn to Ash Hollow

116The great cause of Zion, taken en masse, swallows up all minor or personal considerations, and wife and children and relatives appear lost, as it were, and we are obliged to forsake them all to build up the Kingdom of God and bring about a reign of peace upon the earth. [^1]

116The Latter-day Saint errand into the wilderness hardly began on a positive note. Pent-up excitement was soon tempered by such harsh realities as bitterly cold nights, windswept prairies, stubborn animals, stolen horses, careless accidents, quicksands, and sandbars. Each of these tribulations were amply documented by a score of diarists, whose surviving writings frame a memorable portrait of a faith in exile.

116British-born William Clayton (who the year before in Iowa had composed the hymn "Come, Come, Ye Saints," which had gained instant popularity) found the early going a painful experience, literally from head to foot. A last-minute recruit, Clayton started out suffering from a throbbing toothache. "Tonight I went to bed about 7:30 o'clock suffering severely with pain in my head and face," he recorded on 18 April. Two days later he asked Luke S. Johnson, medical doctor and would-be dentist, "to draw my tooth. He willingly agreed," noted the sufferer,

and getting his instruments, I sat down in a chair, he lanced the gum, then took his nippers and jerked it out. The whole operation Wagons crossing the Platte did not take more than one minute. He only got half the original tooth, the balance being left in the jaw. After this my head and face pained me much more than before. I ate but little supper and then lay down, but could not sleep for pain till near morning. [^2]

117Several days and sleepless nights passed before the best scribe in camp fully recovered.

117But toothaches were not his only problem. After three days of walking an average of 12 to 15 miles per day alongside his wagon, Clayton admitted that his "feet were so sore and blistered he could not walk for some time." [^3]

117The weather at that early season in the Elkhorn Valley alternated between winter and summer, with winds that almost blew loaded wagons onto their sides. "In the night there was a very strong wind, accompanied with frost," complained 30-year-old Thomas Bullock, official camp historian. "When I arose [I] found the ice one ice one inch thick in the water buckets, the guard complained much of the severity of the weather, and the brethren generally wrapt themselves in their buffalo skins and blankets." [^4]

118At other times, afternoon temperatures rose as high as 80 degrees, a fluctuation that spawned the sudden storms so well known in those parts. "About 2 thunder was heard," Bullock remarked a few days later, "which was soon followed by lightning and rain, and continued to descend very prettily until about 4 o'clock, when a strong East wind arose and assisted to blow us forward on our journey." [^5] A careful look at "Professor" Orson Pratt's daily recordings of temperature and barometric readings, as well as a careful review of the diaries, indicate that the weather remained unseasonably cold all the way to Fort Laramie. [^6]

118Other pioneers faced different difficulties, all in keeping with the hazards of life on the trek. Apostle George A. Smith, 29-year-old cousin of Joseph Smith and a seasoned rider, was almost crushed to death by his own horse. While being watered near the Loup Fork, the animal startled and "sprang suddenly," Bullock recorded, "throwing George against the bank, the horse having his hind foot on G. A.'s foot, and his fore foot on G.'s breast, in which situation he continued until the brethren took the horse off him. It was very fortunate that the place was muddy, so he escaped with only a few bruises." [^7]

118During their first 10 days on the trail they lost four of their best horses: one to an accidental gunshot blast, two to Indians, and one to a hole in the ground. During the predawn hours of 24 April, while tied to a stake with a chain near a steep ravine, a horse belonging to Phineas Young (one of Brigham Young's two brothers making the trip) rolled over, fell into the hole, and strangled to death. This was "a grievous loss," as one put it, "for there are no more teams in the camp than what are absolutely necessary, and in fact, there are hardly enough to get along very comfortably." [^8]

It was the river crossings, however, that caused most of their initial stress and turmoil. Although the Elkhorn had proved an easy conquest, with all 72 wagons crossing the 150-foot wide river on a raft with ropes on either side drawn by cattle, the Loup Fork, 133 miles west of Winter Quarters, proved a much more formidable task. Its 400 yards of swiftly flowing, ice-cold spring runoff hinted at the much larger mountain streams and rivers they would eventually have to confront. The current was so rapid that their makeshift rafts almost capsized. The shallow sandbars proved problematic for rafting and the quicksand a potentially fatal quagmire for horses and livestock. Commented Albert Rockwood: "The bottom is quicksand which renders it very difficult and sometimes dangerous to cross. A man on a horse standing a few moments in one place will settle in, and if they do not exert themselves immediately, they will sink to rise no more until the resurrection of the just or unjust." [^9]

119Pratt dared to go first with a lighter carriage, but his horse promptly swamped in the mud; only with great difficulty did five or six men get them out. Three other wagons got by, but only by doubling teams and "with a good deal of difficulty." "The brethren were about discouraged with regard to the rafting business," 42-year-old Norton Jacob, a captain of 10, confessed, because they had concluded the only way across was to empty their wagons and raft their provisions over on the "revenue cutter." This was a leather skiff belonging to Alanson Eldridge, which his son, John, brought along with them; it could serve as a fishing boat or double as a wagon bottom when not in use. [^10]

119How it all worked out makes for colorful reading. After conferring for some time, Jacob recalled,

119a council of officers was called in the evening to consult upon the best method to adopt for crossing the river. . . . It was finally concluded to build two rafts in the morning out of the dry poles at the [Pawnee] village and at the same time commence crossing the goods in the boat; and the Colonel [Stephen Markham] would direct the crossing of the teams. He proceeded the next morning to set stakes in different places across the stream so as to follow one track and thereby pack the sand and make it more firm. President Young commenced crossing his loading in the boat. Brother Heber proposed to his boys to double the teams and take our loads in our wagons as we could not all go over in the boat today. So at it we went and put on three and four teams to a wagon, and took over all our effects long before the first division got theirs over with the aid of the boat. I crossed my ten in about 3 hours. By the time half of us had got over the road had become tolerably firm. At 4 o'clock the whole camp had passed over without any accident, for which we felt truly thankful to our Heavenly Father. [^11]

Even more than toothaches and river crossings, the fear of the unknown wilderness, of an extended separation from loved ones, and of a possible imminent Indian attack proved too much for some. Tempers flared and oaths were exchanged. One teamster, 58-year-old Solomon Chamberlain, an 1830 convert and early missionary, was out of sorts with almost everyone for awhile. Sensing the need to let the camp "blow off steam" from time to time, Brigham nominated the less quarrelsome Henry G. Sherwood as "chief grumbler for the Camp": if anyone had a complaint he would first have to go through Sherwood, "the only man that had a legal right to find fault and murmur." [^12]

120Likewise, Thomas Bullock, constantly frustrated with the lack of time to complete his writing assignments, vented his frustration over one of his disagreeable wagon mates. "There is one thing I do know positive," he complained in a letter to his wife.

120And that is this. I shall be very glad when I shall change both my bed and bedfellow. I suppose you think I sleep with the Dr. [Willard Richards], but it is no such thing. I believe I have slept with him in his wagon twice. I sleep in the wagon I drive, and George Brown is my bed fellow and the most uncomfortable one I ever slept with. If it was night only I could do well . . . but he is a disagreeable, saucy, idle fellow by day. I am tired of him and I pray God, my return journey may be by myself or another person, not him. [^13]

120Another disaffected soul, Ellis Eames, was the only one to "see the Elephant," a contemporary term for those who turned back. For whatever reasons, whether sickness or a lack of faith and commitment, he left the pioneer company. [^14]

120In these ways, the first 10 days on the trail took their toll on both man and beast.

120IN THE LAND OF THE LAMANITE

120As indicated in the preceding chapter, the pioneers expected trouble from the Pawnee, who felt justified in extorting a ransom from any camp passing through their territories, regardless of the cautions Thomas Fitzpatrick had placed on them. The accounts of Pawnee thievery in 1846 and 1847 are multiple. Joseph Bissonette, a trader at Fort John, had written John B. Sarpy at St. Louis just nine months before about the Pawnee penchant for stealing. "I regret to inform you," he said,

that on my way here I was detained by the Pawnees and that to avoid being robbed to a larger extent, I had to give up several articles of value. . . . They have behaved shamefully to some parties of emigrants and killed one of them, after robbing them of cattle and horses. Unless the attention of government be called to that nation, it will be impossible for travellers to follow the road along the Platte, unless they keep in large numbers. [^15]

121Other emigrants experienced similar treatment. Catherine Margaret Haun aptly described the Pawnee art of stealing:

121The emigrants were often sorely tried and inconvenienced by losses more or less serious for in spite of the most alert guard it was almost impossible to see the advancing thief crawling . . . on the ground up to his intended prey.

121

121Horses and mules seemed always to be uneasy and fearing danger. Their keen sense of smell and hearing caused them often to sound the danger alarm, by snorting or being very restless, at the approach of Indians or wild animals. However, even their vigilance was often defeated by the sly enemies. If the wind or gentlest motion of the air was coming from the direction of the intruder they were apt to detect his approach—the Indians knew this and laid their plans accordingly. [^16]

121An Oregon company crossing the plains the same year as the Mormon pioneers did not fare so well in their encounters with the Pawnee. Their accounts are almost comical, were they not so painful—and embarrassing—for those involved. William Hockett remembered one incident his uncle, and a few others in pursuit of several stealing Pawnee, never forgot nor forgave:

121After awhile they found them [cattle stampeded by the Indians], but the Indians had found them [the Oregon company] first and robbed them of their guns and clothing, leaving them nothing but their hats and boots. My uncle resisted so stubbornly about being robbed that they bent him over until his head was on his knees, and then the chief beat him over the back with his bow. Some places the skin was split four or five inches. . . . So we travelled on. . . . We saw many bands of Indians, always moving the same direction we were, but gave us no more trouble. My uncle's back gave him so much trouble that the Widow Fisher took in a young man . . . to drive her team. . . . [^17]

After reuniting with the main company patiently waiting at the Elkhorn, Brigham lost little time organizing the pioneer camp "into a travelling capacity," selecting a military profile, establishing rules for safe conduct, and setting strategy to deal with the Indians. Knowing that the Pawnee would observe their every move from the moment they crossed the Elkhorn (that unmarked boundary line separating the Omaha from the Pawnee), Brigham pursued a definite strategy—much the same as the one they had adopted in Winter Quarters when dealing with the Omaha and the Otoe.

122First, the camp had to be well armed, with guards multiplied at night to prevent theft or loss of life. Second, there must be no unnecessary provocation, with communication preferred over confrontation. Third, hunting, especially of buffalo, elk, and other game, had to be kept to a minimum.

122Stephen Markham and Albert P. Rockwood were appointed the two captains of 100s; Addison Everett, Tarleton Lewis, James Case, John Pack, and Shadrach Roundy were chosen captains of 50s. Fourteen others were selected as captains of 10s. [^18] Markham was then elected captain of the guard and directed to draw out 50 men for a standing guard that was divided into companies of 10 with a guard captain to each 10. [^19]

122The following day the rigid camp structure was further overlaid with military formation or, as Jacob put it, "in a military point of view," clearly in anticipation of possible imminent hostilities. The camp had a regimental structure, with Brigham Young elected general, Stephen Markham colonel John Pack and Shadrach Roundy first and second majors respectively, and all the former captains of 10s, plus Wilford Woodruff, made military captains. Though it may seem an overregulation of a very small host, their penchant for organization insured safety for themselves, plus a certain saving distance between the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and camp leaders in case of disagreements over minor trail concerns. The fear of an unknown wilderness, of probable Indian thievery and potential attack, and of confrontations with other emigrants all contributed to a desire for keen preparation and order. [^20]

122The Council of Captains promptly drew up a list of rules and regulations for the pioneer camp, a sort of prairie constitution that would be their pattern of travel for the next three months. [^21]

122

123

123

123 Mormon Train in Camp, sketch by George Simons

123

123

123

123

123

123

123

123

124

124

124Furthermore, the camp would honor the Sabbath and lay aside, wherever possible, on that day for rest for both man and animal, repairs, worship, and letter writing. [^23]

124The purpose of the cannon, in this case a small three-pounder, was to ward off Indian attack. Fremont and Kearny had learned that Indians had great respect for the roaring fire of cannon shot. As a preventive mechanism, a cannon added that extra measure of defense.

124Military organization was, however, only the first plank in their Indian policy; the second was communication and understanding. This priority motivated a calculated gamble—to veer deliberately north to the Loup Fork and proceed directly towards the Pawnee village, despite the risks. They wanted to establish goodwill and understanding between them and the Pawnee, not only for the present camp but also for the many wagon trains to follow.

124The decision to pass near the main Pawnee village was both deliberate and dangerous, and was prompted, no doubt, by those in camp who had firsthand experience with the Pawnee. James Case, a former employee at the government-operated farm near the Pawnee village who was dismissed after his conversion, had spent much of the past year at the now-abandoned farm and adjacent Presbyterian mission. Case knew the area and the Pawnee well. He also knew that his farm associates had stored a large cache of hay and provisions, which might still be hidden from the Pawnee.

124Tippets and Woolsey had spent several weeks among the Pawnee as grateful, if unwilling, winter captives. Before their release, they had told the Pawnee about Mormon intentions; one of the chiefs had even pledged two of his daughters in marriage to the two sojourners. The pioneers hoped to build on this friendship.

124Furthermore, George Miller, on contract to move furs for Peter Sarpy, had transported several Presbyterian missionaries the summer before, along with a few Pawnee children, out of the way of the warring Sioux and over to Bellevue on the Missouri River. [^24] So both Pawnee and pioneers anticipated one another.

Shortly after 9 A.M. on the morning of 21 April, the pioneers met the first Indian on a pony, then a "dozen or so" of the Loup Band, among whom was their chief, Sisketuk, riding on a mule. Exceedingly friendly, they walked between the wagons, shaking hands enthusiastically with everyone in sight. Their heads were shaved with the exception of a strip about two inches wide and two inches high from a little back of their foreheads to the neck and, in the words of Levi Johnson, "stuck straight up and resembled a rooster's comb." They wore breechcloths and buffalo skins or a blanket. Some few had leggings. [^25]

125About noon they came in sight of the new Pawnee village, across the river on the south side of the Loup Fork. It consisted of approximately 100 lodges "set pretty close together" and built in the characteristic Pawnee fashion—a village of some 4 to 5 thousand Pawnee. At that very moment Peter Sarpy, whom the Mormons knew well, was in the village trading for furs. While they were arranging their wagons in a semicircle fronting south on the river, approximately 200 Pawnee came down to the riverbank; about 75 of them waded across, including the grand chief of the Pawnee nations. With a personal letter in his hand addressed to Brigham—evidence that they knew who the Mormons were and where they were going—in which Sarpy certified the Pawnee's good intention, Chief Cheffolan demanded a large present of goods. [^26]

125While camp leaders saw to it that the chief received four pounds of tobacco, fifteen pounds of lead powder, fishhooks, caps, flour, and meal, Charles Shumway told the Indians (through an interpreter) that "we were not like the other `pale faces,' rich, but that we were poor, and had been driven from among other white people because of our religion and that we believed in the `Great Spirit' like unto themselves" and that "if we had more we would cheerfully give it." [^27]

125Shumway's explanations fell on deaf ears; the chief suddenly turned visibly angry at what he considered an insufficient pile of gifts, "considering our numbers" and how rich "Americans were." He demanded that the whites go back, loudly complaining that they would kill or drive away the Pawnees' buffalo. "Keep! Keep! More!" he cried out, as Addison Everett recalled the scene, "and refused to shake hands with President Brigham Young and signified his displeasure at our travelling through his land." [^28]

Disregarding the outburst, ascribing it to Sarpy and to other traders who feared the coming emigrants, Brigham and his companions nervously harnessed up their teams and "were rapidly in motion." That night, eight miles west, in consequence of the obvious Indian dissatisfaction, a guard of 100 men was enlisted, half of whom were put on duty from 9 to 1 o'clock and the other half till 5 A.M. The cannon was also readied for firing to show the Pawnee, and whatever Sioux may have been in the neighborhood, what firepower they controlled. [^29] For their part, the Pawnee would wait to strike at a less guarded moment.

126Anxious to put as much distance as possible between them and the disgruntled Pawnee, the camp traveled 17 miles the next day, arriving at the deserted Presbyterian missionary station, or Pawnee mission house. At that time it consisted of two double log houses, six smaller single ones, two racks of good hay, several cattle yards, and two fenced-in fields. Begun some years before by Reverend John Dunbar, it now lay vacated, a victim of intertribal warfare. Case knew the place well and lost little time finding the hidden provisions of good hay and corn fodder, which the cattle seemed to think was very good for a change. He even prevailed upon his superiors to sell off the iron plows, wagon boxes, wagon tin, and other items strewn around the site as partial payment for wages he had never received from the government and for the debts he was owed by the missionaries. [^30] After the sale, Case wrote the missionaries in Bellevue, canceling their debts.

126Beautifully situated on a small eminence, bounded on the south by the Loup Fork and on the north, east, and west by a range of hills or bluffs "from the height of which a person can command a view of the whole adjoining country up and down the river for miles," the calm of the deserted station masked the horrors of recent massacres and played host for a night to its westbound visitors. Almost in sight a few miles further west was the abandoned Pawnee village of over 200 lodges—some of which were 45 feet in diameter—on the north side of the Loup Fork, victimized and destroyed by the Sioux. The village invited no end of curiosity visits and lengthy descriptions in camp journals. [^31]

126Two nights later, despite the best efforts of tired guards, the invisible Pawnee made their move. They stole two of the best horses in camp, one of which belonged to Willard Richards and the other to Jesse C. Little, a loss neither man could afford. Richards, 42, arguably the third most influential leader in camp, was an unwell man, but highly respected and revered. [^32] Despite the immediate pursuit of a large posse, the horses were never found.

The following day they dispatched their best sharpshooters and horsemen—Orrin Porter Rockwell, Joseph Mathews, John Eldredge, and Tom Brown—back some 20 miles for one last try. Of their nearly fatal exploit, Bullock recorded the following:

127Followed the trail to within about 1 1/2 miles of our Saturday night camping ground; when Porter Rockwell thought he saw a wolf, determined to shoot it, descended from his horse, levelled his gun to fire, which brought up the resurrection of 15 Pawnee Indians, who running to seize his and Mathews' horses; Rockwell jumped on his horse and levelled his pistol, which caused them to draw back. The 15 Indians were armed with bows and arrows and guns, ready for fight, but were bluffed by the 4 brethren. The Indians got enraged, retreated about 50 yards, and fired six guns at the brethren, sending the balls whistling close by their heads. Not being able to gain the two stolen horses, they returned and fired the Prairie to purify it by fire. [^33]

127Their horses not retrieved, the solemn quartet returned to camp empty-handed.

127"ONE CONTINUED DESOLATE VIEW": TRAVELING UP THE PLATTE

127By the time they reached Grand Island, 214 miles west of Winter Quarters, near the end of April, the pioneers were leaving Pawnee country and the rolling, wooded hills of the Elkhorn. Averaging 12 to 15 miles per day, they were well on their way up the great Platte River Valley. Although the countryside made speedy travel possible, overlanders—Mormon and otherwise—spoke freely of the intimidating vastness of this windswept, treeless landscape. "The eye is tired of the one continued desolate view of the earth," lamented Albert P. Rockwood, "as it stretches itself on our right as we are passing up the wide cold sandy river." [^34] Levi Jackman put it even more succinctly: "The sight of a tree is out of the question." [^35]

127"No place in the world looks more lonesome and discouraging than the wide prairies of this region," wrote James Clyman, while passing through the area three years before Brigham Young's company.

Neither tree, bush, shrub, rock, nor water, to cherish or shelter; and such a perfect sameness, with a delusive ridge all around you meeting the horizon in all directions. You suppose your course to be over some one of these horizontal ridges, when after several hours of anxious fatigue, you suppose you are about to ascend the highest pinnacle and some known landmark. What is your disappointment to find ridge rise beyond ridge, to the utmost extent of human vision. [^36]

128It had become a journey without beginning or end.

128In the absence of any landmarks other than sky, ridge, and river, the slow-moving Platte—their companion and guide to the foothills—received its full share of comment and derision. Called the Nieborahka, or "shallow river," by the Indians and La Platte by French-Canadian trappers, the Platte was often called the Nebraska and sometimes the Flatwater. Woodruff said that it was unlike any other river "that I have any knowledge of in the world." He continued:

128It is much of the way a mile in width and generally covered with water but very shallow. When a south wind blows hard the water all rushes to the north shore until one would suppose there was a great rise in the water. Let the wind shift and blow hard from the north and the water immediately leaves the north shore until one can walk across two thirds of the river on bare ground. And the river constantly ebbs and flows like the tide just according as the wind blows. [^37]

128Another more disappointed observer said that it "counterfeits the majesty of the Mississippi, and even surpasses it in width, but it is a counterfeit sure enough, a complete burlesque in all the rivers of the world! It is a wide sheet of water only three or four feet deep, running over a vast level bed of sand and micah that is continually changing into short offsets like the shingled roof of a house and which thus eternally creeps along." [^38]

128Despite the fact that it had, in Jackman's words, "the appearance of dirty soap suds occasioned by the sand, the water is healthy and good," and provided the camp with water for drinking, washing, and cleaning. [^39]

The other irritating constant in this dreary land was the dust, an almost suffocating, never-ending billow of sand from the passing of the emigrant trains. "You in the States know nothing about dust," recalled one non-Mormon emigrant who also made the overland journey in 1847. "It will fly so that [you] can hardly see the horns of your tongue yoke [and] it often seems that the cattle must die for want of breath." [^40] "This is the coldest and most dusty journey I have ever travelled," complained Thomas Bullock in a letter to his wife, Henrietta, herself preparing for the journey. "I wash my hands and face some days twice and three times and yet I have been as dusty as a sweep in two hours. I would advise you to save your veils for you and the children next spring." [^41] Despite wearing scarves and handkerchiefs across their mouths, "the clouds of dust were almost sufficient to suffocate everyone." [^42]

129Teamsters patiently waited for their turn when, on a rotating basis, their company of 10 might lead all the others. If fortunate, their wagon would lead their group of 10 (usually seven wagons) and the entire column of 72 wagons, giving them the rare opportunity—once in 72 days—of breathing the pure air of the vanguard wagon. Otherwise those following, especially at the far rear, on windy days could barely see in front of them. As punishment, banishment to the dusty end of the line was sometimes reserved for the troublemaker. "If any man should stop his team in the road, without due cause," Kimball warned, "thereby detaining the whole camp from proceeding with his team, [he] should be obliged to travel in the rear of the hindmost wagon the whole day." [^43]

129Under these conditions they understandably looked forward to Sundays, when they almost always laid over for rest, letter and journal writing, religious services, and washing. "Soon as the camp was formed," Clayton recorded somewhere west of Grand Island, "I went about three quarters of a mile below to the river and washed my socks, towel and hand-kerchief as well as I could in cold water without soap. I then stripped my clothing off and washed from head to foot, which has made me feel much more comfortable for I was covered with dust." [^44]

129Dust and cold notwithstanding, as they plodded up the Platte Valley, these overland caravans portrayed an unforgettable image of the frontier history of the West. "It is a singular sight," wrote one Missouri traveler, "to rise a hill and see the long trains winding along over the hills and through the valleys while a cloud of dust at times envelopes them in its haze then is swept away and reveals the teams toiling under the crack of the unmerciful whip." [^45]

129And from the pen of another, earlier overlander traveling on the south bank:

Had a fair view of our camp travelling, as seen from the bluffs about a mile distant. The appearance was quite picturesque. First came a few straggling foot and horse men ahead, and on the left flank, the right being on the river; next a thick squad of horsemen in front, followed by a long string of white-looking wagon covers, flanked with gentlemen and ladies, occasionally; in the rear a long string of loose cattle, horses and mules, the tout ensemble being rather unique. [^46]

130"THE CATTLE ON A THOUSAND HILLS: `THE FAT BULLS OF BASHAN'"

130Even trail dust and tedium, however, could not dampen their rising expectations—and appetites. For days many had been living on corn bread, water, and porridge. Their plan had always been to supplement their diet with fresh meat. Though many were hunters, most had only read about the buffalo. Day after day they scanned the horizon in hope of glimpsing the great beast. For the Latter-day Saints, that day came early on 1 May, when they saw three buffalo grazing on the top of a bluff five or six miles "to our right." Orrin Porter Rockwell, Thomas Brown, Luke Johnson, Heber C. Kimball, and two other "designated hunters" bolted off in the direction of the buffalo, with everyone else in camp scanning the bluffs with eyeglasses. "The brethren's feelings who were left with the wagons," reported Clayton, "were now strung up to the highest pitch, a feeling of exciting interest appeared to prevail throughout the camp, they having heard and read so much of the mad ferocity of the buffalo when hotly pursued, and knowing that all the hunters were inexperienced in regard to hunting the wild buffalo." [^47]

130Their expectations for hunting buffalo came from the varied animated descriptions of predecessors such as William Anderson. "Nothing can be more revolting, more terrific, than a front view of an old bull buffalo," he had written in 1834.

130His huge hump, covered with long wool, rising eighteen or twenty inches above his spine; a dense mat of black hair, padding a bulletproof head; a dirty drunken beard, almost sweeping to the ground, and his thick dark horns and sparkling eyes, gave him altogether, the appearance and expression of some four-legged devil, fresh from Halifax. But nevertheless, and notwithstanding all this, his meat is good eating. Bosse, hump-ribs, side-ribs, tongue and marrow bones. "Sufficient for the day is the fatigue and rest thereof." [^48]

131Setting his glass on Aaron Farr's shoulder, Clayton discovered Rockwell riding into a herd numbering over 200, which began to scatter in all directions as the hunting party approached. After wounding one cow, Rockwell ran off after others; Kimball rode close to her with his "fifteen shooter" and fired over his horse's head as she dropped helpless. At the report of the gun, Kimball's horse "sprang and flew down the bluff like lightning and he having let go the lines to shoot, her sudden motion overbalanced him and his situation was precarious to the extreme." An experienced rider, Kimball soon regained the lines and reined in the horse without accident. When it was ascertained that one had been killed, the revenue cutter was unloaded and sent to bring the buffalo into camp. By 4 P.M., after a three-hour hunt, one bull, three cows, and six calves had been taken, "far exceeding our expectations and best hopes." [^49]

131Joseph Hancock, nicknamed "Nimrod" by Joseph Smith for his hunting skills, was not quite so fortunate. Perhaps wanting to live up to his reputation, the 46-year-old Hancock left the main hunting party to kill a large bull back of the bluffs. Because he was unwilling to leave his prize to the wolves, he opted to stay alone with it overnight. After making a fire, he scattered gunpowder around him and the buffalo to ward off wolves and other invaders and passed the night under the stars. Though the wolves kept up their howling all through the night, the fire kept them at bay. Early in the morning, Hancock hastened back to the camp, but by the time he and his friends returned, the wolves had already devoured most of the buffalo.

131Rockwell, quick with both word and gun, was soon claiming bragging rights for having felled the first buffalo. But John Pack felt constrained to paint a slightly different version of the story: "There was considerable anxiety in the camp who should kill the first buffalo," he later wrote to his family back at the Missouri.

We had none ever killed any except Bro. Wooley and Tippets that came from the army. I said but very little for fear I might not kill one at all. One afternoon about 3 o'clock we came in sight of about 300 buffalo in one herd. 11 of us which had previously been chosen for hunters prepared for the chase on horse back. . . . We started off on a slow walk the buffalo being 3 miles off. There was much bragging by the way. I told them I did not expect to kill any. I was going along behind to skin with my big jack knife. However we got up within 1/4 mile and the buffalo started. We put spurs to our horses and as they ran around a hill I cut across and came in ahead of all the hunters and along side of the buffalo. I fired away and killed one dead on the spot. . . . Porter had shot at one of them once but did not touch them then rode on and left them. I spurred up my horse and came alongside and fired away and shot the largest one through the shoulder. . . . He fell dead on the spot. This one is allowed to be much the largest of any that has been killed. . . . I killed 2 alone and helped Bros. Kimball and J. Redden kill one. They had to all give up. But well you must know that I felt first rate. [^50]

132The camp soon took on the appearance of a "meat market" as the pioneers cut, stripped, and prepared the meat and made good use of whatever was left over. "The meat was unloaded in the semi-circle opposite the President's wagon and placed on the hide which was spread on the ground for the purpose of keeping it clean. The brethren's faces beamed with joy to see the meat begin to come into camp." [^51] The meat was then divided into 14 parcels, one to each company of 10. Cleaned from the bones and laid out in strips, the meat was then cooked and salted—"jerked"—over a small fire. [^52] Hides were cut into lengths to make ropes, halters, lariats, and thongs. The hair was used for stuffing beds and pillows. The bone marrow was used in lieu of butter for cooking. Buffalo robes, in demand for outerwear, were usually made from animals killed later in the year because buffalo shed much of their hair in the spring.

132As the days passed, the number of buffalo increased, until by 7 May they were uncountable. It was still many years before the near extinction of the buffalo from the great American plains, and the Mormon descriptions of the bison were probably no less awe-inspiring than those of their contemporaries. "I rode forward today with the Twelve," penned Woodruff,

132and of all the sights of buffalo that our eyes beheld, [this] was enough to astonish man. Thousands upon thousands would crowd together as they came from the bluffs to the bottom land to go to the river and slues to drink until the river and land upon both sides of it was one dark spectacle of moving objects. It looked as though the face of the earth was alive and moving like the waves of the sea. Bro. Kimball remarked that he had heard many buffalo tales told but he never expected to behold what his eyes now saw. The half had not been told him. [^53]

133During the forenoon of 8 May, the camp traveled through one continuous buffalo herd for eight miles. Estimating herds at 100,000 or more, Clayton, who was seldom without words, could only say: "No pen nor tongue can give an idea of the multitude now in sight continually, and it appears difficult to keep them away from the wagons. . . . Truly, the Lord's cattle upon the thousand hills are numerous." [^54] Worried that cattle would stray and be lost in the immense herds, the pioneers worked extra hard to corral their own without inciting a thunderous stampede, which could easily have destroyed them.

133The accounts of buffalo herds and buffalo hunting are so numerous in the writings of other emigrants that they defy retelling. The travelers witnessed a thundering prairie phenomenon of immense proportions, awesome to those who observed it and bewildering to the 20th-century writer who can only imagine it. Captain Benjamin L. E. Bonneville, writing 15 years before the pioneer camp but on the same north bank of the Platte, was overwhelmed by the roving spectacle. "As far as his eye could reach, the country seemed absolutely blackened by innumerable herds. No language . . . could convey an adequate idea of the vast living mass thus presented to his eye." [^55]

133Meanwhile the Pawnee were not amused. Aware that Brigham's party was succeeding in the hunt, as a warning they deliberately set fire to the luxuriant spring bluegrass of the north side prairie immediately and for miles ahead of them. This common but dangerous Indian tactic tried to drive off the buffalo and dissuade emigrant hunting. Such "buffalo grass," as it was called, resembled bluegrass and grew as high as six inches. "One would think," one journalist recorded, "he was in an old pasture, the grass is cut short and the ground is well covered with dung but the fence is missing." [^56] But once set on fire, the spring green of the plains turned into a barren, black wasteland. "The wind blew the ashes of the burnt grass in all directions, which soon caused us to look like sweeps; however, by washing, after our halt, we were enabled to discern each other again." [^57] For several subsequent days camp members, blackened and sunburned at the same time, had precious little feed for their animals.

Things might have been worse than a blackened prairie. Brigham sent a company of scouts ahead to see how far the fires extended. William Empey of Upper Canada (Ontario), one of their finest horsemen, rode on ahead of the others. On a bluff, he looked "down on the flat in a large hollow and saw a large number of Indians he supposed about 300. Some was on their poneys and some was a standing by them with the bridles in their hands waiting (as he supposed) for the brethren to come up. He then returned to the rest . . . and told them the circumstances." Brigham immediately recalled his hunters and set out extra guards in anticipation of a possible charge; but no attack materialized. [^58]

134"IT WAS INDEED BEST TO MAKE A TRACK OF OUR OWN"

134While struggling through seas of buffalo, the pioneers met the first of what would be a string of eastbound trappers. The first was Charles Beaumont, one of Sarpy's traders with eight or nine others in his threewagon camp, coming down from Fort Laramie on the south side of the Platte. [^59] Claiming he had not seen a white person or tasted milk or flour for two years, Beaumont gladly traded three buffalo robes for needed foodstuffs. In return the congenial French-Canadian offered to carry back a small bundle of letters to Sarpy and on up to Winter Quarters; he even turned down $20 in silver offered to him for his kind services. With only a few minutes available, the camp became a writing frenzy. They produced 54 instant letters, including the following never-before published letter from 28-year-old Horace K. Whitney to his pregnant wife, Helen. Though hurried, it remains an affectionate account of their progress, and historical evidence that Beaumont kept his pledge.

134Head of Grand Island May 4 1847

134

134My dear wife

134

134I improve the opportunity to write you, we having just met a trader who is on his way back from Fort Laramie, . . . Excuse me, dear Helen, for not writing to you before from Pawnee village, as there was no opportunity of sending it back. I have to write (as you can discover) as fast as I can hurry my hand over the paper, because the man is waiting to take the letters back, as most of all of the brethren in the camp are improving this opportunity.

134

We are now, according to my reckoning, 240 miles from Winter Quarters, still going on. My beloved, true and faithful Helen, be of good cheer, for I feel in my heart that we shall see each other again in the Lord's own due time. You may be assured that no opportunity that I have for prayer for you is neglected. . . . On Saturday last, 10 or 12 hunters went out in pursuit of a herd of buffalo which we saw grazing on the side of a hill, and at night they had killed 12 buffalo . . . so you need not be alarmed but what we are doing well as far as living is concerned, for almost every man has got as much meat as he can "pack along" . . . From all appearances we shall have but few, if any chances of communication one with another as the country which we now are is infested with Sioux Indians, and it would be dangerous to send back a single messenger. But be of good courage for we shall meet again and enjoy each other's society in circumstances of greater comfort and pleasure than we have ever yet enjoyed, for I feel to say it in the name of the Lord. Dear wife, I write everything indiscriminately as it comes into my head, for the trader, a Frenchman, is very impatient and in a great hurry to pursue their journey. I have scarcely time to be lonesome, as I have the horses to attend to, and Orson [Pratt] does the cooking, and it is only at the lone hour of midnight, when I am on guard, or laying in my wagon, that memory flies back over the span between us and hurries me back to thee.

135

135Farewell dear wife for the man is just starting.

135

135I remain as ever your affectionate husband,

135

135Horace K. Whitney [^60]

135Beaumont indicated that the Mormons were ahead of any other westbound company on either side of the river. He also strongly recommended that, rather than follow the north bank of the river over a poorly marked trail with little feed, they cross over to the south bank of the Platte and follow the Oregon Trail. Considering their recent difficult circumstances with buffalo congestion and burned-over prairie, Beaumont's suggestion gave them reason to reconsider their commitment to stay on the north side. A travel council was called and all members of the company given a chance to speak; many different opinions were expressed. Brigham, himself, felt inclined to cross over, if only for a few days, because of the burnt prairie. [^61] The majority, however, determined to stay on the north side at least until they reached Fort Laramie.

Their reasoning reaffirmed their essential purpose—to prepare a way for those who would follow. The scorched prairie was a tactic they themselves had practiced, and they would soon ride it out. The burned-off grass would become a fine pasture by June. They also reasoned that roving Indians bent on plunder would probably focus more on the south side, where they knew more travelers would be coming. Finally, by sticking to the north bank they would remain apart from their Missouri and Illinois counterparts on the Oregon Trail for as long as possible. "When we took into consideration the situation of the next company," Woodruff summarized,

136and thousands that would follow after and as we were the Pioneers and had not our wives and children with us, we thought it best to keep on the north side of the river and brave the difficulties of burning prairies and make a road that should stand as a permanent route for the saints independent of the old emigration route and let the river separate the emigrating companies that they need not quarrel for wood, grass, or[water[. A]nd when our next company came along the grass would be much better for them than it would on the south side as it would grow up by the time they would get along. [^62]

136The foregoing travel council illustrates several key elements of their journey. The careful observer will note that even in their travels the Mormons were making an argument for their uniqueness. First, they were abundantly, if not overly, organized, but with room for freedom of expression, dissent, even democratic expression. Once a decision was made, however, all fell in line. Second, they went as one, meaning there was no safety outside the camp. Individuality was sacrificed for the cause of the larger body. Finally, they saw themselves as pioneers preparing the way for thousands to follow.

This pattern of preparation reveals itself in two other ways: communication and expedition. The "prairie post office"—that unique system of employing eastbound travelers as letter carriers and of leaving signposts, notes, letters, and other information for those coming behind—did not originate with the Latter-day Saints, but they certainly magnified the use of it. One of their few breaks from boredom was to read on the skulls of buffalo and other animals the news and comments of other companies. "There is one thing peculiar on this route," recorded Silas Newcomb, "the practice of writing on buffalo skulls scattered along beside the track—names of men and companies and dates of their passing that their friends who follow may read." [^63] Even a cursory examination of Brigham's letters and those of his colleagues shows that, even amidst their daily difficulties, communication with their following friends was both a need and a passion. The clerks were among the busiest people in camp, another reminder that this was a Church in the wilderness, perhaps the first case of a full-fledged organization on the roll across the plains. By staying on the north side, chances were better that such written communiques—left in conspicuous, yet hard to dislodge places—would reach their intended readers.

137For instance, not far from the junction of the North and South Forks of the Platte, Willard Richards left the first such written communique in a small box, 18 inches wide by 6 inches long, on the top of a 15-foot pole firmly set about 5 feet into the ground. On the outside, written in red chalk, were the following instructions: "Look at this—316 miles from Winter Quarters—Camp of Pioneers, bound Westward—May 10, 1847." Inscribed on the reverse side of the board was the following: "Look in this and you will find a letter."

137The letter, written for the Council of the Twelve by Richards, with Bullock as scribe, was directed to Charles C. Rich, whom they expected to be leading the soon-to-depart Emigration Company. It contained an encouraging account of their journey and, more especially, the "laws regulating the pioneer camp, for the benefit and comfort of the Saints who should follow after." After rereading it and before nailing it inside the box, Brigham remarked, "That's scripture." [^64] Such elaborate prairie post boxes were reserved only for official communication from the Twelve and were not for the common or familiar. Along their journey, the pioneer camp left several other such letters beside the trail. Clearly they were setting a pattern of organization and direction for those who would follow. [^65]

137A more frequent form of communication was the mileage post pioneered by William Clayton. Possessed of an active mind and given to both poetry and precision, Clayton was a perfectionist. In a camp where they were always concerned, if not arguing, about how far and how fast they were traveling and how far they had yet to go, most overrated their daily accomplishments and were quick to criticize Clayton, who they felt underestimated their daily achievements. Clayton, ever since the Elkhorn, had been suggesting some sort of mileage meter or roadometer that could be fixed either to the side of the wagon near the wheel or to the wagon wheel itself.

Convinced that his estimates were most accurate, Clayton measured the circumference of the hind wheel of Heber C. Kimball's wagon and discovered it to be exactly 14 feet 8 inches. He then calculated that 360 revolutions would equal precisely one mile—5,280 feet. Into one of the wagon spikes he drove a nail that, once per revolution, struck a saw projecting from the wagon bed. On 8 May, he counted each revolution during the entire day's travel—surely a most unique and dizzying occupation—and found the distance traveled to be a little over 11 1/4 miles. His tenacity now proven, Clayton became the mileage authority in camp. That night he boldly erected the first of his many mileage posts—some on poles, some on rocks, and some on buffalo or antelope skulls—just west of Grand Island. It read: "From Winter Quarters, two hundred ninety-five miles, May 8 '47. Camp all well. Wm. Clayton." [^66]

138Clayton's preoccupation with measuring mileage eventually elicited the interest, if not sympathy, of his colleagues. Orson Pratt approached Appleton Harmon, a master carpenter and former apprentice in Shadrach Roundy's Nauvoo carpenter shop, to see about constructing a device with a spiral shaft and toothed wheel with a system of interlocking gears, not unlike the internal workings of a large clock. By the morning of 12 May, the ingenious Harmon had completed the wooden machine to the point that it required only counting miles, not individual wheel revolutions. Four days later he completed his wooden masterpiece, using Pratt's blueprints, by adding another set of wheel gears. These revolved once in 10 miles, showing each mile and also quarter mile traveled. He then positioned it right on the wagon wheel. There must have been camp-wide celebration at its successful operation. And certainly Clayton was much relieved: "We are now prepared to tell accurately, the distance we travel from day to day which will supersede the idea of guessing, and be a satisfaction not only to this camp, but to all who hereafter travel this way." [^67]

Clayton's precision, Pratt's persistent scientific measurements, Bullock's careful recording of the flora and fauna along the trail, and the recurring references to the cartographic deficiencies of both Mitchell and Fremont—these all clearly point to their journey as expedition. Without government commission, they nevertheless improved on the maps and guides they had been following and in the process made a new guide and new maps of their own. For example, after very nearly being bitten by a large rattlesnake in a creek bed that did not show in any of their maps, Brigham christened the stream Rattlesnake Creek. To ensure a more accurate map for the rest of the journey, he called Pratt and Clayton to a meeting in Dr. Richards's wagon. "A consultation took place about delineating the pioneer road on the topographical map sent by Col. Kane," recorded Bullock, when it was decided that "Clayton should get Professor Pratt's observations that he had taken; then the course of the road by Brother Clayton's measurement showing the bluffs and each creek as found we them, in order." [^68]

139In this manner the concept of making their own emigrant guide was born, an idea that Clayton carefully nurtured, later developed, and eventually published as one of the West's most reliable tools—The Latter-day Saints' Emigrants' Guide, first published in 1848. [^69]

139NIGHTFALL UNDER THE PRAIRIE SKY

139Signposts, roadometers, the prairie post office—all indicated that they were moving west as fast as they could manage. From the time they left Loup Fork, traveling west along the Platte River Valley and on up the North Fork of the Platte to Cedar Island (that junction with the Oregon Trail just a few miles north of Ash Hollow) the pioneer camp averaged a rather slow 13 miles per day, exclusive of Sundays. [^70] After more than a month on the trail, the challenge and routine had become manageable. Their confidence was increasing with every passing mile and, if it was not yet time to celebrate, they certainly felt to congratulate one another that they had come thus far without mishap, loss of life, or serious conflict.

139"The Spirit of God rules over the camp," wrote a confident Wilford Woodruff in his private journal, and "peace, quietness, and contentment seem to pervade almost every breast." [^71] At a special outdoor Sunday meeting two days and 39 miles northwest of Ash Hollow, Brigham complimented the entire camp, "satisfied that the Lord was with us and leading us. [He] had never seen a company of people more united than the camp had been thus far." [^72] Addressing the concerns of some that they might not reach their destination in time for planting, he replied, "Well, suppose we did not. We [have] done all we could and travelled as fast as our teams were able to go, and when we had done all [we] could he felt just as satisfied as if we had a thousand acres planted with grain. The Lord would do the rest." [^73] "I never felt clearer in mind," he said, "than on this journey. My peace is like a river between my God and myself." [^74]

A contented George A. Smith bore testimony that "the prayers of this camp have been heard all the time," and that "we shall get to the right place in due time. I feel first rate. I never lay down but I felt there is a good spirit in the camp. The elders will look back at this journey as one of the greatest schools they were ever in our lives." [^75] Albert P. Rockwood, though hardly a poet, was inclined to express their collective optimism in rugged verse anyway.

140An other weeks journey is done An other hour of rest has come My soul retires Humbled in prayers, On my god I calls For blessings all in all. [^76]

140In the early evening, after supper and after camp had been made, they began to relax. With beds ready and gear put away, it was still possible to play the violin and the harmonica and listen to the crackling of the evening buffalo chip fire. Some nights, under the prairie moon, they danced, as traders and trappers had been known to do, in groups to keep warm. At other times they conducted mock trials on one another, such as "The Camp vs. James Davenport" for blocking the highway and turning ladies out of their course. [^77] All in fun, they danced and played until the fires began to fade, the wagon candles grew dim, and the last sounds of life fell away into much-needed slumber.

140As one overlander described it, these were the quiet moments so well deserved:

140The men, except those on guard duty, would form circles around the fires . . . recounting the incidents of the day's travel, singing songs, telling jokes at each other's expense; while in another part of the camp, the violin would enliven the air with notes, to which young and agile feet were keeping time in the merry dance on the soil of the plains. . . . Gradually the stock would lie down and the people retire to dream of home and the dear ones left behind; the camp would become quiet and the fires grow dimmer until its flickering flames expired; no sound would be heard except the low talk of the guards as they made their rounds or the lonesome howl of the prairie wolf. [^78]

140But like the gusts of a sudden prairie storm, their contentment would not last long.

141NOTES

141It is significant to note that camp members were at total liberty to remain or to quit the camp. Eames did come west with a later train.

142For more on the Mormon arsenal, see Harry W. Gibson, "Frontier Arms of the Mormons," Utah Historical Quarterly 42 (Winter 1974): 4-26.

143For more on Indian missions, see Ray H. Mattison, "Indian Missions and Missionaries on the Upper Missouri to 1900," Nebraska History 38, no. 2 (June 1957): 127-54. See also John Dunbar, "The Presbyterian Mission Among the Pawnee Indians in Nebraska, 1834-1836," Collections of the Kansas State Historical Society 11 (1909-1910): 323-32.

144If the leading scholars on the topic are correct, by 1847 the number of buffalo on the Great Plains—stretching from what is now Saskatchewan to Texas and from the Loup Fork to the foothills—numbered almost 40 million (see Roe, North American Buffalo, and Thompson Seton, Life Histories of Northern Animals, 1:259, 292 as quoted in Roe, 493). The rapid decline and near extermination of the buffalo occurred in the years following 1865—one of America's greatest environmental tragedies.

145Brigham found time to scratch out a letter that provided a string of details about their travels thus far and about future plans. After Fort Laramie, "we shall take the most southern route to the Salt Lake that we can find" (Brigham Young to John Smith and the Saints at Winter Quarters, 4 May 1847, Brigham Young Papers).

145The definitive article on the topic is Guy E. Stringham, "The Pioneer Roadometer," Utah Historical Quarterly 42 (Summer 1974): 258-72. Stringham argues that to Orson Pratt must go whatever credit is due, because it was he who Brigham Young suggested should "give this subject some attention." His concept of a continuous screw amongst a series of cogs and wheels doubtless reflected his mathematical genius and ability. However, it was Clayton's stubborn insistence and sense of precision that initiated it all. According to Stringham, the original was long ago lost or destroyed, although a duplicate of the original is on display at the Church Museum of History and Art in Salt Lake City, Utah.

---
Notas:
[^5] For good accounts of the history of Nauvoo see the following works: Joseph Smith Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (1973), especially vols. 3-5 [cited hereafter as History of the Church]; B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. (1930), esp. vols. 2-3 [cited hereafter as Comprehensive History of the Church]; Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (1965); and David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (1974).
[^19] Journal History of the Church, 9 Aug. 1846. This is a well-known and excellent resource available at the LDS Church Historical Department, consisting of scrapbook-like entries from private journals, letters, various writings of all kinds, newspaper clippings, and so on, compiled by date by former Assistant Church Historian, Andrew Jenson; cited hereafter as Journal History.
[^21] Stampedes were a much dreaded occurrence in overland travel. One of the most chilling accounts is that given by a California forty-niner, Charles Edward Pancoast, while traveling up the Platte River in 1849: "In an instant, as if by magic, all the animals started simultaneously with a grand leap and flew down the river to the plain, the men in front shouting and scrambling to escape the solid mass of teams coming down upon them. Men could be seen dropping from the rear of wagons in all directions as they rumbled over the sands; I myself slipped through a two foot space between two wagons going at lightening speed. Some of the teams ran into a small creek and could not extricate themselves; others stopped from sheer exhaustion; still others ran two or three miles and were halted by the owners of tied horses that had not gotten away. Strange to say, no serious damage was done, except to the wagon of two Germans, which turned over and was irreparably smashed; the owners barely escaping with their lives. This was our first experience of a genuine stampede, not uncommon in the mountain countries of the west" (Charles Edward Pancoast, A Quaker Forty-Niner [1930], 198-99).
[^23] Journal of Nelson Wheeler Whipple, 25 Feb. 1846, LDS Church Archives. "We thus kept a sharp look out for them for we knew as they had slain Joseph and Hyrum so they would slay Brigham, Heber, and the Twelve if they could."
[^28] The definitive works on the history of the Mormon Battalion are Frank Alfred Golder, The March of the Mormon Battalion from Council Bluffs to California (1928); Daniel Tyler, A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion to the Mexican War 1846-1847 (1969); John F. Yurtinus, "A Ram in the Thicket: The Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1975); and Norma Baldwin Ricketts, The Mormon Battalion: U.S. Army of the West, 1846-1848 (1996). See also Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 50-67.
[^29] The best study of Strang still remains Milo Quaife, The Kingdom of Saint James: A Narrative of the Mormons (1930). The most recent reinterpretation is Roger Van Noord's King of Beaver Island: The Life and Assassination of James Jesse Strang (1988). See also Doyle C. Fitzpatrick, The King Strang Story (1970); Richard E. Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 1846-1852: "And Should We Die . . ." (1987), 18-20; The Diary of James J. Strang, ed. Mark A. Strang (1961); William D. Russell, "King James Strang: Joseph Smith's Successor," in The Restoration Movement: Essays in Mormon History, ed. F. Mark McKiernan, Alma R. Blair, and Paul M. Edwards (1973), 231-56. Strang later removed his followers to Beaver Island in northern Lake Michigan, where his settlement realized only modest success.
[^31] Autobiography of Pioneer John Brown, 1820-1896, arr. John Zimmerman Brown (1941), 72-73. See also Jenson, "Day by Day," Deseret News, 31 May 1947. Lay and Crosby later died in California. Flake lived in Salt Lake City for most of his life, dying in Idaho Falls in 1903 at the age of 75.
[^42] Journal of Willard Richards, 14 Mar. 1847. It is interesting to note that in the dreams which Brigham Young said he had of Joseph Smith while preparing for the exodus, Joseph "stepped toward me, and looking very earnestly, yet pleasantly, said `Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. . . . Tell the brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it'" (Journal History, 23 Feb. 1847).
[^43] Little has been written about the costs of the original departures, although much is available on the costs involved in later migrations. This is particularly true of the Perpetual Emigration Fund and the financing of Mormon emigrant companies to Salt Lake City up until at least 1869 and the completion of the transcontinental rail-road. See Leonard J. Arrington's pathbreaking study, Great Basin Kingdom: An Economic History of the Latter-day Saints 1830-1900 (1958), 77-79.
[^55] For the exact wording of this "Memorial to the Queen for the Relief, by Emigration of a Portion of Her Poor Subjects," see J. B. Munro, "Mormon Colonization Scheme for Vancouver Island," Washington Historical Quarterly, 25, no. 3 (July 1934): 278-85. For a thorough and responsible study on British emigration, see Taylor, Expectations Westward, 18-47.
[^58] The Nauvoo Covenant resembled very closely the earlier Missouri Covenant of 1839, when Brigham Young at Far West, Missouri, proposed "that we this day enter into a covenant to . . . never desert the poor who are worthy, till they shall be out of the reach of the exterminating order of General [John B.] Clark." Some 214 men signed the covenant to assist others "to the utmost of our abilities." (History of the Church, 3:250-54).
[^59] There is some dispute over the name of this passerby. Most of the records refer to him as "Beaumont," although some refer to him as Charley Barkham (see Brigham Young letters, 5 May 1847). Erastus Snow records that the leader of the Beaumont company was a "Mr. Papan" who stayed on the other side of the river (see also Journal of Levi S. Johnson, 4 May 1847, Special Collections, Lee Library, Brigham Young University).
[^60] Addison Pratt, who left on a mission to the South Seas from Nauvoo in 1843 and did not return to his family, then in the Salt Lake Valley, until 1848, provides a revealing insight into the temporary lapse among the people in living the Word of Wisdom. On entering the valley, he found that "there seemed to be but two articles . . . and they were tobacco and coffee. The rule with some for selling tobacco was lay a silver dollar onto a flat plug and cut out the bigness of it for the dollar. I don't remember of ever seeing such a hankering after anything in my life as there was after that, and coffee was not much behind it. Notwithstanding, Br. Grouard and myself had urged an observance of the Word of Wisdom so strongly upon the natives of the South Sea Isles, I was surprised to see so little notice paid to it at the gathering place of the Saints" (The Journals of Addison Pratt, ed. S. George Ellsworth [1990], 368). For a full study of the history and development of the Word of Wisdom, see Paul H. Peterson, "An Historical Analysis of the Word of Wisdom" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972). It took almost a century before the Word of Wisdom took on the status of commandment within the Church.
[^61] Samuel Taylor argues in his controversial book The Kingdom or Nothing: The Life of John Taylor, Militant Mormon (1976) that both Taylor and Pratt had married plural wives during their return voyages, which was further cause of Brigham's unhappiness. If such was indeed the case, it only represented the conviction in fellow apostles' minds that they were all equal in authority, while underscoring Brigham's concern that until a new First Presidency was established, regulation of this and other practices was virtually impossible to control.
