Richard E. Bennett, We'll Find the Place: The Mormon Exodus 1846-1848 ( 1997)

147"I AM ABOUT TO REVOLT"

147 Mormon Thunder at Scottsbluff

147I felt all the cares and perplexities of this camp and when a man feels as though his flesh and bones would melt away, he knows it. [^1]

147In late May, as the Mormon pioneers pushed forward northwest of Ash Hollow, both the surrounding scenery and the mood of the camp began to change. The newness of the journey, their success with the Pawnee, the excitement of the buffalo hunt, and the almost comforting sameness of the lower Platte River Valley had all given way to a restless realization that with each passing day time was becoming critical. They were now advancing deeper into the lands of the hostile, unpredictable Sioux and far removed from the ample food supplies in the vast buffalo herds of just a few weeks before. One senses from their writings a change in tone, an increasing sobriety, a growing awareness of their smallness in the face of a vast and expansive wilderness, a waning confidence tempered and cooled by the quiet immensity of their newfound isolation.

147"ONE OF THE WILDEST LOOKING PLACES"

High up the North Fork of the Platte River, on a ridge separating the North Platte Valley from Pumpkin Creek, the monotony of the prairie landscape at last began to give way. "A menagerie of enormous natural forms, monolithic clay and sandstone shapes," came into view: a domain of massive rock formations such as Courthouse Rock, Chimney Rock, Castle Pioneers Crossing the North Platte River, by C. C. A. Christensen Rock, Dome Rock, and Scottsbluff. "It was one of the wildest looking places I ever passed through," wrote the Oregon-bound James Field during his 1845 travels through the area. [^2] And the traveler, wrote another earlier observer, "imagined himself in the midst of the desolate and deserted ruins of vast cities, to which Nineveh, Thebes, and Babylon were pygmies in grandeur and magnificence." [^3]

148Soon after noon on 22 May, Porter Rockwell reported that he had ascended a nearby bluff and had seen in the distance the fabled Chimney Rock. To satisfy their curiosity, William Clayton, Horace K. Whitney, and John Pack grabbed a telescope and scampered up the nearby hillside like excited children to view the surrounding country. Said Clayton: "Northeast, north, and northwest, alternately, appeared high swelling bluffs and valleys as far as the eye could see or the glass magnify. . . . At the distance I should judge of about twenty miles, I could see Chimney Rock very plainly with the naked eye, which from here very much resembles the large factory chimneys in England, although I could not see the form of its base." [^4]

Whitney, a talented writer, was even more descriptive: "The scene to us was truly one of magnificence and grandeur and almost baffles description," he penned.

149The whole scene was one of romantic solitude and inspired me with singular feelings and reminding me forcibly of the descriptions I had read in my boyish days of the fortified castles and watchtowers of the older time. We had an opportunity of viewing it to the greatest advantage, as the setting sun, throwing its lengthening rays upon hill, dale, mound and river, made the sight inexpressibly grand and solemn. [^5]

149Between 23 and 31 May, the pioneer camp passed by Courthouse and Jail Rocks, Castle Rock, Chimney Rock, and Scottsbluff—all in a stretch of thirty-five miles. These physical features towered over the passing canvas-covered caravan like "huge rocks that had been rolled out of their natural place by the wash of the heavy rains or the convulsive throes of nature at the crucifixion of our Saviour." [^6]

149"This is a barren, desolate country," wrote a subdued and weary John Pack in a letter to his wives, realizing, perhaps, how far they yet had to go. "There is but little or no wood. We have cooked our victuals with buffalo chips [dried dung] for weeks. . . . Our teams are reduced for the want of grass. We cannot travel only about 75 miles a week. We hope that Fort Laramie is about half way." Then he admitted the loneliness and homesickness many were beginning to feel:

149This is quite a lonesome journey to me. In fact I never am happy when absent from my family and kindred. The enjoyments of life are but vanity and if it were not for the sake of my kindred and the kingdom of God I never would leave home again but I would spend my remaining days in the sweet society of my family.

149

149The separation was similarly wearing on their families and loved ones back at Winter Quarters. "The time seems long, very long, since I saw you," wrote Louisa M. Lyman, wife of Amasa Lyman.

I have been left many times but never did I realize my incapability of getting along without you to lean on or to advise me. I always had more directions about matters, and understood how to get along better than I do at the present time. For awhile after you left I was very much broken up. I could not content myself anywhere at home or abroad, night nor day. I was miserable. Let me be where I would I had lost my companion and with him all my enjoyment. I would have given almost everything to have seen you and received your counsel . . . and I shall be thankful, very thankful, if the Lord will be merciful to me and spare our lives that we may meet again, I hope never to part. [^8]

150The country, however, was as dangerous as it was spectacular. Their first concern was the weather. They had earlier learned from Sarpy that several years before at this very time of the year "at about this place," a sunny, warm afternoon turned into a rainy and cold evening; before morning 16 of his best horses were frozen to death by the side of the wagons and his boats were frozen into the ice of the river. [^9]

150While passing through the same valley in 1842, another California-bound emigrant, John Bidwell, had noted the hailstorms that often accompanied the "water spouts" or thunderstorms of the high plains. "The hailstones were so large and heavy that we thought they would kill our animals," he recalled. "Some of the stones measured two and a half inches in diameter. Some were found yet unmelted on our next day's travel." [^10] And from the pen of another traveler near Scottsbluff: "Those hail storms are great `bugieboos' here—they are really dangerous, sometimes setting teams afright." [^11]

150Both the intensity and the speed of such storms caught the attention of most emigrants. Another traveler

discovered a small black cloud in the west, and immediately ordered twenty men to saddle horses and remain on them while the rest were securely tied to the wagons, tents extra pinned, the cattle herded closely by horse and footmen. The storm could now plainly be seen coming by the flashes of lightning and the rapidly increasing roar of the thunder. . . . When the storm struck us, it was quite dark, which of course added to the confusion. It seemed as if the very elements were at war with each other. The blinding brightness of lightning as it apparently covered acres, followed instantaneously by the deafening crash that seemed to shake the earth, accompanied by large hailstones and a terrific wind, when all combined was well calculated to throw everything into confusion. Tents were prostrated, thus increasing the fright of the occupants; cattle bellowing as they rushed by with the storm; horses struggling frantically to break their fastenings to the wagons, mingled with the shouting of men, made an hour's experience that can never be forgotten when once endured. But the storm went by as rapidly as it came. [^12]

151A hint of just such a storm hit the camp late in the day on Sunday, 23 May. A sudden gust of wind struck Heber C. Kimball's hat, blowing it across a ravine. Soon afterward, at "about five o'clock, the wind blew a perfect gale and continued till seven when it commenced to rain very heavily, large drops descending, accompanied with hail. . . . We saw the necessity of having good stout bows to our wagons," Clayton recorded, "and the covers well fastened down, for the very stoutest seemed in danger of being torn to pieces and the wagons blown over. When the wind commenced blowing so strongly it turned very cold and long before dark I went to bed to keep warm." [^13] By morning snow lay on the ground, with a cold east wind blowing.

151Throughout such nights on the prairie, if the winds were not howling, then the wolves were, and the cries and sounds of other wild animals seemed to echo for miles. Recalled Joseph Wood of their encampment near Chimney Rock two years later:

151Last night I stood as guard from eleven to one and saw four grey wolves prowling around the encampment. I snapped my gun at them when they cleared out [and] were joined by others. [They] kept up a serenade on every side of us for some time noises of all kinds from wild animals were heard through the night even to the yowling of cats. [^14]

151"IN THE LAND OF THE SIOUX"

151Of far greater concern than inclement weather or the incessant howls was the unpredictability of the nearby Sioux. They posed the single greatest threat, not only to the forward camp but also to future trains of emigrants. From their observations of recent buffalo slaughters and abandoned camp-grounds and from occasional sightings, the pioneers knew that a very large band—from five hundred to one thousand—of Sioux was in the area, likely watching their every move. As with the Pawnee, it would be in their mutual interest to make friendly contact soon and to establish some kind of positive dialogue.

Fortunately that opportunity came quickly. As their trail bent toward Chimney Rock in the afternoon of 24 May, they saw a "drove of Indians" on the other side of the river riding in the direction of the camp. A messenger went ahead while the camp immediately began to stake their horses and form a circle for defense. The Indians waved a flag from their side of the river, signaling their desire to visit. The pioneers answered by hoisting their own "white flag of peace" and sent Albert P. Rockwood and Henry G. Sherwood to receive the natives and learn their intentions. The Sioux, some thirty-five men, women, and children, began to sing and cross the river in single file. Their chief, Owashtecha, wore around his neck a large medal that he had obviously obtained from earlier trades. Inscribed, on one side it read "Pierre Chouteau Jr. and Co. Upper Missouri Outfit," and on the other, "Brave Bear." In his hand he carried an American flag, the first seen in a Mormon camp since James Allen's invitation for the Mormon Battalion. It had the standard stripes, but in place of the stars there was an eagle, emblematic "of America scourging the Indians but giving no star of glory to the sons of the prairie." [^15] The chief also brought two letters of introduction—both in French—from fur traders at Fort Laramie. Unlike the poorly clad Pawnee, the Sioux presented a striking and noble appearance. "They were all dressed in their richest costumes," Erastus Snow recalled. "Some had fur caps and cloth coats, others had cloth pants and shirts, and the rest were neatly dressed in skins ornamented with beads, feathers, paints, etc. and they were by all odds the most cleanly, orderly, and best appearing of any Indians we have seen west of the Missouri River." [^16] Their women were beautifully adorned and noble in stature; Jacob noted that "some of their squaws are pretty brunettes," [^17] a description seconded by Whitney. "There were some very fine looking men and women among them." [^18]

152Clearly on a peaceful, fact-finding mission, the Sioux were kindly escorted around the camp, shown the cannon, and given tobacco, bread, meal, and other presents in abundance. Invited to dinner, the chief sat in a circle with Brigham and other camp leaders and proceeded to pass around the peace pipe. That night the chief amused himself by looking at the moon through the telescope; then he and his squaw stayed the night in a special tent provided for them. Early the next morning, all the other Indians came over and went about "just as their curiosity led them, some to get bread and other things, some trading moccasins, blankets, horses, etc." One of the chiefs, Washteha, was very pressing for a written paper"—a character reference which he could use to advantage with later wagon companies. Bullock was quick to oblige. "This is to certify that Washteha of the Dacotah tribe of Indians, with O Wash te cha the principal chief, and thirty-three other men, women, and children, visited our camp on the 24th and 25th May 1847, behaved themselves civilly and peaceably; we gave them bread. They were very friendly to us, and the best behaved Indians we have yet seen. W. Richards—Thomas Bullock, scribe." [^19]

153The Sioux then shook hands, mounted their horses, and rode away toward the river. Throughout the rest of their outbound journey, at least, there would be no trouble with the Sioux.

153Although the Sioux caused no disturbance, one of their ponies most certainly did. Ohio-born John S. Higbee had exchanged one of his ponies for another belonging to the Indians, one not "broken in" for the rigors of wagon travel. For no apparent reason, on the following day just before noon, the pony suddenly

153ran away with a singletree to his heels and gave a tremendous fright to the cows, oxen, and horses that were attached to the wagons. And in an instant a dozen or more wagons were darting by each other like lightning and the horses and mules flying as it were over the ground. Some turned to the right and some to the left. Some ran into other wagons. The horse and mule that Bro. [John S.] Fowler was driving leaped with all speed. With Bro. [John C.] Little hold of the lines and Br. Fowler hold of the bits they darted by my carriage like electricity and came within one inch of a collision with my wheels. . . .

153

153A person can hardly conceive of the power that is manifest in animals, especially mules, when in such fright. [^20]

153Woodruff and the rest had just witnessed the closest thing yet to a stampede, surely one of the most frightening experiences during an overland journey. [^21] It was the kind of hair-raising experience emigrants prayed would never happen or, at least, never happen again.

153PRAIRIE PRAYERS AND SAGEBRUSH SERMONS

Religious exercises on the trail have yet to receive the scholarly attention they deserve. Neither ordained ministers nor reverent sabbaths fared especially well on the Oregon or California trails. Sundays may have been layover days for most parties but for very practical, not only religious, reasons. And although ministers, most of whom were Protestant, often accompanied camps, they preached with sporadic, intermittent results.

154The wagon pulpit of westbound America was something more needed than heeded, an almost reluctant consent to social conscience. Prayers were more from fear than from sabbatarian duty. And some travelers considered their goals too crass for the blessings of heaven. A gold seeker, J. M. Wood, put it this way: "In the states millions of prayers are being addressed to the throne of grace for mercy for themselves and for others, but few there are who think of us in the wilderness or pray for blessings to rest upon our heads, but why should they care for those who care not for themselves." [^22]

154For most overlanders Sunday was usually a day set aside for needed chores and restless recuperation, time begrudgingly given by impatient company captains for their members to rest and feed the animals, to clean clothes, to mend and repair, and to do the numerous other things not possible any other day of the week. "This day is a day of rest," Solomon Gorgas, an 1850 emigrant observed, "that is, a day of general bustle and confusion—washday, bakeday and reposing day." [^23]

154Catherine Haun, an 1849 overlander, gave her description of a typical Sabbath day. "When the camp ground was desirable enough to warrant it we did not travel on the Sabbath," she observed and

154although the men were generally busy mending wagons, harness, yokes, shoeing the animals etc. and the women washed clothes, boiled a big mess of beans to be warmed over several meals, or perhaps mended clothes or did other household straightening up, all felt somewhat rested on Monday mornings, for the change of occupation had been refreshing. [^24]

154In such busy company, ministers, or more usually lay preachers, could not always be assured of a ready audience. "If we had devotional service," Haun remembered, "the minister—pro tem—stood in the center of the corral while we all kept on with our work. There was no disrespect intended but there was little time for leisure or what the weary pilgrim could call his own." [^25]

154A Reverend M. Stevens, a young Baptist minister from Ohio who was moving his family to Oregon, found that one had to work just about as hard "when stopping in looking after the cattle as when moving." Stevens laid by the first Sabbath, "but found there was no such thing as keeping it anyway and that he might as well be moving as lying by." [^26]

155Charles G. Gray, on his way to California in 1849, told of another forlorn preacher. "At about 10 o'clock a clerical looking young chap invited us to church in a grove about a mile distant and one of our men did actually attend. In the afternoon he preached in a grove quite near us and I believe no one condescended to pay their respects to him." [^27]

155Nevertheless there were times and places, depending on personalities, abilities, and circumstances, when the preaching of the word took good effect. There was enough wilderness and enough fear of the unknown to prompt some to listen, despite the many distractions of trail life. "In the afternoon we were summoned together by a blast from the horn to listen to a sermon by an old preacher named[Liseville[?]," Joseph Wood recalled of one 1849 sermon.

155He is a good man. I listened with pleasure. His text was `watch and pray.' He was practical in his remarks and preached appropriately to the occasion. The audience were lounging about in the corral with heads uncovered and listened respectfully. . . . A sermon on these prairies is listened to attentively by those who at home would not do so. [^28]

155Another emigrant, on his way to fame and fortune in California two years later, told of a certain sermon on the imminent end of the world that caught the ear of his companions. "We had also with us another offshoot of the Baptist Church who had become a Millerite," he wrote,

155Ascension Day being then near at hand, the stirring oratory of this man tended to damper our enthusiasm for gold hunting, seeing how foolish and futile was our mission if we had to ascend in so short a time; and I cannot yet see why he should endure all these hardships to get to California, knowing (as he pretended) that the world would end in a few years at most. [^29]

155There must have been several memorable sermons in overland history. Unfortunately, few have survived in historical documentation. That prize may well belong to the Latter-day Saints and to the sermonizing thunder of Brigham Young.

Unlike the practices of many of their fellow overlanders, Mormon devotion to the Sabbath was a mixture of Puritan devotion and New England practicality. Invariably they rested on Sundays, except when travel for a better campground made it necessary to move on. Hunting was not allowed, unless they were totally without food. And worship services, complete with makeshift pews, choirs, and speeches, were held as occasion allowed. Admitted Isaac Pettijohn, part of an Illinois company that later caught up to the Mormons west of Fort Laramie: "I saw and talked with [William] Vance, a son of Mr. Vance from McDonough Co. Illinois. Unlike us they had stopped to spend the Sabbath." [^30]

156As with most other companies, it was expected that preachers would sermonize in the sagebrush and sing hymns of praise on a prairie highway. [^31] What distinguished the Latter-day Saints, in keeping with the earliest Puritans, was more than mere sermons: it was a developing sense of divine mission. And they believed that to accomplish it, God would have a chastened and a contrite people. Burdened and blessed by such faith and expectation, it was only a matter of time before their own Jonathan Edwards would speak boldly of their Pilgrim's Progress to a new Mount Zion.

156While much counsel and many sermons were given along the trail in 1847, most of them were of the kind and supportive variety. Yet the one that will stand out forever came not on a Sunday, but on a Saturday in the shadow of Scottsbluff, and from a man they had already begun to call "the Lion of the Lord." Brigham's prairie-borne jeremiad of 29 May is as much a landmark in pioneer history as Chimney Rock was to the overland trail—not merely because of its quick and colorful chastisements (for which Brigham Young was already well known), but more significantly for what it revealed about how they viewed their journey, how they would define success, and on whose errand they believed they were.

156Obviously the spoken word had already borne fruit. Thomas Bullock said as much in a letter to his wife in mid-May. "I expect you will think there is a reformation in me," he said, "when you know that I have commenced reading the Bible through. I have already read as far as the 7th chapter of Judges and express my gratitude to God . . . that I have already received much light and intelligence in things of which I have been a long time dark." [^32]

156"I AM ABOUT TO REVOLT FROM TRAVELLING WITH THIS CAMP"

Perhaps it had something to do with the place. Scores of earlier travelers had already commented on the towering presence and stark desolation of Scottsbluff. "The whole viewed altogether has the appearance of a stupendous Scottsbluff, sketch from the Appleton Milo Harmon Journal, 27-28 May 1847 city in ruins with broken walls," J. E. Howells recorded in 1845. "The peculiarities of this land is its sterility, its extensive level plain, large dry basins without outlets, large tracts extremely broken." [^33]

157Some travelers considered that a curse had been about the place since 1828, when a wounded Hiram Scott was left to die of sickness and starvation by his two notorious companions. "His death has left here a traveller's landmark," wrote an 1834 visitor to Scottsbluff,

which will be known when the name of the canting hypocrite and scoundrel who deserted him will be forgotten, and remembered only in hell. . . . The unburied corpse of poor Scott was found at this spot, having crawled more than two miles towards his father's cabin and his mother's home. His only witness, the only watcher in his death-agony, was the dark raven and the ever hungry wolf. And keen, sharp and eager was his watch. I know the name of the soulless villain, and so does God and the devil. [^34]

158Not given to committees, advisors, or leadership by consensus, Brigham independently spoke his mind when he wanted and where he wanted. Passionately committed to the success and purpose of their present journey, he showed little patience with sinners or fools, with the proud or the excuse maker. Erastus Snow had learned that lesson the hard way two weeks before when, after trying to justify himself for losing Brigham Young's field glasses, he had borne his leader's blistering rebuke.

158This is a school to us all. . . . The advice is good that we had better chew india rubber than talk. The last dressing was the only regular built dressing that I had for fifteen years and I intend it shall be for the next fifteen years to come. I would not expose myself for such a chastisement again for all the horses in the land of God. I do not mean to aim all my remarks at President Young. I had no business to have spoken. I had suffered my feelings to be overcome. I am very sorry for it, and I have been the target. . . . If I cannot get a piece of india rubber, I'll chaw something else next time. [^35]

158Some few days later, unhappy with what he thought was needless and careless killing of animals by camp hunters, Brigham gave instructions to the captains "not to let their men kill any more game, as we had more on hand now than we could take care of." He also stated

158that life was as dear to the animal . . . as it was to us. That if the horsemen hunters would go ahead and hunt out the road they would be of more utility to the camp than pursuing every band of antelope that passed the camp; . . . that the spirit of the hunter as was now manifested would lead them to kill all the game within a thousand miles as inconsistently as the butcher would apply the knife to the throat of a bullock. [^36]

158Unlike the ministers of most other camps, who usually came along for the ride as a reminder of heaven, Brigham was a dominant figure, convinced that the success of their journey depended less on maps and wagons and more on personal obedience. And as for his fellow sojourners, they should have seen it coming.

Ever since Nauvoo, his periodic admonitions carried with them the theme of self-improvement, repentance, and obedience. Back in Mount Pisgah, Iowa, almost a year ago to the day, he had told his people that "now is the time to prove to be the Lord's, or else go into the world or to hell like other fools. . . . If this people will continue as they have done, their own prayers will bring a curse upon them and they will be blown up and scattered." [^37]

159Later, at Winter Quarters, after presenting "The Word and Will of the Lord," with its theme of personal improvement, he returned to the same topic. "If we penetrate into the wilderness and do not do right and keep the commandments of God, it is better to tarry here. You need not think that you are going to creep into my company and commit iniquity without being punished for it. . . . I want every family to break off from all iniquity and turn unto the Lord." [^38]

159And on 15 April, back at the Elkhorn, he had said, "We go as Abram of old; where we stop we now know not; we want the brethren to cease every [light-]hearted speech, levity, nonsense and childish notions and to act as servants of God." [^39]

159His message was as clear as it was consistent: They were on a divine errand; the success of the journey depended on their obedience to covenant; they were being tried and tested; a scourge awaited the rebellious; and the Church was in dire need of a reformation.

159It is relatively certain what triggered his immediate concerns. The threat of Indian attacks was real. The country lay vast and intimidating. Some persisted in wanton hunting and killing against specific instruction. And because of weather delays, they were running behind. It is far more demanding, however, to probe the deeper causes.

159The obvious trigger was an incident on Friday evening, 28 May, just 17 miles north of Scottsbluff. Only five days after commending the camp for good behavior, Brigham walked over to Woodruff's wagon; a large number of the company were dancing about. While standing by the fire, he commented to Norton Jacob, Woodruff, and others "upon the spirit that prevails and has the ascendancy in the camp—levity, loud laughter, whooping, and hallooing among the elders." He then went on:

159There is no harm [that] will arise from merriment or dancing if brethren, when they have indulged in it, know when to stop, but the devil takes advantage of it to lead the mind away from the Lord.

159

160

160

160They forget the object of this journey, and all feel well together. But if we travel in this way 500 miles farther, it will lead to the shedding of blood, and some will seek to destroy the priesthood. It would be far better for three or four to go away together to pray than to engage in playing cards and thus forget the Lord. . . . We are the pioneers for the whole Church of God on the earth, seeking for a place to establish the kingdom, but we have not found it yet. [^40]

160Woodruff, who "felt the force of his remarks and thought them necessary," sensed the coming storm. Retiring to Willard Richards's wagon (which served as Church headquarters on the trail because as apostle, historian, and post office agent Richards supervised the writing and receiving of all official communications), Woodruff read in the Book of Mormon before praying. Then, moving over to Brigham's wagon for a late night meeting of the Quorum of the Twelve, he heard him reread "The Word and Will of the Lord." Brigham "expressed his views and feelings concerning the camp that they must speedily repent or they would be cursed, that they were forgetting their mission and he had rather travel with 10 righteous men who would keep the commandments of God than the whole camp while in a careless manner and forgetting God." [^41]

160Thus it came as no surprise, to the Twelve at least, that in the cold and rain of the following morning, Saturday, 29 May, at about 10:30—having not advanced further because of the inclement weather—the bugle sounded as a signal for the teams to come together. After harnessing their teams, all were called together in a semicircle around the wagon boat, or revenue cutter, where Brigham stood above the crowd. After getting a roll call from each captain of 10, he launched forth.

160"This morning I feel like preaching a little, and shall take for my text, `That as to pursuing our journey with this company with the spirit they possess, I am about to revolt against it.'" He then proceeded, to the discomfort of all:

I have said many things to the brethren about the strictness of their walk and conduct when we left the gentiles, and told them that we would have to walk upright or the law would be put in force. . . . If you do not open your hearts so that the Spirit of God can enter your hearts and teach you the right way, I know that you are a ruined people and will be destroyed and that without remedy, and unless there is a change and a different course of conduct, a different spirit to what is now in this camp, I go no further. Give me the man of prayers . . . the man of faith . . . the man of meditation, and I would far rather go amongst the savages with six or eight such men than to trust myself with the whole of this camp with the spirit they now possess.

161Pinpointing the immediate cause of his frustration, he said:

161They will play cards, they will play checkers, they will play dominoes, and if they had the privilege and were where they could get whisky, they would be drunk half their time and in one week they would quarrel, get to high words, and draw their knives to kill each other. . . . I have played cards once in my life since I became a Mormon to see what kind of spirit would attend it, and I was so well satisfied, that I would rather see in your hands the dirtiest thing you could find on the earth, than a pack of cards. . . . If any man had sense enough to play a game at cards, or dance a little without wanting to keep it up all the time, but exercise a little and then quit it and think no more of it, it would do well enough, but you want to keep it up till midnight, and every night, and all the time. You don't know how to control your senses. . . .

161

161Some of you are very fond of passing jokes and will carry your jokes very far. But will you take a joke? If you do not want to take a joke, don't give a joke to your brethren. Joking, nonsense, profane language, trifling conversation and loud laughter do not belong to us. Saints, a resting place, a place of peace where they can build up the Kingdom and bid the nations welcome, with a low, mean, dirty, trifling, covetous wicked spirit dwelling in our bosoms? It is vain! vain!

161Finally, he concluded with these warnings: "If you do not stop it you shall be cursed by the Almighty and shall dwindle away and be damned. Such things shall not be suffered in the camp. . . . If we don't repent and quit our wickedness we will have more hindrances than we have had, and worse storms to encounter." [^42]

161Dominoes, card-playing, light mindedness—surely there was more that was troubling him. Calm one week and explosive the next, he was obviously deeply disturbed. Some might attribute it to other things, such as an uncomfortable night's sleep, a personality clash, or an upset stomach. But there was obviously more, much more on his mind.

162There was a worry—and many in camp were already writing about it—that despite their good progress they were falling behind schedule, that they should have then been well beyond the Black Hills. [^43] In the back of everyone's mind was the fact that many of their own families had already begun, or soon would begin, their march to a home the pioneer camp could then only imagine. The risks and dangers their families would encounter in the following emigration camp, coupled with their concern about reaching a suitable valley soon enough to plant late-summer crops, put a strain on everyone. And Brigham, as leader, was ultimately responsible. All was at risk and nothing certain was yet at hand. [^44]

162Filed away in their wagon-borne Church headquarters were countless other reminders of the pressures they faced. Representing the widow and the poor was the following letter of Aurelia Spencer, pleading for assistance. "It is with feeling of sorrow and bitter disappointment," she had written from St. Louis in early April 1847 in a letter probably delivered by John Taylor,

162Having done all that lay in my power to go to the camp as it is the only place to fly to, but what more can I do. I have begged and plead with the Lord to open the way and with brethren until my spirit is weary, but I cannot give it up. St. Louis is no place for me or my family . . . now Brother Brigham what am I to do? There is no blame to be attached to me. . . . My three big girls are keeping company with gentile young men. What am I to do? If I could get them to the Bluffs they will be saved but I have not the means to do so. . . . If I don't succeed in getting to the Bluffs before you leave will you remember me and my family? I have no one to look to. [^45]

162From late reports out of Voree, Wisconsin, they also knew that James Strang was still claiming prophetic revelations for his people and that his emissaries were converting entire branches of Latter-day Saints to his brand of Mormonism. [^46] Reuben Miller, an on-again off-again Strang supporter, wrote in April that Strang was sending John E. Page, a former Apostle, and "one or two others" on a mission of reclamation to England. [^47]

Of even greater concern, however, was their undeniable conviction, spelled out in so many of their writings, that the success of their present journey, and the safety and well-being of those now coming behind, were in direct proportion to their adherence to covenant and commandment. Though no one had died so far, a near-fatal rattlesnake bite to Nathaniel Fairbanks and the nearly fatal stampede had reminded them of another march long before—Zion's Camp. The Lord had chastened them then with many deaths and with failure to reach their goal; was it not possible it might happen again?

163The careful student of Mormon history will appreciate the fact that Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, Erastus Snow, and others in camp saw in their present expedition a very close parallel to, if not a repeat of that overland march led by Joseph Smith 13 years before from Kirtland, Ohio, to near Independence, Missouri. That grueling experience had tried the faith and endurance of men who either left the Church or went on to become leaders in the faith. Though it ended in the death by cholera of 18 men—a sign, Brigham Young and others had always maintained, of divine displeasure at the criticisms and bickerings of many in camp—it nevertheless established the faith of a coming generation of Mormon leaders. It was more than a march: it was a proving ground, a school. The pioneer camp believed the Lord was involved in this pilgrimage as well, and he would prove the faith and obedience of his leaders and his people. As much as their exodus must find a place, it was also about a people finding themselves. Brigham would return to this theme over and over again. Zion's Camp of 1834 was fast becoming Zion's March of 1847. [^48]

163George A. Smith saw the same parallels. Referring specifically to their earlier experience, he said:

163I went up in the camp of 1834. There came among the leaders of that camp some division, growling, etc. I have noticed that those who murmured there murmured since. Joseph mounted a wagon wheel and told us a scourge would come upon us for murmuring. The cholera came and sixteen or eighteen died. . . . I wonder now if we will suffer ourselves to follow the such like snares. If we go on in union we shall accomplish our journey and return in peace.

163Then, in rebuking the camp for excessive hunting and killing beyond their necessities, he reminded them all that "if you will not kill the rattlesnakes they will not bite you." [^49]

Repeatedly speakers referred to their journey as "a school," "a mission," and a testing ground. "We are now in a place where we are proving ourselves," said Woodruff. [^50] "The elders will look back at this journey as one of the greatest schools they ever were in [in] our lives," added George A. Smith. [^51] "Our little children will look upon this camp as angels," said Heber C. Kimball, "and will rank us the first Elders in this Church because they have learnt from the Servants of the Lord and been instructed by them and received their knowledge from their own mouths and camped night after night, and month after month with them." [^52] And from Amasa Lyman: "My idea is to go right through right side up with care. . . . We shall get fat on short feed building the foundation of a work where millions will be benefitted by this campaign, and our names will be hallowed for this very journey by million yet unborn." [^53]

164Erastus Snow defined their exodus-mission as clearly as any of the others:

164We have been chosen out of the world and are delivered from this world but as we have been chosen and set apart as elders of Israel let us show ourselves approved in all things. Let us not falter in our course until we accomplish all we have undertaken. And although Satan may test us to try our energies he [God] will enable us to overcome. It appears to me that all kinds of snags, trials and troubles ought to be put in a way to prove us. Had not our Martyred Prophet everything to contend with and yet in every trial there was an almighty fixation brought to bare upon it that enabled him to overcome all his trials. . . . I feel that the little school that we have passed through has been useful to us and I feel that we shall have new things to call for our attention from this time henceforth and forever. [^54]

164Constantly referring to Joseph Smith and his teachings and deliberately patterning his style, even to the point of standing on wagon wheels as Joseph had done thirteen years before, Brigham stressed the same point. "Many of these my brethren have been with me from the commencement," he said.

164Yet this very mission will soon be considered as one of the first acts of the church. The principles that have come to us from Joseph are very easily circumscribed. Suppose Joseph were here, and you take the whole knowledge in this camp of created things. Joseph would circumscribe and wound it round his finger. What knowledge had Joseph in comparison to one of the angels that have been myriads of years with God. I feel my weakness, my littleness. [^55]

165Brigham and his colleagues had used the word reformation deliberately and repeatedly since they received "The Word and Will of the Lord." They knew certain patterns of conduct had to change. This reformation was tied most closely to behavior in their adherence to the Word of Wisdom.

165The evidence suggests that the Mormon leader felt a growing sense of frustration over the fact that his people were not yet living the Word of Wisdom, a code of living they believed had divine sponsorship. It prohibited the consumption of liquor, the use of tobacco, and the taking of hot drinks. Given by revelation in 1833, this Word of Wisdom was still viewed as advice, not commandment, and the general attitude of increasing noncompliance concerned Brigham.

165In December 1846, back in Winter Quarters, the High Council voted that "all ardent spirits now in the camp or shall be hereafter brought in for sale, shall be delivered up to the Bishops of the ward to be sold by them alone and the net proceeds be applied to the poor." [^56] And despite their efforts, coffee, tea, brandy, and other spirits were a fairly common sight. [^57]

165Later Brigham said, "I am going to a stake of Zion with fasting and prayer and the Word of Wisdom has got to be kept, and quit tobacco, snuffing, drinking and swearing and if this people will be humble and prayerful the Spirit of the Lord will be increased a hundred fold. But if you neglect this you will be afflicted more than ever. I wish every man to say `Just you say what I must do and I will do it.'" [^58] "Will the Latter-day Saints at this time [for] once think [of] the Word of Wisdom and take the money that we pay for tobacco, spirits, etc. and come over and clothe your children." He went on:

165I think to propose to the pioneers to leave out ten pounds [of] coffee and take twenty of flour. . . . The Word of Wisdom says tobacco is good for cattle . . . is temperance in all things, this eating and drinking in a great measure is the misery of men. . . . There is no food, drink, vegetable, mineral or anything that is not attached to it without his death in it, but tobacco, opium—the end thereof is worse than the beginning. . . . When you go to a Stake of Zion you will have to quit it. . . . I am for a reformation. You don't go to a stake of Zion and prosper with these habits. [^59]

In early Nauvoo days the Word of Wisdom had been prominently taught with some successful results, but in the ensuing periods of heavy migration, conflict, and strife the principle had suffered neglect. [^60] Under better circumstances than a forced exodus, leaders might have restored the principle to a higher level of behavioral application, but they reluctantly accepted that such a reformation of all the people could come only after their physical safety and well-being were assured. Brigham spearheaded that reformation in 1856, after the Latter-day Saints were settled in the West, a belated attempt to improve a more settled people. [^61]

166Brigham's Scottsbluff sermon was, then, both rebuke and admission. In the moment of chastisement, he seemed to be admitting to himself that a deeper reformation would have to wait for a more appropriate time and place.

166Immediately after completing his remarks, Brigham did something not seen since perhaps the final days of the Nauvoo temple. He called on all the camp to assemble in rows by quorum—8 Apostles, 15 high priests, 4 bishops, 78 seventies, 8 elders, the remaining members and nonmembers (of which there were a few). He then asked each member by quorum, starting with the Twelve, to show by uplifted hand if they were willing "to covenant, to turn to the Lord with all their hearts, to repent of all their follies." All covenanted without a dissenting voice. Then Brigham "very tenderly blessed the brethren and prayed that God would enable them to fulfil their covenants." [^62] He turned some time over to Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, and Wilford Woodruff, and Elder Woodruff took deliberate pains to remind the camp that they would be scourged, as was Zion's Camp in 1834, if changes were not forthcoming. [^63]

166The results were dramatic. Colonel Markham, whose sometimes careless arrogance had caused some of the immediate irritation, acknowledged that he had "done wrong in many things." While asking for forgiveness, "he was very much affected indeed and wept like a child." Many others "were in tears and felt humbled." [^64] So great a change was manifested that William Clayton made this astute observation:

It seemed as though we were just commencing on this important mission, and all realizing the responsibility resting upon us to conduct ourselves in such a manner that the journey may be an everlasting blessing to us, instead of an everlasting disgrace. No loud laughter was heard, no swearing, no quarrelling, no profane language, no hard speeches to man or beast, and it truly seemed as though the cloud had burst and we had emerged into a new element, a new atmosphere, and a new society. [^65]

167The next day, Sunday, 30 May, the camp fasted and prayed and for the first time in many weeks partook of the sacrament. [^66] Later in the day members of the Twelve, with a few others, "went into the valley of the [nearby] hills and according to the order of the priesthood," an obvious reference to a sacred temple ordinance, "prayed in a circle." [^67] It was a day of deep reflection and earnest soul-searching. Two days and 23 miles later, a subdued and somber pioneer camp rolled into sight of the first sign of civilization since leaving the Loup Fork: Fort Laramie.

167NOTES

169For more on the comparison to Zion's Camp, see Therald N. Jensen, "Mormon Theory of Church and State" (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago, 1938), 43. Jensen quotes Brigham Young as saying: "I have travelled with Joseph a thousand miles, as he has led the camp of Israel. I have watched him and observed everything he said or did. . . . I watched every word and summed it up, and I knew just as well how to lead this kingdom as I know the way to my own house" (see also Arrington, Great Basin Kingdom, 429). Considering the above, there may have been another purpose in Brigham's discourse: to make conscious connection with Joseph Smith.

170It has been suggested from time to time that Mormon leaders used force to ensure obedience. Certainly Brigham Young did not mince words. Back in Winter Quarters, for instance, he had warned that "those who lied and stole . . . would have their heads cut off, for that was the law of God and it should be executed" (Manuscript History of Brigham Young, 20 Dec. 1846). On another occasion he said: "The wicked in camp had better go to Missouri and spend the rest of their time with the gentiles for . . . if they go with us and continue their wickedness, their heads shall be severed from their tabernacle and the devils that are in them shall go out and have no tabernacle to dwell in" (Journal of Wilford Woodruff, 15 Dec. 1846). And from the journal of Heber C. Kimball: "We were told that the Law of God would be executed upon the sinners and upon the hypocrites; wherefore, such was told that they would be far better off to not start another inch with this people" (19 Jan. 1847).

170Whatever the wording, no evidence has ever shown that Brigham Young or any of the Mormon leaders ever carried through on such apparent threats. The record has already shown one defection back at the Elkhorn. Others defected later, yet never at the risk of life or limb.

---
Notas:
[^5] For good accounts of the history of Nauvoo see the following works: Joseph Smith Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (1973), especially vols. 3-5 [cited hereafter as History of the Church]; B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. (1930), esp. vols. 2-3 [cited hereafter as Comprehensive History of the Church]; Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (1965); and David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (1974).
[^19] Journal History of the Church, 9 Aug. 1846. This is a well-known and excellent resource available at the LDS Church Historical Department, consisting of scrapbook-like entries from private journals, letters, various writings of all kinds, newspaper clippings, and so on, compiled by date by former Assistant Church Historian, Andrew Jenson; cited hereafter as Journal History.
[^21] Stampedes were a much dreaded occurrence in overland travel. One of the most chilling accounts is that given by a California forty-niner, Charles Edward Pancoast, while traveling up the Platte River in 1849: "In an instant, as if by magic, all the animals started simultaneously with a grand leap and flew down the river to the plain, the men in front shouting and scrambling to escape the solid mass of teams coming down upon them. Men could be seen dropping from the rear of wagons in all directions as they rumbled over the sands; I myself slipped through a two foot space between two wagons going at lightening speed. Some of the teams ran into a small creek and could not extricate themselves; others stopped from sheer exhaustion; still others ran two or three miles and were halted by the owners of tied horses that had not gotten away. Strange to say, no serious damage was done, except to the wagon of two Germans, which turned over and was irreparably smashed; the owners barely escaping with their lives. This was our first experience of a genuine stampede, not uncommon in the mountain countries of the west" (Charles Edward Pancoast, A Quaker Forty-Niner [1930], 198-99).
[^22] The new members of the company included Robert Crow, Elizabeth Crow, Benjamin B. Crow, Harriet Crow, Elizabeth Jane Crow, John McHenry Crow, Walter H. Crow, George W. Therlkill, Martilla Jane Therlkill (then seven months pregnant), Milton Howard Therlkill, James William Therlkill, William Parker Crow, Ida Vinda Exene Crow, Ira Minda Almarene Crow, Archibald Little, James Chesney, and Lewis B. Myers. Accompanying Myers were two Indian wives and a number of children (see William Clayton's Journal, 4 June 1847, 215).
[^23] Journal of Nelson Wheeler Whipple, 25 Feb. 1846, LDS Church Archives. "We thus kept a sharp look out for them for we knew as they had slain Joseph and Hyrum so they would slay Brigham, Heber, and the Twelve if they could."
[^28] The definitive works on the history of the Mormon Battalion are Frank Alfred Golder, The March of the Mormon Battalion from Council Bluffs to California (1928); Daniel Tyler, A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion to the Mexican War 1846-1847 (1969); John F. Yurtinus, "A Ram in the Thicket: The Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1975); and Norma Baldwin Ricketts, The Mormon Battalion: U.S. Army of the West, 1846-1848 (1996). See also Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 50-67.
[^29] The best study of Strang still remains Milo Quaife, The Kingdom of Saint James: A Narrative of the Mormons (1930). The most recent reinterpretation is Roger Van Noord's King of Beaver Island: The Life and Assassination of James Jesse Strang (1988). See also Doyle C. Fitzpatrick, The King Strang Story (1970); Richard E. Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 1846-1852: "And Should We Die . . ." (1987), 18-20; The Diary of James J. Strang, ed. Mark A. Strang (1961); William D. Russell, "King James Strang: Joseph Smith's Successor," in The Restoration Movement: Essays in Mormon History, ed. F. Mark McKiernan, Alma R. Blair, and Paul M. Edwards (1973), 231-56. Strang later removed his followers to Beaver Island in northern Lake Michigan, where his settlement realized only modest success.
[^31] Autobiography of Pioneer John Brown, 1820-1896, arr. John Zimmerman Brown (1941), 72-73. See also Jenson, "Day by Day," Deseret News, 31 May 1947. Lay and Crosby later died in California. Flake lived in Salt Lake City for most of his life, dying in Idaho Falls in 1903 at the age of 75.
[^40] William Clayton's Journal, 18 June 1847, 242. The crew left at the North Platte River crossing included some of the best carpenters and blacksmiths in camp: Thomas Grover, captain; John S. Higbee, assistant; Benjamin F. Stewart; James Davenport, blacksmith; William Empey; Luke S. Johnson; Appleton Harmon; Francis M. Pomeroy; and Edmund Ellsworth. Eric Glines decided, against counsel, to stay back with Grover's crew; he later changed his mind and hurried on by himself at considerable danger, catching up with the main camp several miles west.
[^42] Journal of Willard Richards, 14 Mar. 1847. It is interesting to note that in the dreams which Brigham Young said he had of Joseph Smith while preparing for the exodus, Joseph "stepped toward me, and looking very earnestly, yet pleasantly, said `Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. . . . Tell the brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it'" (Journal History, 23 Feb. 1847).
[^43] Little has been written about the costs of the original departures, although much is available on the costs involved in later migrations. This is particularly true of the Perpetual Emigration Fund and the financing of Mormon emigrant companies to Salt Lake City up until at least 1869 and the completion of the transcontinental rail-road. See Leonard J. Arrington's pathbreaking study, Great Basin Kingdom: An Economic History of the Latter-day Saints 1830-1900 (1958), 77-79.
[^55] For the exact wording of this "Memorial to the Queen for the Relief, by Emigration of a Portion of Her Poor Subjects," see J. B. Munro, "Mormon Colonization Scheme for Vancouver Island," Washington Historical Quarterly, 25, no. 3 (July 1934): 278-85. For a thorough and responsible study on British emigration, see Taylor, Expectations Westward, 18-47.
[^58] The Nauvoo Covenant resembled very closely the earlier Missouri Covenant of 1839, when Brigham Young at Far West, Missouri, proposed "that we this day enter into a covenant to . . . never desert the poor who are worthy, till they shall be out of the reach of the exterminating order of General [John B.] Clark." Some 214 men signed the covenant to assist others "to the utmost of our abilities." (History of the Church, 3:250-54).
[^59] There is some dispute over the name of this passerby. Most of the records refer to him as "Beaumont," although some refer to him as Charley Barkham (see Brigham Young letters, 5 May 1847). Erastus Snow records that the leader of the Beaumont company was a "Mr. Papan" who stayed on the other side of the river (see also Journal of Levi S. Johnson, 4 May 1847, Special Collections, Lee Library, Brigham Young University).
[^60] Addison Pratt, who left on a mission to the South Seas from Nauvoo in 1843 and did not return to his family, then in the Salt Lake Valley, until 1848, provides a revealing insight into the temporary lapse among the people in living the Word of Wisdom. On entering the valley, he found that "there seemed to be but two articles . . . and they were tobacco and coffee. The rule with some for selling tobacco was lay a silver dollar onto a flat plug and cut out the bigness of it for the dollar. I don't remember of ever seeing such a hankering after anything in my life as there was after that, and coffee was not much behind it. Notwithstanding, Br. Grouard and myself had urged an observance of the Word of Wisdom so strongly upon the natives of the South Sea Isles, I was surprised to see so little notice paid to it at the gathering place of the Saints" (The Journals of Addison Pratt, ed. S. George Ellsworth [1990], 368). For a full study of the history and development of the Word of Wisdom, see Paul H. Peterson, "An Historical Analysis of the Word of Wisdom" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972). It took almost a century before the Word of Wisdom took on the status of commandment within the Church.
[^61] Samuel Taylor argues in his controversial book The Kingdom or Nothing: The Life of John Taylor, Militant Mormon (1976) that both Taylor and Pratt had married plural wives during their return voyages, which was further cause of Brigham's unhappiness. If such was indeed the case, it only represented the conviction in fellow apostles' minds that they were all equal in authority, while underscoring Brigham's concern that until a new First Presidency was established, regulation of this and other practices was virtually impossible to control.
