Richard E. Bennett, We'll Find the Place: The Mormon Exodus 1846-1848 ( 1997)

171"IT'S A LONG ROAD THAT NEVER TURNS"

171From Fort Laramie to Fort Bridger

171The air at sunrise is clear and pure, and the morning extremely cold, but beautiful. A lofty snow peak of the mountains is glittering in the first rays of the sun, which has not reached us. The long mountain wall to the east, rising two thousand feet abruptly from the plain, behind which we see the peaks, is still dark and cuts clear against the glowing sky. . . . The scenery becomes hourly more interesting and grand, and the view here is truly magnificent; but, indeed, it needs something to repay the long prairie journey of a thousand miles. [^1]

171Situated at the junction of the North Platte and Laramie Fork, Fort Laramie had been an ideal fur trading center since 1834, when Robert Campbell and William Sublette erected a fur trading post, a mere stockade of logs, on the now famous historical site. Campbell christened it Fort William after his friend and partner. The next year, Milton Sublette, Thomas Fitzpatrick, and Jim Bridger bought the post for the American Fur Company as an ideal rendezvous site with the Ogalala Sioux to purchase both beaver furs and buffalo skins.

In 1841, the company erected a more substantial post—a new fort made of New Mexican adobe on the original site—renaming it Fort John and improving on it in the year afterward. By 1847 it had become a well-established, fully fortified commercial trading post complete with high-timbered Fort Laramie, from an engraving by Frederick Piercy walls, corner towers, and two massive doors looking out over the vast plain before it. Though still officially referred to as Fort John by its owners, most travelers called it Fort Laramie after the river. This designation was not officially recognized until the fort was purchased by the United States in 1849. [^2]

172Fort Laramie marked the first sign of civilization in 600 miles. Beautifully situated on a small eminence on the banks of Laramie Fork, about 1 1/2 miles above its confluence with the Platte, the fort commanded an extensive view of the whole adjacent country, with the dusky outlines of the Black Hills towering far above the surrounding scenery. It measured 168 feet long by 116 feet wide, with 15-inch thick walls, and boasted 16 rooms, 10 for dwelling and the rest for storage, a trading room, and a blacksmith shop. Cattle and horses were secured within an interior corral. Over the main entrance stood a square tower and at two of the corners, diagonally opposite each other, were large square bastions.

Brigham and his pioneers were surprised to find there were already Mormons at Fort Laramie before they arrived. Since the middle of May, Robert Crow had been scanning the rugged North Platte landscape south of the fort with his looking glass, anxiously waiting for a glimpse of the first emigrants of the season to come up the valley. Finally, after two weeks of daily searching, on the morning of Tuesday, 1 June, he made out in the far distance four men on horseback who, on closer examination, turned out to be none other than Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, and William Clayton. Crow shouted out the news to his brother, William Parker Crow, his son-in-law, George W. Therlkill, and their wives and children. This company of 17 men, women, and children was part of the Mississippi company, whose 12-month, 1600-mile search for the pioneer camp was finally coming to a happy conclusion. [^3]

173Crow reported that his small contingent was part of the original Mississippi company spearheaded by John Brown and William Crosby and their families and friends. It consisted of 43 souls (including two slaves) who had left Monroe County, Mississippi, 8 April 1846, with instructions "to proceed through Missouri and fall in with the companies from Nauvoo in the Indian country." Reaching Independence, Missouri, they were joined by Robert Crow and William D. Kartchner, both Mormons from Perry County, Illinois, with their families. [^4]

173After hearing rumors that the Mormons were active on the trail west, robbing caravans and killing emigrants, they decided to keep their religion to themselves and joined an emigrant company outbound up the Oregon Trail. At Ash Hollow they learned from John Reshaw, another trader, the disheartening news that there were no Latter-day Saints west of that point. Disappointed, the company of about 100 moved on to Fort Laramie separately from the Oregon emigrants who, after learning their fellow sojourners were Mormons, had gone ahead. To escape the harshness of a Laramie plains winter, Crosby and his grumbling band took Reshaw's advice and detoured south some 250 miles to winter at Fort Pueblo on the Arkansas River. [^5]

Crow also reported that almost one-third of the Mormon Battalion enlistees, after reaching Santa Fe, had been too ill and otherwise exhausted to complete the grueling overland march to San Diego. Colonel Doniphan, commandant at Santa Fe, and Lt. Col. Philip St. George Cooke agreed to send a "sick detachment" of 89 men, 18 women laundresses, and some children on a 300-mile detour to Pueblo, 75 miles west of Bent's Fort, in time to winter with their fellow Latter-day Saints. Their orders were to intersect with the main body of the Church in the spring of 1847 somewhere near Fort Laramie and then to move westward—all at government expense. Meanwhile the main body of the Battalion, as Mormon leaders would later learn, continued their continental march westward, reaching the welcome shores of the Pacific in January 1847 just in time to celebrate Mexico's capitulation and the surrender of California. [^6]

174The Pueblo detachment had weathered the winter reasonably well, reported Crow, and most of them were presently en route from Fort Pueblo for Fort Laramie. However, because of dissension over Mormon versus non-Mormon authority within their ranks, as well as rumors and reports on how their families were faring at Winter Quarters, the detachment had so soured in morale that some were talking openly of mutiny and desertion. Almost "half of the men rebelled and entered into obligation to leave the company at Laramie, take their portion of teams and provisions and go to the States." [^7] "Nothing in the world would have held us together," wrote John Steele, a member of the disenchanted company, "but the gospel and some were fast forgetting that." [^8]

174Upon hearing such happy as well as disturbing news, Brigham requested that Apostle Amasa Lyman and Roswell Stevens, plus John Tippets and Thomas Woolsey (who were enlistees in the Battalion), head south through dangerous Indian country with a large mail, intercept the oncoming party, and douse the smoldering discontent. Lyman was then to bring the detachment west, hard in the wake of the pioneer camp. On the morning of 3 June, Brigham Young, Willard Richards, Heber C. Kimball, and Orson Pratt accompanied the Pueblo-bound quartet to Fort Laramie, where they "took seats on a large tree fallen on the banks of the river." Before kneeling with and blessing each one, Brigham

174read some instructions . . . and gave them to Amasa Lyman [in which] he told the [Battalion] brethren that they had accomplished their designs in getting the Battalion to Mexico but the brethren at Pueblo must not follow Brown to Mexico, but go to California. If the officers will not do right, he instructed Amasa to call out the men, and choose officers who would do right . . . and throw all the Gentile officers out of the Battalion when you come up to it. [^9]

After visiting with the rest of the Mississippi company who had camped outside the fort, Brigham and company went inside the fort. There they were welcomed by James Bordeaux, the 32-year-old principal, or fort supervisor, whose young years belied his almost 20 years' experience as trader, voyageur, hunter, and explorer of the intermountain West. With him at the fort were his Sioux Indian wife, Marie, and two of their children, along with some 20 other Sioux men, women, and children.

175A supervisor at the fort since 1842, Bordeaux proved an excellent host—"a Frenchman and a gentleman" in Woodruff's words. "He received us kindly and invited us into a large setting room on the north side of the Fort . . . a flight of stairs leading to it." [^10] It "looked very much like a bar room of an Eastern hotel. It was ornamented with several drawings [and] portraits. A long desk, a settee, and some chairs constituted the principal furniture of the room." [^11]

175Bordeaux informed his visitors that they were the first emigrants in what was expected to be a very busy season, and that they had arrived almost too early in the spring because the snow was "middle deep ten days ago" in the Sweetwater country. He then offered them the use of the fort's flatboat, which was large enough to ferry over a swollen Platte River, now 100 yards wide, two wagons at a time—all for the most reasonable price of 25 cents per wagon. In addition he offered them liberal use of his smithies and any other needed facilities. [^12]

175Brigham welcomed his new host's kindnesses. Further travel on the north bank was impossible because of the steep river banks, so the pioneers needed to ferry their wagons over the Platte. While this happened, they would use the time to wash, mend wagon covers, repair broken rims, and unload for trade heavy iron plows and other unnecessary items to lighten their loads for the mountain climbs ahead. And they would learn as much as possible about their future course of travel.

175So for the next two or three days, everyone was busily engaged. "We . . . made fires to do our washing. Bro. Burnham done my washing today," recalled one pioneer, "the first time I have washed my clothing since I left Winter Quarters. Bro. Frost set 6 shoes for me today and 2 for Bro. [William C.] Smoot." [^13]

175If most overlanders cheered when seeing the fort, those on the inside never knew what to expect. From Bordeaux's perspective, the emigrant traffic was a rich source of income, a captive audience anxious to trade off their wares at discount prices and willing to buy robes, blankets, and foodstuffs at inflated prices. But their profiteering came at a price. Francis Parkman wrote of one emigrant visit just the year before:

176The emigrants were preparing their encampment; but no sooner was this accomplished, than Fort Laramie was fairly taken by storm. A crowd of broad-brimmed hats, thin visages, and staring eyes appeared suddenly at the gate. Tall, awkward men, in brown homespun; women with cadaverous faces and long lank figures, came thronging in together, and, as if inspired by the very demon of curiosity, ransacked every nook and corner of the fort. . . . They penetrated the rooms, or rather dens, inhabited by the astonished squaws. They explored the apartments of the men, and even that of Marie and the bourgeois. . . . Being totally devoid of any sense of delicacy or propriety, they seemed resolved to search every mystery to the bottom. [^14]

176Convinced that the French were common instigators of Indian attack on the wagon trains, many emigrants treated Bordeaux and his wife with both prejudice and disdain. Whether or not former Missouri governor Lilburn W. Boggs had been part of the above-described company when he had passed that way in 1846 is impossible to prove. One thing, however, is certain: he had tried hard to abuse Bordeaux's mind about the Mormons and their intentions.

176Boggs vilified the Mormons as thieves and murderers, a brutal element in a savage land. Yet according to Bordeaux, Boggs and his fellow travelers had acted so ungentlemanly and irresponsibly while at the fort that he had been relieved to see them go. "He informed us that Gov. Boggs and his men had much to say against the Mormons," wrote Woodruff, "and cautioned him to take care of his horses, cattle, etc. lest we should steal them. [He tried to prej]udice him against us all he could. He said that Boggs' company was quarrelling all the time and most of the company had deserted him. He finally told Boggs and company that let the Mormons be as bad as they would, they could not be any worse than he and his men were." [^15]

Such a recounting was just another indication that, along with the prairie wind, rumors blew wild across the trails that spring of 1847—and it took some historians decades to sift the truth from the error. One persistent misconception had it that Boggs was on the trail in 1847, just ahead of the pioneer camp. [^16] Although they had unconfirmed reports that Boggs had passed by the year before, some Mormons believed he was just ahead of them, returning with troops to block their progress to the West. [^17] Boggs's rumored intervention was a primary topic of discussion at the fort. And if Lilburn W. Boggs Boggs had maligned the Latter-day Saints the year before, many returned the favor.

177Actually, as one of his own fellow travelers wrote, Boggs was running scared and had been since the failed attempt on his life just a few years before. "I heard them talk in camp about Boggs' troubles," reported one A. B. Robbison, an Oregon-bound traveler with Boggs in 1846.

177It was just after the death of Joe Smith. I heard Boggs and others speak about the Mormon difficulties. I was satisfied from what I saw and heard that that was his object in leaving the country, although of course he denied it. It was generally understood and believed by everybody at the time that that was his object—that he was afraid of the Mormons. There was nothing in California to induce him to go there at that time. There were no settlements. It was before it was occupied by the United States. He simply wanted to get away from the Mormons and to take his family all out of danger. [^18]

177Bordeaux and his Mormon visitors could not then have known it, but Boggs had very nearly gone with the ill-fated Donner party to their inglorious end in the high Sierra in late 1846. William Montgomery Boggs, a son of the former governor, along with other family members, had accompanied his father overland the year before. He told of their meeting with Lansford W. Hastings in Sweetwater County and their near decision to follow his new and untried cutoff to California. Donner decided to follow Hastings, but Boggs chose to go to Oregon and separated from his co-travelers at Independence Rock. Once at Fort Hall, however, Boggs was convinced by Applegate and Godfrey, bearing news of the recent Mexican defeat, to come to California over the more proven trail down the Humboldt Canyon. Boggs arrived at the Pacific late in 1846 and settled into prosperity, but forever nurtured a fear of the Mormons. [^19]

177Meanwhile, back at the fort, in return for Bordeaux's hospitality, Luke S. Johnson treated so many of those who were sick that Bordeaux

178said to me [Albert P. Rockwood] that this was the most gentleman-like company that had ever visited the establishment. Other companies took liberties to go in all and every bit of the fort with leave, whereas our people asked to examine and look over and [he] felt honoured by our society for every man of us had acted the part of a gentleman, which was not practiced by other companies. He also spoke in high terms of Bro. Crow that has camped by him several days. [^20]

178Bordeaux even expressed his intention of visiting the pioneers in the Salt Lake Valley, a place he had earlier visited and now strongly recommended to eager ears.

178While sheltered at the fort, the pioneer camp began to receive firsthand information on the area ahead of them and on the people left behind them. Regarding the road ahead, they learned from a passing party of trappers just arrived from Fort Bridger that just two weeks earlier the snow was several feet deep on the Sweetwater and in the mountains, and that the spring runoffs were very strong. The Bear River Valley, they reported, was well timbered with plenty of grass, light winters, and very little snow.

178And as for news from the east, four men from St. Joseph, Missouri, arrived on horseback just two days after the Mormons. They told of a 20-wagon express company of emigrants from Missouri, Illinois, and Iowa just three miles below and some 600 to 700 wagons further back along the Oregon Trail. "They think that there will be about 2,000 wagons leave the States this season for Oregon and California"—certainly the largest emigration yet anticipated. [^21]

178Anxious to keep ahead of the oncoming trains for as long as possible, the pioneer camp stayed at Fort Laramie no longer than necessary. With the last of Kimball's wagons safely ferried over and with all the necessary repairs and alterations made, they moved out, this time following the Oregon Trail on the south side of the North Platte fork.

178"TWINS OF THE BLACK HILLS"

The enlarged pioneer camp now numbered 161 souls (148 men, 8 women, and 5 children) in a caravan of 79 wagons. Refreshed and well rested, they set out from Fort Laramie in midmorning of a partially cloudy 4 June. [^22] They needed their rest, because the 397 miles of poorly marked trail from Fort Laramie (elevation 4,090 feet) to Fort Bridger (elevation 6,865 feet) would test their pioneering and road-clearing skills as never before. Despite swollen rivers, high mountain passes, cold nights, and hot travel days, they had to make Bridger by the first of July, at the very latest, in order to reach the Salt Lake by 15 July, their intended date of arrival. Though they missed their target by a few days, they averaged more miles per day through the Black Hills and beyond than they ever did on the bald prairie of the Platte—and for obvious reasons.

179By now, seven to eight weeks out of Winter Quarters, they had mastered the routine of wagon travel—breaking morning camp, sorting out travel sequence, scouting ahead for Indian troubles and the best campsites, setting up evening encampments, and so forth. They had also learned, as did most other seasoned overlanders, that the ox and the mule were far more reliable means of motive power than the horse. "My large oxen have taken me through thus far," one Missourian recorded that same year. "I have been stalled in no place, and have never taken the second pull. The young oxen work all the way [and] I have been offered $100 for them several times. They are as good as when I started." [^23]

179Perhaps the fundamental reason for their accelerated pace was the competition. For the first time in their travels, they were competing for the best campsites and water holes, now further apart than before, with other wagon trains, mostly from Missouri. The vanguard company of these "Gentile" companies, as the Mormons were fond of describing them, caught up with them just one day out of Fort Laramie. Piloted by Gabriel Freedom, this express company was bound for Oregon, particularly for Vancouver Island to find sea shells for the coming summer season's trade with the Indians. [^24]

179The pioneer camp was not without a newfound pilot of their own. Lewis B. Myers, a non-Mormon trader and pilot who had thought to return to Pueblo after guiding the Mississippi company to Fort Laramie, changed his mind after an hour's journey southward and "retraced his steps to our camp, just as we had got ready to start." Having lived and traveled in the Black Hills country for the past nine years and "represented as knowing the country to the mountains," Myers quickly proved a valuable asset to the camp. [^25]

To accelerate their march even more, Willard Richards appointed Albert P. Rockwood "Deputy Supervisor of the road from Fort John to Salt Lake." Facing a poorly marked trail that seemed to prefer going over the top of hills and bluffs rather than around them, Rockwood was assigned to take at least 10 or 15 men—"the Road Tax Crew"—ahead of the teams with pickaxes, hoes, and spades to remove boulders, level steep declines, "make the rough places smooth," and generally "clear a better way for the wagons." [^26]

180Immediately past the fort, the Oregon Trail struck west and away from the Platte, over parched hills in order to circumvent a wild river country, before reconnecting with the Platte 125 miles ahead. Such country, recorded Oregon-bound James Clyman,["make[s] a very singular appearance with shabby junts of dark-looking pine and cedars rooted in the white, dry, weatherworn lime rock, which in many places shows like chalk banks and appears to be formed of strong, white narly clay dried by the sun and formed into rough, solid masses of rock . . . affording but few springs and no brooks." [^27] Consequently, for the first time, the company needed to use double teams while ascending and to lock the wagon wheels while descending.

180Ten miles west of the fort and in full view of Laramie Peak, they came to a "long, steep and stony declivity." "At the foot," Clayton described,

180is a short sudden pitch and then a rugged ascent for a quarter of a mile. The bluff is rocky and many large cobble stones lay in the road which made it hard on the teams. Appleton Harmon took one of his yoke of cattle and assisted George Billings to the top and Brother Johnson took Appleton's steers and put them forward of his and brought up his wagon. Appleton and Johnson then took the three yoke of oxen and fetched up Appleton's wagon. . . . After arriving on the top the road was good but still rising for a quarter of a mile farther. We travelled on this high land five and a quarter miles which was very good traveling although it was considerably rolling. [^28]

180Because of the difficult terrain, Clayton's guide posts, usually on wood bearing Willard Richards's familiar brand, were erected at ten-mile intervals. Still, they averaged 16.5 miles per day—25 percent faster than their travel time up the Platte.

180The one ready advantage to their rigorous climb was a resplendent and changing scenery, a welcome relief from the weariness of the Platte River plains. As Fremont said of it:

"Truly magnificent; but, indeed, it needs something to repay the long prairie journey of a thousand miles." [^29] When at the summit of one high hill, Crossing the Platte, by George L. Strebel they "had view of a most beautiful country, being in two directions like an immense park, without any fence, and dotted with pines; on the other side had a full view of Laramie Peak, covered with timber, and tipped with snow." [^30]

181Sixty miles west of Fort Laramie they stumbled on a stroke of good fortune in the presence of several eastbound mountaineers on horseback—William Tucker, James Woodrie, James H. Grieve, James Bouvoir, and six other Frenchmen with two squaws. Tucker, sick with the chills, was attended to by Luke S. Johnson. These men were all well acquainted with Lewis Myers, and in appreciation for Johnson's medical services, informed Myers that if they outran their Missourian counterparts they would find at the North Platte River crossing some 50 miles ahead a large leather buffalo boat hung up in a tree and "that we might use it for ferrying." [^31] Accordingly, 19 wagons including the revenue cutter, under the direction of Tarleton Lewis, set out in express fashion along a shorter route, likewise pointed out by their unexpected benefactors. The result was that Lewis arrived at the North Platte (near present day Casper, Wyoming) just two hours before Freedom and his Oregon-bound party and earned the prize.

182Under normal conditions, crossing the North Platte at this point, where it was usually four to six feet deep and 60 yards wide, was simple. However, the heavy snows of 1846-47 and a late but quickly warming spring had swollen the Platte far beyond its banks, causing a current so swift and swollen that a normal crossing was quite impossible. Now 100 yards wide and up to 15 feet deep, the Platte was a formidable challenge. For a full day before the arrival of the main camp, Lewis and company busily roped over the empty wagons and ferried across Freedom's small number of Oregon emigrants and their possessions at $1.50 per head, paid for in flour at $2.50 per hundred pounds. After a day's hard work (all of 11 June), they had earned $34 in provisions "which is a great blessing to the camp inasmuch as a number of the brethren have had no bread stuff for some days." [^32]

182Lewis and his crew were quick to argue, however, that roping or floating over one wagon at a time and having fearful cattle and balking horses swim over would take the camp at least a week, probably more. [^33] After much deliberation, the decision was made to lash together several wagons at a time, using pine poles to prevent excessive pitching or rolling. On Monday morning, they put the pine pole plan into action, but with almost fatal results. "The second division then got a rope stretched across the river from shore to shore," one observer reported, "letting [the wagons] drift with the current to save breaking the rope." A few wagons floated successfully across to the opposite bank in this fashion. But because of the strong winds and current, they ended up some two or three miles downstream. At other times, "when the wagons struck on the sand on the other side the upper one keeled over and finally rolled over the other one, breaking the bows considerably and losing iron." [^34]

182Howard Egan almost lost his life in the attempt, after volunteering to get in one wagon and ride on the upper side to prevent its turning over. "Soon after we pushed off," he recalled,

Brother [Andrew S.] Gibbons jumped in the river and caught hold of the end of the wagon. When we got out about the middle of the river, the wagon began to fill with water, and roll from one side to the other, and then turn over on the side. I got on the upper side and hung on for a short time, when it rolled over leaving me off. I saw that I was in danger of being caught in the wheels or the bows, and I swam off, but one of the wheels struck my leg and bruised it some. I struck out for the shore with my cap in one hand. The wagon rolled over a number of times and was hauled ashore. It received no damage, except the bows were broken. [^35]

183A violent thunderstorm struck the area in the late afternoon, raising the river level considerably higher. By nightfall, after 16 hours of strenuous work in which several men were up to their armpits in water all day long, they had managed to get over only 11 wagons of the first division and 12 of the second.

183Horace K. Whitney, although usually possessed with boundless energy, could barely write in his journal. "After eating some supper . . . Bro. Luke Johnson and myself laid down before the fire in the open air, covering ourselves with buffalo robes. After a while, Orson [Pratt], who had been over the river, came back and slept with us. I have done the hardest day's work today I ever recollect to have done in my life and this evening I feel quite worn out with cold and fatigue." [^36]

183The following morning the wind blew so hard and the current ran so strong that even the livestock refused to swim across. After further council, the camp decided that the only sure way to solve their problem was to construct a ferry boat large enough to carry over two wagons at a time with teams and provisions. And if they were going to spend the time and energy to do so, they should leave a ferry crew behind to operate it—not only to assist their own emigrant company coming on but also as a commercial enterprise for the many hundred Oregon- and California-bound wagons coming up the Platte.

183Several of their number followed the river downstream two or three miles to find cottonwoods tall enough to fashion the anticipated ferry. And Brigham, a master carpenter by trade, removed his shirt and "went to work with all his strength, assisted by the Dr. [W. Richards] and the brethren, and made a first rate white pine and white cottonwood raft." [^37]

183Completed in two days, the ferry consisted of two 24-foot cottonwood canoes, 2 1/2 feet wide, placed parallel to each other, reinforced with cross timbers and cornered with puncheon. It had a rudder and good oars affixed for steering, and was promptly dubbed "Twins of the Black Hills." Both divisions were across the river by noon the following day, ending a six-day delay. As Woodruff put it: "The longest hindrance I ever saw at a ferry or crossing a river." [^38]

184Their new ferry soon paid handsome dividends. Even before the pioneer camp was entirely over, the ever-anxious Missouri companies were offering to pay $1.50, and some $2.00, per wagon if they could be ferried over during the night. With 108 emigrant wagons within four miles, all eagerly waiting to cross, the new Mormon Ferry was a very busy—and profitable—service indeed. [^39]

184Although several volunteered to remain behind and operate the ferry, only nine men, under the direction of Thomas Grover, received the assignment. [^40] They were instructed to come on with their families in the emigrant camp or, if their families did not come, to return to Fort Laramie and remain there until the following season. [^41]

184"A REMEMBRANCER OF PAST TIMES"

184As coincidence would have it, many of the Oregon-bound emigrants crossing at the North Platte ferry crossing were from Jackson, Clay, Lafayette, and Davies counties in Missouri, battlegrounds between the Mormons and Missourians during the conflicts of the 1830s. Even the well-known Lansford W. Hastings, author of the 1845 Emigrants' Guide to Oregon and California, was guiding several of their companies. Deep and abiding animosities still existed between the two groups. The Mormons blamed Missouri vigilantes for the needless slaughter of 18 men, women, and children at Haun's Mill, Caldwell County, Missouri, in 1838 and also for instigating the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, deaths many had covenanted to avenge if ever the chance presented itself.

184And with the Missouri overlanders on guard against the rumored evil intents of Porter Rockwell, Tom Brown, and Jackson Redden, it was a prairie prescription for disaster. Neither armed camp welcomed the sight of the other, but fate, for one brief moment, made unwilling travel partners of them all. [^42]

184 Mormon accounts show outright fear and disdain on the part of those who had lived through the troublesome Missouri years, but sharp curiosity on the part of the more recent converts. To Bullock and Clayton, they were the "Gentile camps." To Pratt and Erastus Snow, they were the "Oregon Emigrants." Howard Egan referred to them merely as "Missourians," and Woodruff as "the Missouri Companies." Norton Jacob got more to the point: "mobocrats."

"Four Missourians came up mounted," Clayton recorded of their first face-to-face contact, "being part of a company a little behind. Some of these are recognized by the brethren and they seem a little afraid and not fond of our company. They say the old settlers have all fled from Shariton, Missouri, except two tavern keepers, and I feel to wish that their fears may follow them even to Oregon." [^43] Others, on hearing of Clayton's roadometer, came over "to see inside and looked upon it as a curiosity. I paid no attention to them," Clayton hastened to record, "inasmuch as they did not address themselves to me." [^44]

185Isaac Pettijohn, a traveler in the Missouri train, had been taking note of the Mormon's progress since before Laramie. "Traveled about fifteen miles today," he wrote on 4 June, the day the pioneer camp left the fort. "100 Mormon wagons crossed the river here yesterday and have gone ahead of us. 2000 more are said to be on the way." [^45]

185When the ferrying first commenced, the Missouri companies "were armed with bowie knives and pistols, but before the brethren had finished their work, the men had put them all away and having put away their fears also, were very civil and kind." [^46] While waiting on both sides of the river, by the light of an evening fire men thought they recognized one another and carefully probed a troubled, explosive past. In one such conversation, a Mr. Bowman, one of the "gentile" leaders, said he was the father of Bill Bowman who had had custody of Joseph Smith at the time he escaped from Liberty Jail in April 1839. Bowman was ridden out of town on a bar of iron by Obadiah Jennings, leader of the mob. "The old man says it would not be good for him to see any of the mob," Bullock detailed, "but he tries to keep it out of his mind as much as possible. He also said Morgan the Sheriff is in Oregon, Brassfield and Togue he did not know." [^47]

185Whatever their differences, the ferry was as much a godsend to the impatient Missouri companies as it was to the impoverished Mormons. Aaron Burr, the blacksmith, repaired several of Hastings's broken irons. [^48] A lost Wilford Woodruff one night found shelter and protection in a Missouri camp. Lorenzo Young's broken axle was repaired by his new neighbors. And one young Missouri lad was saved from certain drowning by the quick dispatch of the revenue cutter. [^49]

By the end of the week, invitations were going back and forth to socialize and enjoy one another's company. A Captain Ashworth invited Rockwood and Bullock "to breakfast with him on bacon, warm biscuits, and light fried biscuits, good coffee with sugar and then milk." Said a thankful Bullock: "Eating a good breakfast from a woman's cooking is a remembrancer of past times, and renews the desire for such times to come again." [^50]

186"THIS IS UNCLE SAM'S DAY OF INDEPENDENCE"

186The pioneer camp finally bid Grover and his men farewell early in the morning of 19 June. From the Platte they rolled out cross-country to connect with the Sweetwater River some 50 miles west. "In good health and spirits," they were anxious to make up lost time. "It was remarked by several that their stock had fattened so much while stopping at the ferry, they hardly knew them." [^51] They set a record for distance traveled in a single day—21 1/2 miles—over high bluffs, steep pitches, and crooked descents before finding sufficient spring water.

186Unfortunately it turned out to be a miserable, dangerous place. "Its banks are so perfectly soft that a horse or ox cannot go down to drink without sinking immediately nearly overhead in thick, filthy mud, and is one of the most horrid, swampy, stinking places I ever saw." [^52] Said Norton Jacob: "Such a country! Mire holes on the mountains, frost in July, salt water, and no wood to cook with." [^53]

186They could not have chosen a worse campground. Close to the Poison Springs, or Poison Pond, the camp might have met with disaster if it were not for the high moisture content still in the ground because of recent heavy snow melts. Other travelers in the same place fared much worse, as a later passerby explained:

186This morning we came to Poison Spring or the Poison Pond; it is the first water we saw since leaving the [N.] Platte River. . . . Here are the graves of some five or six persons who drank of the water and died in a few minutes. Notices are stuck over the graves and at the road side, and on each side of the spring giving warning to the Emigrants in every conceivable form: "He drank of this water and died." "Drank at this spring and died." "This water is poison." "Death!" "Poison!" "Beware! For God's sake do not taste this water! Happy is the man who can read!" [^54]

As they approached the Sweetwater, the whole countryside began to take on the appearance of a moonscape—with high hills and ridges of granite rock starkly rising above desert desolation. Due to the high concentration of alkaline soil, even sagebrush grew sparsely. "I can describe their Independence Rock, from a painting by Barna Meeker appearance," wrote Clayton, "only by saying that it seems as though giants had in by-gone days taken them in wheelbarrows of tremendous size and wheeled up in large heaps, masses of heavy clay which has consolidated and become solid, hard rock." [^55]

187Along the way they passed between small lakes ringed with wild saleratus, a yeastlike alkaline substance which they collected by the bucketful to leaven bread and light cakes. They soon learned, however, that it had to be used with care; it was so much stronger than common saleratus that if the same quantity was used it made the bread quite green. [^56]

187On 21 June they reached the Sweetwater and the famed Independence Rock (or Liberty Rock as Rockwood termed it) nearly a half-mile long, 80 feet high and "shaped like an oblong loaf of bread." It had already become a well-marked trail attraction—that Great Register of the Desert—whereon the names of hundreds of persons were "painted upon these rocks . . . with red, black, and yellow paint." [^57]

After inscribing a few names of their own and erecting a guidepost indicating 175 1/4 miles from Fort Laramie, they moved on, camping four miles further near Devil's Gate. Never content to trust Fremont's calculations, Pratt measured the two high rocky ridges to be 379 1/2 feet high and almost 200 yards long. Beyond Devil's Gate, the scenery dramatically improved, "a romantic appearance," in the words of Howard Egan, "very sublime," as the Wind River mountain chain burst clearly into view. [^58]

188From Devil's Gate they pressed on through the valley, which varied in width from five to ten miles. They had to stay close to the banks of the Sweetwater, which was still shouldered with immense banks of snow, and constantly forded the stream for a better trail. Living off antelope, Missouri flour, sagebrush, and mountain water, the camp neared the base of South Pass, that "Cumberland Gap" of the West since its discovery in 1812. Named South Pass to distinguish it from Lemhi Pass in present-day Montana, through which Lewis and Clark had earlier traveled, by the 1840s it had become the favored passage over the Continental Divide.

188The pioneer camp crossed over the pass, at an altitude of 7,220 feet, without difficulty, but always wondering precisely when and where they had reached the summit. Fremont had expressed the same imprecision a few years before:

188The ascent had been so gradual that, with all the intimate knowledge possessed by [Kit] Carson, who had made this country his home for seventeen years, we were obliged to watch very closely to find the place at which we had reached the culminating point. This was between two low hills, rising on either hand fifty or sixty feet. . . . From the impression on my mind at this time, and subsequently on our return, I should compare the elevation which we surmounted at the pass to the ascent of the Capitol Hill from [Pennsylvania] Avenue at Washington. [^59]

188Although the Mormons crossed over South Pass before the 4th of July, other travelers "from the states" usually reached the Sweetwater country just about the time to celebrate the nation's birthday. In fact, Independence Rock was likely so called because of earlier celebrations by those passing by who were eager to remember the glorious Fourth. John H. Brown, in an Oregon-bound camp just two weeks behind Brigham's, tells of how his group arrived at Independence Rock. "As we camped there and celebrated the 4th of July, our company also added their names, with dates, etc. We here read the names that had been placed there for years before ours." [^60]

Charles R. Parke, part of the vast number of later California gold-seekers who passed this way two years later, told of how he and his company celebrated the nation's birthday at South Pass in a most resourceful way. "Having plenty of milk from the cows we had with us," he remembered,

189I determined to [do] something no other living man ever did in this place and on this sacred day of the year, and that was to make ice cream at the South Pass of the Rockies. . . . I procured a small tin bucket which held about two quarts. This I sweetened and flavored with peppermint—had nothing else. This bucket was placed inside a wooden bucket or "Yankee Pole" and the top put on. Nature had supplied a huge bank of coarse snow, or hail, nearby, which was just the thing for this New Factory, with alternate layers of this and salt between the two buckets and with the aid of a clean stick to stir with I soon produced the most delicious ice cream tasted in this place. In fact the whole company so decided and as a compliment drew up in front of our tent and fired a salute. [^61]

189Joseph Wood, another 1849 overlander, enjoyed a similar special South Pass celebration.

189I fired three rounds with my rifle—one for liberty, one for home and one for success. We had a few homespun extras for dinner of which we all partook heartily. They consisted of fried cakes, fried pie and apple sauce. . . . The celebration began in earnest in the pass at evening, fireworks were displayed and many large guns were fired. Companies of men would discharge their guns in rapid succession and among the hills they sounded very loud. . . . After a while all sounds died away save that of the wolves as they howled over the body of some dead ox. [^62]

189Another party, just after crossing the pass, also marked the day. "We have enjoyed ourselves quite as well as could be expected," a traveler reported, "in a country like this, with little else but wild sage for our cattle to eat. It is true we did not have the `Star Spangled Banner' to wave over us, but in its absence might be seen `floating over the breeze' a cravat, handkerchief, or something else, almost anything for an imitation. Until a late hour . . . the boys in our camp were quite merry, making Fourth of July speeches." [^63]

In stark contrast, for the Mormons the glorious Fourth was a painful reminder of broken dreams and promises. There were no gun salutes, no banners, and no ice cream. Only Norton Jacob made even passing reference to the day, and then only critically. "This is Uncle Sam's Day of Independence. Well, we are independent of all the powers of the gentiles; that's enough for us." [^64]

190Nor were there any celebrations and flag-waving ceremonies back at Winter Quarters. "Spent the evening at Bro. Leonard's," wrote Eliza R. Snow.["[He] spoke of the American government—its fall, etc. after which the Lord manifested the centers of the happiness of the Saints and the sufferings of the Gentiles when the Lamanites go forth. Language cannot describe the scene." [^65]

190The day the Latter-day Saints did remember and record was 27 June, the third anniversary of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. The enduring grief and deep sense of loss cannot be minimized. It signaled more than a tragic loss: it reminded Brigham and others that for the Church to survive the wilderness of both geography and ruptured Church government, much work had yet to be done—but at a more convenient time.

190Perhaps Clayton expressed their anguish best:

190It is three years today since our brethren Joseph and Hyrum were taken from us and it was the general feeling to spend the day in fasting and prayer. But the gentile companies being close in our rear and feed scarce, it was considered necessary to keep ahead of them for the benefit of our teams, but many minds have reverted back to the scenes at Carthage jail, and it is a gratification that we have so far prospered in our endeavors to get from under the grasp of our enemies. [^66]

190This community grievance permeated their thinking for years to come, overshadowing any allegiance to a nation many once had loved and revered. It was a reflection of the esteem they held for their former leaders and of the well-nigh impossibility of ever replacing them. And if they had a flag with them, it was not that of the United States of America but a banner of their own making, a multicolored, oversize "ensign to the nations" which at some future time and place might be unfurled over a great new land of religious freedom.

Evidence shows that the pioneers were very serious about a flag, a very large banner, of their own, an "ensign to the nations." Writing in behalf of the Twelve, Willard Richards instructed Jedediah M. Grant, then on his way to St. Louis one month before the departure of the Camp from Winter Quarters,

191to procure on your journey . . . a sufficient quantity of the best and most suitable cloth or fabric by whatever name you may find it called, to manufacture or form a flag, or colors, for the camp, not less than 35' in length and 15' in width, composed equally of white, blue and red. Of the same or similar material as your judgment shall dictate you will get—in addition to the above—one half the amount of cloth of either the foregoing colors—in scarlet and also in purple, for insignia . . . be sure to select such articles as will long buffet the wind and weather; a charm to your own eye whenever you behold it; an honor to the union, a praise to the Saints, to be sanctioned by the Heavens and viewed with delight by all people.

191The inner councils of Church leadership had earlier discussed that Joseph Smith had begun work on such a flag shortly before his death. Brigham Young picked up on the idea and called for an enormous flag, large enough to fly over a mountain top, one that would have to be hoisted by pulleys as high as 100 feet. This banner would bear the motto, in red letters shaded with blue, "Religious Toleration." [^67]

191"BUT WHERE WE GO, WE KNOW NOT"

191Sixty miles past Fort Laramie, Thomas Bullock wrote the last of his three surviving exodus letters to his wife back at Winter Quarters. It suggests that, although chief clerk of the camp, he still could not say with precision what was their ultimate destination. "We are now about 300 miles from Bridger, but where we go we know not." [^68]

191Nevertheless, a careful study of their varied writings leaves little doubt that they had narrowed their options. Horace Whitney wrote the very next day: "Bro. Heber [Kimball] told me that he thought that in about five weeks we would reach the place of our destination, viz. the Salt Lakes . . . where he said there was only one inhabitant or settler." [^69] John Pack had likewise written earlier that "we do not know yet where we shall settle, but think near the Salt Lake." [^70]

Bordeaux had already sustained their Salt Lake plan. And from Grieve, Woodrie, Bouvoir, and others fresh out of the mountains, the camp learned that the "Utah [was] a beautiful country" and gained from them a "flattering Jim Bridger or good account" of the Salt Lake country. [^71]

192The Salt Lake plan was challenged, however, by one of the most respected mountain men of the time—Moses (Black) Harris, or as the Mormons called him, "Major Harris"—whom they encountered just past the summit of South Pass on 27 June. Then about 40 years old, Harris had explored a newer route to Oregon in 1846 and now, with two pack mules loaded with skins, was ready to trade and pilot his way through the coming season. [^72]

192Cache Valley was, in his opinion, far superior to the Salt Lake Valley for a serious settlement. "The Bear River runs through it at right angles," he told his eager listeners, "on the west side of which the soil is sandy and barren, except considerable wild sage, while on the east side, there is less wild sage and quite a heavy body of timber, such as cottonwood, box elder, etc." From his description, Clayton concluded, "which is very discouraging, we have little chance to hope for even a moderately good country anywhere in those regions." [^73]

192Harris also brought other news. Reading from a file of newspapers Harris had with him, several copies of the Oregon Spectator dated 4 March and one from Sam Brannan's new Mormon paper, The California Star from Yerba Buena, the Mormons learned all about Brannan's successful voyage on board the Brooklyn and his early Mormon settlements in California. They also learned more of the sordid details of the ill-fated Donner party. Before leaving the pioneer camp, then at the Little Sandy, Harris advised them to avoid Fort Bridger and to take a more northern route to their destination, "there being more feed on the one than on the other." [^74]

If Harris discouraged them in their pursuit, the camp had little time to admit it. Eight hours later, they received an entirely different report from none other than Jim Bridger, another mountain man whose name is synonymous with the early West. A "pioneer, hunter, trapper and trader," Pioneers at Green River, from a painting by George Ottinger Bridger was then 43 years old, relatively short in stature but with a thick neck. [^75] Like Harris, he too was starting east as a trader and guide. In contrast to Harris, however, Bridger knew all about the country south of Salt Lake and, contrary to myth and tradition, spoke well of the Salt Lake, commending it highly. "The information obtained concerning the Utah country is very encouraging," wrote a somewhat relieved Norton Jacob. [^76]

193If one can discount Bridger's proprietary interest in the pioneer camp going to Salt Lake via his fort, then only a few days away, Bridger commended their tentative decisions, saying that Harris did not know what he was talking about. Wrote Whitney:

The country of which he gave us a description is situated between the two lakes, Utah and Salt, consisting of a valley of 100 miles in extent. The soil is good, producing wild flax in abundance, also white and red clover, and is peculiarly adapted to the growth of corn and wheat. Between the two lakes, three large streams coming from the mountains traverse the valley and empty into the Salt Lake. These abound in various kinds of fish, and their banks are heavily lined with timber, consisting of pine and oak, also quite a number of groves of sugar maple. . . . Gold, silver, copper, iron, sulphur, saltpetre, etc. are found in abundance in the mountains, he giving a description of a number of places where the above minerals were to be found.

194He went on to make even more positive comments about another valley 200 miles south of the Salt Lake. "In fine, he gave a minute description of the whole country, which differed materially from the account given us by Major Harris." His only cautionary comment pertained to the possibility of early frosts, considering the high altitudes. [^77]

194Bridger recommended that from his fort they try the more southerly route to the valley—the Hastings route or cutoff that the Donner party had blazed just the year before. "We conversed about a great variety of things," Woodruff recalled. "He said he was ashamed of the maps of Fremont for he knew nothing about the country, only the plain traveled road, [and] that he could correct all the maps that had been put out about the western world. He said if we wanted any of his services to let him know." [^78] But Bridger was more interested in going east, not west.

194Forty-eight hours later the pioneers met still another eastbound messenger in what truly was a remarkable sequence of visitors. This was a fellow Latter-day Saint and now continental traveler, the colorful, 38-year-old Sam Brannan. Brannan arrived in camp while the camp was ferrying across the Green River in the afternoon of 30 June. He was accompanied by two men, one of whom was a distant cousin of Joseph Smith.

194In addition to a 10,000-mile ocean voyage around the southern tip of South America on board the Brooklyn, Brannan had just traveled on horseback 800 miles overland from San Francisco Bay; they left there on 4 April, the same day many of the pioneers left Winter Quarters. On the way, crossing over the deep snows of the high Sierra, they met with the last of the unfortunate souls in Donner's party, before heading across the California Trail to the Great Basin and the Salt Lake Valley and on to Fort Hall and the Green River crossing.

Brannan, all aglow with the California fever, was on a mission of his own. Having just compared the arid shores of the Salt Lake with the golden coasts of California, he was convinced that the Saints should go all the way west to the Pacific. The Mormon Battalion had safely reached the coast and were in possession of the Mexican city Pueblos Angelos de los (Los Angeles). "Elder Brannan gives a very favorable account of the climate and soil of California," wrote Whitney, "and appears quite anxious that we should Sam Brannan immediately go there and take possession of the country, before it becomes occupied by others. . . . San Francisco . . . bids fair to become a flourishing city." [^79] Brannan felt they should not settle for the sands of a desert lake when the verdant shores of the Pacific were just a few weeks farther. Besides, he said, "old Boggs is on the opposite sides of the Bay and dares not come over for fear of the Mormons." [^80]

195Brannan's eyewitness account of the blighted Donner party certainly held the rapt attention of his newfound listeners, especially on hearing that some in Donner's camp were Mormons. Among those listening, one or two were quick to ascribe their fate to divine retribution. "Brother Brannan fell in with a company of emigrants," Jacob reported,

195who by quarrelling and fighting among themselves, delayed time until they got caught in the snows on the mountains last fall. . . . The snows were much deeper in all this region than was ever known before. Their sufferings were incredible. Many of them perished with cold and hunger. All their cattle died, and they [were] compelled to eat the flesh of those that died among them! In fact they killed some, and among the rest a Mormon woman by the name of Murphy, who formerly lived in Nauvoo. Those people are in a wretched condition. Their teams all gone, they cannot get away until assistance shall be sent from Oregon. Quarreling is a common complaint among these emigrants, until they [are] all divided and subdivided into small parties [and] can't agree to travel together in peace, which fulfils Joseph Smith's prophecy that "peace is taken from the earth." These are the men that have mobbed and killed the Saints! [^81]

While all paid close attention to everything Brannan had to say about California, Brigham was as skeptical of the man as he was of the message and played the disinterested party at best. If Brigham had not yet heard of Brannan's overbearing leadership style while sailing on board the Brooklyn and later in California—an approach that almost led to mutiny—he certainly suspected it. A master at reading men's minds and intentions, Brigham welcomed Brannan with less than three cheers. Brannan's importuning notwithstanding, Brigham and the Twelve put his zeal for California on hold, inviting him to come with them to the Salt Lake and to await further information. [^82]

196Meanwhile the pioneer camp left the Green River overland to Fort Bridger, where they finally arrived 7 July. It had taken them five grueling weeks over mountains and rivers to cover the nearly 400 miles from Fort Laramie. As Brigham himself said: "`It's a long road that never turns' is an old maxim; and though this is a pretty long road, we expect when we have gone a little further, it will so turn as to lead us directly west." [^83]

196Undeterred and despite Brannan, Harris, and whomever else, they were as committed as ever to their future course of action.

196NOTES

196A second post, Fort Platte, a large adobe fort situated a mile north of Fort Laramie on the North Platte River, had been built in 1841 by competitors of the American Fur Co. but was sold in 1845. By 1847, Fort Platte was in ruins, although well described by every civilization-starved overland journalist.

John Brown, who had been dispatched to Winter Quarters for clarification and directions and who had become a member of the pioneer camp, was especially glad to meet his old friends, although only a portion of their wagons and teams had been able to make the return trip to Fort Laramie. The rest remained back at Fort Pueblo.

197Lyman accomplished his mission. A few days later he intercepted the soldiers and "laid before them the instructions from the council which had the effect to quell the spirit of mutiny that was among them. Instead of leaving at Fort John, as they had calculated, they concluded to follow the counsel and a good spirit prevailed" (Amasa Lyman to Brigham Young and Council, 28 June 1847, Brigham Young Papers).

199Between 19 June and 11 July, Thomas Grover and his busy crew ferried over a minimum of 23 emigrant companies, 489 wagons, and approximately 1,956 souls, earning almost $600 in the process (see table below). On 13 July, after the river had receded sufficiently to allow travelers to cross on their own, Grover left William Empey and three others in charge while he and the others left for Fort Laramie. For more on the ferry operation, see Dale S. Morgan, "The Mormon Ferry on the North Platte," Annals of Wyoming 21 (July-Oct. 1949).

199The Mormon Ferry: 25 June-11 July 1847

199The approximate number of emigrant wagons (excluding Latter-day Saints) that made full use of Grover's ferry are as follows:

199

199#Totals # #489 #1,956 #$593.05

200Source: Appleton Milo Harmon Goes West, 20 June to 11 July.

200According to one early county history, quoted by B. H. Roberts, the people were "greatly exercised, and they disgraced themselves by very ruffianly conduct. They rode the sheriff on a rail, and Bowman was dragged over the square by the hair of the head. The men guilty of these dastardly acts accused Sheriff Morgan and ex-Sheriff Bowman of complicity in the escape of the Mormon leaders; that Bowman furnished the horses, and that Morgan allowed them to escape, and both got well paid for their treachery" ("History of Daviess County" [1882] as quoted in History of the Church, 3:321, note). Jennings, who led the charge against Bowman and Morgan, was never brought to trial.

200While descending from the rock, they noticed a short distance away the burial ceremony of a 25-year-old woman, Rachel Morgan, who had died of poisoning.

"Independence Rock is an isolated outcropping of the granite which forms the mountains enclosing the Sweetwater Valley; it is, thus, part of the Sweetwater Range. The rock stands 6,028 feet above sea level; its northern summit is 136 feet above terrain. With a circumference of 5,900 feet, its mass covers an area of 24.81 acres" (Robert L. Munkres, "Independence Rock and Devil's Gate," Annals of Wyoming 40 [Apr. 1968]: 24-25).

201 John Smith, of the emigration camp following behind, expressed a similar sentiment: "We do not feel to celebrate the birthday of the Independence of the United States, as we have been driven from its boundaries because we worshipped God according to his laws" (Journal History, 4 July 1847).

201Whether Grant ever succeeded in his mission is not clear. Certainly there is no reference to such a monstrous flag in any of the camp journals. Because of weight restrictions, it was probably not brought along that summer of 1847, if ever. It would appear that the purpose of such a flag was not only to herald a religious society, but also to be "an honor to the union," perhaps the antecedent to a future territorial or state flag.

202Bridger's alleged statement may have originated not with Bridger but with Harris, who was much less kind in his comments about the Salt Lake. Or it may have derived from a less well-documented conversation between Bridger and oncoming members of the Mormon Battalion, some of whom were unhappy they were bound for a desert valley and not the gentler climates of California (see "Extracts from the Journal of John Steele," 17).

202Bridger's positive comments are further witnessed in the General Church Minutes for 28 June 1847, as recorded by Thomas Bullock. In certain parts of the valley, Bridger had eaten "the best wheat I ever saw" and instead of a desert, "it rains at the Salt Lake at all times of the year."

Brannan failed to organize a branch of the Church at the Bay as he had been instructed to do, but succeeded in publishing one of California's first newspapers, The California Star, which first appeared on 9 January 1847. Soon after his return from Utah to California in the late summer of 1847, and still carrying a grudge against the Mormon leaders, he quit Mormonism and embarked on his own career. He amassed a fortune with the discovery of gold at Sutter's Fort in 1849 and became California's first great landowner and millionaire and later a state senator. Later his fortunes turned sour and he lost his wealth in a spectacular series of misfortunes and mismanagement. He died in ruin and abject poverty in 1889 in San Diego. For lack of money even to bury him, his remains lay unclaimed for a year (see Eugene E. Campbell, "The Apostasy of Samuel Brannan," Utah Historical Quarterly 27 [1959]: 157-67). For more on Brannan and his colorful career, see Paul Bailey, Sam Brannan and the California Mormons (1943); William Glover, The Mormons in California, ed. Paul Bailey (1954); Reva L. Scott, Samuel Brannan and the Golden Fleece: A Biography (1944); Annaleone D. Patton, California Mormons by Sail and Trail (1961); and Douglas S. Watson, "Herald of the Gold Rush: Sam Brannan," California Historical Society Quarterly 10 (1931): 298-301.

---
Notas:
[^5] For good accounts of the history of Nauvoo see the following works: Joseph Smith Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (1973), especially vols. 3-5 [cited hereafter as History of the Church]; B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. (1930), esp. vols. 2-3 [cited hereafter as Comprehensive History of the Church]; Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (1965); and David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (1974).
[^19] Journal History of the Church, 9 Aug. 1846. This is a well-known and excellent resource available at the LDS Church Historical Department, consisting of scrapbook-like entries from private journals, letters, various writings of all kinds, newspaper clippings, and so on, compiled by date by former Assistant Church Historian, Andrew Jenson; cited hereafter as Journal History.
[^20] Charles R. King, "The Woman's Experience of Childbirth on the Western Frontier," Journal of the West 29, no. 1 (1990): 76-84. Years later, one observer could still say, "The learned profession was not so very learned. [Doctors were] to be sent for only as a last resort" (A. Britt, An America That Was: What Life Was Like on an Illinois Farm Seventy Years Ago (1964), 135, as quoted in King, 83).
[^21] Stampedes were a much dreaded occurrence in overland travel. One of the most chilling accounts is that given by a California forty-niner, Charles Edward Pancoast, while traveling up the Platte River in 1849: "In an instant, as if by magic, all the animals started simultaneously with a grand leap and flew down the river to the plain, the men in front shouting and scrambling to escape the solid mass of teams coming down upon them. Men could be seen dropping from the rear of wagons in all directions as they rumbled over the sands; I myself slipped through a two foot space between two wagons going at lightening speed. Some of the teams ran into a small creek and could not extricate themselves; others stopped from sheer exhaustion; still others ran two or three miles and were halted by the owners of tied horses that had not gotten away. Strange to say, no serious damage was done, except to the wagon of two Germans, which turned over and was irreparably smashed; the owners barely escaping with their lives. This was our first experience of a genuine stampede, not uncommon in the mountain countries of the west" (Charles Edward Pancoast, A Quaker Forty-Niner [1930], 198-99).
[^22] The new members of the company included Robert Crow, Elizabeth Crow, Benjamin B. Crow, Harriet Crow, Elizabeth Jane Crow, John McHenry Crow, Walter H. Crow, George W. Therlkill, Martilla Jane Therlkill (then seven months pregnant), Milton Howard Therlkill, James William Therlkill, William Parker Crow, Ida Vinda Exene Crow, Ira Minda Almarene Crow, Archibald Little, James Chesney, and Lewis B. Myers. Accompanying Myers were two Indian wives and a number of children (see William Clayton's Journal, 4 June 1847, 215).
[^23] Journal of Nelson Wheeler Whipple, 25 Feb. 1846, LDS Church Archives. "We thus kept a sharp look out for them for we knew as they had slain Joseph and Hyrum so they would slay Brigham, Heber, and the Twelve if they could."
[^28] The definitive works on the history of the Mormon Battalion are Frank Alfred Golder, The March of the Mormon Battalion from Council Bluffs to California (1928); Daniel Tyler, A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion to the Mexican War 1846-1847 (1969); John F. Yurtinus, "A Ram in the Thicket: The Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1975); and Norma Baldwin Ricketts, The Mormon Battalion: U.S. Army of the West, 1846-1848 (1996). See also Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 50-67.
[^29] The best study of Strang still remains Milo Quaife, The Kingdom of Saint James: A Narrative of the Mormons (1930). The most recent reinterpretation is Roger Van Noord's King of Beaver Island: The Life and Assassination of James Jesse Strang (1988). See also Doyle C. Fitzpatrick, The King Strang Story (1970); Richard E. Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 1846-1852: "And Should We Die . . ." (1987), 18-20; The Diary of James J. Strang, ed. Mark A. Strang (1961); William D. Russell, "King James Strang: Joseph Smith's Successor," in The Restoration Movement: Essays in Mormon History, ed. F. Mark McKiernan, Alma R. Blair, and Paul M. Edwards (1973), 231-56. Strang later removed his followers to Beaver Island in northern Lake Michigan, where his settlement realized only modest success.
[^31] Autobiography of Pioneer John Brown, 1820-1896, arr. John Zimmerman Brown (1941), 72-73. See also Jenson, "Day by Day," Deseret News, 31 May 1947. Lay and Crosby later died in California. Flake lived in Salt Lake City for most of his life, dying in Idaho Falls in 1903 at the age of 75.
[^40] William Clayton's Journal, 18 June 1847, 242. The crew left at the North Platte River crossing included some of the best carpenters and blacksmiths in camp: Thomas Grover, captain; John S. Higbee, assistant; Benjamin F. Stewart; James Davenport, blacksmith; William Empey; Luke S. Johnson; Appleton Harmon; Francis M. Pomeroy; and Edmund Ellsworth. Eric Glines decided, against counsel, to stay back with Grover's crew; he later changed his mind and hurried on by himself at considerable danger, catching up with the main camp several miles west.
[^42] Journal of Willard Richards, 14 Mar. 1847. It is interesting to note that in the dreams which Brigham Young said he had of Joseph Smith while preparing for the exodus, Joseph "stepped toward me, and looking very earnestly, yet pleasantly, said `Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. . . . Tell the brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it'" (Journal History, 23 Feb. 1847).
[^43] Little has been written about the costs of the original departures, although much is available on the costs involved in later migrations. This is particularly true of the Perpetual Emigration Fund and the financing of Mormon emigrant companies to Salt Lake City up until at least 1869 and the completion of the transcontinental rail-road. See Leonard J. Arrington's pathbreaking study, Great Basin Kingdom: An Economic History of the Latter-day Saints 1830-1900 (1958), 77-79.
[^55] For the exact wording of this "Memorial to the Queen for the Relief, by Emigration of a Portion of Her Poor Subjects," see J. B. Munro, "Mormon Colonization Scheme for Vancouver Island," Washington Historical Quarterly, 25, no. 3 (July 1934): 278-85. For a thorough and responsible study on British emigration, see Taylor, Expectations Westward, 18-47.
[^58] The Nauvoo Covenant resembled very closely the earlier Missouri Covenant of 1839, when Brigham Young at Far West, Missouri, proposed "that we this day enter into a covenant to . . . never desert the poor who are worthy, till they shall be out of the reach of the exterminating order of General [John B.] Clark." Some 214 men signed the covenant to assist others "to the utmost of our abilities." (History of the Church, 3:250-54).
[^59] There is some dispute over the name of this passerby. Most of the records refer to him as "Beaumont," although some refer to him as Charley Barkham (see Brigham Young letters, 5 May 1847). Erastus Snow records that the leader of the Beaumont company was a "Mr. Papan" who stayed on the other side of the river (see also Journal of Levi S. Johnson, 4 May 1847, Special Collections, Lee Library, Brigham Young University).
[^60] Addison Pratt, who left on a mission to the South Seas from Nauvoo in 1843 and did not return to his family, then in the Salt Lake Valley, until 1848, provides a revealing insight into the temporary lapse among the people in living the Word of Wisdom. On entering the valley, he found that "there seemed to be but two articles . . . and they were tobacco and coffee. The rule with some for selling tobacco was lay a silver dollar onto a flat plug and cut out the bigness of it for the dollar. I don't remember of ever seeing such a hankering after anything in my life as there was after that, and coffee was not much behind it. Notwithstanding, Br. Grouard and myself had urged an observance of the Word of Wisdom so strongly upon the natives of the South Sea Isles, I was surprised to see so little notice paid to it at the gathering place of the Saints" (The Journals of Addison Pratt, ed. S. George Ellsworth [1990], 368). For a full study of the history and development of the Word of Wisdom, see Paul H. Peterson, "An Historical Analysis of the Word of Wisdom" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972). It took almost a century before the Word of Wisdom took on the status of commandment within the Church.
[^61] Samuel Taylor argues in his controversial book The Kingdom or Nothing: The Life of John Taylor, Militant Mormon (1976) that both Taylor and Pratt had married plural wives during their return voyages, which was further cause of Brigham's unhappiness. If such was indeed the case, it only represented the conviction in fellow apostles' minds that they were all equal in authority, while underscoring Brigham's concern that until a new First Presidency was established, regulation of this and other practices was virtually impossible to control.
[^82] Journal of Lorenzo Snow, Summer 1846, LDS Church Archives. For more on the topic of death at Winter Quarters, see Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 131-47.
