Richard E. Bennett, We'll Find the Place: The Mormon Exodus 1846-1848 ( 1997)

204"HURRA, HURRA, HURRA — THERE'S MY HOME AT LAST"

204Fort Bridger to the Great Salt Lake

204The final stage of the pioneer company's march, from Fort Bridger to the Salt Lake, was the most difficult of the entire journey and also the most rewarding. It began in murmur and complaint but ended in triumph and discovery, although not before they had endured more sickness and suffering than yet experienced on the trail. There would be one last obstacle more formidable than the Rockies, one final test of their faith and endurance, this time in the form of the smallest of enemies, the active agent of a serious disease that hindered their progress as no mountain pass ever could.

Because they were running two weeks behind their appointed schedule, their stay at Fort Bridger, consisting then of nothing but "two or three rudely constructed log cabins," was as brief as possible. [^2] They arrived in the afternoon of 7 July and left only 40 hours later. Their time was used for essential blacksmith repairs, mapping the route to the Great Basin, trading Fort Bridger, from a sketch by Frederick Piercy for buckskin and horses, and as time would tell, insufficient rest and recuperation. Used more as a trading lodge with the Snake Indians than as a fort, Bridger's trading post was "a shabby concern" built of poles and dogwood. It was situated on a beautiful site on the Black Fork of Green River, with trout-laden streams running in several channels. George A. Smith described it as consisting of "two long, low, rough cabins built in the form of an L with a small enclosure for stock built of upright poles. The surrounding country was beautiful, but the fort itself was an unpretentious place." [^3]

205Some still found time for diversion. None enjoyed the respite more than Wilford Woodruff. "The calculation was to spend the day at the fort," he recalled. So,

as soon as I got my breakfast I rigged up my trout rod that I had brought with me from Liverpool, fixed my reel, line, and artificial fly and went to one of the brooks close by camp to try my luck catching trout. The man at the fort said there were but very few trout in the streams. And a good many of the brethren were already at the creeks with their rods and lines trying their skill baiting with fresh meat and grasshoppers, but no one seemed to catch any. I went and flung my fly, . . . it being the first time that I ever tried the artificial fly in America, or ever saw it tried. I watched it as it floated upon the water with as much intense interest as [Benjamin] Franklin did his kite. . . . And as Franklin received great joy when he saw electricity or lightning descend on his kite string, in like manner was I highly gratified when I saw the nimble trout dart my fly, hook himself, and run away with the line.

206By noon he had pulled in a dozen fish while his fellow anglers looked on in jealous surprise—"proof positive to me that the artificial fly is far the best thing now known to fish trout with." [^4]

206Meanwhile, the restless Sam Brannan, upset with Brigham's lack of interest in his California Eldorado, jumped at the chance to head back east. He quickly accepted the assignment to take mail for Amasa Lyman and for the oncoming Battalion contingent and then to pilot them on to Salt Lake Valley. And for those of the sick detachment anxious to collect their musterout pay, he likewise agreed to pilot them all the way back to California. On Friday morning, 9 July, he, his two sidekicks, Sergeant Thomas Williams, six other Battalion soldiers, and Thomas Brown headed back along the trail, leaving five soldiers to go on ahead with the pioneer camp. Anxious to rid the camp of a detracting influence, Brigham was as relieved to see Brannan go as Brannan was to get away.

206THE HASTINGS CUTOFF

206While some fished, others fretted. Bullock, who always saw himself more overworked than appreciated, spent several hours copying out at least two important items Brannan had loaned them. The first was handwritten directions by Lansford W. Hastings giving directions from Fort Bridger to the Great Salt Lake, the first part of the "Hastings Cutoff" to California. The second was a map of the proposed shortcut, apparently embellished by Brannan during his recent trip east from California. Brannan knew the trail firsthand.

They already had a copy of Hastings's guide, so what Bullock copied were likely more detailed descriptions of the trail that Brannan got earlier from Hastings himself and from his own recent experiences. If they had not decided on the Hastings Cutoff before they met Jim Bridger and Sam Brannan, they certainly did afterward. Both men had advised it unequivocally, it being much better marked than the year before. The other route—up the Oregon Trail, north to Bear Lake, and down the Bartleson Trail to the Great Salt Lake—was at least three times longer than the Hastings Cutoff. They also knew that Fremont had successfully taken the route to the Valley in 1845.

207A young, ambitious Ohio lawyer, Hastings made his first journey to Oregon in 1842 and on down to California in 1843. Seizing a chance to make fame and fortune for himself in California, he returned east in 1844. There he lectured extensively and wrote a book called The Emigrant's Guide to Oregon and California (1845). Although he never followed the entire route himself until 1845, this newcomer to Rocky Mountain geography confidently pronounced that the most direct route to California left the Oregon Trail "about two hundred miles east from Fort Hall; thence bearing west, southwest to the Salt Lake; and thence continuing down to the bay of San Francisco." [^5] So long as travelers properly prepared for a long, but manageable, trek across a salt desert to Pilot Peak and the valleys beyond, Hastings simplistically argued, overland companies should save 200 or 300 miles and several weeks hard travel time on their way to California.

207The first white man to follow what essentially was an Indian or pack trail from Fort Bridger to the Salt Lake Valley was Fremont, during his third expedition in 1845. The following spring, Hastings, James Clyman (an experienced trapper), James M. Hudspeth, and a few others left San Francisco on mules to prove the theory by traveling east to the Salt Lake, northeast up Mountain Dell Creek to Big Mountain, through East Canyon, up the Red Fork (Echo Canyon), and eventually to Fort Bridger.

207There they met a small pack party led by William H. Russell (later founder of the Pony Express) and Edwin Bryant who, listening to the newly-arrived enthusiasts, chose to follow Hastings's route to the Pacific. This time Hudspeth was determined to find a passage down the mountainous Weber Canyon rather than follow the Indian trail over the Wasatch Mountains. At great cost to animal life and human endurance, they miraculously made their way down the Weber Canyon gorge, learning the hard way that a large wagon train could never hope to follow in their footsteps.

207Behind the Russell-Bryant party came a second pack company on the southern route—the Harlan-Young party—with Hastings himself as their guide; a third party, of Swiss emigrants led by Heinrich Lienhard, was close behind. All reached the Salt Lake via Weber Canyon and in reasonably good time.

208A fourth party to take the same route belonged to James Frazier Reed, William Pike, and Charles T. Stanton (better known as the Donner Company), who reached Fort Bridger only eight days after Hastings had gone ahead with Russell. Seven days getting over the mountains to the Weber Canyon, they there found a handwritten note from Hastings advising them to take their heavy wagons down the pack trail over the mountains instead of through the dreadful canyon.

208Bewildered at such nebulous instructions, Reed and two others rode ahead on horseback, eventually catching up with Hastings somewhere west of Salt Lake. Hastings and Reed returned to a summit somewhere in the Oquirrh Mountains from where Hastings, by means of hand pointing, explained to Reed as best he could the Big Mountain Indian trail from East Canyon to the valley. Reed returned to his waiting company and in due course found the trail. They then proceeded to cut and hack a roadway from the base of Echo Canyon to Big Mountain, then west to Little Mountain, and eventually down into Emigration Canyon. Historians concluded that the 30 days spent by the Donner party clearing a sad semblance of a wagon trail through the Wasatch underbrush cost them far more time than they could afford. [^6]

208One day out from Fort Bridger, the Mormon pioneers thus became the fifth company in less than a year to try the Hastings road. Only 115 miles from the Salt Lake Valley, with ten times as many able-bodied men to clear a trail as their predecessors the year before, they planned to be planting crops in ten days.

208Almost immediately, however, following Three Mile Creek on a barely visible trail, they encountered some of the most difficult mountain trails they had yet encountered—or as one later emigrant put it, "a worse and worse continuation of a bad beginning." [^7] Climbing over the ridge dividing the waters of the Colorado from those of the Great Basin, they climbed 750 feet in two days, reaching an altitude of 7,700 feet on 10 July—over 300 feet higher than South Pass.

Hauling wagon trains through dense willow underbrush, up steep climbs, and down precipitous, life-threatening descents was surely the challenge of the entire trek. "The last 100 miles is some of the worse road you can imagine," wrote one traveler, "over mountains 3, 5 and 7 miles from the top to the bottom, and so narrow are the passes you would almost think to look ahead of you, that you could travel no farther, but a narrow passage always opens out before you." [^8]

209Doubling or even tripling ox teams for a single wagon while on a climb, with men out clearing stones and cutting tree branches on one side and pulling on extended ropes on the other, was a common, backbreaking scene. The constant fear that a wagon might tip over and plunge far down a mountainside exacted their most skillful efforts.

209And the descents were even more hazardous. Locking the wheels of a one-ton wagon was only a partial answer to the frightening proposition. Usually, a dozen or more men held on tightly to ropes attached to the back of the wagon to ease the descent. Occasionally even a team of oxen were hitched to the back end of the wagon and held back in order to keep it from "ending over." The occupants tumbled or slid the best they could to get down the steep declivities. It's "like jumping off the roof of a house," a frightened Bullock complained of one particularly steep descent near Muddy Creek, in what others described as "the most mountainous course we have yet seen." [^9]

209Yet in just two days, they made 31 miles. Orson Pratt, ever scouting the trails ahead, soon discovered smoke rising from a nearby camp. Pratt soon found himself in company with the first white settler of the Great Basin, the redheaded mountaineer Miles Goodyear, who was heading east with a corral of California horses to trade with the oncoming Oregon immigrants.

209The 30-year-old, Connecticut-born Goodyear and his associate, John Craig, were quickly beholden to Pratt for his information on the earlier than usual Oregon emigration. As a result, Goodyear changed his course to the northwest toward Fort Hall to intercept as many of the earliest spring companies as he could. In return, Goodyear and Craig were generous with their advice on the best of the three poorly marked trails to Salt Lake, sketching yet another map and pushing hardest for the road that would lead to Goodyear's own encampment, Fort Buenaventura, a primitive cottonwood log cabin and small farm acreage at the mouth of Weber Canyon. [^10]

If Goodyear was encouraging about a future settlement, Craig took an opposing view. Having recently settled near San Francisco Bay, this former resident of Ray County, Missouri, was hard pressed to say anything positive about the Salt Lake. "Notwithstanding all we had heard of the richness of the country," Whitney recorded, "we would find it vastly overrated and that if we had formed an idea of its superiority, we should be disappointed." [^11] The only hope for settlement, Craig argued, was irrigation, and any success in settling would come at a terrible price.

210Craig, in a 7 October letter to a George Bossinger, confirmed the coming of the Mormons and their intent to plant crops around both Salt Lake and Utah Lake. "About seventy-five miles this side the Lake," he wrote,

210on the 11th of July we met 83 wagons being an advance party of the Mormons on their way to the lake intending (as they informed us) to sow buckwheat and establish a colony around this and the Uataw Lake intending to sow a large quantity of wheat. They having all kinds of seeds with them together with implements of husbandry. The party numbered about two hundred men with eight or ten females. They informed us that their was about six hundred more wagons on their way from the Council Bluffs that expected to reach these Lakes and there spend the winter and the Spring. Such as could not be suited here would proceed to California proper. [^12]

210Craig's bluntness seems to have struck a negative chord in the minds of an increasing number in the camp. Some were beginning to question their ultimate destination and the treacherous route they were following to get there. Perhaps Brannan and Craig were right after all and California should be their ultimate goal. Why go to all this trouble over so poorly marked a trail? And even if they did get to wherever it was they were going, the season was getting so late they might never get in sufficient crops. What's more, many were coming down sick with the mountain fever. Confided Bullock: "As I lay in my wagon sick I overheard several of the brethren murmuring about the face of the country." [^13] Echoed Clayton: "There are some in camp who are getting discouraged about the looks of the country but thinking minds are not much disappointed." [^14]

210It was the first vocalization of any real dissatisfaction during the entire journey, and they expressed it by accepting Goodyear's advice to follow a route to the Red Fork (Echo Canyon) which the Twelve had rejected. "But let the Camp decide," said a frustrated Woodruff, "so that none may have room to murmur at the Twelve hereafter." [^15]

210ROCKY MOUNTAIN FEVER

The very next morning, within hours of Goodyear's departure, Brigham came down so violently sick that the entire camp was forced to halt in the Bear River Valley. Seized with the most excruciating pain in his hands and back, and suffering a sudden fever that spiked to 104 or 105 degrees within hours, their leader by nightfall lay raging and delirious.

211Before this time he had counted himself fortunate to have been spared what many in camp had been suffering during the past two weeks. The first hint of trouble came back at the Green River crossing. Tired and exhausted, Erastus Snow came down with a fever on 3 July; and at least half the camp had been sick since. "Its first appearance is like that of a severe cold," he warned,

211producing soreness in the flesh, and pains in the head and all parts of the body; and as the fever increases the pains in the head and back become almost insufferable. But an active portion of Physic accompanied with warming and stimulating drinks, such as ginger and pepper tea, cayenne, etc. taken freely before and after the operation of the Physic, seldom fails to break it up, though it left the patient sore, weak and feeble. All are now recovering except some fresh cases. [^16]

211It was well-known among trail-goers that Rocky Mountain Fever stalked the Oregon Trail, particularly from where it joined the Sweetwater back at Independence Rock. [^17] A springtime disease of the higher North American altitudes, it was wrongly attributed either to contaminated melted snows or to the seasonal swarms of flies and mosquitos at river crossings.

211That they all began to suffer at more or less the same time points to a decisive contaminating moment. Passing the Sweetwater ahead of season, the pioneers' first brush with the problem probably began on Saturday, 26 June, just two miles below South Pass. There they first encountered the tall, fresh grasses of the high Rockies plain, which were infested with tiny wood ticks, no larger than the lead end of a blunt pencil, waiting for the passerby.

Modern research has shown that the brand of mountain fever they suffered from may have been typhoid related, but more likely was Colorado Tick Fever caused by a tick-borne virus. Within three to fourteen days, the illness would often show itself with a rash on the hands and feet that looked very much like the black measles. This was followed by, as Snow correctly described, chills, a hacking cough, severe headache, acute pain in the calves and lumbar regions of the back, rapid temperature rise, restlessness, and delirium until the body's immune system had received sufficient strength to destroy its attackers. Among those over 40 years old who were infected, as many as 20 percent died from the disease; and in some companies, 10 to 15 percent of the entire group perished from it. [^18]

212Brigham (46 years old) and Albert P. Rockwood (41 years old) had carried the virus for up to 17 days; when it hit, it did so with sudden vengeance and held on with a tenacity not seen among others in their camp. After suffering for 19 days, barely able to write and smarting from every jar and jolt of the wagon, Rockwood recorded what he thought was his death wish on 14 July: "Brigham Young is a little better. The fever rages harder than ever on me. Br. Lorenzo Young and many others look upon me as dangerous ill. I so considered myself and so told the brethren that if no relief came in 24 hours they might dig a hole to put me in." [^19]

212The standard medical treatment of the time for such advanced cases was to purge the body of all foreign substances by inducing vomiting and flushing the bowels with enemas. The former came by way of lobelia and the latter, as Rockwood explained, with "emetick and cathartics." If that failed, doctors prescribed bleeding, in the mistaken belief of that preimmunization era that health was restored through balancing the four humors of the body—blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile.

212But like many others of their time, the Mormon pioneers put little trust in the traditional medical practices of the age (or "poison doctors" as they were often called). [^20] Instead they preferred the so-called Thompson school of medicines, of which their own Willard Richards was a licensed practitioner. The Thompsonians usually prescribed mild herbs and emetics and warmed the blood with cayenne pepper (hence Snow's reference to a "physic," or enema) "accompanied with warming and stimulating drinks, such as ginger and pepper tea, cayenne, etc." [^21]

212Confident in Richards's prescriptions and in the power of healing through the laying on of hands by the priesthood, camp leaders fully expected a quick recovery. Heber C. Kimball thought they were seeing an improvement in Brigham's weakened condition, but he decided that the prudent course of action would be to send Orson Pratt and several others on ahead, down Echo Canyon to ascertain for themselves if the Weber Canyon was at all passable. If not, they were instructed to find "Mr. Reed's route across the mountains." [^22]

So on the afternoon of 13 July, with 23 wagons and 42 men from both the Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball divisions, Pratt left the main company on Coyote Creek, near the top entrance to Red Fork or Echo Canyon. He was to explore the country, find the trail, go over the mountains, and leave trail instructions for the rest to follow so they could eventually reassemble prior to entering the Salt Lake Valley. Meanwhile, with Brigham and Rockwood using the comfort of Woodruff's carriage, the main camp would descend the canyon as best they could and await word from Pratt's various messengers. [^23]

213The following evening Pratt's company made it down Echo Canyon. While exploring and evaluating the upper reaches of Weber Canyon and ruling out all possibility of that route (as Rockwell described it, "blocked up by the rocks, some places could not see two wagons ahead"), Pratt discovered the Hastings's trail or "Reed's Route." [^24] From there he traveled up the divide called Hog's Back (Reed's Pass), crossed Dixie Creek southwest of present Hennifer, Utah, reached East Canyon Creek on 17 July and the top of Big Mountain two days later.

213The main camp, meanwhile, spent the time passing slowly down Echo Canyon with its "wild and melancholy red rocks frowning down upon us with sullen majesty," and was forced to lay over repeatedly because of sickness, much to the chagrin of some. "Quite dull business this, lying by," wrote a frustrated Horace K. Whitney. But he had enough time on his hands to see how such a ravine might someday work in their favor: "Indeed, this pass is so well fortified by nature, that I have no doubt but that 10 men could successfully dispute its passage for a long time, against 100 men." [^25]

213By the time they reached the Weber River at the foot of Echo Canyon—despite the comforts of Woodruff's carriage and all the prayers, blessings, and medicines in camp—Brigham had suffered a serious relapse and appeared worse than before, totally incapable of further travel. Fearing the worst, all the Apostles in camp, with a few selected others, ascended a nearby high mountain, where in a special circle of faith they prayed to Almighty God for their leader and all the other sick in camp. [^26]

213Uppermost in their minds was that daunting "what if." Who would lead them if Brigham died? Where would they go? Who would follow them? And above all, what would happen to the Church? [^27] Brigham eventually rallied, but not before unwillingly testing the faith and allegiance of a once more tried and humbled band.

214"A RESTING PLACE FOR THE SAINTS"

214Sunday, 18 July, with Brigham's sick camp still navigating the twisting creek of Echo Canyon, Kimball proposed further that a planting party go on ahead to join Pratt's exploring company, "find a good place, begin to plant potatoes, etc., as we have little time to spare." All voted to sustain Kimball's proposition. [^28]

214Consequently the next morning the planting party, consisting of Willard Richards, Erastus Snow, George A. Smith, and the majority of the camp, in 41 wagons under John Pack's command, started out ahead. They left Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, Ezra T. Benson, and a few others in 8 or 10 wagons to care for the sick. Prior to their departure, a slightly stronger Brigham Young counseled Erastus Snow to go ahead on horseback and overtake Pratt's vanguard company with specific instructions that once in the valley they were to "halt at the first suitable spot after reaching the Lake Valley, and put in our seed, potatoes, buckwheat, turnips, etc. regardless of our final location." [^29]

214The critical point was to start planting. They would decide later if the valley would be their permanent home.

214Pres. Young gave us his views concerning a stopping place in the Basin, by saying that he felt inclined for the present not to crowd upon the Utes [Ute Indians] until we have a chance to get acquainted with them, and that it would be better to bear toward the region of the Salt Lake rather than the Utah Lake, and find some good place for our seeds and deposit them as speedily as possible, regardless of a future location. . . . And begin to judge where will be the best spot to put in the plows. . . . It matters not where it is. The President thinks the Utes may feel a little tenacious about their choice lands on the Utah Lake, and we had better keep further north towards the Salt Lake, which is more of a . . . neutral ground, and by so doing we should be less likely to be disturbed. [^30]

Pratt, however, was hard to catch. That very day, he and his riding companion, John Brown, ahead of their own road-clearing company, had ascended Big Mountain, from where they first saw the Salt Lake Valley. Not given to dramatic expression, let alone exaggeration, Pratt could only mention "an extensive level prairie, some few miles distant" and must give way Pathway to Zion, from a painting by William Maughan to the following, more literary account by a later, non-Mormon traveler at the same point:

215We then ascended up a very long and steep mountain, over a horrible road over stumps, holes, rocks, logs, etc. and the greatest care being required to prevent the upsetting and breaking of the wagons. Our progress consequently was very slow. At last . . . we gained the top where we were fully and more than fully compensated for all our days' toil and trouble by a splendid view which burst upon us in an instant. . . . And when on the summit of the mountain . . . ahead of us for some 30 or 40 miles the splendid valley of the Great Salt Lake bathed in golden sunshine and we could see mountain tops far above it. [^31]

215From the peak, Pratt and Brown rode down the eastern slope of Big Mountain into Mountain Dell Canyon (still following Reed's trail), over a steep divide (Little Mountain), and down into a narrow ravine later known as Emigration Canyon. They then returned to their own company, which through strenuous labor had moved over six miles up East Canyon. On 20 July, Pratt's company of 23 wagons worked its way through to Parley's Park and camped in an area now inundated by Mountain Dell Reservoir.

The final 35 miles from Big Mountain to near the mouth of Emigration Canyon were by far the most difficult of the journey. At times the groves of aspen, poplar, willow, shrub oak, and balsam were so thick there was "scarce room to pass through." And where the timber had been cleared, the path was so cluttered with stumps that it kept every teamster busy clearing them away. Boulders loomed everywhere out of the dense brush, and the descents were as precipitous as the large rattlesnakes and curiously big black crickets were abundant. Dropping at the rate of 130 feet per mile, their wagons descended 4,000 feet in two days. Frightened oxen, worried teamsters, suspended wagons, blistering heat, worry, and confusion mingled with restless anticipation everywhere. Lorenzo Young's wagon lost control while in steep descent and crashed down the mountainside, but his two young boys survived uninjured by cutting out a hole in the canvas to escape. Obstacles notwithstanding, George A. Smith, Willard Richards, and their planting crew managed to camp within a mile or so of Pratt's company on the evening of 21 July, having covered in three days what the Donner party had taken 16 days to travel.

216The next day, rather than follow the Donner trail over the precipitous mountain that now bears its name, the newly-combined parties inched their way down Canyon or Emigration Creek. They found it "practicable" to make their own road down the creek bed "thus avoiding the strenuous Donner Mountain climb" before coming into full view of the valley. [^32] As Levi Jackman described it: "The mountains came almost together at the bottom. But when we got through it seemed like bursting from the confines of a prison." [^33]

216Meanwhile, Snow, with his additional counsel from Brigham, had ridden horseback express all the way from Echo Canyon and finally reached Pratt at the foot of Little Mountain in the afternoon of 21 July. Riding on ahead of the struggling road builders, and after climbing Donner hill, they suddenly came in full panoramic view of the Salt Lake Valley. "We involuntarily, both at the same instant," recorded Snow, "uttered a shout of joy at finding it to be the very place of our destination." [^34]

216Sharing a common dream but a single horse, the excited pair proceeded down into the valley, descending a gradual slope some four or five miles before returning in the evening to their eagerly waiting but weary canyon company.

Most others in the forward companies got their first full view of the valley on 22 July, and their comments, after months on the trail, are a kaleidoscope of color and reaction. To some, it was Zion in a moment; to others, how could such a desert bleakness ever prove a paradise? Common to all, however, was a certain relief and a sense of discovery, a hope for a possible promised land but tempered by the stark reality of a timberless desert stretching for miles below them. "I could not help shouting `hurra, hurra, hurra,'" wrote Bullock. "There's my home at last." [^35]

217To tired eyes accustomed to the timbered hills of New England and the vast prairie green of Illinois and the Missouri River Valley, the sight of such an arid plain gave pause for soul-searching reflection. "We at length engaged from the pass," wrote Horace K. Whitney, "and were highly gratified with a fine view of the open country and the Great Salt Lake whose blue surface could be seen in the distance with a lofty range of mountains in the background." [^36]

217William Clayton, wanting to be more excited than he was, could not but notice the scarcity of timber. "And that is mostly on the banks of creeks and streams of water, which is about the only objection which could be raised in my estimation to this being one of the most beautiful valleys and pleasant places for a home for the Saints which could be found. . . . For my own part," he concluded, choosing to take the long-term, optimistic view, "I am happily disappointed in the appearance of the valley. . . . But if the land be as rich as it has the appearance of being, I have no fears but the Saints can live here and do well while we will do right." [^37]

217But for many, these were the very qualities they were looking for in a new mountain home. Those diarists with long memories of past persecutions were quick to perceive the natural defenses such a valley could afford, ringed with snowcapped mountains and difficult valleys. "From what knowledge we have of it at present," penned Howard Egan, "this is the most safe and secure place the Saints could possibly locate themselves in. Nature has fortified this place on all sides, with only a few narrow passes, which could be made impregnable without much difficulty." [^38]

217Regardless of reaction, little time was spent in sightseeing. On the morning of 22 July, Orson Pratt, George A. Smith, Joseph Matthews, John Brown, John Pack, Orrin Porter Rockwell, Jesse Little, and one other explored the valley further. Following a line west of north, they explored the eastern reaches of the Great Salt Lake, discovered several hot springs, and eventually, after conferring with Willard Richards, selected a place for a temporary campground. Pack and Matthews, meanwhile, rode back with letters to the sick company still on the eastern side of Big Mountain.

218The following morning, 23 July, at a special meeting Orson Pratt prayed to God, returning thanks for their preservation and consecrating the land to the Lord. Several project committees or work crews then began the task of planting. A "committee of five" was appointed to locate a place for planting potatoes, corn, and beans. Other committees were also formed, including "the committee to stock plows and drags," "the committee to superintend the moving and seizing up of scythes," "the committee for circulating teams," and "the committee for making a coal pit."

218Before noon they reported on a spot 40 by 20 rods in size (near a point where Main Street now intersects First South Street), where the first furrow was turned by Captain Seth Taft at 12 noon. The sunbaked, brittle ground broke Taft's and several other plows on the first run. Undaunted, by two o'clock they had erected a small dam diverting what was later called City Creek into several small trenches "to irrigate the land." As Clayton put it: "This land is beautifully situated for irrigation, many nice streams descending from the mountains which can be turned in every direction so as to water any portion of the lands at pleasure." [^39]

218Meanwhile the sick camp had sufficiently recovered to pursue their journey, crossing Big and Little Mountain on 23 July. The following morning, Saturday, 24 July, after coming down the last six miles of Emigration Canyon in Woodruff's carriage, Brigham (still sick with a low-grade fever) saw the full valley, from near Donner Mountain, for the first time.

218There is limited contemporary evidence that Brigham ever expressed himself in these familiar terms, "This is the right place; drive on," as he surveyed the valley before him. His own account leaves everything to be desired, sick as he was. And of the handful of men who were in the rearguard company, none referred to such a pronouncement. Albert P. Rockwood, his nearby companion in sickness, made no reference, even retrospectively, although this comes as no surprise given his sparing and parsimonious style of writing. Neither did the more careful writer, Horace Whitney. More surprising is the fact that Heber C. Kimball, who must have shared the moment near his file leader, if he did hear him say such words, never said so at the time.

218The only reliable witness comes from Wilford Woodruff, in whose carriage Brigham rode. He alone captured their poignant moment of discovery and decision. From his comments, it is incontestable that if Brigham did not then utter such a proclamation, he surely meant the same.

219First Glimpse, sketch of the initial sighting of the Salt Lake Valley, by Charles B. Hall

219We came in full view of the great valley or basin of the Salt Lake and land of promise, held in reserve by the hand of God for a resting place for the Saints upon which a portion of the Zion of God will be built.

219

219We gazed with wonder and admiration upon the vast rich fertile valley. . . . Our hearts were surely made glad . . . to gaze upon a valley of such vast extent entirely surrounded with a perfect chain of everlasting hills and mountains covered with eternal snow, with their innumerable peaks like pyramids towering towards Heaven presenting at one view the grandest and most sublime scenery probably that could be obtained on the globe. [^40]

219He concluded: "President Young expressed his full satisfaction in the appearance of the valley as a resting place for the Saints and was amply repaid for his journey." [^41]

219If Brigham felt a pang of disappointment on looking at that barren, desert expanse—as Harris, Craig, and the California-bound Brannan predicted he surely would—that, too, went unrecorded.

The two men gazed on the scene for some time, long enough for a weakened but rallying leader to feel the kind of profound relief and gratitude that comes only with recovery from a near fatal illness. Perhaps their long and tiresome journey was, finally, at an end and he and others could find the rest they craved so desperately.

220More clear-minded than he had been for days, Brigham's feelings centered on more than just the moment or himself. For all their obstacles and delays, it was not yet too late to plant and prepare some late summer crops for the hundreds now on the trail behind them. Surely this must have been a brief moment of exhilaration, even victory, that none had perished along the way (as he himself had predicted at the outset), and that their march had been spared the tragedy of Zion's Camp.

220He might also have mused of other times: of Joseph and Hyrum Smith who had died that such a moment of promise might come; of the message of Cumorah which he and many of his companions in camp had taken to Canada and overseas to England as early missionaries. Perhaps it would yet survive the misunderstandings, disruptions, and persecutions that had marred and hindered its way since those Palmyra beginnings a short seventeen years before.

220He also understood that there must be more to the valley than planting crops and building shelter. For the Church to survive, it needed more than a safe and isolated habitat, timberless or otherwise. It required a home where, through dint of continued hard labor, it could restore itself, rebuild, and heal its collective wounds and divisions, and a place from where it could send out a message and a beacon to its far-flung membership that the destructive storm of the past three years was over. A new temple would have to be erected. Doctrines and practices needed time and space to be tested and developed. And a new First Presidency must be organized. In short, there was a church to save and to mold, and here lay their place and opportunity.

220After a journey of three and a half months and 1,073 miles, the Mormon pioneers had finally reached a potential settlement site. They still needed time to ascertain if it would be a permanent spot, but for now they would plant first and explore and decide later. The season was already well advanced. Their very lives and those to follow lay in the seeds they were now planting. But surely it had the makings of a new mountain Zion. Perhaps Egan said it best: "My heart felt truly glad, and I rejoiced . . . that [it] may yet become a home for the Saints." [^42]

221NOTES

221Another 1847 visitor to Fort Bridger, Lansford B. Hastings, described the fort as follows: "The buildings that constitute the fort are two double log cabins. One is used for a trading house and the other for a dwelling house. He [Bridger] has a very high yard for his horses. The fort is situated on the head waters of Blacks Fork of Green River in a valley 4 or 5 miles wide covered with thick grass. The mountains on the south and west are covered with snow. This fort is a few miles acrost the line into California" (Journal of Lansford B. Hastings, 31 July 1847, mss #660, Oregon Historical Society).

221Elizabeth Geer, passing by Fort Bridger in 1849, described the area as "a pretty place to see in such a barren country—perhaps there is a thousand acres of level land covered with grass interspersed with beautifully stoney brooks and plenty of timber such as it is quaking asp" (The Overland Journal of Elizabeth Dixon Smith Geer, 9 Aug. 1849, Oregon Historical Society).

Levi Riter, a member of the emigration camp, and many others were surprised to hear of Goodyear's establishment: "When we arrived in this valley we supposed that no civilized man had ever entered it for the purpose of settling it, but to our astonishment we soon learned that a man by the name of Miles Goodyear and a Mr. Wells born in the city of Boston had formed the nucleus of settlement 40 miles north of us. They came here from Arkansas in 1846 bringing with them a large number of cattle, horses and goats" (Levi Evans Riter letter, 15 Jan. 1848, Levi Riter Collection, LDS Church Archives).

222Both are caused by the bite of the wood tick Dermacentor andersoni found in Colorado, Oregon, Utah, Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming. The more deadly Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, particularly prominent in Montana's Bitterroot Valley, south of Missoula, is a form of typhus caused by a Ricketsia bacteria. Its symptoms are usually longer and more severe than those manifested by the Pioneer Company. For excellent studies on Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, see Victoria A. Harden, Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever: A History of a 20th Century Disease (1990) and Jerry K. Aikawa, Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (1966). Harden suggests in passing that the Mormons "may have seen cases of Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever" (Harden, p. 11).

222It is more likely most of them suffered from a tick-borne virus, rather than a bacteria, and were afflicted with the milder Colorado Tick Fever. Jay A. Aldous (M.D.) and Paul S. Nicholes (M.D.) have both made recent convincing arguments that the mountain fever Brigham Young and his colleagues suffered from lacked the prominent skin rashes, longer duration, and higher mortality rate associated with Spotted Fever. See Jay A. Aldous and Paul S. Nicholes, "What is Mountain Fever?" Overland Journal 15, #1 (1997): 22-23.

223 Samuel Thompson (1769-1843) was the original botanic physician and father of the popular 19th-century school of medicine that bore his name. His patented system of treatment, in its simplest form, was to (1) cleanse the body with lobelia (an emetic) and other enemas; (2) restore lost body heat with cayenne pepper, hot packs, and sweat baths; and (3) carry away the residue of infection by doses of bayberry, sumac, and red raspberry. Spiteful of the regular medical professionals and their habit of bleeding patients and clogging human bodies with laudanum, mercury, and opium, Thompson patented his medical approach in 1813. He sold the right for others to use his approach at $20 a diploma. His medicines soon swept the northeast, especially Ohio (see Blanche E. Rose, "Early Utah Medical Practice," Utah Historical Quarterly 10 [1942]: 14-33, 44-48). For the manual on the standard medical practices of the age, see Gunn's Domestic Medicine (1830), reprinted by University of Tennessee Press (1986).

223Willard Richards's interest in medicine did not develop until he was about 29, because of the severe illness of his beloved sister, Rhoda. He studied the Thompsonian system of medicine and received a "Thompsonian Certificate" in 1833. Realizing he had only a diploma and no training, he moved to Boston to enter the Thompsonian Infirmary and practiced for some time under Dr. Samuel Thompson himself; this was just before his conversion to Mormonism through his cousin, Brigham Young. Though his duties and responsibilities in the Church gave him little time to practice, he never abandoned his medical beliefs and was later instrumental in organizing the Council of Health in Great Salt Lake City. Luke S. Johnson, on the other hand, apparently had a more traditional medical training.

223

223#Total #23 wagons #42 men

224Dale Morgan argues that they were awed by a sense of desolation and infinite remoteness, because "the wide empty valley was filled with a loneliness in which a whole people might disappear like a stone dropped in still waters." (Morgan, The Great Salt Lake, 198.)

---
Notas:
[^5] For good accounts of the history of Nauvoo see the following works: Joseph Smith Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (1973), especially vols. 3-5 [cited hereafter as History of the Church]; B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. (1930), esp. vols. 2-3 [cited hereafter as Comprehensive History of the Church]; Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (1965); and David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (1974).
[^19] Journal History of the Church, 9 Aug. 1846. This is a well-known and excellent resource available at the LDS Church Historical Department, consisting of scrapbook-like entries from private journals, letters, various writings of all kinds, newspaper clippings, and so on, compiled by date by former Assistant Church Historian, Andrew Jenson; cited hereafter as Journal History.
[^20] Charles R. King, "The Woman's Experience of Childbirth on the Western Frontier," Journal of the West 29, no. 1 (1990): 76-84. Years later, one observer could still say, "The learned profession was not so very learned. [Doctors were] to be sent for only as a last resort" (A. Britt, An America That Was: What Life Was Like on an Illinois Farm Seventy Years Ago (1964), 135, as quoted in King, 83).
[^21] Stampedes were a much dreaded occurrence in overland travel. One of the most chilling accounts is that given by a California forty-niner, Charles Edward Pancoast, while traveling up the Platte River in 1849: "In an instant, as if by magic, all the animals started simultaneously with a grand leap and flew down the river to the plain, the men in front shouting and scrambling to escape the solid mass of teams coming down upon them. Men could be seen dropping from the rear of wagons in all directions as they rumbled over the sands; I myself slipped through a two foot space between two wagons going at lightening speed. Some of the teams ran into a small creek and could not extricate themselves; others stopped from sheer exhaustion; still others ran two or three miles and were halted by the owners of tied horses that had not gotten away. Strange to say, no serious damage was done, except to the wagon of two Germans, which turned over and was irreparably smashed; the owners barely escaping with their lives. This was our first experience of a genuine stampede, not uncommon in the mountain countries of the west" (Charles Edward Pancoast, A Quaker Forty-Niner [1930], 198-99).
[^22] The new members of the company included Robert Crow, Elizabeth Crow, Benjamin B. Crow, Harriet Crow, Elizabeth Jane Crow, John McHenry Crow, Walter H. Crow, George W. Therlkill, Martilla Jane Therlkill (then seven months pregnant), Milton Howard Therlkill, James William Therlkill, William Parker Crow, Ida Vinda Exene Crow, Ira Minda Almarene Crow, Archibald Little, James Chesney, and Lewis B. Myers. Accompanying Myers were two Indian wives and a number of children (see William Clayton's Journal, 4 June 1847, 215).
[^23] Journal of Nelson Wheeler Whipple, 25 Feb. 1846, LDS Church Archives. "We thus kept a sharp look out for them for we knew as they had slain Joseph and Hyrum so they would slay Brigham, Heber, and the Twelve if they could."
[^28] The definitive works on the history of the Mormon Battalion are Frank Alfred Golder, The March of the Mormon Battalion from Council Bluffs to California (1928); Daniel Tyler, A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion to the Mexican War 1846-1847 (1969); John F. Yurtinus, "A Ram in the Thicket: The Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1975); and Norma Baldwin Ricketts, The Mormon Battalion: U.S. Army of the West, 1846-1848 (1996). See also Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 50-67.
[^29] The best study of Strang still remains Milo Quaife, The Kingdom of Saint James: A Narrative of the Mormons (1930). The most recent reinterpretation is Roger Van Noord's King of Beaver Island: The Life and Assassination of James Jesse Strang (1988). See also Doyle C. Fitzpatrick, The King Strang Story (1970); Richard E. Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 1846-1852: "And Should We Die . . ." (1987), 18-20; The Diary of James J. Strang, ed. Mark A. Strang (1961); William D. Russell, "King James Strang: Joseph Smith's Successor," in The Restoration Movement: Essays in Mormon History, ed. F. Mark McKiernan, Alma R. Blair, and Paul M. Edwards (1973), 231-56. Strang later removed his followers to Beaver Island in northern Lake Michigan, where his settlement realized only modest success.
[^31] Autobiography of Pioneer John Brown, 1820-1896, arr. John Zimmerman Brown (1941), 72-73. See also Jenson, "Day by Day," Deseret News, 31 May 1947. Lay and Crosby later died in California. Flake lived in Salt Lake City for most of his life, dying in Idaho Falls in 1903 at the age of 75.
[^40] William Clayton's Journal, 18 June 1847, 242. The crew left at the North Platte River crossing included some of the best carpenters and blacksmiths in camp: Thomas Grover, captain; John S. Higbee, assistant; Benjamin F. Stewart; James Davenport, blacksmith; William Empey; Luke S. Johnson; Appleton Harmon; Francis M. Pomeroy; and Edmund Ellsworth. Eric Glines decided, against counsel, to stay back with Grover's crew; he later changed his mind and hurried on by himself at considerable danger, catching up with the main camp several miles west.
[^42] Journal of Willard Richards, 14 Mar. 1847. It is interesting to note that in the dreams which Brigham Young said he had of Joseph Smith while preparing for the exodus, Joseph "stepped toward me, and looking very earnestly, yet pleasantly, said `Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. . . . Tell the brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it'" (Journal History, 23 Feb. 1847).
