Richard E. Bennett, We'll Find the Place: The Mormon Exodus 1846-1848 ( 1997)

225"IT IS AN EXCELLENT PLACE TO SERVE THE LORD"

225We have now fulfilled the mission on which we were sent, by selecting and pointing out to you a beautiful site for a city, which is destined to be a place of refuge for the oppressed, and one that is calculated to please the eye, to cheer the hearts and fill the hungry soul with food. [^1]

225Having reached the Salt Lake Valley behind schedule, the Mormon pioneers had much to accomplish—and in short order. The burden of their moment was to prove the purpose of their entire westward journey—to lay stake to their future in this desolate and remote wilderness, to raise an ensign to waiting Latter-day Saints everywhere, to signal the construction of a new temple, to blunt the pretensions of Strang and others, to explore the territory, and to plant sufficient crops to test the soil and preserve the lives of coming settlers. To succeed they needed speed of action, decisiveness, and abundant industry, qualities they manifested in rich supply. Now was the time and this was the place.

225PLOWING, PLANTING, AND IRRIGATING

The valley had withheld its secrets long and well. The Great Salt Lake, some 100 miles long and up to 40 miles wide, had lain undiscovered by modern civilization until Jim Bridger first looked on it in 1824. Not until Captain B. L. E. Bonneville and his crew explored the lake eight years later, in 1832-33, was it proven that the Salt Lake was part of a vast geological basin without outlet to the Pacific. The valley's reputation as a great wilderness desert, incapable of cultivation, had only recently begun to surrender to the plow of Miles Goodyear and to the sanguine observations of other recent passersby.

226Writing in 1846, Heinrich Lienhard, on his way west to California, remarked on the majesty of the scenery and the richness of the soil in the land east of the Salt Lake as few fur traders and mountain men ever did. "The soil is deep, rich, black, and mixed with sand," he confided to his journal,

226and is doubtless potentially highly productive. The clear sky-blue surface of the lake, the warm, sunny atmosphere, the high mountains with the beautiful countryside at their base . . .—all this put me in a very happy mood. All day long I felt like singing and whistling; and if there had been a single white family there, I believe I would have stayed. What a pity that the magnificent countryside was uninhabited. [^2]

226The scarcity of timber throughout the valley floor masked the fact that it was "clothed with a heavy garment of vegetation" and that wheat grass grew 6 to 7 feet high, in some places as high as 10 or 12 feet. The lines of small bush growth and greenery following the creeks from the canyons onto the floor of the valley led Clayton and others to defy the arid, desert sight with their optimistic predictions: "We can easily irrigate the land at all events, which will be an unfailing and certain source of water, for the springs are numerous and the water appears good." [^3] What nature had long withheld, perhaps ingenuity and irrigation could now provide.

Orson Pratt, Willard Richards, and Erastus Snow took to the task of planting with both dispatch and alacrity. The first earthen dams were thrown up on City Creek, one of two creeks flowing down through their chosen site seven and a quarter miles from the mouth of Emigration Canyon. And despite broken plows and large, shiny black crickets, the parched and hardened soil soon surrendered to the spreading, life-giving waters. Their misgivings, if any, gave way later that afternoon when a light shower passed through, which lasted almost two hours, "not quite enough rain to lay the dust" as Clayton recorded, but proof enough that the desert could be tamed and "that [God] listens to and answers the prayers of the Saints." [^4]

227By the time Brigham arrived in camp in the early afternoon of 24 July, still unwell and riding in Woodruff's carriage, they had already planted a few acres of potatoes. Even before eating his first meal in the valley, Wilford Woodruff planted half a bushel of potatoes in the widening potato patch. Of his early planting efforts, he later wrote:

227Of course we had no experience in irrigation. We pitched our camp, put some teams onto our plows . . . and undertook to plow the earth, but we found neither wood nor iron were strong enough to make furrows here in this hard soil. It was like adamant. Of course we had to turn water on it. We would have done anything. We went and turned out the City Creek. We turned it over our ground. Come to put our teams on it, of course they sank down to their bellies in the mud. We had to wait until this land dried enough to hold our teams up. We then plowed our land. [^5]

227And although all publicly ceased from their labors on the Sabbath, some, like Albert Carrington, found the temptation too great and in between meetings managed to plant some corn, beans, and peas.

227For the next several days, starting with the 4 A.M. bugle call and Stephen Markham's daily instructions, the order of business for almost everyone was planting, plowing, and irrigating. With five prairie oxen teams plowing in constant four-hour rotations and another three teams harrowing, within the week they had cultivated a 53-acre public farm; 35 acres were sown in buckwheat, corn, and oats; 8 acres in potatoes and beans; and another 10 in various garden vegetables. Although it was a public, or community, farm, a careful accounting was made of which seeds and furrows belonged to each of the two grand divisions in camp—Brigham's or Kimball's. Those with any leftover energy managed to plant smaller, temporary vegetable plots of their own three miles south of the big farm. Within the week, thanks to their ambitious irrigation efforts, good weather, and hard work, corn was already sprouting two inches high and the potato sprouts were showing above the ground.

Much has been written about their use of irrigation, some even crediting them for its introduction to America. The practice, however, was not at all new, and several in camp had observed similar irrigation efforts in Mexico, the Holy Land, and elsewhere. It really took "no leap of the imagination to see that water, if it can be brought to the fields, might save a withering crop." As prominent scholars have concluded, "Immediate necessity more than lofty vision forced the Mormons to pioneer the arts of irrigation." [^6]

228"SHALL THIS BE THE SPOT?"

228Although "highly satisfied" with their discovery and their newly cultivated farm, none yet knew precisely where in the valley they would permanently settle. "We shall go tomorrow," remarked an enthusiastic Heber C. Kimball during his first Sunday sermon in the valley, "if Brigham [Young] is well enough, in search of a better location—if indeed, such can be found." [^7] Come Monday morning, exploration parties fanned out in all directions to determine if a better location existed elsewhere.

228While John Brown and Joseph Mathews followed the emigrant road (the Bartleson-Bidwell Trail of 1841) across the valley west to the mountains and other parties scouted areas to the north and south, Brigham's party made a "short exploring expedition" five miles north to a lookout hill they promptly called Ensign Peak. From this vantage point, they had, in Bullock's words, "a splendid view of the Salt Lake, [the] islands thereon, and the surrounding valleys." [^8] And the more they viewed, as Clayton recorded, "the better we were satisfied that it is as handsome a place for a city as can be imagined. . . . The more I view the country, the better I am satisfied that the Saints can live here and raise abundant crops." [^9] Though still feeble and barely able to navigate the climb, Brigham "considered it [Ensign Peak] a good place to raise an ensign" and looked out with obvious satisfaction on the valley below. [^10]

228The party then traveled southwest some 20 miles to explore the southern shores of the Salt Lake where they discovered the Utah inlet. This they later renamed the Jordan River, an obvious parallel to biblical geography, in which the River Jordan joins the Sea of Galilee to the Dead Sea. Like children in gleeful discovery, they enjoyed "a fine bathing frolic," discovering that they could not sink in this landlocked ocean brine. Calling it the eighth wonder of the world, they found it "so warm that no one had a desire to retreat from it." [^11]

Returning to camp on 28 July, they were of the unanimous opinion that they had seen enough to know they had probably made the right decision four days before. "After returning from this trip," wrote Howard Egan, "the brethren were more satisfied than ever that they were already encamped upon the spot where their contemplated city should be built." [^12] Brigham put it this way:

229Some of the brethren talked about exploring the country further for a site for a settlement. I replied that I was willing that the country should be explored until all were satisfied, but every time a party went out and returned, I believed firmly they would agree that this is the spot for us to locate. [^13]

229That evening they moved their wagons across the creek and slightly northeast to the intended site of the city.

229With a confident air belying his fragile condition, Brigham strode out from their wagons at about 5 P.M. to a center spot between the two creeks and declared to his fellow Apostles, as he waved his hands in the air: "Here is the forty acres of the temple lot." He then went on to give instruction on how to build the basement and the baptismal font of the proposed new temple. Spreading out from the temple lot and in all directions, he envisioned a city "two miles east and west" and "as large as we have a mind to north and south." The Twelve then alternately moved and approved that each lot be one and a quarter acres in size, that the streets be eight rods wide, that the sidewalks be 20 feet wide, that the houses be built 20 feet back from the street, that all the people on a block could choose a school for themselves, and that there be four public squares. [^14]

229Later that evening, the entire camp attended a special council meeting on the proposed temple site. Enjoying the warm evening air and obviously pleased with their planting efforts, "cheerfulness and a general hilarity prevailed in [the] little company." Brigham then asked the question: "Shall we look further or make a location upon this spot and lay out and build a city? . . . Shall this be the spot or shall we look further? I want all to freely express their minds and feelings."

All but William Vance, who "felt as though we should go farther, perhaps on the other side of the lake," commented in favor of the site. Brigham replied that "if we were on the other side of the lake we should not have the benefit of the warm north and west winds from the lake. I knew this spot as soon as I saw it," he continued, and "up there on that table ground [Ensign Peak] we shall erect the Standard of Freedom!" Invoking the memory of Joseph Smith, as he was prone to do at such critical moments, he persuaded:

230Well, I know it is the spot, and we have come here according to the suggestion and direction of Joseph Smith who was martyred. The word of the Lord was, "Go to that valley and the best place you can find in it is the spot." Well, I prayed that he would lead as directly to the best spot, which he has done, for after searching we can find no better. [^15]

230Another eyewitness noted the militant rhetoric and vengeful talk sure to stir the hearts of his followers and gain their support.

230He hoped to lead forth the armies of Israel to execute the judgments and justice on the persecuting Gentiles and that no officer of the United States should ever dictate him in this valley, or he would hang them on a gibbet as a warning to others. He showed the spot where the Ensign would be hoisted, and never have any commerce with any nation, but be independent of all. [^16]

230The entire company then voted in favor of a committee to superintend the management and layout of the new city on the site as approved earlier by the Twelve.

230And so their city—a new city on a hill—was born.

230"A WELCOME ADDITION"

230But Brigham was not one to let rhetoric get in the way of practical requirements. He knew that the arrival of a United States army was imminent. The very next day the combined company of Mississippi Saints and the Pueblo detachment of the Mormon Battalion, some 240 souls in all, arrived in camp with 60 wagons, over 100 horses and mules, and some 300 head of cattle, more than doubling their numbers. [^17] Marching to fife and drum, the soldiers, now looking like mountaineers, sunburned and weatherbeaten, entered the valley in smart military procession—council and officers first, infantry next with martial music, then the cavalry, with the baggage wagons bringing up the rear. "The brethren were very much rejoiced at getting once more among their friends," Bullock noted, "and a general congratulation took place." [^18]

Praising the Battalion boys enthusiastically, Brigham assured them that all their families were well and many of them were already on the overland road. Shouting "Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna, give glory to God and the Lamb," he congratulated the Battalion for having "saved the people by going into the Army. If they had not gone, Missouri was ready with 3,000 men to have wiped the Saints out of existence." [^19] It was better to have a beholden army, still on government payroll, than an opposing one. He closed his comments by asking the Battalion to erect a bowery 40 feet long by 28 feet wide for Sunday preaching.

231The truth of the matter was that many of the new arrivals had almost mutinied on their way to Fort Laramie, wanting to return to their families. Many were unhappy with how some of their enlistment pay and later wages had been appropriated and were convinced that their wives and families were getting less than their due. While some made secret arrangements to leave for the East in a day or two, others wanted assurances that their families were indeed part of the emigration camp (or "Big Company") that was following the advance camp. Some had the "California fever" and were anxious to follow Sam Brannan to the Pacific, there collect their muster-out pay, and set out on their own.

231Anxious to keep the heavily armed Battalion in camp, particularly in case of possible Indian attack, Brigham instructed them to "quarter here until their captain could go over to the Bay [of San Francisco] and obtain their discharge." [^20] In the meantime they would help in getting their oncoming families over the mountains, build houses, make their farms, and lay out a city. A little over a week later, on 9 August, Captain James Brown, a disgruntled Sam Brannan, and several others started for the Pacific by way of the Bear River. Convinced that the Mormon desert experiment was doomed to failure, Brannan was once again as glad to leave as Brigham was to see him go. [^21]

231"THEY SAY THEY OWN THIS LAND"

Throughout all their busy activities, the new arrivals had been carefully observed by the aboriginal populations native to the valley. First to show, on 27 July, were two Ute Indians "of moderate size, pleasing countenance and dressed in skins." [^22] They arrived in camp ostensibly to trade ponies for rifles and muskets but privately anxious to scout out the numbers and assess the intent of their industrious new neighbors. Four days later, 30 more came Utah Indians in Utah Valley, engraved by Charles B. Hall, after an etching by John Hafen to trade horsepower for firepower, no doubt to gain an upper hand in their long, continuous intertribal warfare.

232Later that same afternoon, obviously observing both Mormons and Utes, approximately 20 Shoshone Indians converged on the scene. They came not just to trade but to demonstrate their dominance over the Utes and their ownership of the land. In short order they redressed a grievance of a stolen horse, which one of the young Ute Indians had already traded with the unsuspecting Mormons earlier in the day. After learning of his identity, four Shoshone started out in wrathful pursuit, "shooting him dead while another one shot his horse. They returned and made this report to the others of the tribe at the camp at the same time exhibiting fresh blood on one of the rifles. They appear to be much excited," wrote Clayton, "and continually on the watch. When the men returned, they sat down and made a meal of some of these large crickets." [^23]

232Later that evening, Brigham advised

us of the folly of trading with the Indians here for if we continued to do so, we would always be molested with them, therefore, we should give them to understand that we were not permitted to trade at this place, but appoint a distant place for that purpose. He also admonished the brethren not to buy Indian and Californian horses, as they were not near so good as our American ones, neither did we wish to be overstocked with horses, for they were only a trouble to us. [^24]

233Once again the place the Latter-day Saints were intent on settling lay between warring tribes. As they had done back at Winter Quarters the year before—when they had settled between the Sioux on the north and the Ponca, Otoe, and Omaha on the south—the Mormons were here following the counsel of Jim Bridger, deliberately or otherwise, to choose a settlement in a buffer zone, a disputed area, between two unfriendly tribes.

233And here again they followed a similar policy with respect to the Indians: be friendly but impartial; be firm and fair but trade sparingly; provide food where absolutely necessary; and finally, avoid conflict wherever possible. The last thing they could afford was armed conflict with the Indians. It was a deliberate policy Brigham had forged back at the Missouri with some success and one he now was determined they follow. [^25]

233The coming of the Latter-day Saints and of other white settlers to the area marked the beginning of the end, for both tribes, of their nomadic lifestyle, which had endured for centuries, if not millennia. The Utes had been accommodating to modern culture as soon as the Spanish had settled New Mexico in 1598. The most dramatic change to Ute culture came as a result of the Pueblo Revolt of 1680, which freed many of their slaves, made an equestrian lifestyle available to them on a far wider scale than ever before, and allowed the Utes to extend hunting rights to the high plains east of the Rockies. Eventually driven from the Plains by other tribes, the Utes retreated to their traditional mountain setting.

Unlike their Colorado cousins to the east, change came more slowly to the Utes of the Great Basin. As late as Father Escalante's visit in 1776, they owned no horses and many lived in "little huts of willow" in abject poverty and filth, even by native standards. By the 1840s, their northern boundary with the Shoshone was vaguely drawn at the Point of the Mountain, some 20 miles south of the Mormon camp. Most still traveled on foot and already had been labeled "diggers" for their propensity to live off ants, grasshoppers, crickets, roots, seeds, and weeds. [^26] As the respected Roman Catholic priest and explorer, Father Pierre de Smet, had written: "There is not, perhaps, in the whole world, a people in a deeper state of wretchedness and corruption . . . their habitations are holes in the rocks, or the natural crevices of the ground." [^27]

234The Shoshones—related to the Snake Indians of the northern plains, Montana, and Wyoming—occupied much of the upper Great Basin regions as far north as the Snake River and as far south as the Great Salt Lake. Unlike the Plains Indians, who made handsome garments of buffalo, antelope, and elk skins, the Snakes and Shoshones west of the mountains spent their lives in little more than searching for something to eat. "The very names they gave to their groups," argues one authority, "indicate their absorption in the quest for food. The Snakes or Shoshonis were divided into Root Eaters, Rabbit Eaters, Squirrel Eaters, Salmon Eaters, Seed Eaters, Pine Nut Eaters, and one poor group was known as the Earth Eaters." Barely able to live in their parched and desert surroundings, neither Utes nor Shoshones had organized themselves into strong tribes. [^28]

234At first accepting of white emigrants on their way east, by the mid-1840s the Shoshone and Paiute Indians had turned hostile and aggressive, especially near Fort Hall and other sites on the Oregon Trail to the north. A saving grace in the Mormon migration had been the selection of a trail and a settlement in an area not heavily populated by either Shoshones or Utes and, moreover, in an area of ill-defined ownership. [^29] Nevertheless, it was the Shoshones, not the Utes, who claimed that the Mormons were occupying their lands and who demanded compensation in the form of powder and lead for selling. "They appear to be displeased because we have traded with the Utahs," wrote Clayton, "and say they own this land. . . . They signified by signs that they wanted to sell us the land for powder and lead." [^30]

234The Mormon response was consistent with how most new emigrants of the day were treating Indian claims—without serious consideration. However, just as there were variations in the Mormon's attitudes towards the United States government, there were subtle differences among them toward the "Lamanites." Orson Pratt, for instance, anxious that they start off on a good basis and a strong advocate for preaching the gospel to the tribes in due course, was of the opinion that "we should not [even] feed them at all until they had done something for it so as to begin right with them and teach them industry." [^31]

Kimball, meanwhile, was concerned about favoring one tribe above another and discouraged "the idea of paying the Indians for the lands, for if the Shoshones should be thus considered, the Utes and other tribes would claim pay also. . . . The land belongs to our Father in Heaven, and we calculate to plow and plant it." [^32]

235Brigham, who had gained the respect of the Omaha, Ponca, and other tribes back at the Missouri, would not have disagreed with either man but perhaps struck a more expansive tone. His view was that "we should not buy any land of the Indians, but as the Lord made the land there was enough for both them and us, that we would teach them to labor and cultivate the earth." [^33] He could not be persuaded that the Shoshones owned the surrounding lands even though they had occupied portions of it for a very long time. Neither tribe pressed the issue or countered in stubborn conflict, although in later years, as Mormon settlements extended to the north and south, conflicts did erupt. [^34]

235"THE LAND OF THEIR INHERITANCES"

235At their outdoor services of Sunday, 1 August, under the hastily-erected bowery, there was much to talk about. First of all, because they had made such good progress in planting during the past week and because so many new women and children had recently joined them with many more on the way, it was proposed "that we build houses instead of living in wagons this winter; that we go to work immediately putting up houses; . . . that the houses form a stockade or fort to keep out the Indians; . . . and that we let the Indians alone." [^35] A stockade, a corral, and a fort—all would be necessary to shelter and protect the settlement throughout the coming winter.

235Recognizing the scarcity of timber and having seen the Spanish-style adobe construction native to the American southwest, the Battalion took the lead in recommending adobe brick construction for the proposed settlement. Cheaper and quicker to build than log houses and better insulated and less susceptible to fire, the adobe home was well-suited for the valley. "To those unacquainted with this kind of building," argued Erastus Snow from his new desert pulpit, "dobies are brick made of gravelly soil and dried hard in the sun instead of being burned with fuel."

235It was then unanimously resolved "to go jointly to enclosing one of the public squares of the city, containing 10 acres or 40 rods square, by a wall of log and dobie houses, to be joined together with the exception of a gate on each of the four sides; buildings to be 14 feet wide, 9 feet high on the outside, roofs to slant a little inwards." [^36]

236Illustrating the kind of instant response and diversity of talent characteristic of the pioneers, Samuel Gould and James Drum reported in as lime burners and Sylvester H. Earl, Joel J. Terrill, Ralph Douglas, and Joseph Hancock offered their brick-making skills. Albert Carrington promised to set out in the morning with a party to look for limestone and others signed up to find and bring down spruce and pine logs from nearby valleys and ravines for floors, roofs, and some log houses. [^37]

236The next day the Mormon hive was busy with activity, virtually every person part of one committee or another. Many were still planting while others were out exploring. Some were laying out the adobe square while others were preparing a saw pit. Blacksmiths, hot and sweaty, were busy hammering out wagon repairs while careful tailors trimmed their cloth. Mothers tended to their makeshift wagon homes while children played everywhere, all the while with dogs barking, cattle lowing, and sheep bleating. A whole new sound of industry and a budding sense of excitement dented the daunting silence of the sprawling valley floor. It was the sound of new life and a new future.

236Others, impatient at how long it was taking to haul the needed limestone and to dry the adobe mud, decided to head for the hills to cut down as many logs as possible. Soon several hands were chopping down fir and pine with almost careless energy. "This made 77 logs in two days that we cut and drew home," a tired and winded Wilford Woodruff recorded. "In two days we got timber sufficient for two buildings, each of us one. But I had labored so hard during the two days I could hardly stand upon my feet. I went to my wagon and flung myself upon my bed to rest." [^38]

236No committee took its responsibility more seriously than did Henry G. Sherwood's city survey crew. Starting out from the proposed temple lot with survey chains, his first priorities were to locate the public square on the southwest quarter of the city that would serve as the fort and to locate the "dobie square" four blocks south and three blocks west of Temple Square. The size of the proposed temple lot was eventually reduced, after considerable discussion, from 40 to 10 acres as the Twelve concluded that they "could not do justice" to such a large acreage. [^39] With the survey completed on the northwest and northeast corners of the temple block, Thomas Tanner and Burr Frost were free to erect their blacksmith shop.

Meanwhile the adobe pit was soon churning out large quantities of material—some 1,600 adobes per day by 6 August and 4,000 per day a week later. And by mid-August, they had completed 30 log houses and had erected a perimeter adobe wall about four feet high on two sides of the proposed fort, with materials ready for the third side (log houses formed the fourth side). [^40]

237The history of the early building of what they soon called "Salt Lake City—Great Basin of North America" (still a part of Mexican Territory) is well known and requires no further elaboration here. What merits attention, however, is their unique method of land distribution. Unlike most other settlements of the developing West, where the race was on for private property and individual ownership of the choicest locations, the Mormon distribution of land—as before in Far West, Independence, and other early communities—was Church-governed. Properties were assigned to obedient followers, a reward for commitment and endurance. [^41] And those who chose not to follow counsel understood that they could forfeit everything. [^42]

237Furthermore, the concept of the good of the whole ruled, rather than monetary gain for the individual. Small holdings were thought best, with the general "desire to people the region with as many families as could make a living." Private speculation in land was foreign to their immediate objective. It was God's land and as God's people they would adhere to his spokesmen and take what was granted them—no land banks, no real estate offices, no land for a quick profit. [^43]

237Their original method of land apportionment owed everything to the apostolic adopted family and the dual divisional organization that had governed their travels across the plains. Immediately after their arrival, the soldiers "reorganized themselves" to join one of either of the great family divisions and resume their places in the families of the leading Apostles (see chapter 2).

##MESSAGE KEY MISSING: '-'#-238According to their respective rank of seniority within the Quorum of the Twelve, Brigham chose first, opting for the block immediately east of the temple block "and running southeast to settle his friends [including his adopted family] around him." Kimball took the block north, and Orson Pratt selected the block opposite on the south side. Woodruff chose the block west of the temple for him and "his friends." Amasa Lyman chose the block 40 rods southwest of the temple block and George A. Smith further west still. "It was supposed Bro. [Willard] Richards would take his inheritance on the east near Bro. Young." The other Apostles (Ezra T. Benson had already returned east with mail) chose their sites later. [^44] Thereafter, Minutes of a Quorum of the Twelve meeting planning Salt Lake City, from the Thomas Bullock journal, entry for July 28, 1847, p. 48 The Salt Lake Plat Map, by Nicholas Morgan according to their adopted family affiliation and lottery selection, almost everyone else claimed their property or inheritance in turn, spreading the settlement outward from the center of the city.

##MESSAGE KEY MISSING: '-'#-238Horace K. Whitney (Kimball) explained precisely how the lots were divvied up in the Kimball family.

After [supper] we took a walk over the creek to look at the city lots, of the situation of which, etc. He [Heber C. Kimball] gave me a better idea than I had before possessed. After we had got [there], we knelt and prayed by his suggestion; after which we returned to camp. He then called most of his boys [adopted sons] together at Bro. Wilkie's tent, when each chose his respective lot and I wrote their name on the blanks, representing the lots on the city plot or map. [^45]

240Two days later, at Kimball's request, Whitney copied the names of those who had selected lots as well as the number of lots and blocks selected opposite each one's name.

240By 11 August, Sherwood's survey ran 15 blocks north and south by 9 blocks east and west. By 20 August his survey consisted of 135 blocks, each containing 8 lots of 1 1/4 acres, large enough to accommodate 1,080 families or from 5,000 to 6,000 people; streets 8 rods wide; and three public squares besides the temple lot. [^46] The streets were named, starting from the temple block, First East, Second East; First South, Second South; First North, Second North; and so on.

240Although family division of properties did not last long for a variety of practical reasons, the larger concept of communality of property endured a generation and spread throughout the Mormon settlements of the west. Believing that their new social order would lessen or eliminate the scramble for private property, reduce economic jealousies, and preserve social order, Brigham said that "this is the principle of oneness that this people will have to go into in order to help build one another up." This idea was the original guide for settlement: without purchase price, a means of repaying the Saints for the loss of lands in Nauvoo and elsewhere and of putting all on an equal footing. [^47]

240In the midst of laying claim to brave new hopes, bold dreams, and divine directions—and as if fate itself would demand a price for their enthusiasm—came word of a tragedy, a victim of their general distraction. On Wednesday, 11 August, three-year-old Milton Howard Therlkill, son of George W. and Martilla Jane Therlkill (both non-Mormon members of the Mississippi company), fell into the deepest part of the creek near the dam on the southeast of the camp while playing with his brother. The boy was immediately taken out, but despite every frantic effort at resuscitation was pronounced dead.

240"The grief of both the parents was great," Whitney sadly recorded,

but that of the agonized mother baffles all description. She laughed, wept, walked to and fro alternately, refusing all attempts at consolation from her friends, being apparently unable to be resigned to her domestic and melancholy bereavement. As for myself, I never witnessed a sight that so awakened my sympathy and I sincerely hope that I may ne'er look on its like again. [^48]

241Ironically, three days later this same grieving mother gave birth to a daughter, Harriet Anne.

241Asked to speak at the child's funeral, Brigham used the occasion, as well as the ensuing Sunday meetings, not merely to extend comfort to the grieving family but also to speak on the principle of temples and temple sealings and of family togetherness beyond the grave. While directed to the family, it gave opportunity for him to answer the questions of his people and of detractors about the place of temple worship in their new wilderness.

241"In the loss of this child . . . that was drowned, I felt that I could weep in sorrow," he remarked.

241It is true all children are saved. Their names are written in the Lamb's book of life. . . .

241

241But notwithstanding this, can Brother Crow [grandfather] get that child again or any other person their children except there is something done for them on the earth by their parents? No, they would not. They would go to God who gave them, but the parents on the earth would not have them. . . .

241

241What then can be done? I will tell you. A man that has embraced the gospel must [be] someone who has the priesthood and keys and power of Elijah and must attend to ordinances for that child; . . . have it sealed to him and . . . claim his child in the morning of the resurrection and the Lord will give it up to him. [^49]

241Brigham then turned his attention to the matter of both a temple in the valley and, until its completion, possibly a temporary place for conducting their sacred ordinances, this despite earlier statements that such work could never be done outside the temple. [^50] He recognized here, as he had done back at the Missouri, the demands of his people, particularly of the Mormon Battalion and their concerns for their families. "As soon as we get up some adobe houses for our families," he said,

we shall go to work to build another temple and as soon as a place is prepared we shall commence the endowments long before the temple is built. And we shall take time and each step the Saints take, let them take time enough about it to understand it. Everything at Nauvoo went with a rush. We had to build the temple with the trowel in one hand, the sword in the other; and mobs were upon us all the while and many crying out "O the temple can't be built!"

242

242Not only would they have all they realized back in Nauvoo, but as they had done back at Willard Richards's octagon in Winter Quarters, certain temple blessings would be restored almost immediately.

242"A CITY SOUGHT OUT AND NOT FORSAKEN"

242There was more than streams and wagons, logs and adobe, in their view at least, to what was happening. They came to believe that they were not merely leaving an old world and seeking a new, but that they were fulfilling prophecy and that their success depended again on their collective obedience to divine will. Further, they saw in their new surroundings the recovery of their relinquished Zion.

242Such belief explains the decision to rebaptize as many in camp as desired to renew their covenants and inaugurate a new order in their mountain home. Performed sparingly previous to this time and place, this repeat of their original baptisms had been earlier commended as a way of reaffirming the faith, of healing, and even of remission of sins—a long-since abandoned practice in modern Mormonism. [^52] But this was an exciting place of new beginnings, a promised land. Consequently, early in the morning of Sunday, 8 August, after damming up the streams sufficient for deeper pools of water,

the bishops repaired with the Twelve to the streams of water for the purpose of baptizing and confirming the whole camp who had not been [rebaptized] since we came into the valley. We felt it our privilege to be baptized and to baptize . . . for the remission of our sins and to renew our covenants before the Lord. Bros. [Tarleton] Lewis, [Stephen H.] Goddard, [Addison] Everett, [Andrew P.] Shumway, [Erastus] Snow, and H. C. Kimball baptized and the Twelve confirmed them. There were 224 baptized and confirmed . . . making 288 in all . . . during the last three days. [^53]

243The above episode would not merit more than a footnote in this history were it not for two overriding considerations central to this work: first, they firmly believed that their transgressions had to be blotted out in order to ensure the permanent success of their venture; and second, they came to see with unbending conviction that they were truly on a divine errand, fulfilling prophecy, and establishing Zion.

243Regarding their transgressions, the record is clear that the rumblings, murmurings, and "iniquities," more particularly among some within the Battalion ranks, would only hinder their progress. Rather than single out any one group for grievous conduct, the leaders determined to rebaptize virtually the entire camp. This perception of themselves as God's chastened, if chosen, people is evident in many of the earliest valley sermons. "The revelation tells us what to do," Amasa Lyman said,

243and if we are not a righteous people we deceive ourselves and shall defeat the very object we are laboring for and it is to begin to be holy and to build a city. It is ours because God has given it us. We must not buck at impurity in any way favorable. Go to work and be pure every wit and then if they build up a temple and the city the blessings will flow down to us as the waters from yonder hill. . . . Zion is the pure in heart and the only way to be pure is to have no will but the will of God. [^54]

243They likewise began to see, or at least interpret for themselves, that they were in the middle of fulfilling ancient prophecy. If while crossing Iowa and beyond they had paid at least lip service to ancient Israel's flight from Egypt, in the valley they began to proclaim that their long and tedious journey and recent establishment of a mountain city was literal fulfillment of biblical prophecy.

The importance of such a new self-perception can hardly be overstated. Such scriptural vindication would more than validate their decision to quit Missouri and Nauvoo—it would redeem it! It would give them the doctrinal ammunition they required to confront Strang and others and to convince many laboring behind in doubt and confusion. And it would come to define them as a distinct people, a religious movement with a purpose perhaps unparalleled since the Puritan arrival in the New World over two centuries before. It was as if the enormity of their immediate accomplishment was only now being fully realized—a collective dawning of enormous consequence.

244Orson Pratt

244It was Orson Pratt, their scientist and systematic theologian, who first voiced this conviction. "It is with peculiar feelings I arise before so many of the Saints in this uncultivated region," he announced in the bowery that same Sunday in August, just after the choir had sung "On the Mountain Tops Appearing."

244My mind is full of reflection on the scenes through which we have passed and being brought through the deserts of sage to this distant region. God's ways are not as our ways. . . . This movement is one of the greatest that has taken place among this people.

244

244For many years I have not read the good old book, but I remember the predictions in it and some that are now very nearly fulfilled by us. Isaiah says (Chapter 62) speaking of the City of Zion, "it shall be sought out, a city not forsaken, etc." Many in this congregation know what is meant by the garments of salvation and the robe of righteousness. Righteousness and praise shall spring forth before all the nations of the earth and they will not hold their peace. . . . We have gathered out the stones out of the road and thousands will yet fulfil this prophecy. . . . If ever there was a place sought out it is this. We have inquired diligently and have found it. [^55]

Turning then to the second chapter of Isaiah, Pratt quoted as follows: "It shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the tops of the mountains, . . . and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; . . . for out of Zion shall go forth the law and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem." [^56] With their new temple site determined and a new city soon to be built, surely, Pratt proclaimed to his eager audience, this prophecy would soon be fulfilled. "The wilderness shall become as a fruitful field and a fruitful field as a forest" and "the desert shall blossom as the rose." [^57]

245One cannot help but notice not only how soon the pioneers seeded their crops and laid claim to the valley but how quickly they regarded it as the symbol and substitute of their relinquished Missouri Zion. Not to be confused with the former "center stake," or site of the New Jerusalem, their new mountain home would nevertheless retain in them the conviction and belief that God's imprimatur was on this place. [^58]

245To a busy people well aware of the many earlier prophecies and predictions that their ultimate Zion or New Jerusalem was still back east, in Independence, Missouri, and to the many who still regarded Nauvoo as the center of their faith, it was reassuring, if not flattering, to know that God had been leading them all along. And despite the lack of a First Presidency, their leaders were still inspired and directed. It was, in short, a new scriptural frame of reference—a doctrinal delivery after a long night of labor. And for many, it would make all the difference. [^59]

245"I WISH TO GOD WE HAD NOT GOT TO RETURN"

245The journeys back to Winter Quarters (start backs) began as early as 11 August, when Norton Jacob and his advance hunting party set out with several well-rested teams of oxen. Six days later, under the direction of Shadrach Roundy and Tunis Rappleye, 72 men, 32 wagons, and 92 more yoke of oxen began the long trek east. Both companies were instructed to wait at Grand Island for the returning Company of the Twelve.

245On Sunday, 22 August, the Battalion soldiers were instructed to turn over most of their arms; then provisions were made for a new stake to be organized with John Smith as president after his arrival with the emigration camp. Finally Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and the rest of the Twelve began their return journey on 26 August, none too happy at the prospect of leaving their new settlement. Said Kimball: "I wish to God we had not got to return. If I had my family here, I would give everything I have [to stay]. This is a Paradise to me. It is one of the most lovely places I ever beheld. I hope none of us will be left to pollute this land." [^60]

245Having accomplished so much in so little time, perhaps Wilford Woodruff can be forgiven for his hyperbole and self-congratulatory tone on the eve of their return:

246We as a pioneer company have accomplished more this season than can be found on record concerning any set of men since the days of Adam. [We have] traveled with heavy loaded wagons over one thousand miles, having made our road more than one half of the way over and through the rough mountains and canyons, and searched out a glorious land as a resting place for the Saints. And in one month after our arrival [we] laid out a city two miles square and built a fort and fortification of hewn timber drawn seven miles from the mountains and of unburnt brick, surrounding 10 acres of ground, 40 rods of which was covered with block houses, besides planting about 100 acres of corn, potatoes, buckwheat, turnips, and gardens. [^61]

246Yet some of their greatest challenges lay before them.

246NOTES

As early as June 1833, Joseph Smith had proposed a layout for the City of Zion. The plan had specified lot, block, and street sizes, building materials, the distance houses were to be set back from the streets, and the population of each city. However, the only similarity between this new Salt Lake city and the original City of Zion plan was its grid pattern and ten-acre blocks. Perhaps the greatest departure from the original plan was in the size of the city: 20,000 with provision for at least five times that number, due no doubt to their desire to have a strong center from which they could never be driven (see Richard H. Jackson and Robert L. Layton, "The Mormon Village: Analysis of a Settlement Type," Professional Geographer 28, no. 2 [May 1976]: 136-41).

247Brigham Young once estimated that the valley could hold one million people.

247As a later precaution, before the Twelve headed back East, most of the Battalion rifles were confiscated "for safekeeping."

Silas Newcomb, traveling through the area in 1850, described the Utes as "small in stature, dark complexion and half naked and living on the flesh, feet and even entrails of cattle and horses. . . . The Utah and Snake Indians are deadly enemies" (Journal of Silas Newcomb, 16 July 1850).

248The prevailing sentiment of most, but not all, Latter-day Saints toward the Great Basin Indians was one of sympathy, bordered with fear and burdened with religious responsibility. Considering their filthy, weakened, diseased, and impoverished circumstances, the Utes and the Shoshones were particularly and simultaneously repulsive and pathetic, sorry symbols to a lost glory. That was not enough to change the pervasive prejudices and biases of a largely eastern American population, but it did soften them to some degree. At the risk of choosing one comment over another, it is nevertheless a fact that Brigham always spoke more kindly, if condescendingly, about the Indians that he ever did about the policies of the American government and its Office of Indian Affairs. "We call them savages," he said on one occasion, "while at the same time the whites too often do as badly as they have done, and worse, when difference of intelligence and training are taken into account. This has been so in almost every case of difficulty with the red skins. When soldiers have pounced upon these poor, ignorant, low, degraded, miserable creatures, mention a time, if you can, when they have spared their women and children. They have indiscriminately massacred the helpless, the blind, the old, the infant, and the mother" (in Journal of Discourses, 10:108, 8 Mar. 1863).

249The temple lot eventually became Temple Square, on which the Mormon Tabernacle was completed in 1867, followed by the Assembly Hall in 1880 and the temple itself in 1893, 40 years after its groundbreaking in 1853 (see Susan Easton Black, "The Mormon Temple Square: The Story behind the Scenery" [1993]).

249"And I have made the earth rich, and behold it is my footstool, wherefore, again I will stand upon it.

249"And I hold forth and deign to give unto you greater riches, even a land of promise, a land flowing with milk and honey, upon which there shall be no curse when the Lord cometh;

249"And I will give it unto you for the land of your inheritance, if you seek it with all your hearts" (D&C 38:17-19).

250Until the end of the nineteenth century, it was a general custom to allow a repetition of the ordinance to adults before they first entered the temple. The practice was discontinued, however, both to preserve the sanctity and significance of one's original baptism and to discourage reliance upon rebaptism as an easy way to gain forgiveness of sins (see Joseph F. Smith, "The Repetition of Sacred Ordinances," Juvenile Instructor, 1 Jan. 1903, 18-20).

250"But where is the spot where the city of Zion or the New Jerusalem shall stand? We answer, in Jackson County, State of Missouri, on the western frontiers of the United States. It is there that the city of Zion shall be built. All the other cities that have been built by the gathering of the Saints are called, not Zion, but `stakes' of Zion" (Orson Pratt, "New Jerusalem or The Fulfillment of Modern Prophecy" [Liverpool, 1849], 18).

---
Notas:
[^5] For good accounts of the history of Nauvoo see the following works: Joseph Smith Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (1973), especially vols. 3-5 [cited hereafter as History of the Church]; B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. (1930), esp. vols. 2-3 [cited hereafter as Comprehensive History of the Church]; Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (1965); and David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (1974).
[^9] The killing of Jacob Weatherby is the only documented instance of a fatal encounter between Indians and Mormons in all of 1847. Having gone out after a frightened and disoriented Nancy Chamberlain (wife of Solomon Chamberlain), who was alone in a wagon west of the Elkhorn, Weatherby and three companions were fired on by three Omaha Indians. According to one account, one of Weatherby's friends "jumped out of the wagon and clinched two of the Indians [but] the third one shot Weatherby through the hip and bowels. The Indians then ran off as soon as the scuffle began." Weatherby died soon afterward and was buried in a buffalo robe near the Liberty Pole. Hosea Stout led a posse in search of the guilty party (Patty Sessions Journal, 20 June 1847).
[^19] Journal History of the Church, 9 Aug. 1846. This is a well-known and excellent resource available at the LDS Church Historical Department, consisting of scrapbook-like entries from private journals, letters, various writings of all kinds, newspaper clippings, and so on, compiled by date by former Assistant Church Historian, Andrew Jenson; cited hereafter as Journal History.
[^20] Charles R. King, "The Woman's Experience of Childbirth on the Western Frontier," Journal of the West 29, no. 1 (1990): 76-84. Years later, one observer could still say, "The learned profession was not so very learned. [Doctors were] to be sent for only as a last resort" (A. Britt, An America That Was: What Life Was Like on an Illinois Farm Seventy Years Ago (1964), 135, as quoted in King, 83).
[^21] Stampedes were a much dreaded occurrence in overland travel. One of the most chilling accounts is that given by a California forty-niner, Charles Edward Pancoast, while traveling up the Platte River in 1849: "In an instant, as if by magic, all the animals started simultaneously with a grand leap and flew down the river to the plain, the men in front shouting and scrambling to escape the solid mass of teams coming down upon them. Men could be seen dropping from the rear of wagons in all directions as they rumbled over the sands; I myself slipped through a two foot space between two wagons going at lightening speed. Some of the teams ran into a small creek and could not extricate themselves; others stopped from sheer exhaustion; still others ran two or three miles and were halted by the owners of tied horses that had not gotten away. Strange to say, no serious damage was done, except to the wagon of two Germans, which turned over and was irreparably smashed; the owners barely escaping with their lives. This was our first experience of a genuine stampede, not uncommon in the mountain countries of the west" (Charles Edward Pancoast, A Quaker Forty-Niner [1930], 198-99).
[^22] The new members of the company included Robert Crow, Elizabeth Crow, Benjamin B. Crow, Harriet Crow, Elizabeth Jane Crow, John McHenry Crow, Walter H. Crow, George W. Therlkill, Martilla Jane Therlkill (then seven months pregnant), Milton Howard Therlkill, James William Therlkill, William Parker Crow, Ida Vinda Exene Crow, Ira Minda Almarene Crow, Archibald Little, James Chesney, and Lewis B. Myers. Accompanying Myers were two Indian wives and a number of children (see William Clayton's Journal, 4 June 1847, 215).
[^23] Journal of Nelson Wheeler Whipple, 25 Feb. 1846, LDS Church Archives. "We thus kept a sharp look out for them for we knew as they had slain Joseph and Hyrum so they would slay Brigham, Heber, and the Twelve if they could."
[^28] The definitive works on the history of the Mormon Battalion are Frank Alfred Golder, The March of the Mormon Battalion from Council Bluffs to California (1928); Daniel Tyler, A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion to the Mexican War 1846-1847 (1969); John F. Yurtinus, "A Ram in the Thicket: The Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1975); and Norma Baldwin Ricketts, The Mormon Battalion: U.S. Army of the West, 1846-1848 (1996). See also Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 50-67.
[^29] The best study of Strang still remains Milo Quaife, The Kingdom of Saint James: A Narrative of the Mormons (1930). The most recent reinterpretation is Roger Van Noord's King of Beaver Island: The Life and Assassination of James Jesse Strang (1988). See also Doyle C. Fitzpatrick, The King Strang Story (1970); Richard E. Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 1846-1852: "And Should We Die . . ." (1987), 18-20; The Diary of James J. Strang, ed. Mark A. Strang (1961); William D. Russell, "King James Strang: Joseph Smith's Successor," in The Restoration Movement: Essays in Mormon History, ed. F. Mark McKiernan, Alma R. Blair, and Paul M. Edwards (1973), 231-56. Strang later removed his followers to Beaver Island in northern Lake Michigan, where his settlement realized only modest success.
[^31] Autobiography of Pioneer John Brown, 1820-1896, arr. John Zimmerman Brown (1941), 72-73. See also Jenson, "Day by Day," Deseret News, 31 May 1947. Lay and Crosby later died in California. Flake lived in Salt Lake City for most of his life, dying in Idaho Falls in 1903 at the age of 75.
[^40] William Clayton's Journal, 18 June 1847, 242. The crew left at the North Platte River crossing included some of the best carpenters and blacksmiths in camp: Thomas Grover, captain; John S. Higbee, assistant; Benjamin F. Stewart; James Davenport, blacksmith; William Empey; Luke S. Johnson; Appleton Harmon; Francis M. Pomeroy; and Edmund Ellsworth. Eric Glines decided, against counsel, to stay back with Grover's crew; he later changed his mind and hurried on by himself at considerable danger, catching up with the main camp several miles west.
[^42] Journal of Willard Richards, 14 Mar. 1847. It is interesting to note that in the dreams which Brigham Young said he had of Joseph Smith while preparing for the exodus, Joseph "stepped toward me, and looking very earnestly, yet pleasantly, said `Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. . . . Tell the brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it'" (Journal History, 23 Feb. 1847).
[^43] Little has been written about the costs of the original departures, although much is available on the costs involved in later migrations. This is particularly true of the Perpetual Emigration Fund and the financing of Mormon emigrant companies to Salt Lake City up until at least 1869 and the completion of the transcontinental rail-road. See Leonard J. Arrington's pathbreaking study, Great Basin Kingdom: An Economic History of the Latter-day Saints 1830-1900 (1958), 77-79.
[^55] For the exact wording of this "Memorial to the Queen for the Relief, by Emigration of a Portion of Her Poor Subjects," see J. B. Munro, "Mormon Colonization Scheme for Vancouver Island," Washington Historical Quarterly, 25, no. 3 (July 1934): 278-85. For a thorough and responsible study on British emigration, see Taylor, Expectations Westward, 18-47.
[^58] The Nauvoo Covenant resembled very closely the earlier Missouri Covenant of 1839, when Brigham Young at Far West, Missouri, proposed "that we this day enter into a covenant to . . . never desert the poor who are worthy, till they shall be out of the reach of the exterminating order of General [John B.] Clark." Some 214 men signed the covenant to assist others "to the utmost of our abilities." (History of the Church, 3:250-54).
[^59] There is some dispute over the name of this passerby. Most of the records refer to him as "Beaumont," although some refer to him as Charley Barkham (see Brigham Young letters, 5 May 1847). Erastus Snow records that the leader of the Beaumont company was a "Mr. Papan" who stayed on the other side of the river (see also Journal of Levi S. Johnson, 4 May 1847, Special Collections, Lee Library, Brigham Young University).
[^60] Addison Pratt, who left on a mission to the South Seas from Nauvoo in 1843 and did not return to his family, then in the Salt Lake Valley, until 1848, provides a revealing insight into the temporary lapse among the people in living the Word of Wisdom. On entering the valley, he found that "there seemed to be but two articles . . . and they were tobacco and coffee. The rule with some for selling tobacco was lay a silver dollar onto a flat plug and cut out the bigness of it for the dollar. I don't remember of ever seeing such a hankering after anything in my life as there was after that, and coffee was not much behind it. Notwithstanding, Br. Grouard and myself had urged an observance of the Word of Wisdom so strongly upon the natives of the South Sea Isles, I was surprised to see so little notice paid to it at the gathering place of the Saints" (The Journals of Addison Pratt, ed. S. George Ellsworth [1990], 368). For a full study of the history and development of the Word of Wisdom, see Paul H. Peterson, "An Historical Analysis of the Word of Wisdom" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972). It took almost a century before the Word of Wisdom took on the status of commandment within the Church.
[^61] Samuel Taylor argues in his controversial book The Kingdom or Nothing: The Life of John Taylor, Militant Mormon (1976) that both Taylor and Pratt had married plural wives during their return voyages, which was further cause of Brigham's unhappiness. If such was indeed the case, it only represented the conviction in fellow apostles' minds that they were all equal in authority, while underscoring Brigham's concern that until a new First Presidency was established, regulation of this and other practices was virtually impossible to control.
