Richard E. Bennett, We'll Find the Place: The Mormon Exodus 1846-1848 ( 1997)

251"WE EXPECT TO SEE THE SUN RISE AGAIN"

251The Emigration Camp of 1847

251Our numbers far exceed what we anticipated, for instead of numbering 100 wagons we have near 600; the cattle were generally weak in coming off the rushes; we had to recruit our cattle and send to Missouri for breadstuffs. You know, brethren, that it takes a little time and labor to start a large wheel; it has, however, commenced rolling and will, we trust, not stop until it reaches the valley of the Salt Lake. [^1]

251So wrote an anxious and overburdened John Taylor in mid-August 1847, some 35 miles east of the Mormon Ferry on the North Platte, to Brigham Young, then just leaving on his return trip to Winter Quarters. Having modified Brigham's original instructions, which had been given by revelation, Taylor and his immediate leader, Parley P. Pratt, knew they were in for a fateful day of reckoning. Nonetheless, they took consolation and pride in their accomplishment—the bringing out of the single largest train of emigrants yet to have crossed the great American Plains—the Emigration Camp.

251"I MEAN WHAT I SAY WHEN I TALK OF THE 25TH OF MAY"

Just as Brigham had learned, while crossing the mud fields of Iowa in the spring of 1846, that it was infinitely more difficult to get away from his followers than it was to flee from his enemies, Pratt and Taylor were learning firsthand that they, too, could not resist the press of their people. Even before the vanguard pioneer company had disappeared over the hills west of Winter Quarters two months before, the rush was on to follow "as soon as the grass grows." As Amelia Richards said in a letter to her uncle, Willard Richards: "It makes me almost sick of home to see the teams rolling out so this morning. I want to be going myself." [^2]

252And little wonder! Winter Quarters and the Council Bluffs settlements had proven sad and weary habitats. Hundreds had died of scurvy, exposure, and malnutrition. The long winter had been severe, and their hovels, huts, wagons, and caves had provided scarce comfort. Many were fearful of potential Indian attacks. Scores of Battalion wives and families yearned to roll out and meet their returning husbands and fathers, just as Brigham and the bishops who provided for them had promised. And if the pioneers had indeed found a new place, as they had promised, everyone wanted to be there. Surely the cost of going could be no greater than that of staying. Reluctantly they had let Brigham and his little band forge onward in April; now in June there would be no stopping them.

252"There was only one thing that made [us] venture to start from the Missouri River in 1847," wrote George W. Hill, with an attitude representative of their anxious faith bordering on defiance,

252and that was the health of my wife. She had taken the scurvy in the winter superinduced by our living as we did without vegetables. And as soon as the weather began to get warm in the spring, she got worse instead of better and came very near dying. In fact, I had no hopes for her but to get on the road travelling as soon as possible, thinking a change of scenery, a change of air, and a change of water might be beneficial to her. I was determined to try it, let the consequences be what they might. . . . You may think this was a very hazardous undertaking; well, we thought so too, but the stakes were terrible we had to play. [^3]

The original plan was for Patriarch John Smith (uncle to Joseph Smith) to preside over the Emigration Camp with the well-seasoned Isaac Morley second in command and all the various companies organized as per "The Word and Will of the Lord." [^4] To make the trip, each family had to bring along a minimum of 300 pounds of provisions because they did not expect to find enough crops in their new mountain home to sustain them for the coming winter. Each company was to include as many of the poor as possible, as per the Nauvoo Covenant, and a large number of the Battalion families. As the last official communique of the Twelve had stated:

253It is our wish and counsel that the emigration company . . . shall follow the pioneers as soon as the grass is sufficient to support the teams, and the presidents and captains will examine and know that every soul that goes in said company is provided with from 3 to 500 lbs. of breadstuff for a year and [a] half and as much more as he can get, for we know not whether we can raise corn this summer, as we anticipate, at the place of location.

253

253Let the first emigration company take with them as many of the sisters whose husbands are in the army as can fit themselves out, or can be conveniently fitted out. [^5]

253As repayment for their sacrifice, Brigham had pledged the departing soldiers back in July 1846 that he would do all in his power to ensure that as many of their families as possible would meet them in the valley, rather than expect them to crisscross the continent a second time.

253Their original instructions were to assemble first at the Elkhorn River no later than 25 May and then to come on in installments of smaller, more manageable companies of no more than 100 wagons each. Larger groups than this would be too cumbersome and unwieldy for everyone and make it too difficult to properly care for and feed the animals. But despite every effort at restraint, everyone who was even nearly ready began assembling at the Liberty Pole—a 51-foot high willow tree pole 6-feet deep in the ground with pins 18 inches apart from top to bottom and a white flag at the top—at the Elkhorn as early as mid-May, intent on leaving with the first companies. [^6]

Pratt and Taylor, having declined Brigham's earlier invitation to go west in the pioneer company, were now, by right of their apostleship, sustained as overall company leaders. John Smith was appointed to "preside over the spiritual affairs" of the camp and John Young over "the temporal affairs," with Edward Hunter and Daniel Spencer as his counselors. Spencer was given command over the first hundred; Hunter, Jedediah M. Grant, and Abraham O. Smoot each commanded one of the other three hundreds. Charles C. Rich was appointed commander of the military unit and W. C. Staines camp clerk and historian. [^7] Those who could not obtain sufficient flour from the overworked Winter Quarters mill were detouring south to Westport, St. Joseph, and other Missouri frontier towns to acquire the needed provisions.

254One of the biggest problems Pratt and Taylor had to deal with was the reorganization of those who had been assigned to Brigham's first division and Kimball's second division in this second, or emigration, camp.

254Pratt spoke on the circumstances with which we were surrounded, how that Captains of hundreds, of fifties, etc. appointed last winter are not here, some coming on, some not. Now I think it is best to act according to our circumstances; or shall we stay here and theorize and alter for a week or two . . . the time is now when we have to go and the theory is not what we will see now so much as the practical. Now if you belong to Heber or Brigham, shall you not belong to them if you do not go maybe in Brigham's but because we both go in the same company or the same fifty will that alter us any . . . now act in operation and union with us and we will deliver you up to those whom you belong. [^8]

254The result was a rising tide of the most adequately provisioned and best-prepared families but fewer of the poor and Battalion families than originally anticipated. New captains of hundreds, fifties, and tens had to be called at the last minute to replace those previously assigned who were either not yet ready or chose not to come. In a word, it became the departure of the fittest.

254Such a rush of oncomers inevitably delayed their departure. Despite Pratt's warning—"I mean what I say when I talk of the 25th of May"—every family wagon had to be checked for provisions and pass a road-worthiness inspection. Besides waiting for several to return from Missouri, Pratt and Taylor waited several extra days for the late arrival of a nine- and a six-pound cannon, a leather skiff, and the rescued 700-pound Nauvoo Temple bell. This they planned to ring each morning to alert the far-flung wagons of their daily departures. Some others were detained by sickness, and others, like Hosea Stout, refused the invitation to come at all. The murder of Jacob Weatherby by Omaha Indians, just past the Elkhorn, also caused considerable consternation and delay. [^9]

What finally came of the confusion was a sprawling, wagon-borne congregation numbering 1,448 men, women, and children and almost 600 wagons—or a would-be caravan some 10 miles long. In tow were 2,213 oxen, 887 cows, 716 chickens, 358 sheep, and 124 horses. [^10] There were approximately 482 men and boys over the age of 13, almost an equal number of women (471), 485 children, and 50 infants under the age of three, 26 of whom had been born in Winter Quarters during the previous year. Included in the group were 77-year-old Abigail McBride, 73-year-old Hezekiah Sprague of Massachusetts, 72-year-old Priddy Meeks of South Carolina, and at least a dozen others in their 60s. Some 450 (31 percent) hailed from New England (229 from New York State alone). Almost 200 (14 percent) called themselves Southerners, with 50 from Kentucky. Another 16 percent were British or Canadian converts. [^11]

255Not everyone was enthusiastic about leaving. "Soon after parting from our kindred on the banks of the Missouri," wrote one young man inclined to turn back,

255and while grieving over the separation, I was gently chided by my mother who rehearsed to me the story of Lot's wife, and exhorted me never to "look back." This made a deep impression upon my mind. . . . I [was] more or less in dread all the way over the plains, for my rebellious thoughts, in spite of me, would often go back to the loved ones we had left behind. [^12]

255The great majority, however, were determined to make the journey, no matter what the risks, and pleaded for their nonbelieving relatives to understand. "All I ask of this world is to get comfortably out of it," wrote one woman in a letter to her unbelieving relatives back in Missouri,

or through it. I am not deposed to hurry out by any bye path, but I wait the leisure of my Lord. I believe my sun will set in peace; I can say in truth I am weaned from the world. I do not love the world nor the things of the world. When shall we fast for Gould and Laura [relatives]? Not, I suppose until they have tried the world a little longer, and let it pierce them to the heart a few times more, for it is hard to give it up; well, stick to it as long as you can, and when you get ready, come to us; we shall be very glad to see you, and we as much expect you will come if you live, as we expect to see the sun rise again . . . and we know assuredly that everything will work together for the good of those that love him, and put their trust in him. [^13]

256Despite their many problems and delays, the swollen emigration camp finally left the Elkhorn on the morning of 15 June, almost two months to the day after the departure of the pioneer camp. They were late by at least three weeks but still westward bound. It was an unforgettable sight as "the wagons went four abreast, and you can hardly imagine their appearance; some that were there declared it the grandest sight their eyes were ever blest with, their wagons all neatly prepared, and everything for their comfort." [^14]

256"THE WOMEN BORE THE BURDEN WITH MUCH PATIENCE"

256The route of the emigration camp followed that of the pioneer company in virtually every detail. From the Elkhorn they passed by the Pawnee village without incident and followed the north bank of the Platte River. They reached Grand Island on 6 July, the Platte Forks nine days later, Chimney Rock on 29 July, and Fort Laramie on 5 August, averaging almost as many miles per day as did the vanguard company ahead of them. From Fort Laramie they followed up the North Platte, crossed over to the Sweetwater and to South Pass. There they finally met up with Brigham's returning party in early September.

256The sight of such a moving entourage was something to see. "The whole camp of near 600 wagons arranged in order on a fine plain," remembered Jesse Crosby, "beautifully adorned with roses . . . our cattle are seen in herds in the distance—the whole scene is grand and delightful." [^15]

Accounting for their relatively good time were better feed, little Indian interference, less time spent in hunting, easier river crossings, and the very clear instructions left them by the pioneer camp. Fifteen miles west of Grand Island, for instance, they found "the first traces of our Brethren who have gone before"—a board with the following inscription: "Apr. 29 Camp of Pioneers—grass short but plenty—watch Indians—217 miles to Winter Quarters—watch the trees near our encampment." [^16] Several more directives and communiques were later located wedged into poles, written on buffalo skulls, or inscribed on rocks or boards along the way. As a further aid, pilots such as George Woodward had been dispatched to travel back to Wagons moving out greet the advancing party. Scattered members of the returning sick detachment of the Battalion also were welcomed into camp from time to time.

257Unlike the pioneer company, the emigration camp counted large numbers of women, children, and families. Their colorful accounts, trials, and interpretations give new insights into what it meant to be a daughter of Zion—a mother, a wife, a plural wife, and child—while moving west. Most of the men had been directed by the priesthood to keep a written record of their journey; those journals kept by the women show a refreshing spontaneity, a natural willingness to record the wild adventure of it all on the one hand and the tedium of the daily grind on the other. Their several accounts make for memorable reading. [^17]

257"I will describe our wagons and tent as well as I can," wrote Ursuline Hascalls.

The wagon is long enough for both our beds made on the flour barrels, chest and other things. Thales and I sleep inn thee back end and F. and Irene at the forward end. It is painted red. It has eight bows eighteen inches apart; a hen coop on the end with four hens. We had two webs of thick drilling. We put on one cover of than, then three breadths of stout sheeting over that and then painted it. The heaviest showers and storms does not beat through, only a few drops now and then. Our tent is made of drilling sixteen breadths in the shape of an umbrella. A cord three feet long in the middle that holds it up carries it three feet from the ground, than a breadth of sheeting put on the edge to let down in cool weather and fasten with loops and pins in the ground. [^18]

258It took a woman, for instance, to convert a wagon into a home. Helen Mar Kimball Whitney, young wife of Horace K. Whitney, told of her attempt. "We had doors, generally, cut on the left side of the wagon covers," she recalled.

258Boxes and bags of grain, etc., were packed in the rear part of our wagon, upon which our bed was made. We had our provision chest in front, which served as a table and between was just room for my chair—this being my only piece of furniture—the most of our household chattels having been left in our house in Nauvoo. I could now knit and read as we traveled. . . . None, I think, but those who had a like experience can form the slightest idea of the appreciation and happiness it gave us to have a little wagon all to ourselves, which, under the circumstances, was [the] next thing to paradise. [^19]

258Paradise, however, was not the word many women chose to describe their experiences, especially after a few weeks out on the trail. For one thing, it was their lot to prepare the food, to cook the meals, and, once in buffalo country, to roam the countryside in search of buffalo chips to fuel their prairie fires. Many are the accounts of women milking cows, making cheeses, churning butter, picking berries and black currants, and baking meat and berry pies over open flames to feed their hungry families. How tiring it all could be is captured well by a later emigrant traveling over the same countryside:

From the time we get up in the morning, until we are on the road, it is hurry scurry to get breakfast, and put away the things that necessarily had to be pulled out last night—while under way there is no room in the wagon for a visitor, nooning is barely long enough to eat a cold bite—and at night all the cooking utensils and provisions are to be gotten about the camp fire, and cooking enough done to last until the next night.

259

259Although there is not much to cook, the difficulty and inconvenience in doing it, amounts to a great deal so by the time one has squatted around the fires and cooked bread and bacon, and made several dozen trips to and from the wagon, washed the dishes (with no place to drain them) and gotten things ready for an early breakfast, some of the others already have their night caps on—at any rate it is time to go to bed. [^20]

259Tedious or otherwise, at least when there was food none went to bed hungry. Some nights when the meat supply was low, they "went to bed supperless and what was worse got up this morning breakfastless. Some crying among the children. We churned and drank the buttermilk." [^21]

259No less onerous was the constant need to knit, mend, wash, and dry the clothing. Men usually wore heavy, durable trousers, woolen shirts, sturdy high boots, work gloves, and broad-brimmed hats. Women often traded in their hoop skirts for more adaptable, simple homespun or cotton dresses, large aprons, shoes, and sunbonnets. Usually all the water had to be heated in large camp kettles over open flames. At other times, creeks, rivers, and rain water sufficed as a place to wash in their attempts to keep up with the suffocating dust. Whenever the camp did stop, even on the occasional Sabbath, most of the women were busy washing the week's heap of dirty clothing. "Four of our women," recorded one diarist, "went down to the creek with a wagon and stopped there the whole day to wash and did suffer much for heat and for want of food. The water was first rate and there was also very good spring water. The women bore the burden with much patience." [^22]

259Some of their other experiences were anything but routine. "My first child was born in a wagon," remembered Eliza Maria Partridge Lyman of her travels back in Iowa. Although wagon companies would usually make short stops to allow for the birth of a child, the stay was always too short, giving rise to sickness and discomfort for both mother and child. Many women took weeks to recover. "I am uncomfortably situated for a sick woman. The scorching sun shining upon the wagon through the day and the cool air at night is almost too much of a change to be healthy." Lyman continued:

260Sunflowers and Buffalo Chips, from a painting by Gary Kapp

260I am now like a skeleton, so much so that those who have not been with me do not know me till told who I am. It is a fearful place to be sick with fever in a wagon with no shade over except the cover and a July sun shining every day. All the comfort I had was the pure cold water from a spring nearby. [^23]

260Distrustful of regular doctors in these pre-anesthesia times, most Mormon women relied either on the practitioners of Thompsonian medicine (see chapter 7) or on priesthood blessings and, like most other American women, treated themselves. It was the Mormon midwife with almost religious zeal who played the prominent role in assisting with deliveries on the prairie. Of this group, none stands out so prominently as Patty Sessions. [^24] Between 25 June and year's end, Sessions delivered at least 14 babies, including two girls and two boys born along the trail and later, the first boy born in the Salt Lake Valley, a son of Harriet Page and Lorenzo Dow Young. [^25]

Women were also called on to do work traditionally left to the men. With so many men away with the Battalion or the pioneer camp, several companies were left "with almost half the teams without teamsters except females. This was a scene of things that looked hard indeed but go we must at this crisis and under these circumstances." [^26] Consequently several women, many of whom had absolutely no experience with driving oxen, drove their wagons all the way west, while others took an occasional turn at the reins while their menfolk were off hunting.

261Wrote Mary A. Rich, one of Charles Rich's wives:

261Mr. Rich thought he would have to hire two more men or boys to drive two of the wagons, but there was one of his wives besides myself who had no children, so we volunteered to drive the wagons until we got to the Valley. He did not think we could, but we persuaded him to try us one day and see. We did so well that we had our teams every day after that until we arrived in the Valley, as regularly as the men did. We did not grieve or mourn over it, we had some very nice times when the roads were not so bad. [^27]

261Ann Pratt, one of Parley P. Pratt's plural wives, was a city girl, "never having seen cattle yoked together." But seeing the need, she quickly thought:

261"Well, what any other woman can do, I can do." So shouldering my whip I drove out of Winter Quarters and soon learned to manage my team first class. I learned to put on the lock chain instantly at the top of a steep hill and would jump out quickly while the cattle were going; and to take it off, so that the impetus afforded by the end of the descent would aid them in starting up the other side for we often passed through deep gullies. [^28]

261Many women had to learn their trade as fast as lightning. Eliza R. Snow tells of one of the most frightful experiences in overland travel—a stampede. "We had stopped to repair a dilapidated crossing over a broad slough," she remembered.

The teams were standing two, three and four abreast; and from the top, nearly to the bottom of a gentle slope, facing the hands at work, when two men on mules, with blankets swinging, rode galloping past frightening the back teams. They started on a rush forward, which started others, and soon nearly every vehicle was in motion with fearful velocity, the drivers absent, and women and children in wagons, carriages, and others still more exposed, standing where they were in danger of being crushed by the reckless flying wheels. With fearful velocity, heedless of crossings and bridges, those teams whirled their vehicles across the slough where it was admitted that the most skillful teamster could not have succeeded. I was sitting alone on the back seat of a carriage, holding the reins of a high-spirited spirn [sic]—vehicles were flitting past—the horses made several springs, and I knew very well, if they really got started, no human power could prevent them stripping everything to strings. While I held them with all my strength, I prayed with all the fervency of my soul. Mrs. Pierce and her daughter, Margaret, with whom I was journeying, being out of the carriage when the scene occurred, had been trying to stop some ox-teams, but finding they would not succeed, they came, one on each side, and caught the horses by the bits: they stopped prancing but shook all over like a person with the shaking ague. Whatever skeptics may say, I attribute my preservation at that time to the peculiar and special blessing of God. And not only mine, but that of others: in the midst of the many fearful exposures no one was seriously hurt. [^29]

262Sometimes even their best efforts met with injury and calamity. Ann Pratt remembered her lock chain giving out while charging down a hill. "I had to hold the nigh ox by the horn," she said,

262and tap the off one over the face and keep saying, "Whoa back, whoa back," and nearly hold my breath till I got down to the bottom; then stop and draw a breath of relief, see that all was right, and then on again for others were right on our heels and we had to get out of their way. You can just imagine what a condition our skirts were in. [^30]

262Another woman fell from the tongue of her wagon, which weighed 1,600 pounds, and the front wheel ran across her chest as she lay prostrate on the ground. "To all appearances," her friend recorded, "she was crushed, but on being administered to by some of the elders, she revived; and after having been anointed with consecrated oil, and having the ordinance of laying on of hands repeated, she soon recovered and on the fourth day after that accident, she milked her cow as usual." [^31]

262Not all were as fortunate. "The burial of the dead by the wayside was a sad office," wrote Eliza R. Snow of the great intruder on the prairies.

For husbands, wives, and children to consign the cherished remains of loved ones to a lone desert grave was enough to try the firmest heart-strings. Today [4 August], a Sister Esther Ewing who had passed away after a sickness of two weeks was buried. The burial was attended with all the propriety the circumstances would permit. After the customary dressing the body was wrapped in a quilt and consigned to its narrow house. It truly seemed sad and we sorrowed deeply as we turned from the lonely grave. [^32]

263Of all the natural landmarks and impressive sites along the Platte River road, perhaps none were as sobering and soul-stirring to passersby of all faiths and backgrounds as these hastily made monuments to their fallen dead—wilderness reminders that their journeying often came at the supreme price. Witness the following moment of silence by an Oregon-bound emigrant wending his way up the Platte that same year:

263We have seen a number of graves along the road, five I believe. Truly it was a sad spectacle to behold the graves of those who had thus left their friends comfortless during the toils and fatigue of emigration. Thrilling and sad were the thoughts that passed through my mind as I gazed on those sacred spots in the wilderness. Where, thought I, are those who have left here their dearest and nearest friends. I asked of the silent dead: `Where are thy friends? Where are those for thee wept? Gone, gone to a distant clime or left behind where was once my sunny home,' seemed to be the saddening answer. [^33]

263One woman, the wife of Jedediah M. Grant, took sick near Bear River. Before her death, she begged her husband to carry her remains for burial in the valley—a request he dutifully fulfilled. [^34]

263Every emigrant company developed its own mechanisms to deal with such griefs and hardships. Many of the Mormon women coped with faith and religious convictions as their solutions, referring often to a sort of working sorority on the high plains, reminiscent of the many small devotional meetings that had characterized female worship back at Winter Quarters. [^35]

263Several women devoted whatever free time they had while traveling overland to teaching their children. This was particularly the case with instruction on the doctrines and practices of their faith. Patty Sessions, for instance, tells of meeting "with the little girls in my wagon. Have a good time. The lord is pouring his spirit out on the youth. They spoke in tongues and rejoiced in God." [^36]

264If women and men shared the responsibilities and heartaches of overland travel, the children, full of excitement and adventure, often seemed oblivious to the dangers around them. "This was quite an undertaking for me as I was only 6 1/2 years old and small for my age," recalled one young boy. "It was hard for me to keep out of the way of the teams and wagons, for in fact I had my feet and legs run over two or three times by the wagon in jumping out to stop the teams." [^37]

264Eliza R. Snow

264Others were less fortunate. William Staines recorded that one day, at the Loup Fork, "Bro. Kinyon's son, aged 7 years, and Robert Gardner, aged 5 years [son of Archibald Gardner], were run over by wagons while crossing the river. One of the wagons weighed 3,000 lbs. and the other 3,500 lbs. Both boys were administered to immediately and they soon appeared to be in a fair way of recovery." [^38]

264The thundering crash of a fully loaded wagon over a young body often proved fatal. Unfortunately the injury suffered by young Robert Gardner, though he tried gamefully to show otherwise, eventually killed him. Not wanting to let on to others or even believe himself how badly hurt he was, "for 500 miles, through dust and wind, over rough roads or smooth the little sufferer grew more thin and wan. He lived until he was nothing but skin and bones before expiring on 13 August at Deer Creek on the North Platte." [^39]

The agony of losing children in a forlorn wilderness and of burying them in makeshift shallow graves was a constant fear. John Bennion had to write the sorrowful news to his wife's sister and family of the passing of their infant daughter. The day after her death on 7 September, they carried her dead body 13 miles "and buried it on the morning of the 9th near the camp-ground called The Pacific Springs, on the left hand side of the road, `Oregon Route-South Pass of the Rocky Mountains.' I put down a head board with this inscription: `Ann Bennion, died September 7, 1847, aged 1 year, 9 months and 19 days.'" As if wanting to put such bad news far behind them, the camp traveled 21 miles that day—"the longest day's travel of any of the journey"—though of slight consolation to the grieving family. [^40]

265In the case of young Robert, the following year family members visited his grave during their journey back to the Missouri River. Unfortunately when they came to the place where his body had been buried, "they found that the wolves had uncovered the grave and his bones were scattered about. The sight was too much for kind-hearted [cousin] John. He wept and wailed and tore his hair. They tenderly gathered up the bones, reinterred them and sadly journeyed on." [^41]

265The surprising thing is that even with so large a traveling congregation, few were injured or killed. Only four people died during the movement of the emigration camp, and of that small number, two were children.

265But for most children, many of whom walked barefoot the entire distance, their travels spelled a never-ending panorama of excitement and adventure. "The trip to me, as a boy, was one of interest, novelty and pleasure," recalled one of Parley Pratt's children.

265Daily new scenes burst upon our view, and now and again we would meet the hunter and the trapper or a band of Indians decked with beads, ornaments and feathers. The novelty and bustle of camp life, the neighing of the horse, the lowing of the cows with their young calves, the deer, the antelope, the buffalo and flocks of wild geese, the rocks, rills and caves [and] the wild night owls . . . all filled my young heart with delight and inspiration. [^42]

265Many of the boys and girls sang, whittled sticks, threw countless stones into the boring brown Platte, and played hide-and-seek and every other game dear to the hearts of the young. Ann Woodbury recalled one of their many childhood pranks:

265While they were eating, I picked some service berries and sat down by the creek to pick them over. While sitting there, I started to bleat like a sheep. The men and boys all started to run. One said, "I'll keep it if I catch it first." When they had gone as far as I thought they could hear me, I bleated again. They ran back to their dinner and saw me. They asked: "Was that you?" I laughed. It was the law then that if anybody left anything behind, the finder could keep it. [^43]

Others found delight in the smallest of things. "There were a great many ant hills along the road raised to a considerable height," Mary Jane Mount Tanner recalled,

266where we often found beads which were, no doubt, lost by the Indians and collected by those indefatigable little workers along with the gravel of which their mounds were composed. If we were hardy enough to risk a bite now and then we found much amusement in searching for the beads to string into necklaces.

266

266Another favorite pastime consisted of walking far enough ahead of the train to get a little time to play; when we would drive the huge crickets, large unwieldy insects, if they could be called such, that abounded in some sections of the country; and build corrals of sand or rocks to put them in, calling them our cattle. . . . In keeping ahead [of the train] we managed to get across if possible before the teams came up. If the rivers were not too deep we pulled off our shoes and stockings and waded through. [^44]

266For most children, the wide-open west was their never-ending playground, or as one emigrant recalled: "In the innocence of our childhood, we looked upon the whole affair as a great picnic excursion." [^45]

266But even the youngest boys were assigned as teamsters wherever required. Inexperienced, they often made clumsy mistakes. For instance, 13-year-old Thales Haskell managed to run a wheel onto a bank and broke an axletree. "I heard a great many making remarks about me being a very careless boy to let such an accident happen. I felt badly, of course, and thought if they had given me a little caution beforehand it would have done more good." [^46]

266Another young man, George Q. Cannon, had the misfortune to drive his wagon straight into the one belonging to General Charles C. Rich, military commander of the whole camp. Later in life a counselor in the First Presidency, Cannon learned a lesson there on the high Nebraska plains which he never forgot. "It became necessary one day for the company in which I was traveling to pass through the line of General [Charles C.] Rich's company," he recalled.

My team, which I had left standing while I went back to assist some of the other teams in crossing a difficult place, started on, and the point of the hub of the wagon I drove struck the rim of the wheel of one of Brother Rich's wagons and broke the axle-tree. I ran up in time to see what had been done, but not in time to prevent the damage. An axle-tree in that timberless region, and under those circumstances, was worth more than gold. I was exceedingly sorry, and bore patiently without any attempt at justification the reproof which Brother Rich gave me. The captain of our fifty (Orson Horne) told me to drive on, while he stayed behind to do what he could to repair the injury. Brother Rich was put to great inconvenience to get a new axle-tree; but by Captain Horne he sent to me his regrets for the manner in which he had spoken to me. He had learned that I was not so much to blame as appearances would indicate, and felt that he had spoken too harshly; but I thought I deserved all he said, and more too, for leaving my team in such a position where it could do such mischief. [^47]

267By the time the camp reached Independence Rock in late August, they had lost one-third of their cattle through stampedes, their own carelessness, and theft by Indians.

267"BY THE BLAZE OF A WILLOW PATCH"

267Unofficial news of the discovery of the Salt Lake Valley first reached the toiling emigration companies just west of Fort Laramie on 14 August with the arrival of the pilot party from the Mormon Ferry; it was confirmed two days later by Apostle Ezra T. Benson's advance party on 16 August. [^48] In quick order the glad tidings rippled through the group, like the sudden excitement of unexpectedly seeing long-lost relatives. Messengers on ponies shouted the news up and down the lines in glad hurrah's for all to hear. Children screamed and shouted. Men hollered to their wives. Mothers beamed for joy. Excitement mounted everywhere, and happy faces black with dust burst out in cheers. Some laughed; others sang; and many wept for the fulfillment of their faith. As George B. Wallace remembered it: "In the evening Elder E. T. Benson preached to us, telling about the beautiful land that the Lord had given to the Saints. He said that he felt like a little child and that he could go by himself and weep for joy." [^49] John Taylor, meanwhile, blessed with a soft and mellow singing voice, was quick to sing the song "The Upper California." "It was," as one eyewitness recorded, "a most joyful evening for all who attended." [^50]

267Later that night, an exuberant Taylor continued his song in a fulsome communication to Brigham Young and others of the Twelve:

268We thank God, our Heavenly Father, that you have been so successful in your undertaking and that after the many wanderings, trials, persecutions, and afflictions of the Saints that you have at last found a home, and we trust that when your families and ours shall meet in Zion, you may rest from your weary pilgrimage, realize the full fruition of your hopes and rejoice with your brethren, the Saints of the Most High, in the Kingdom of God, which shall be established, and in the Lord's House which shall be reared in the mountains. [^51]

268Such happy times repeated themselves all along the trail, from company to company, as west met east. All were particularly anxious to talk with Brigham and the others of the Quorum of the Twelve in their returning company of 33 wagons. Perrigrine Sessions's group met them just over South Pass in late August. "We met several of the Pioneers on their way back after their families," Sessions recorded. "They gave us a brief account of the Valley with many instructions pertaining to the course that the Camp should pursue. . . . Our spirits were refreshed and it seemed as though our burdens were lightened although we were worn out with the long and tedious journey." [^52]

268The full story of these interesting meetings, which Woodruff called "one of the most interesting councils we ever held together on the earth," high on the plateau of the Big and Little Sandy Rivers west of South Pass has not been adequately told. [^53] In them lay not only the heralding of a new Zion and a promising future for the Latter-day Saints, but also the struggle of a leader convinced that finding a new home was only a partial resolution to the challenges they faced as a Church.

268In two nights of meetings, on 3 and 4 September, between the returning members of the Quorum of the Twelve and Apostle Parley P. Pratt in Willard Richards's wagon, there was less excitement and more blunt criticism of Pratt and Taylor's handling of the camps. Evident was Brigham's rising frustration that the government of the Church was still disorganized and incomplete.

268First they shared the good news. Said George A. Smith (as recorded almost verbatim by clerk Thomas Bullock):

It feels well. We started out to seek a country. We came over these sages, plains and rocks and found a sweet little valley in the midst of the hills. I was satisfied we should not find the beautiful timber and prairies on the same ground—we are not afraid we can't sustain ourselves but fear the saints will not always do right, but bring down the displeasure of the Lord should we forget to call on the Lord. The scourges of the Almighty are to be feared. . . . If the valley was interspersed with groves it would be the most beautiful spot. The children of Israel built of sun-dried bricks; we have done the same. That will be the best way of building. The walls can be whitewashed. The soil is of sufficient variety to please every person. If the sisters are in want of hot drinks they can find spring water already heated for them and drink as much as they please . . . with industry, economy and prudence it will be one of the most blessed places in the world. I never was so contented as I was in that valley.

269He concluded by praising the virtues of nearby Utah and Cache Valleys, convinced that it was "land enough for a million men. . . . We all feel first rate and you will all feel first rate [too]."

269Orson Pratt, Parley's brother, was quick to follow with an array of meteorological and geographic descriptives and superlatives. "We had prayed for many years that we might enjoy health and escape one of the greatest enemies and sickly places. . . . We have found a land that has not been cursed by the hands and abominations of the Gentiles."

269Brigham then said:

269Our minds, feelings, judgements and affections are to build up the Kingdom of God on the earth in spite of all hell. The Lord has led us this summer. . . . Every man and woman that is filled with the Spirit of the Lord will see that the Lord has guided his people since the death of the Prophet. You will see thousands living in the tops of the mountains.

269He talked of their successful irrigation efforts and declared their new valley motto: "Every man do his duty." He instructed Pratt and others that none of the land was to be sold but all to be divided up as needed—without price. "If the brethren will only be humble I know that this Church will never be removed. I am afraid for the brethren becoming covetous."

269Erastus Snow followed with his testimony that

we have been led to the right spot. . . . There has been a oneness of feeling in the Pioneer Company. The moment our eyes caught a glimpse of the Valley we felt as though we got home. . . . You will pass through canyons where you could roll down rocks and destroy all the armies of the world. . . . We will not have to be on a combined watch. The only thing we have to fear is the corruptions of our own heart. . . . [W]e shall establish and raise a standard to all the nations of the earth.

270Wilford Woodruff, ratifying everything said by his peers, told Pratt, "I never saw a site for a city better in my life," and commented on the city layout, the wide streets, the new temple block, and the richness of the soil. [^54]

270And so the glowing talk and valley promotion continued until Pratt and his lieutenants were called on to describe their journey, provide the company lists, review their difficulties, and, above all, explain why they had not followed counsel and "the Word and Will of the Lord." [^55] It was not long before it became clear that the emigration camp was far larger than the Twelve had expected or directed it to be; that it was overpopulated with the best-provisioned but underrepresented the poor and the halt; and that it did not include nearly as many of the Mormon Battalion families as Brigham had promised his army boys back at the Missouri River the year before.

270Pratt stoutly defended his actions, saying that as for the changes in leadership, the people had nominated him and John Taylor to take the lead because of their apostolic authority. Swamped as they were with so many newcomers at the Elkhorn, they had no choice but to name new captains of hundreds and fifties and form new complements of travelers. Unwilling and unable to wait any longer, because of the lateness of the season, they took what they had and reorganized everything. In a word: "We had no time to alter it."

270Sensing Brigham's keen disappointment that he had not come west with the pioneer camp, Pratt defended himself: "It was not a spirit of rebellion and wickedness in regard to my not going with you last Spring. I did not feel it my duty to go and if you censure me, censure me." Moreover, he argued that his position as a coequal member of the Twelve gave him the right to act independently of Brigham Young: "We hold the keys as well as yourself and I will not be judged by you but by the Quorum."

270What followed, "by the blaze of a willow patch," was a remarkable give and take that underscored the tenseness of the time, the strength of their personalities, and their differing views of mission and Church government.

271Parley P. Pratt

271Brigham: Our companies were perfectly organized . . . why should our whole winter's work be set at naught? Every man knew what they had to do when they got to the Horn. There was the president to appoint who should lead. This is all disarranged and disannulled. When the Quorum of the Twelve do a thing it is not in the power of two of them to rip it up. . . .

271

271Pratt: If I have done wrong, I am willing to repent. . . .

271

271Brigham: . . . You had no business to control, alter or direct our organization. We wanted you to bring a part of your family [with the Pioneer Camp] and leave the rest—the same as we did. If you had done right you would have come into the organization and would have assisted. I know you have had a hard time and you have brought it on yourself. . . . We've got the machine amoving and it is not your business to stick your hands among the cogs to stop the wheel. . . .

271

271Pratt: I have done the best I could. You said I could have done better. If I am to blame in it, I have done wrong. If I am guilty of an error, I am sorry for it. I would lead them to the Twelve. I am willing that all the camps should know that I have done wrong and that I repent. I am willing to confess that I did wrong. Am I forgiven?

271

271Brigham: I forgive you . . . if I don't do right I want every man so to live in the sunshine of glory to correct me when I am wrong. I feel bowed down to the grave with the burden of this great people and if a president [of the quorum] does not do right put him down and put another in his place. . . . Parley, you did know about the divisions and it was to get the poor, the halt, the lame and the blind. . . .

271

271Pratt: It was at the latest moment that we organized and had not time to organize them. . . . I acknowledge the error but I did the best I could.

In the ensuing comments, Brigham hinted at the much greater concern that lay behind his rebuke of Pratt and why it was he felt so strongly about the issues at hand. "I do believe that better men [the Twelve] cannot be found on the earth who can live as we live," he said.

272I report to them my thanks for their forbearance. Before my clothes were dried on my back [baptism in 1832] I was ordained an Elder. By and by Brother [David] Patton ordained me to be a high priest. I said I had not power to magnify my calling. By and by I was ordained to the Twelve and I think as little of myself as any man can think of me. I am unworthy. I look upon myself as a weak, poor, little man who is called by the providence of God to preside. Now I tell you: we may sit here till doom's day and the word and will of the Lord will come to me before any of you. . . . I want you to go right into the Celestial Kingdom with me. . . . God bless you [Parley] forever and ever and don't think any more about it. [^56]

272At this same meeting Patriarch John Smith was nominated to preside over the Salt Lake Stake of Zion once the camps arrived in Salt Lake Valley. [^57]

272What Brigham urgently wanted was the unanimous support of his fellow Apostles to agree to the reordering of priesthood and Church government and the reestablishment of the First Presidency. As Woodruff put it while on their return trip from the Valley: "I had a question put to me by Pres. Young what my opinion was concerning one of the Twelve Apostles being appointed as the President of the Church with his two counsellors. I answered that . . . I thought it would require a revelation to change the order of that quorum." [^58]

272Likewise the matter of succession and reorganizing the First Presidency had been heavy on Brigham's mind while settling in the Salt Lake Valley. He had digressed from his funeral sermon to address the topic by stating that just as Joseph Smith had been the senior Apostle in this dispensation by right of his divine ordination from Peter, James, and John in 1829 before becoming President of the Church at its creation in 1830, so he, too, as president of the quorum now had both the right and sacred responsibility to reorganize the presidency. Until such work was done, others would continue to claim control. "Joseph was a prophet, seer and revelator long before he received the priesthood," he argued. [^59]

The imperative in Brigham Young's mind was the pressing need to convince the rest of his colleagues, including Pratt and Taylor and perhaps most especially them, that the supreme governing quorum of the Church, the First Presidency, had to be reestablished as soon as possible. Government by the Twelve was, in his mind, no longer satisfactory, because they all felt they could rule in the place of each other. As Parley P. Pratt had said at Winter Quarters just prior to their departure:

273I don't know anything about three but I do know about Twelve men who hold the keys of this kingdom . . . all the Twelve are alike in keys, power, might, majesty and dominion and the Seventy [Quorum of] are equal, everyone in its place. So are all who have the fullness of the Priesthood. . . . There is no higher nor lower. [^60]

273It was for this very reason that Brigham had been so upset that neither Pratt nor Taylor had agreed to come in the original pioneer company, where the matter of place and government could be addressed as a unanimous quorum. [^61]

273Part of the heritage of the 1847 pioneer treks, then, was the matter of reorganizing the Church and laying the groundwork for the reestablishment of the First Presidency. Such a view leads to a more accurate understanding of why Brigham was displeased with Pratt and Taylor. With part of the Twelve now going east and another going west, the possibility of obtaining unanimous support for reorganization was impossible. And until that approval was extended, the potential for disagreement and disharmony played into the hands of opposing claimants to succession.

273There is no evidence that Brigham sought such a sustaining vote from Pratt on the trail nor is there any indication the chastened leader would then have given it. Furthermore, Brigham knew that even Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith, and Orson Pratt did not yet see the need for an imminent reorganization. It would take much more persuasion and discussion than any light from a prairie willow patch could provide. Nevertheless, the wheel was in motion.

Three days after the Brigham and Parley companies rolled out in opposite directions, the returning company of the Twelve reached John Taylor's division. On 8 September, on the east side of South Pass, Taylor was struggling west up the Sweetwater with barely enough oxen power to make it up the Pass. The weather had turned wintry cold and snow was falling heavily. Whether out of Taylor's desire to temper the moment, or simply as an expression of sheer gratitude and respect, what occurred in the evening among that poorly provisioned people is unparalleled, at least in Mormon pioneer history. Instead of giving a cold and formal greeting, the womenfolk busied themselves with preparing a sumptuous feast more fit for a banquet hall than a snowy wilderness.

274"A nice fat steer was bought from Bishop Hunter," Isabella Horne recalled. "The dishes were unpacked and the sisters did the best possible to prepare a dinner worthy of the occasion. . . . It was snowing heavily . . . , which made camp cooking quite a task. The storm passed before dinner, and the brethren cleared away the brush and improvised a rude table, and I can assure you we had a feast indeed, spiritual as well as temporal." [^62]

274The banquet consisted of roasted and broiled beef, pies, cakes, and biscuits. Fully a hundred people dined in their improvised outdoor setting with Brigham at the head of the table and the Twelve by his side. A program followed, at which "Bishop Hunter and [Bishop] Foutz acted as masters of ceremonies. . . . A dance in the evening completed the festivities. It was a joyful occasion." [^63] As Eliza R. Snow concluded: "I know not as I have set at a table better supplied with the luxuries of life in all my travels for many years than was this table set at the foot of the South Pass of the Rocky Mountains." [^64]

274The council meetings that followed with Taylor and his leaders were significantly less tense than the one held earlier with Pratt, in part because Taylor was junior to Pratt in command. And if there were rebukes, they were muted by the glow of a warm reception, a delicious meal, and a happy evening.

274Shortly afterwards the companies left in opposite directions. The company of the Twelve reached Winter Quarters seven weeks later on 31 October, while the forward lines of the emigration camp attained the Salt Lake Valley as early as 28 September. Though once again not all were pleased, perhaps Ann Pratt should have the final word:

274I shall never forget the last day we traveled and arrived in the Valley. It happened to be my turn to drive that day, September 28, 1847. The reach of our wagon was broken. . . . I kept expecting every minute to see the poor old concern draw apart and come to grief but it held together and when my eyes rested on the beautiful entrancing sight—the Valley—oh! how my heart swelled within me. I could have laughed and cried, such a commingling of emotions I cannot describe. My soul was filled with thankfulness to God for bringing us to a place of rest and safety—a home. [^65]

275NOTES

275That Brigham Young confidently expected a large number of Battalion families is witnessed further in a later communication to Captain James Brown, then with the Battalion: "We expect another company of Saints are on their way from Winter Quarters, following our trail, among whom will be as many of the families of the Battalion as can possibly be fitted out, and they will be with us nearly as soon as yourself" (Journal History, 2 June 1847).

276As late as 1850, Weatherby's grave and the Liberty Pole were noticed by passing emigrants. "A raise of earth and a board on the right [of the pole]," wrote one passerby, "marks the spot where his murdered remains are deposited. There are also two other graves aside of [Weatherby's], these are Mormons" (Journal of William B. Lorton, 27 May 1850, Bancroft Library).

276There is a slight discrepancy regarding the final numbers. Some diarists counted 1,553. The Journal History figure shows 1,490; Susan Easton Black's studies show a final figure of between 1,423 and 1,438, plus the militia (see Susan Ward Easton [Black], "Pioneers of 1847: A Sesquicentennial Remembrance," unpublished, LDS Church Archives). Brigham Young is on record as having counted 566 wagons while he returned east (Journal History, 25 Nov. 1847).

278Actually, as president and senior member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Brigham did have authority to direct his colleagues—and to chastise them. And they knew it. Samuel Taylor not only misread this critical point but misses on several other issues as well, including his argument that Pratt and Taylor clashed with Brigham over the need to travel up the north, rather than the south, bank of the Platte River.

278Likewise, Reva Stanley, in her biography of Parley Pratt (The Archer of Paradise: A Biography of Parley P. Pratt [1937]), at best simplifies a complex matter. She argues that the biggest cause of debate was Pratt's earlier plural marriages without permission. While this was clearly a factor, the consent of Brigham Young, at least in the matter of plural marriages, was not yet well understood. The issue was representative of the bigger problem before them—whether or not a new court of supreme ecclesiastical authority—the First Presidency—should not now be reestablished.

---
Notas:
[^2] Throughout October, others of the original pioneer camp arrived back, including John Smith and Tunis Rappleye on 21 October and John Pack on 24 October (Historical Department Journals, 3-30 Oct. 1847).
[^5] For good accounts of the history of Nauvoo see the following works: Joseph Smith Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (1973), especially vols. 3-5 [cited hereafter as History of the Church]; B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. (1930), esp. vols. 2-3 [cited hereafter as Comprehensive History of the Church]; Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (1965); and David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (1974).
[^9] The killing of Jacob Weatherby is the only documented instance of a fatal encounter between Indians and Mormons in all of 1847. Having gone out after a frightened and disoriented Nancy Chamberlain (wife of Solomon Chamberlain), who was alone in a wagon west of the Elkhorn, Weatherby and three companions were fired on by three Omaha Indians. According to one account, one of Weatherby's friends "jumped out of the wagon and clinched two of the Indians [but] the third one shot Weatherby through the hip and bowels. The Indians then ran off as soon as the scuffle began." Weatherby died soon afterward and was buried in a buffalo robe near the Liberty Pole. Hosea Stout led a posse in search of the guilty party (Patty Sessions Journal, 20 June 1847).
[^19] Journal History of the Church, 9 Aug. 1846. This is a well-known and excellent resource available at the LDS Church Historical Department, consisting of scrapbook-like entries from private journals, letters, various writings of all kinds, newspaper clippings, and so on, compiled by date by former Assistant Church Historian, Andrew Jenson; cited hereafter as Journal History.
[^20] Charles R. King, "The Woman's Experience of Childbirth on the Western Frontier," Journal of the West 29, no. 1 (1990): 76-84. Years later, one observer could still say, "The learned profession was not so very learned. [Doctors were] to be sent for only as a last resort" (A. Britt, An America That Was: What Life Was Like on an Illinois Farm Seventy Years Ago (1964), 135, as quoted in King, 83).
[^21] Stampedes were a much dreaded occurrence in overland travel. One of the most chilling accounts is that given by a California forty-niner, Charles Edward Pancoast, while traveling up the Platte River in 1849: "In an instant, as if by magic, all the animals started simultaneously with a grand leap and flew down the river to the plain, the men in front shouting and scrambling to escape the solid mass of teams coming down upon them. Men could be seen dropping from the rear of wagons in all directions as they rumbled over the sands; I myself slipped through a two foot space between two wagons going at lightening speed. Some of the teams ran into a small creek and could not extricate themselves; others stopped from sheer exhaustion; still others ran two or three miles and were halted by the owners of tied horses that had not gotten away. Strange to say, no serious damage was done, except to the wagon of two Germans, which turned over and was irreparably smashed; the owners barely escaping with their lives. This was our first experience of a genuine stampede, not uncommon in the mountain countries of the west" (Charles Edward Pancoast, A Quaker Forty-Niner [1930], 198-99).
[^22] The new members of the company included Robert Crow, Elizabeth Crow, Benjamin B. Crow, Harriet Crow, Elizabeth Jane Crow, John McHenry Crow, Walter H. Crow, George W. Therlkill, Martilla Jane Therlkill (then seven months pregnant), Milton Howard Therlkill, James William Therlkill, William Parker Crow, Ida Vinda Exene Crow, Ira Minda Almarene Crow, Archibald Little, James Chesney, and Lewis B. Myers. Accompanying Myers were two Indian wives and a number of children (see William Clayton's Journal, 4 June 1847, 215).
[^23] Journal of Nelson Wheeler Whipple, 25 Feb. 1846, LDS Church Archives. "We thus kept a sharp look out for them for we knew as they had slain Joseph and Hyrum so they would slay Brigham, Heber, and the Twelve if they could."
[^28] The definitive works on the history of the Mormon Battalion are Frank Alfred Golder, The March of the Mormon Battalion from Council Bluffs to California (1928); Daniel Tyler, A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion to the Mexican War 1846-1847 (1969); John F. Yurtinus, "A Ram in the Thicket: The Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1975); and Norma Baldwin Ricketts, The Mormon Battalion: U.S. Army of the West, 1846-1848 (1996). See also Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 50-67.
[^29] The best study of Strang still remains Milo Quaife, The Kingdom of Saint James: A Narrative of the Mormons (1930). The most recent reinterpretation is Roger Van Noord's King of Beaver Island: The Life and Assassination of James Jesse Strang (1988). See also Doyle C. Fitzpatrick, The King Strang Story (1970); Richard E. Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 1846-1852: "And Should We Die . . ." (1987), 18-20; The Diary of James J. Strang, ed. Mark A. Strang (1961); William D. Russell, "King James Strang: Joseph Smith's Successor," in The Restoration Movement: Essays in Mormon History, ed. F. Mark McKiernan, Alma R. Blair, and Paul M. Edwards (1973), 231-56. Strang later removed his followers to Beaver Island in northern Lake Michigan, where his settlement realized only modest success.
[^31] Autobiography of Pioneer John Brown, 1820-1896, arr. John Zimmerman Brown (1941), 72-73. See also Jenson, "Day by Day," Deseret News, 31 May 1947. Lay and Crosby later died in California. Flake lived in Salt Lake City for most of his life, dying in Idaho Falls in 1903 at the age of 75.
[^40] William Clayton's Journal, 18 June 1847, 242. The crew left at the North Platte River crossing included some of the best carpenters and blacksmiths in camp: Thomas Grover, captain; John S. Higbee, assistant; Benjamin F. Stewart; James Davenport, blacksmith; William Empey; Luke S. Johnson; Appleton Harmon; Francis M. Pomeroy; and Edmund Ellsworth. Eric Glines decided, against counsel, to stay back with Grover's crew; he later changed his mind and hurried on by himself at considerable danger, catching up with the main camp several miles west.
[^42] Journal of Willard Richards, 14 Mar. 1847. It is interesting to note that in the dreams which Brigham Young said he had of Joseph Smith while preparing for the exodus, Joseph "stepped toward me, and looking very earnestly, yet pleasantly, said `Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. . . . Tell the brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it'" (Journal History, 23 Feb. 1847).
[^43] Little has been written about the costs of the original departures, although much is available on the costs involved in later migrations. This is particularly true of the Perpetual Emigration Fund and the financing of Mormon emigrant companies to Salt Lake City up until at least 1869 and the completion of the transcontinental rail-road. See Leonard J. Arrington's pathbreaking study, Great Basin Kingdom: An Economic History of the Latter-day Saints 1830-1900 (1958), 77-79.
[^55] For the exact wording of this "Memorial to the Queen for the Relief, by Emigration of a Portion of Her Poor Subjects," see J. B. Munro, "Mormon Colonization Scheme for Vancouver Island," Washington Historical Quarterly, 25, no. 3 (July 1934): 278-85. For a thorough and responsible study on British emigration, see Taylor, Expectations Westward, 18-47.
[^58] The Nauvoo Covenant resembled very closely the earlier Missouri Covenant of 1839, when Brigham Young at Far West, Missouri, proposed "that we this day enter into a covenant to . . . never desert the poor who are worthy, till they shall be out of the reach of the exterminating order of General [John B.] Clark." Some 214 men signed the covenant to assist others "to the utmost of our abilities." (History of the Church, 3:250-54).
[^59] There is some dispute over the name of this passerby. Most of the records refer to him as "Beaumont," although some refer to him as Charley Barkham (see Brigham Young letters, 5 May 1847). Erastus Snow records that the leader of the Beaumont company was a "Mr. Papan" who stayed on the other side of the river (see also Journal of Levi S. Johnson, 4 May 1847, Special Collections, Lee Library, Brigham Young University).
[^60] Addison Pratt, who left on a mission to the South Seas from Nauvoo in 1843 and did not return to his family, then in the Salt Lake Valley, until 1848, provides a revealing insight into the temporary lapse among the people in living the Word of Wisdom. On entering the valley, he found that "there seemed to be but two articles . . . and they were tobacco and coffee. The rule with some for selling tobacco was lay a silver dollar onto a flat plug and cut out the bigness of it for the dollar. I don't remember of ever seeing such a hankering after anything in my life as there was after that, and coffee was not much behind it. Notwithstanding, Br. Grouard and myself had urged an observance of the Word of Wisdom so strongly upon the natives of the South Sea Isles, I was surprised to see so little notice paid to it at the gathering place of the Saints" (The Journals of Addison Pratt, ed. S. George Ellsworth [1990], 368). For a full study of the history and development of the Word of Wisdom, see Paul H. Peterson, "An Historical Analysis of the Word of Wisdom" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972). It took almost a century before the Word of Wisdom took on the status of commandment within the Church.
[^61] Samuel Taylor argues in his controversial book The Kingdom or Nothing: The Life of John Taylor, Militant Mormon (1976) that both Taylor and Pratt had married plural wives during their return voyages, which was further cause of Brigham's unhappiness. If such was indeed the case, it only represented the conviction in fellow apostles' minds that they were all equal in authority, while underscoring Brigham's concern that until a new First Presidency was established, regulation of this and other practices was virtually impossible to control.
