Richard E. Bennett, We'll Find the Place: The Mormon Exodus 1846-1848 ( 1997)

279"WE HAVE BEEN IN THE VALLEY TO SET THE BIG WHEEL TO WORK"

279The cause of Zion is brightening, and the mobbing and driving of the Saints will all lend to hasten their final gathering together.

279Our removes thus far have tended to the diminution of our substance, and also that of many others of the brethren, but we believe the Lord will still open the way again, soon as it shall be his will for us to go, which we anticipate shall be in a short time. [^1]

279As watchful eyes of relief parties dispatched from the Salt Lake Valley eagerly awaited the first canyon sighting of the jostling wagons of the approaching Emigration Camp, a thousand miles to the east, 10,000 anxious Latter-day Saints worried and waited. Their summer had been long and hot, and their rich farmland had brought them an abundant harvest of grain and vegetables that, unlike the year before, assured them of all the provisions they would need for the coming winter. The Lord had been good to them, they were quick to say. But they wondered what news lay just beyond their western horizons.

It was an excited but exhausted Phineas Young, with three companions, who arrived back in Winter Quarters first, the evening of 2 October. But he was not so tired that he could not preach to an overflow outdoor crowd the following day. After sharing the news of the discovery of the Salt Lake Valley, he called for relief missions to help the struggling oxen team party and, further back, the company of the Twelve somewhere out along the Platte. [^2]

280The Twelve, meanwhile, after quitting John Taylor's wagon lines on the high Sweetwater, made the return journey in relatively good time—67 days total from the valley—without serious incident, although they were very fatigued and perilously low on provisions. Due to some misunderstanding, the returning ox and hunting parties that had been instructed to wait for them at Grand Island had gone ahead. What transpired next was little less than a prairie rescue. Some 90 miles out of Winter Quarters on 18 October, Hosea Stout and several others met up with them "with the determination to find out what was become of us." The result was, in Brigham's words, "they gladdened our hearts and caused our souls to rejoice even as much as though sixteen Heavenly messengers had come down to congratulate us in our return from the arduous enterprise and to comfort us in the hour of fatigue." [^3]

280Two weeks later, Bishop Newel K. Whitney, Alpheus Cutler, and a dozen others awaited them at the Liberty Pole at the Elkhorn "with abundance of provisions." "Brother Brigham looked very thin," reported one observer, "and others from their exposure and hardships felt fatigued." [^4]

280The next day, 31 October, the Mormon leader made his final speech of the campaign short and precise:

280Brethren I will just say to the Pioneers I want you to receive my thanks for your kind service and willingness to obey orders. I am satisfied with you as you have [labored] with me and the Twelve. The boys have done first rate. We've accomplished more than we expected. Out of 143 men, all are well. Not a man died. . . . The blessings of the Lord have been with us. [^5]

280Late that afternoon, their wagons rolled into Winter Quarters. The streets were crowded with people who had come out to shake hands with the returning pioneers, who were anxious to see wives and children once again. Woodruff recalled:

Each one drove to his own home. I drove up to my own door and was truly rejoiced to once more behold the face of my wife and children again after being absent over six months and having traveled with the Twelve and the pioneers near 2,500 miles and sought Willard Richards out a location for the Saints and accomplished one of the most interesting missions ever accomplished at the last days. [^6]

281But there was no time to celebrate—that would come later. A crowded agenda awaited Church leaders as they reassembled, after a few days of needed rest, at Willard Richards's octagon house in Winter Quarters. A decision had to be made immediately about evacuating Winter Quarters and turning over their lands and improvements to the local Omaha and Otoe Indian tribes.

281There was also a desperate need to raise funds, from both within and without the Church, to underwrite the costs of future migrations of as many members as possible, most of whom were more anxious than prepared to make the journey. Likewise, the call to gather to the Great Basin had to be distributed quickly by printing press and word of mouth to the entire scattered membership: all the way across Iowa; in the many branches of the Church in Illinois, Wisconsin, the South, and the East; and to the British Isles. Finally, the time was ripe to reorganize the Church, to set in place a new leadership that would free the Twelve and the Seventy to fulfil once again their missionary duties throughout the world.

281These three issues—evacuating Winter Quarters, promoting the valley as the place of gathering, and the reordering of Church government—would absorb the minds and energies of almost everyone during the coming winter months.

281"I AM IN FAVOR OF VACATING THIS PLACE"

The Mormon city of Winter Quarters, Nebraska's first, on a site later occupied by Florence, a northern suburb of Omaha, was never intended to be a permanent settlement. It was a necessary compromise with the wilderness and the delayed march of the pioneers across Iowa. Rather than risk the exodus of his people with too late a start, Brigham had decided to quarter his people at the Missouri River, on the west side to eliminate a springtime crossing of a river filled with runoff. His decision was made all the more compelling with the enlistment of the Mormon Battalion. And at Captain James Allen's request, he negotiated a tentative agreement with the United States government to settle temporarily on Indian lands owned then by both the Omaha and Otoe Indian tribes. [^7]

282Although the Mormons had negotiated a treaty with both tribes to remain on the land for two years in return for certain favors and services, the Office of Indian Affairs frowned on the idea and continually tried to terminate the agreement. While the government took more than enough criticism for its stance, in truth it seemed most concerned about the possibility of bloodshed and inciting further friction between two already angry, dispossessed tribes. The Indians themselves were insistent on the Mormon removal and the recent killing of Weatherby underscored the fact that an agreement must soon be made.

282By November 1847 it was clear that Winter Quarters would have to be vacated the following spring and its 4,000 citizens choose either to go west with the 1848 migration or to move east back across the river. The prospect of moving into Iowa was made more palatable because of the recent abandonment of that area by the Pottawattamie Indians and the imminent extension of Iowa Territory to the Missouri River. "I am in favor of vacating this place," Brigham proposed in council, "and the brethren draw their houses over the river" the following spring. Or, as Orson Pratt put it: "I motion that every man and family who cannot go West, go into the state of Iowa and settle where they may until they can fit themselves out for the mountains." [^8] Although some were convinced that a total evacuation might signal a Sioux massacre of the Omaha, the general consensus was otherwise and "to remove over the river as soon as they can." The new site proposed on the Iowa side was Miller's Hollow, six miles from "where four small streams descend through a table land to Keg Creek,"—a "natural place for a town," as Orson Hyde remembered it. [^9]

Rather than construct a new city, however, it was determined to spread the settlements out over a much larger area and to concentrate on farming and erecting other improvements. In the process the new settlements would become a breadbasket and a fitting-out center for future migrations of incoming Latter-day Saints. And unlike Nauvoo and Winter Quarters, when time came to sell off their properties, they would realize a favorable return and even a respectable profit. "If the design is to sell improvements," said George A. Smith, "it will be best to scatter all over the country for farms; then they may be sold." [^10]

283At the time, Winter Quarters consisted of 700 to 800 houses of varying size and quality, "mechanical shops of sufficient kinds, shelters, stables, a water driven grist mill and one or two other mills propelled by horse power." [^11] Despite the prospect of losing their many improvements, the local citizens approved the plan of abandonment unanimously at a public meeting on 14 November; they were convinced that the eastern bank would be a healthier, safer place than Winter Quarters had been.

283When April came, most of the settlers who were not going west began leaving the city to resettle in one of some 40 new settlements all clustered within a radius of 30 to 40 miles of Miller's Hollow. This they soon christened Kanesville in honor of Colonel Thomas L. Kane and his ready support of the Mormon cause in the halls of political power back in Washington. [^12] By the autumn of 1848, Winter Quarters was a deserted memory looking "pretty much as it did," remembered George A. Smith,

283except the roofs and floors which had been brought to this side of the river. The Indians visited it of late and feasted on the potatoes that grew in the old cellars, and also upon the Indian corn and the volunteer squash and such other vegetables as grew without culture. . . . Winter Quarters afforded more flies and fleas than anything less than a stargazer could well estimate. [^13]

283"THIS PEOPLE ARE CALLED TO REVOLUTIONIZE THE WORLD"

283The matter of relinquishing Winter Quarters to the Indians now decided, leaders turned their attention to other pressing issues of much longer-lasting consequence. The immediate priority was to disseminate quickly and broadly the news of the valley. Despite such severe cold that the clerks could not write the exact wording of each sermon, large numbers assembled at the stand at Winter Quarters to listen to a combination of happy persuasion and heavy directive.

283"We filled the mission that we were sent to do and come home humble and like little children," reported Ezra T. Benson.

284The Lord God of Israel has been with us. Shall we now sit down and give up the ship? We have a good man at the helm. No, let us arise and have more perseverance than we ever did before. . . . That valley is a place reserved by the Almighty for this people. We have been tried in poverty and sickness. Now you are going to be tried in riches, in homes, farms and vineyards. . . . You may as well have it all. We have gold, warmth, salt, soil, tar and springs. We have been in the valley to set the big wheel to work and that sets all the little wheels whirling. . . . We have now laid the foundation for our coming day. [^14]

284Amasa Lyman referred to it "as the best place to keep the commandments of God that we have ever been in. I have no uneasiness about the place of rest but my anxiety now is to get the people there." [^15]

284Brigham Young then followed.

284I am perfectly satisfied with the mission. I rejoice in it. Many of the Saints have witnesses to what I told them in Nauvoo that I would lead them to a healthy country. It has been highly extolled. It is the will of the Lord for us to repair to the spot. After travelling for months through grease, wood and sage, mountains and barren rocks, the place there looks beautiful to me. . . . That country is not for any but Mormons. [^16]

284The picture of a healthier climate scored well. Kimball said "he was not going to flatter the country but would tell it as it is," but rushed to compare the valley with their Missouri winter settlement. "It seems to me [like] a person living in a four story building in the upper room all finished off in good style and the comforts of life and then move down in a cellar where it is damp and chilly and sickly; that is the contrast between the valley and this place here in Winter Quarters." [^17]

284The need was critical to promote the news to the widespread membership in order to dampen the continuing tide of defection and to gather the Church to the Missouri. To this end, the Twelve drafted a "General Epistle" to the Saints in December 1847 and printed it in St. Louis the month following. Aimed at disciple and detractor alike, the document cut swiftly to the quick.

284What shall we do?

284

Gather yourselves together speedily, near to this place, on the east side of the Missouri River, and, if possible, be ready to start from hence by the first of May next, or as soon as grass is sufficient. . . . Let the Saints who have been driven and scattered from Nauvoo, and all others in the western states, gather immediately to the east bank of the river . . . ; and let all the Saints in the United States and Canada gather to the same place, by the first spring navigation, or as soon as they can, bringing their money, goods, and effects with them. . . .

285

285To the Saints in England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and adjacent islands and countries, we say, emigrate as speedily as possible to this vicinity, looking to and following the counsel of the Presidency at Liverpool; shipping to New Orleans, and from thence direct to Council Bluffs, which will save much expense. . . . And to all Saints in any country bordering upon the Atlantic, we would say, pursue the same course. . . .

285

285For the time has come for the Saints to go up to the mountains of the Lord's house, and help to establish it upon the tops of the mountains. [^18]

285The above was more than invitation or mild request: it was a proclamation to gather, an expectation bordering on directive, an urgent call for Latter-day Saints everywhere to "leave Babylon" and consolidate the strength of the Church in a new mountain stronghold. Like generals in battle needing to concentrate their forces and like shepherds worried about lost and straying sheep, they clearly recognized that for its survival, the Church had to circle the wagons, to replant and rebuild and in the process reinterpret itself for another new day.

285But the question was, who would bear the cost? While some might be able to afford moving west, most could not. Tithing submissions were at low ebb among a people out of work and on the move. Battalion pay was all but spent and no other government contracts were in the works, despite the best efforts of Thomas L. Kane. Neither could they expect a dime from relinquishing Winter Quarters. The only possible options were to canvass the Church membership back east and to beg for assistance from an American public clearly unsympathetic towards this strange people. It would be no small undertaking. (See chapter 11.)

Such destitute conditions called for desperate and decisive action. "To the rich saints in the United States" is how Brigham began his letter distributed 7 December, which was obviously designed to accompany their General Epistle.

286The Camp of Israel in the wilderness is in want; the hands of the servants of the Lord are stayed for lack of means; the operations of the Church are paralysed with poverty, but the time for the Lord to favor Zion is at hand. . . . Send us of your substance, that the poor may be blessed, the sick relieved, the hungry fed, the naked clothed, and the camp may move forward to their destination. Send us of your substance . . . not by farthings, by pence and by shillings, but by hundreds and thousands and by tens of thousands. . . . The time has verily come to favor Zion and help must be had, for the Lord designs it.

286Characteristic of so many others of his letters, Brigham was quick to add a concluding warning: "If you refuse or neglect this our call . . . and prove not your faith by your works, . . . the spirit will take its departure from your souls; your light will be turned into darkness, and you will ere long be left to mourn that your money has perished with you." [^19]

286But what good is a message without its messengers? Worn out and tired though they obviously were, many of the leaders faced the daunting task of going as far east on missions that coming winter as they had just traveled west to the Rockies. They also had to call many sick and weary settlers on both sides of the river to head back as missionaries to where many of them had come from. Once more, sacrifice knew no bounds. Fortunately, with the harvest in, many could see their way to go.

286There was talk of a general missionary call as early as 15 November, and likely far sooner. "I feel that we ought to keep the big wheel agoing," Brigham had said earlier and that volunteers were needed to go "apreaching" and to gather the people. [^20] George A. Smith was quick to respond: "My feelings are to go over the mountains, but I am quite ready to go anywhere." Said Orson Pratt: "I feel like roaring, as I have something to roar about." [^21] Five days later, the first mission calls were extended to Winslow Farr, W. W. Major, and George W. Harris to go to Terra Haute, Indiana; Phineas Young and Jonathan C. Wright to try their hand with a reconsidering Oliver Cowdery; and scores to go elsewhere. [^22] Soon a list of over 30 high priests and 80 seventies was drawn up, and a general plea went out by letter and over the pulpit. [^23]

287And woe to those who pleaded the care of farm or family above service. Preached Amasa Lyman:

287Some men, in getting a little farm, their whole soul and entire man are swallowed up in a 160 acres of land at the footstool of the Almighty. Men do not appreciate the calling unto what they are called. . . . This people are called to revolutionize the world . . . they have to turn the world inside up, turn the veil inside out. . . . Let us wake up and if you are going to be Latter-day Saints wake up and don't be swallowed up in a little patch of 160 acres. I don't want to be swallowed up in anything less than the redemption of the world. The cause of Mormonism will wash you up on your little farm and it will run over your farm and you, too. The Lord don't care much about you or your farm if you get in the way. It is bound to travel onward and go the tops of the mountains and if Zion gets in a low place, it is the highest low place there is in the earth. [^24]

287By late December 100 to 125 men had heeded the call and were on the road—again.

287"IT IS IN ME LIKE SEVEN THUNDERS ROLLING"

287The other critical concern was to reorganize the Church, specifically to reinstitute the First Presidency. By late 1847, the onus was on the Quorum of the Twelve to show why Brigham Young, the oldest and senior member of the Quorum, should not be called and ordained to the office of President of the Church, a position that had been vacant since the death of Joseph Smith in 1844. As shown earlier, the issue had been discussed repeatedly but without resolution.

287In a series of remarkable meetings over a three-week period between 15 November and early December the wheel turned. One reason for the change was the missions that the Apostles and others would have to serve. "From the time I have been in the Great Salt Lake till now," Brigham said, "the whisperings of the Spirit to me [are] for the Church to be now organized and it whispers to the Church if there is a God in Mormonism . . . to prove to the devils in men that we are just willing to do what the Lord wants us to do. Now is this question to be answered." [^25]

The matter was very much on his mind in the Salt Lake Valley and later in the return meetings with Pratt and Taylor. And all the way back to Winter Quarters, he had put the question to each of his traveling companions "concerning one of the Twelve Apostles being appointed as the President of the Church with his two counselors." [^26]

288The full account of Brigham's appointment has been chronicled elsewhere. [^27] Nevertheless, it is instructive to understand the several issues involved. Of the surviving, active Apostles at Joseph's death, Lyman Wight had gone to Texas to settle his fugitive company of followers. Wight entertained no thought of returning to the Saints. John E. Page (replaced by Ezra T. Benson) was now solidly in Strang's camp. William Smith remained back in Illinois vacillating between going with Strang or combining with Brigham. Parley P. Pratt and Taylor were now in the valley. That left only eight Apostles to ratify and sustain such a major change.

288Although it may always be a point of controversy between the divergent traditions of the "restoration movement," those Apostles who gathered at Winter Quarters in November 1847 fully believed that they had received the "keys of the priesthood" or governing ecclesiastical authority from Joseph Smith, as an administrative body equal in authority to the First Presidency, though held in dormancy until that higher quorum was dissolved.

288What they did not understand was the urgent need to reorganize and how soon it should be done. Most felt that the Twelve were administering the affairs of the Church well enough. There was also resistance to breaking up the unity they obviously enjoyed. Some of them worried, frankly, over how their quorum president had never hesitated to chastise and correct them, in both private and public settings, and wondered what might happen if he were given more authority. Most importantly, this group of men who so devoutly believed they were on a divine errand required inspiration, if not revelation, to make such a change.

288Tempering their reluctance, however, were several realities. It was understood that James Strang, the Voree prophet, was still counting points among disenchanted believers for having already organized his own first presidency. One of their first items of business once back at the Missouri was to hear briefings on Strang's progress. And despite the wording in their General Epistle that "many false prophets and teachers . . . [have] run their race undisturbed [and] have died natural deaths, or committed suicides," [^28] the matter of defection and apostasy was a real concern.

Their recent decision to send missionaries on winter assignments to the east would severely limit the decision-making powers of a depleted quorum. There was also uneasiness over abuses in the practice of plural marriage and the emerging consensus that a First Presidency was best equipped to handle these delicate matters with authority. And if there had been any hope that one of Joseph Smith's own sons might immigrate with them and perhaps take his place in the quorum, by now it was clear that no such possibility existed.

289In retrospect, the tone of discussions had changed with the discovery of the Salt Lake Valley. Joseph Smith had staked his leadership by prophecy and revelation, and Brigham continued in that tradition, proving his claim through mud and mountain. None questioned his industry, integrity, or shrewd political savvy. His status grew the further west they traveled. As Orson Pratt put it: "There is no man in this Quorum who I respect more than Brother Young, and no man that I would wish sooner to be at the head. . . . He has a great anxiety on his mind and although I consider I have seen errors in him, I feel that I could lay down my life for him." [^29] It may well be argued that the discovery of the valley was an essential precursor to the restoration of the First Presidency.

289All things considered, none could any longer resist Brigham's arguments that as president of the quorum he was already the foremost leader in the Church, that the authority and responsibility rested in them to reorganize the Church, and that the complexities of the time demanded it. "If my lot is to preside over the church," he said, "must I eternally be asking when should I speak? If this body is the head of the church, I am the head of the Quorum, I am the mouthpiece and you are the belly." [^30] Or, as he said on a later occasion, "You can't make me President because I am President. You can't give me more power because I have it." And further: "It is in me like seven thunders rolling. . . . I love this quorum as I love my eyes. . . . I know what it is to have a First Presidency. God has brought us where we are and we have got to do it, and if the devil can get us to decide we will not have a First Presidency, [or] if you throw the Kingdom into the Quorum of Fifty they can't manage it and the Seventies can't do it." [^31]

289Perhaps Ezra T. Benson, the junior member of the quorum, captured best the growing unanimity of feelings.

I have not exchanged a word with Brigham on the matter. I feel now . . . that everything is right and it is hard to get it wrong. . . . I have a testimony that he is called of God. My conscience is perfectly clear and my feelings the same as they ever have been. I am willing to lift him up a peg. That's my private and public feelings. The arguments that have been used are gone. The time has come and it may as well be done now as any other. I can act tonight [5 December] as well as any time. As the revelation says "It is of necessity."

290

290After some further private discussion, Heber C. Kimball motioned and Wilford Woodruff seconded that Brigham Young be sustained as President of the Church. All others voted in the affirmative. To Orson Pratt's suggestion that he select two counselors, Brigham nominated Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards. The meeting then adjourned for supper and quiet celebration until 11:30 P.M.

290It was further decided not to wait until April conference, as would normally have been the case, but to hold a special assembly as soon as possible because most of them were about to disperse east on missions. Furthermore, the call to gather would be strengthened by the calling of a new President. The best time for such a conference would be around Christmas, since many of the Saints were coming to the Bluffs from further settlements then to be with family and friends.

290An important ancillary question was where to convene the conference, which would surely attract a large audience. There was no building large enough in Winter Quarters, and holding a conference outdoors in January would negatively affect attendance.

291Log Tabernacle, a painting by Katie Gregory (Used courtesy of Katie Gregory, Omaha, Nebraska)

291Recognizing that the largest meetinghouse then available, Silas Richards's double blockhouse some 10 miles southeast of Winter Quarters on the Iowa side, would be entirely inadequate, that same night the Twelve directed Henry W. Miller, a leading settler on the Iowa side, to erect a tabernacle. Highly regarded and an original member of the Pottawattamie High Council, Miller immediately went to work on an edifice large enough to fit the need. About "200 gave their names to go to work immediately at it" despite the winter cold—some cut and others hauled the large cottonwood logs from over three miles away; the rest fashioned the construction. [^33] The happy result on the evening of 23 December was that the building was completed—and with one day to spare! The finished structure pleased almost everyone. It was, for its time, a wonderfully large cottonwood log tabernacle 65 feet long by 40 feet wide, complete with newly hewn benches, stoves for heating on all sides, a large fireplace, several doors, glass windows, and a smooth floor—"an ornament to this new country." [^34] As one proud settler put it: "Such is the industry and perseverance of the Saints, that whatever they undertake they soon accomplished." [^35]

So it was that a four-day special conference convened in the new tabernacle at Miller's Hollow (later Kanesville) from 24 through 27 December, for instruction, song, inspiration, and dance. There were talks on the pending 1848 migrations and appointments of new captains; the need for missionaries; where those from Winter Quarters would settle on the east side; the Nauvoo Covenant; temple work; the importance of gathering to the valley; and the need to stay clear of Strang, Lyman Wight, and other detractors.

292But it was the final Sunday session that everyone was impatient to attend. Over 1,000 people crammed into their new quarters, filling every corner; many spread out on buffalo robes on the floor, pushing up against the band and the choir. After John Kay, with violin accompaniment, had sung William Clayton's already beloved prairie anthem, "Come, Come, Ye Saints," Orson Pratt took the stand.

292"We have been able to overcome apostates and the powers of darkness," he began,

292with the highest quorum taken away out of our midst. How much more shall we be able to overcome them when we have all the quorums flourishing. . . . The time has come when the Twelve must have their hands liberated to go to the ends of the earth. [^36]

292George A. Smith followed, saying when Joseph and Hyrum were martyred, "the Twelve had a right to nominate a Presidency or go ahead without one." Amasa Lyman continued the theme by saying "the interests of the [church] can't be served any longer without a President. The work is faltering for want of the servants of the Lord being set free. He who furnishes the materials is the man. He is at the head already. He has been acknowledged for years." [^37]

292Then, on motion of Elisha H. Grover, seconded by W. W. Major, the name of Brigham Young was presented for a sustaining vote as President of the Church, with Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards as first and second counselors. A thousand hands were raised, without a single dissenting vote.

292"There is nothing more done this day than I knew at the death of Joseph," Brigham said in his acceptance remarks. "Joseph told the Twelve `There is not one principle or key to enter in the celestial kingdom but I have given you. . . . The kingdom is set up and you have the perfect pattern and you can lead the Kingdom in at the gate. I am going to rest.'" The meeting concluded with the entire congregation singing "The Spirit of God Like a Fire is Burning," ending with the sacred hosanna chorus shout reserved for such sacred occasions. [^38]

293"THE BRETHREN ENJOYED THEMSELVES FIRST RATE"

293The new year found the Latter-day Saints enjoying a sense of confidence they had not know since the early days of Nauvoo. A year before they were in a crisis, suffering and dying in epidemic numbers t Winter Quarters and all along their Iowa trail. Most had lost almost everything in Nauvoo. Their wanderings across Iowa had exacted the harshest toll. The call for the Battalion had drained them of sorely needed manpower at the most inconvenient of times. And through it all they had waited and wondered whether or not the mountain west really did hold promise and redemption.

293Now so much had changed. Their fall harvest proved marvelously abundant. Their health was vastly improved. The mountain west was now a beckoning reality. The Battalion had completed its march to the Pacific and some—at least 47 of them—had already returned, despite the worst of conditions. [^39] A new First Presidency had been reestablished and the Church was on firm footing once again. The long, dark night of persecution and hardship was at last giving way to renewed hope.

293William Appleby, returning to the Bluffs in early December 1847 after an extended absence as presiding elder over the eastern U.S. branches, captured well the new upbeat tone:

293Ever since we entered Iowa [from Missouri] we have beheld, scattered along, the log houses of the brethren who were driven from Nauvoo by a cruel mob about 18 months ago. And indeed the country shows the industry of the Saints that their enemies cannot gainsay. Farms, fenced off in nearly every direction, some fields containing a hundred acres or more. . . . Corn, wheat, buckwheat, potatoes, cabbage, turnips, pumpkins, squashes, etc., have been raised, and they have cut and secured plenty of hay. Their cattle look well and everything else throughout the camps, considering the situation and circumstances they were placed in when they arrived here, looks comfortable and the prospect cheering. [^40]

293Optimism was in the winter air—an eager anticipation of the coming spring migrations—and a budding conviction that all might yet turn out. In short, it was a time to celebrate.

What happened at Miller's Hollow in the dead of winter is another example of pioneer optimism and the need to express it. Lasting five days from 16-20 January, the Seventies Jubilee held in the new log tabernacle caught the attention of Mormon and non-Mormon alike. Military officers came all the way from Fort Kearny to participate. Announced the last day of the succession conference, the Jubilee was touted as a time for all the Latter-day Saints, from Winter Quarters all the way back to Garden Grove, to assemble for instruction and exhortation, song and dance, celebration and congratulation.

294Their largest gathering since the last days of Nauvoo, the Jubilee also provided leaders the ideal opportunity to promote the valley, organize the 1848 migration companies, call missionaries, and gather together enough signatures on a petition to establish their own post office and organize a new county—Pottawattamie—in western Iowa. Having lost most of their properties in Nauvoo and, to a lesser extent, in Winter Quarters, it would b best to ensure legal protection for their Iowa settlements and future improvements. To this end, Andrew Perkins and Henry W. Miller were appointed delegates to present the petition to organize a county, recently signed by 1,805 male members, to the Iowa legislature. [^41]

294Everyone agreed to call it a jubilee—everyone, that is, except their new President. "I attended meetings held on the 16th, 17th, 18th, 19th, and 20th in the Log Tabernacle, Miller's Hollow," Brigham recorded, "convened by the Seventies, which they called a Jubilee; but I told them it could not be considered a Jubilee spoken of in the revelation, for all bands were not broken, and I called it a jubilo." He went on to say, "The Saints enjoyed themselves first rate." [^42]

294His objections notwithstanding, the Jubilee (except for the first day of Sabbath preaching) consisted each day of speaking and instruction until mid-afternoon, followed by a sumptuous feast provided by the various branches from all over the settlements and concluded each night with concerts nd dances. William Pitt's brass band provided most of the music. John M. Kay, the favorite singer of the camps, sang several times during these festivities, as did other singers and choirs. Since not all could fit into their tabernacle, now being used as a festival hall, most of the 5,000 to 6,000 who attended came at preassigned intervals and stayed for one or two days.

Strict rules were made on who could participate and on standards of behavior. For instance, the local high council ordered that "the marshall shall take any person who shall be found intoxicated or having liquor around this house during the meetings of the Jubilee and shall detain them until he or she shall pay one dollar." [^43]

295None were more pleased to hear about the Jubilee than the young people. To their way of thinking, it was way past time to have some fun and to get together to meet that pretty young lady or that fair-haired young man seen back along the trail. To the consternation of many a parent, some had already been going elsewhere for the privilege, attending "Gentile" dances down at Trader's Point, a few miles south of Miller's Hollow. And it was obvious that the arrival of so many young, beautiful Mormon women was attracting the attention of nearby soldiers and traders.

295"We had a grand ball given me on my return from Grand Island," A. W. Sublette, a non-Mormon soldier, recorded on his return to Fort Kearny in December 1847.

295We have plenty of pretty girls on the opposite side of the river and 20 or 30 miles above this at the Mormon Town there is cords of them. They are moving down and settling round us hunting work such as have no other scenes of support. There is one at Boonville which takes them all. As I passed through there last summer she presented me with a handsome bouquet and a handsome little article since then. There is others near your home whom I have not nor will not forget. [^44]

295Dancing proved problematic for many of the older generation, particularly those of stern, Puritan-like New England background. And if their new president had not approved, there likely would not have been any. The serious-minded Woodruff, for instance, could hardly take it in:

295While there is so much depending upon us and our prayers, should we be satisfied with the record of this city of the Saints in the eternal world kept by the angels of heaven if we should hear read before an assembled world that the inhabitants of Winter Quarters, who were the Lord's anointed, . . . spent nine days of their time fiddling and dancing where they did one in prayer and praise to Almighty God? [^45]

But Brigham would hear none of it. "It is perfectly right to dance," he said just days before the happy gathering, "but it is very wicked to sin. I council the people not to go to the dance tomorrow at the Point [Trader's Point] that is getting up by the soldiers there . . . if you want to dance, dance on this floor. . . . I would not go there and dance, God forbid, but I would come and dance with you." [^46] "Everything that is calculated to fill the soul with joy is ordained of God and is proper for the Saints," he said at the opening of the Jubilee, "if they acknowledge God in all things and do not sin. But don't mingle with the wicked world and sin but serve the Lord with it. . . . You will never see any music or dancing in hell." [^47]

296Describing their good times, the ever-positive Irene Hascall wrote that

296the Mormons . . . do not have any guess work in their exercises. They have a rule and the order of God for all their movements. They open their school with prayer and so they always do at their dancing parties or feasts. They have all the good and fat things they can procure for supper. I never saw a larger supply at any place. . . . There is some of the smartest and best men and women here there is in the world. [^48]

296And so it was that they made merry in the wilderness or, as their leader put it, "We had a blessed meeting—all hearts were comforted and lifted up above our trials and persecutions." [^49]

296Their good times did not end with the Jubilee. Several parties were held in February, including one hosted by those who had fought in the Battle of Nauvoo in September 1846. A special "figure was got up called the Battle of Nauvoo which was danced" by all who came and, as they had done in the several skirmishes, those who had worn red badges to distinguish themselves from their enemies did so again on the dance floor. [^50] Later another dance, a Mormon Battalion Ball, was also held in the log tabernacle to celebrate the accomplishments and safe return of so many soldiers. [^51]

296The general conference of the Church convened at the log tabernacle in April 1848 for three days; final preparations were then put in place for the pending migration. Early in June, Brigham once again left for the valley, never again to return east, this time at the head of a combined camp of some 1,891 people for the valley. For at least the next four years, Kanesville served as the jumping off place for several thousand Latter-day Saints.

296NOTES

297For more on these settlements, see Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 215-28. See also Gail George Holmes, "The LDS Legacy in Southwestern Iowa," Ensign, Aug. 1988, 54-57.

298One Forty-niner later "visited the inside of the Mormon council house. It looks very large inside with a fire place 20 feet long, columns like tree trunks" (Journal of William B. Lorton, 22 May 1849). It was not called the "Kanesville" log tabernacle until at least April 1848.

298The story of their travels home is worthy of note, at least in passing. On the morning of 18 December, rumor had it that a group of Battalion soldiers had arrived in Winter Quarters the evening before. Emily Bunker, wife of Edward Bunker, prepared to go and inquire. "Just before she was to leave the house," the record tells "a knock was heard at the door. It proved to be Edward himself. He thought they were still in Garden Grove where he left them, but someone told him they had moved since he left. He was almost frozen and starved. It was necessary for him to remain in bed for several weeks and he was fed gruel every few hours just a few spoonfuls at a time at first. He had endured terrible privation on the return journey and had completed one of the most difficult marches on record" (Lois E. Jones, "George Abbot and His Descendants," unpublished, Missouri Historical Society, 6).

299Perkins and Miller traveled to Iowa City soon afterward, returning 6 March with news that the creation of Pottawattamie County had already been approved "precisely according to the terms of petition" (Brigham Young to Parley P. Pratt and John Taylor, 17 July 1848).

299Pottawattamie County was officially organized 24 September 1848 with William Pickett organizing sheriff (William Snow to Brigham Young, 8 Oct. 1848, Brigham Young Papers).

299The first representative to the Iowa Assembly from the new Pottawattamie County was Henry W. Miller; the second was Archibald Bryant. The first clerk was James Sloan; the first commissioners was R. H. Perkins, David D. Yearley, and George Coulson. The first county judge was T. Burdick.

299Despite efforts by both Whig and Democrat to court the sizeable Mormon vote, the Mormon leaders encouraged a nonpartisan stand. Their objective was to leave, not settle. As Brigham said on one occasion: "Our policy is to slide between wind and water and get away as fast as possible" (Journal History, 24 Mar. 1848).

299After the 1852 exodus, the Mormon presence steadily declined as waves of new settlers brought out farms and improvements at very respectable prices never known at Nauvoo. Miller's Hollow was renamed Kanesville in April 1848 at the general conference of the Church, but it, too, was eventually changed to Council Bluffs. For some years it became a favored jumping off spot for the Oregon and California trails.

29944.[A[ndrew] Sublette to a friend named "Francis," 4 Dec. 1847, Ft. Kearny, William L. Sublette Papers, Missouri Historical Society.

---
Notas:
[^2] Throughout October, others of the original pioneer camp arrived back, including John Smith and Tunis Rappleye on 21 October and John Pack on 24 October (Historical Department Journals, 3-30 Oct. 1847).
[^5] For good accounts of the history of Nauvoo see the following works: Joseph Smith Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (1973), especially vols. 3-5 [cited hereafter as History of the Church]; B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. (1930), esp. vols. 2-3 [cited hereafter as Comprehensive History of the Church]; Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (1965); and David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (1974).
[^9] The killing of Jacob Weatherby is the only documented instance of a fatal encounter between Indians and Mormons in all of 1847. Having gone out after a frightened and disoriented Nancy Chamberlain (wife of Solomon Chamberlain), who was alone in a wagon west of the Elkhorn, Weatherby and three companions were fired on by three Omaha Indians. According to one account, one of Weatherby's friends "jumped out of the wagon and clinched two of the Indians [but] the third one shot Weatherby through the hip and bowels. The Indians then ran off as soon as the scuffle began." Weatherby died soon afterward and was buried in a buffalo robe near the Liberty Pole. Hosea Stout led a posse in search of the guilty party (Patty Sessions Journal, 20 June 1847).
[^19] Journal History of the Church, 9 Aug. 1846. This is a well-known and excellent resource available at the LDS Church Historical Department, consisting of scrapbook-like entries from private journals, letters, various writings of all kinds, newspaper clippings, and so on, compiled by date by former Assistant Church Historian, Andrew Jenson; cited hereafter as Journal History.
[^20] Charles R. King, "The Woman's Experience of Childbirth on the Western Frontier," Journal of the West 29, no. 1 (1990): 76-84. Years later, one observer could still say, "The learned profession was not so very learned. [Doctors were] to be sent for only as a last resort" (A. Britt, An America That Was: What Life Was Like on an Illinois Farm Seventy Years Ago (1964), 135, as quoted in King, 83).
[^21] Stampedes were a much dreaded occurrence in overland travel. One of the most chilling accounts is that given by a California forty-niner, Charles Edward Pancoast, while traveling up the Platte River in 1849: "In an instant, as if by magic, all the animals started simultaneously with a grand leap and flew down the river to the plain, the men in front shouting and scrambling to escape the solid mass of teams coming down upon them. Men could be seen dropping from the rear of wagons in all directions as they rumbled over the sands; I myself slipped through a two foot space between two wagons going at lightening speed. Some of the teams ran into a small creek and could not extricate themselves; others stopped from sheer exhaustion; still others ran two or three miles and were halted by the owners of tied horses that had not gotten away. Strange to say, no serious damage was done, except to the wagon of two Germans, which turned over and was irreparably smashed; the owners barely escaping with their lives. This was our first experience of a genuine stampede, not uncommon in the mountain countries of the west" (Charles Edward Pancoast, A Quaker Forty-Niner [1930], 198-99).
[^22] The new members of the company included Robert Crow, Elizabeth Crow, Benjamin B. Crow, Harriet Crow, Elizabeth Jane Crow, John McHenry Crow, Walter H. Crow, George W. Therlkill, Martilla Jane Therlkill (then seven months pregnant), Milton Howard Therlkill, James William Therlkill, William Parker Crow, Ida Vinda Exene Crow, Ira Minda Almarene Crow, Archibald Little, James Chesney, and Lewis B. Myers. Accompanying Myers were two Indian wives and a number of children (see William Clayton's Journal, 4 June 1847, 215).
[^23] Journal of Nelson Wheeler Whipple, 25 Feb. 1846, LDS Church Archives. "We thus kept a sharp look out for them for we knew as they had slain Joseph and Hyrum so they would slay Brigham, Heber, and the Twelve if they could."
[^28] The definitive works on the history of the Mormon Battalion are Frank Alfred Golder, The March of the Mormon Battalion from Council Bluffs to California (1928); Daniel Tyler, A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion to the Mexican War 1846-1847 (1969); John F. Yurtinus, "A Ram in the Thicket: The Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1975); and Norma Baldwin Ricketts, The Mormon Battalion: U.S. Army of the West, 1846-1848 (1996). See also Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 50-67.
[^29] The best study of Strang still remains Milo Quaife, The Kingdom of Saint James: A Narrative of the Mormons (1930). The most recent reinterpretation is Roger Van Noord's King of Beaver Island: The Life and Assassination of James Jesse Strang (1988). See also Doyle C. Fitzpatrick, The King Strang Story (1970); Richard E. Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 1846-1852: "And Should We Die . . ." (1987), 18-20; The Diary of James J. Strang, ed. Mark A. Strang (1961); William D. Russell, "King James Strang: Joseph Smith's Successor," in The Restoration Movement: Essays in Mormon History, ed. F. Mark McKiernan, Alma R. Blair, and Paul M. Edwards (1973), 231-56. Strang later removed his followers to Beaver Island in northern Lake Michigan, where his settlement realized only modest success.
[^31] Autobiography of Pioneer John Brown, 1820-1896, arr. John Zimmerman Brown (1941), 72-73. See also Jenson, "Day by Day," Deseret News, 31 May 1947. Lay and Crosby later died in California. Flake lived in Salt Lake City for most of his life, dying in Idaho Falls in 1903 at the age of 75.
[^40] William Clayton's Journal, 18 June 1847, 242. The crew left at the North Platte River crossing included some of the best carpenters and blacksmiths in camp: Thomas Grover, captain; John S. Higbee, assistant; Benjamin F. Stewart; James Davenport, blacksmith; William Empey; Luke S. Johnson; Appleton Harmon; Francis M. Pomeroy; and Edmund Ellsworth. Eric Glines decided, against counsel, to stay back with Grover's crew; he later changed his mind and hurried on by himself at considerable danger, catching up with the main camp several miles west.
[^42] Journal of Willard Richards, 14 Mar. 1847. It is interesting to note that in the dreams which Brigham Young said he had of Joseph Smith while preparing for the exodus, Joseph "stepped toward me, and looking very earnestly, yet pleasantly, said `Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. . . . Tell the brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it'" (Journal History, 23 Feb. 1847).
[^43] Little has been written about the costs of the original departures, although much is available on the costs involved in later migrations. This is particularly true of the Perpetual Emigration Fund and the financing of Mormon emigrant companies to Salt Lake City up until at least 1869 and the completion of the transcontinental rail-road. See Leonard J. Arrington's pathbreaking study, Great Basin Kingdom: An Economic History of the Latter-day Saints 1830-1900 (1958), 77-79.
