Richard E. Bennett, We'll Find the Place: The Mormon Exodus 1846-1848 ( 1997)

300"THE OPERATIONS OF THE CHURCH ARE PARALYSED WITH POVERTY"

300The Salvation Missions of 1847-48

300We probably shall remain in this place [Winter Quarters] until next May, if we should live so long and then start for the mountains. . . . I am also destitute of clothing. My old coat that I am now wearing is an old broad cloth . . . as to our cooking utensils we have one pot that we used up on our store, when we had one, one black kettle without a lid, . . . four or five old knives, [and] three old broken forks to eat with. As to earthen dishes we have none. We have four 3-pint tin basins which we brought with us from Massachusetts nearly rusted out so as to have holes in them, 3 or 4 tin pans, 2 or 3 tin plates, 3 britannia cups, one tin cup, one old tin coffee pot and [an] old tea pot. . . . I wish you would write me soon informing me what the prospect is of raising money for me. . . . We fell to the hands of the bishops and are still living on the means of others. [^1]

So wrote a desperate Lyman Hinnman in the summer of 1847. And his condition was representative of hundreds of other families then living in Winter Quarters. Those who had gone ahead in the emigration camp were generally the better prepared and provisioned. For those waiting to follow, their uppermost question was simple: "Where will the money come from?" Even Brigham Young was forced to admit the painfully obvious: "The operations of the Church are paralysed with poverty." [^2]

301Little wonder, then, that the primary reason for the call for missionaries in November 1847, just after the return of the Twelve from the Salt Lake Valley, was to raise money—from anyone, anywhere.

301"I wish that Andrew would send me all the money that he has collected of mine," wrote an anxious John A. Wolfe to his mother in New York in February 1847, "as I am going a long journey and I know not how much expense I may be to before I may again be settled upon a farm." [^3]

301Even the First Presidency was reduced to begging for help. "I am confined to my bed by sickness, and in debt," Willard Richards wrote David Hollister in the spring of 1848. "And I know of no one who has the means. I therefore send to [you], in the name of the Lord, for help, and this the more freely as I know you have the heart to do good . . . so that you can send me one thousand dollars, which will relieve me from my present encumbrances." [^4]

301The poverty alluded to by Hinnman was everywhere. "Our camp is almost universally destitute of sugar and all the comforts of life vested in groceries of any kind," admitted Brigham in a letter to Kane near the end of 1847.

301Almost the entire sustenance of this great people consists in corn and garden vegetables, for our cattle have become few in number and our money expended, so that we cannot purchase pork. . . . We have had no raw material to manufacture; consequently, our clothing is worn and useless or threadbare and cold.

301

301While then, looking round us and seeing this people here in the wilderness, destitute of meat and clothing, the comforts of health and necessaries, of sickness, teams and wagons to move forward, or money to procure them. . . . We feel that it is a fit subject for an appeal to the American people. [^5]

Unable to negotiate any further contracts with the United States for assistance in carrying mail or erecting forts along the Oregon Trail, it was Kane himself who had suggested the propriety of begging missions to the East. Why not make a direct appeal to the sympathies and humanitarian instincts of the American public? If large sums of money could be raised for Irish famine relief ("Black '47" or "the Great Hunger" killed a million Irish and drove a million and a half to America) and for victims of other tragedies, would not the plight of their fellow Americans in the wilderness touch an equally responsive chord?

302Thus was the genesis of the begging missions of the winter of 1847-48, a little known but colorful attempt to rally public sympathy for the plight of the Latter-day Saints. From New Orleans to Charleston, from Cincinnati to Boston, the word had to get out. And in the process, if this small missionary force of some 100 to 150 men, sent literally without purse or scrip, could preach the gospel of gathering, reclaim friends and family members to the faith, deflect Strang and his missionary efforts, and in other ways set the "wheel awhirling," then so much the better. [^6]

302"THE BEST TEA PARTY EVER GOT UP IN WASHINGTON CITY"

302The idea may not have entirely originated with Kane. At the request of Lorenzo Snow, a local leader at Mt. Pisgah, Charles R. Dana and Robert Campbell had earlier embarked on a five-month mission to the east coast, where together they raised a substantial sum of money for the Pisgah settlement. Their journey in the summer and fall of 1847, from the dusty plains of Iowa to the rose gardens of Washington, if not an overwhelming success, proved nonetheless to be an inspiration for the scores to follow them. [^7]

302They left Mt. Pisgah on their foray east in mid-July 1847, retracing their steps to Nauvoo. In Quincy, they called on Jane Brown, a member, who requested of her husband "to loan us some money. He refused to do so, but Sister Brown came . . . and slipped $2.50 into my hand as a donation to assist us on our journey." [^8]

302Soon afterward, while on a Mississippi steamboat southbound for St. Louis, Dana made known their mission to the captain, a Mr. Charles Dean, in hopes of both a discount in the fare and a chance to preach. He was scorned on both counts. "He absolutely refused to give me any privilege of lecturing to the passengers or to take us to St. Louis [for] less than full price," Dana recorded. "He said he knew enough about Mormonism and did not feel disposed to contribute anything to that people. May the Lord reward him according to his works." [^9]

Once in St. Louis, Dana was presented with "a very good second hand hat" by a David Cundling, who had previously given him two shirts, two handkerchiefs, a white cravat, one collar, and one handkerchief. "Sister Levee at St. Louis, drawing by A. C. Warren, engraving by R. Hinshelwood Farnham also gave me a very good undergarment in exchange for a poorer one. May the Lord bless her and all that have administered to our wants and comforts." [^10] And so the curses and blessings followed up and down the river lanes of America.

303Onboard another steamboat, northbound on the Ohio River for Cincinnati, this intrepid companionship had better luck than before, winning permission "to lecture to the passengers which numbered some 150 persons." They must have sounded convincing enough, because afterward Dana "took up a collection [and] got $8.52 for the church. A young woman gave me 25 cents for the children."

303It was on such riverboats that many first heard of the Mormon cause. "After a good deal of talk we retired to the deck," Dana continued,

303and was called upon by a man by the name of Charles Friedman, a Polander and a Jew. He told me had given 50 cents in the cabin, but he would give 50 cents more to be contributed to my own use if I pleased. He also told me it was the first time he had ever heard of Mormonism [and] was much displeased with the manner that we had been treated. Said he came here for freedom but seemed to feel a little uneasy lest he and his people should share the same fate. [^11]

304Making the rounds of editors, bankers, and law firms in Cincinnati, Dana "asked one man to relieve the Mormons. Said he: `I thought the Mormons had all gone to Hell.' I told him that [the] Father had made no such requisition." [^12]

304With Campbell heading south to Fredericksburg, Virginia, to connect up with his companion later in Washington, Dana proceeded north on his own. At Kirtland, Ohio, he met with several "old Mormon families" who had long since abandoned their faith because of one disagreement or another. Staying with relatives of Lorenzo Snow, Dana reported that they "asked how many spiritual wives Lorenzo had. . . . Said if Lorenzo would come back they would be willing to help him. I expect it would be to a coat of tar and feathers, if anything." [^13]

304Eastbound on the Erie Canal, Dana's preaching caught the ear of Joshua R. Giddings, a Congressman from Ohio, who "very readily passed his hat and spoke in our behalf and, I believe, gave one dollar." Hoping to spend the night with his brother's family in Rochester, New York, Dana noticed very quickly that "they did not seem to want me to tarry long with them. Neither did they like my doctrine." Remaining only three hours and just long enough for a short dinner, he was soon on his way again. [^14]

304Once in Philadelphia, Dana met with Thomas L. Kane in order to get the necessary letters of introduction and recommendation to meet with high-ranking government officials. Dana was quick to notice the contrasts between the icy cold receptions so many had shown him and the warmth of Kane. "There we met Col. Kane and counselled with him concerning our mission. He takes the responsibility of laying our claims before the public. Also making his office a place of deposit and of appealing to his personal friends. [He] also intends to carry on the work of gathering means for us during the fall and winter." [^15]

304While awaiting Kane's paperwork, Dana took to visiting the rich and famous in Wilmington, Delaware, and in Baltimore, Maryland. But it is obvious Dana's patience was beginning to wear thin. "Lost most all my religion that I got last evening [at church]," his entry for 27 September began,

but I attribute it to the fact that in soliciting aid from door-to-door I address myself to may persons that had rather give me kicks than coppers and say that the sooner we are out of existence the better for us. But as I feel disposed to pray for them, I ask the good Lord to open the bowels of the Earth, or cause his servants to do it in due time, that such might be soon swallowed up.

305The very next day, while canvasing various Baltimore law firms, the visitor was told by one attorney "that lawyers are hard cases. `Yes' says I, `my Master complained of them in his day, but I was in hopes that they would redeem themselves in this dispensation.'" [^16]

305In Washington Dana joined up with Campbell again and the pair from Pisgah fearlessly continued their rounds, explaining their mission to such officials as John T. Morgan, Secretary of the Navy; William Marcy, Secretary of War; William Medill, Secretary of the Office of Indian Affairs; and the Secretary of State, James Buchanan, who "gave me ten dollars." Finally, after several canceled appointments, Dana gained an audience with President James K. Polk, who listened politely to their message and sympathized with the sorry state of the Latter-day Saints. After their interview, "he referred me to K. Knox Walker, his private secretary, [who] gave me $10 in behalf of the President." [^17]

305At the suggestion of the mayor of Washington, Dana made the rounds of several leading clergymen and, with the support of a Madam Lefevre, struck on the idea of hosting a "Ladies Tea Party" in order to "carry out more effectually the object of raising means to alleviate our present suffering circumstances." Over 600 tickets were printed and newspapers in Washington, Baltimore, and Philadelphia carried notice of the coming event.

305The big night finally arrived on 28 October. Scores of female guests representing Washington's aristocracy began arriving at "Mrs. Reed's" at 7 P.M. "I stood at the entry and sold tickets to the amount of $50," an excited Dana wrote. "Stayed all night in the saloon to keep watch of their silver plate." By the time the evening was over, he counted a contribution of $82.50 and noted that "a colored woman . . . wished to contribute her mite. Accordingly she gave me 12 1/2 cents." [^18] He concluded his summary of the day's successes on an upbeat tone: "The best tea party ever got up in Washington City." [^19]

Dana and Campbell left the capital immediately thereafter by traveling much the same way they had come, arriving back at Mt. Pisgah on 5 December. During their mission, they raised over $300, a good portion of which, however, had been used to meet their expenses. With admirable courage and obvious devotion, they set a standard for many others to follow.

306"LITTLE ELSE BUT INSULTS"

306Whether inspired by the boldness and success of the farm missionaries or concerned that too many voices were representing the Church unofficially in high places, the Council of the Twelve dispatched several of its members to the East and South. Furnished with official papers and assigned to specific missions, the first to leave Winter Quarters was Orson Hyde. His assignment was to return immediately to Philadelphia in Dana's wake and "to make a representation to get another government contract [in addition to the Mormon Battalion] to build forts through the help of [Col.] Kane" who by this time was acting as "our attorney in fact or, if you choose, our special agent." [^20]

306Leaving Miller's Hollow on the east side of the Missouri the second week of December, Hyde arrived in St. Louis after 12 days of hard riding. "But, Oh! To ride on horseback on the prairies, facing a cold wind always, for 450 miles I will not comment on," he wrote. "Neither how badly I was chapped from the calf of the leg to the highest seat of honor on the saddle." [^21]

306Once in St. Louis, in addition to raising $705.84 "from the saints in St. Louis to assist the presidency of the Church to remove to Great Salt Lake Valley," he "also secured a press and type . . . to be sent up by the first boat, with paper, ink, etc., and men to carry it on, also sash, doors, and glass for the house or office." Urging members to contribute liberally, Hyde warned them that if they attempted to hold back unnecessarily, "they would either go out of the Church or lose their money, and perhaps both." [^22]

306The money Hyde raised was immediately deposited with the dry goods firm of Beach and Eddy in St. Louis, as were most other funds raised by other Latter-day Saints elsewhere in America through bank deposit. [^23] With the credit established at Beach and Eddy, every conceivable tool, utensil, conveyance, or other piece of hardware could be purchased and shipped upriver for future migrations.

306Though unsuccessful in persuading Washington to contract out any other projects, Hyde remained in the East for almost two months fulfilling other requests. "I hope you will find the time to visit the best book stores in Boston and New York," Willard Richards asked of his traveling colleague,

307City of St. Louis

307to procure a sample of every useful treatise on juvenile education. Primers, pictorial cards, letters, modern maps, charts, diagrams, easy readings, choice stories, etc.—and any general salesman will be glad to furnish you a specimen for the purpose of making sale to our camp, if he knows his own interest. [^24]

307Three weeks later, Apostles Ezra T. Benson, Amasa Lyman, and Erastus Snow, in company with John Scott, Daniel Davis, William I. Appleby, Preston Thomas, and Thomas Flanigan took leave of Winter Quarters on their eventually separate missions. Their official purpose: "to solicit from the rich Saints and the benevolent of all classes donations for the relief of our poor and to assist the Camp of Israel to move forward to the places of their destination." [^25]

After reaching Savanna, Missouri, some 130 miles south, they were faced with long delays because of ice flows on the Missouri. There the group divided: Benson, Lyman, Appleby, and Snow engaged a lighter, faster carriage to cut across Missouri to Hannibal on the Mississippi side of the state in time to catch a steam packet for St. Louis. Such a decision—to travel directly through the heartland of their Missouri enemies, who had driven out the Mormons just nine years before—demanded a certain amount of caution and imagination. While in Liberty, for instance, they put up at a "Mr. Higgins Hotel" who, as Appleby recorded, was "one of the keepers of the jail in Liberty when Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith and Lyman Wight were incarcerated in there by mobs. . . . Therefore we thought it prudent to keep who we were a secret." He then provided even more details.

308Knowing that bitter enmity still existed towards all that were called `Mormons,' we deemed it prudent to travel `incog' while in Missouri. Accordingly we passed as gentlemen, travelling for our pleasure and convenience under the assumed titles of Col. Benson of Massachusetts, Esqr. Mason of New Hampshire, (Mason being the middle name of Br. Lyman), Dr. Snow of Boston, and Judge Appleby of New Jersey—each one corresponding with our native state. Under the above appellation we travelled and fared well, and good attention and care was our reception at the different hotels and private houses where we put up. [^26]

308Once safely in St. Louis, the new arrivals called two meetings of all the local membership and raised $100, which was used to pay their pending travel costs and to print 3,500 copies of the "General Epistle of the Twelve" at a total cost of $30. Lyman and Appleby attended to the business of proofreading, punctuation, and printing, all of which was done at the office of the St. Louis Republican. [^27] The printing of the general epistle, and this on donated funds, represented the first printing by the Church in America in some two years; it would signal to believers and detractors alike that Mormonism, as it were, was back in business. Only after the printing was completed did the several missionaries leave St. Louis for their respective destinations, each carrying several hundred copies of the freshly printed epistle.

Lyman, Flanigan, and Preston Thomas pursued their mission by steamboat into the southern states, reaching Aberdeen, Mississippi, ("the central point of our mission") early in February. Along the way they preached in Memphis, Holly Springs, and Pantotoc. In addition to preaching, however, they had two other purposes. The first was to persuade as many friends and family members of William Crosby (who had earlier led a company of Mississippi Saints to Fort Laramie; see chapter 6) as possible to move to Winter Quarters. The second was to raise as much money as possible. If he expected persecution and prejudice, Lyman came away surprised: he returned in April with over $1500 ($1368 from Crosby himself) and also with an immigration company led by Crosby and John Brown, "which consisted of some 70 or 80 persons, about half blacks [servants] and 11 wagons." [^28]

309Lyman could speak only superlatively of antebellum southern hospitality. "In all our journeying in the Southern Country," he reported, "we found a general spirit of enquiring after Mormonism. The field is open for a rich harvest." [^29] Lyman and his followers arrived back at Winter Quarters "at dusk" on 9 May 1848.

309Meanwhile, with abundant energy and commitment, Appleby, Snow, and Benson spent their time in Ohio, Pennsylvania, New York, and several New England states, "exhorting and encouraging [the membership] to good works and circulating among them the Epistle of the Twelve." In New York City, they "spent a few days together in visiting the leading men of the city, the rich and the honorable and high minded. From some we received kind treatment, good wishes and free and liberal donations." But from most others: "little else but insults to our persons and contempt of our missions." [^30]

309While in Boston Erastus Snow collected almost $1,000, part of which ($100) came from Josiah Quincy, the mayor of Boston who had long held a very favorable impression of Joseph Smith and the Latter-day Saints. [^31]

309By the time they returned to St. Louis in early April, Snow and Benson had received in cash "about $2,000 besides some hundreds in goods and clothing"—enough money for Beach and Eddy to charter the steamboat Mandan from St. Louis to Winter Quarters for over 100 people and "about 50 tons of goods." [^32]

309And so the begging missions continued through hundreds of different communities and with hundreds of different stories. Thomas McKenzie, for instance, who left early in the spring, preached all over Ohio in towns like Portsmouth, Circleville, and Columbus but with little success.

309In Cincinnati he, like Dana before him, met stern opposition. Finding it too expensive to rent a hall for preaching, he

went from house to house calling on them for books or means to establish schools in the valley. Some that I called on were very abusive and told me to leave quick. They were very bitter to our people. . . . [Some] seem to have the disposition to drive out and destroy us as a people. They asked my how I dared to go round decent people. . . . I told them that they had driven us out from their midst for no other reason than that we maintain that God had the prophet to speak from the Heavens again. [^33]

310And in Columbus, McKenzie tried the same approach with even less success. "I then went around the city from house to house and met with a deal of opposition," he continued.

310I went into the office of Doctor Skinner and found in this office six or eight men and among them a Baptist preacher. . . . The Doctor wanted me to take 4 oz. of poison and the preacher wanted me to perform a miracle. I told the preacher he was following in the footsteps of his master the Devil as he also was a sign seeker. The preacher, finding he could do nothing stirred the others against me but the Lord enabled me to speak to all of them and make the truth manifest. Yet in the whole city of Columbus I could not name one cent and the only person that offered to give me anything to eat was Mr. Lloyd who was very kind to me. He asked me to dinner and said he believed if any were right it was the Mormons. [^34]

310Moving on to Kirtland, he described it as "a den of wild spirits." While in the former Mormon headquarters, he attended in the temple a prayer meeting put on by Martin Harris and William E. McLellin, both of whom were still bitter towards the Church. [^35]

310William Clayton, meanwhile, received permission to revise and correct his emigration guide and prepare it for publication. With the growing number of emigrants heading west (and gold waiting to be found at Sutter's Mill that same season), a ready market might be willing to purchase an accurate and detailed guide to the west. Asked on several occasions to let out handwritten copies of the guide for his personal profit, Clayton declined. "I have had application for several copies," he admitted in a letter to Brigham, "but have not attempted to let one go without your permission." [^36]

310He and Lucius Scovil set out for St. Louis early that winter. By March 1848, Clayton could report that he had succeeded in publishing 5,000 copies of his guide, a work that soon won the attention and approval of overlanders everywhere as one of the finest works of its kind. [^37]

The success of these missions, if measured only in dollars and cents, was not spectacular. As Snow put it, after subtracting their expenses, they netted "a very paltry sum to be sure when the necessities of our people are compared with the wealth of the South and East from which this title was received." [^38]

311However, they raised an estimated $10,000, no small feat considering a disbelieving and distrustful public and a hit-and-miss, one-time-only approach to fund-raising. It was money needed at a most critical hour that provided encouragement and hope to the waiting parties of emigrants. Perhaps these emissaries succeeded in less measurable ways, because "the most important feature of these missions," concluded Erastus Snow, "was in the fact that our application to the rich and the municipal authorities of the East afforded us an opportunity to prove before God and man the extent of their pretended sympathy for the exiled Saints." [^39]

311"WE HAVE NOW WHIPPED ALL OF OUR ENEMIES WITH ONE HAND TIED BEHIND US"

311Of no less strategic importance to the welfare of the Church than the begging missions was the decision to revive their once sagging fortunes in the British Isles and to promulgate the gathering overseas. Since the evacuation of Nauvoo, British emigration had been at bay, stymied by the uncertain course of the exodus and the crisis of confidence in leadership (see chapter 1). Although John Taylor and Parley P. Pratt had cleaned house and remedied the situation the winter before, lingering problems remained.

311An anxious Orson Spencer, assigned to remain in England to supervise Church affairs, could only see the positives and the limitless possibilities. During 1847 he liquidated almost half the debts run up by Reuben and Hedlock's joint stock scheme and restored a new sense of confidence. "The Saints in this land are united, peaceful and increasing in faith," he wrote. "The spirit of apostasy is as still as the grave. No one dares to move his tongue. . . . The increase of the Church during this year will probably not be less than 6,000, some say 8,000." Spencer was obviously buoyed at the reaccelerating rate of conversion.

311The problem, however, was one of money, not desire.

The Saints are poor and constantly urgent to emigrate. I am teased continually. They say, "Our means are lessening all the time and soon we shall have none to help ourselves to emigrate." If the times do not improve, many are bent on going to some parts of America for work, at all events. Now in case they cannot emigrate to the proper destination, have you any special counsel to give them? [^40]

312Spencer, himself, made a special plea to return to America and rejoin his now motherless family. "I am willing to stay or go," he said in a letter to Brigham.

312At the same time I love my young and tender family, and would love to guide the dear orphans with a father's care. . . . They are anxious to have me return to them. They have suffered not a little since I left them. Their oxen and cows and horse have all died save one and they have lived some of the time without flour, meal or meat, floor, door or window. [^41]

312Spencer's pleadings must have struck a responsive chord, because in December, Orson Pratt was called to go to England on a short mission, replace Spencer, and take charge of the British Mission. Pratt did not finally get away until the following May, when he and Levi Richards departed on their new assignment in company with five others. [^42] Assigned to serve as emigration agent in New Orleans was Lucius N. Scovil, whose duties would be to supervise the arrival of the imminent British contingents and their forward migration by steamboat, via St. Louis, to the Bluffs. In the meantime, Wilford Woodruff was assigned to visit New England and the Maritime provinces of British North America.

312Furnished with ample quantities of the general epistle, the British emissaries also carried with them instructions to collect and bring back as much tithing as possible. "Exert yourself to gather up tithing," wrote Brigham in his letter of release to Spencer,

312and bring it with you in order to prepare for glass, nails, paints and such other articles as will be needed to bring from the States to assist in building up the Temple of the Lord in the Valley of the Great Salt Lake. And I earnestly desire Elders Orson Pratt and Levi Richards will use all their energies on this subject and assist you in gathering in the tithing until the time of your departure. [^43]

The first manifestation of the resumption of British emigration came on 18 January 1848 when a small handful of Latter-day Saints left Liverpool on board the Ringfield, arriving in New Orleans 16 March 1848. [^44] A month later, on 21 February, 120 Latter-day Saints sailed down the Mersey River, also bound for New Orleans, most of them paying their own way. And on 9 March, another 80 came on board the ship Sailor Prince. By the end of 1848, 650 British converts had made the long and dangerous voyage to New Orleans, where Scovil awaited them. What resumed as a mere trickle rose to a substantial stream of new faces in the years to come. Between 1849 and 1852, 26 schooners carried another 6,130 British Saints to their new home in America. [^45]

313Ironically, one reason for the reinvigoration of the British missionary efforts had been the rumored arrival of some of James Strang's more notable missionaries. That Strang was still a thorn in the Mormon side is evident in the wording of the general epistle itself where, in the very same paragraph declaring the reorganization of the First Presidency, there appeared this warning: "Since the murder of President Joseph Smith, many false prophets and false teachers have arisen, and tried to deceive many, during which time we have mostly tarried with the body of the Church, or been seeking a new location, leaving these prophets and teachers to run their race undisturbed, who have died natural deaths, or committed suicides." [^46]

313Strang, who had made significant gains in Illinois and Wisconsin and among the eastern branches of the Church, particularly in New York and Pennsylvania, dispatched to England such new and well-known conscripts as Martin Harris, one of the Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon. In company with Lester Brooks, "old Bump" (as he was called) preached among several British Mormon congregations in late 1846. But their message fell largely on deaf ears. "They are determined to maintain their ground in that country at all costs," scribbled Brooks in a letter to George Adams. [^47] Harris hurt his own cause by his rambling, self-condemning style of preaching and his lukewarm support of the Voree prophet. More an embarrassment and a hindrance than an advantage to the Strangite cause, Harris was discharged and returned to Ohio.

The failure of Martin Harris notwithstanding, Strang redoubled his overseas missionary efforts, convinced that the British Saints, whom he perceived as poor, restless, and discouraged, surely promised a fertile field. In the spring of 1847, another delegation, this time led by John E. Page, returned to England to resume where Harris had left off. However, due to the widespread circulation of the Millennial Star and its effective criticisms of Strang and his message, the disorganized and intermittent nature of his proselyting attempts, and the quick action of the Twelve to restore confidence and to revive immigration, Strang's message never gained a British following.

314Consequently he concentrated his major efforts among Latter-day Saint branches in Illinois, Wisconsin, New York, and Pennsylvania. In fact, rarely did his missionaries proselyte outside the Mormon communities. Despite Strang's limited focus and every effort to downplay or even disregard his rearguard action, his success was a concern. [^48] Far more than the pretensions of Sidney Rigdon to start his own church (whose following was already in decline) or any other, Strang must be regarded as a contributing factor in the mission calls of 1847-48. Jonathan C. Wright, Thomas McKenzie, James H. Glines, and several others were instructed to return to Illinois, eastern Iowa, and Wisconsin "to gather up the saints," "to hunt up saints that had been driven out of Nauvoo," and to stem the tide of defections. Even those missionaries who went to the east coast were instructed to contend with the Strang issue.

314As early as February 1847, the Strangites (as they became popularly known) "had assumed the jurisdiction of the conference in western New York and were misguiding many." [^49] Throughout 1847 they were canvassing throughout the eastern branches with some notable success in New York. [^50] Reuben Miller, an eloquent Mormon preacher sent back earlier to reclaim Strang's believers, had previously converted to Strangism long enough to take many with him and, in his own eyes, make a fool of himself. "You know that this imp of Satan his injured me much and deceived me," he lamented in early 1847, "and led me into error, so that I denied the true authority and by that means lost blessings that may never be conferred on me. Now, while I have my foot on his neck, I feel like giving him what he so richly deserves." [^51] With the vengeful zeal of one once betrayed, Miller went on to become one of Strang's most bitter enemies, publishing waybills, pamphlets, and broadsides critical of the Wisconsin prophet.

Strang's influence peaked in early 1848. The schism promoted by the earlier departure of Aaron Smith as a counselor in the First Presidency was but a minor deflection. Although William Smith converted over for a time, he was regarded, even by Strang's followers, as an opportunist, unstable emotionally, morally, and financially. [^52] More disappointing was their failure to attract Emma Smith and Lucy Smith to the fold. [^53] By late 1848, because of economic constraints and the inability to buy sufficient lands for a temple, Strang decided to relocate his Zion to Beaver Island, in northern Lake Michigan, in the spring of 1849. Eventually over 2,600 of his followers settled on Beaver Island, much to the consternation of local residents and fishermen, who viewed these "Mormon" newcomers with thinly-veiled contempt. In 1850 Strang printed his Book of the Law of the Lord and was crowned king of the Kingdom of God on earth. One of his most famous recruits while on Beaver Island was George Miller who had severed his connections with Brigham Young back at Winter Quarters in early 1847.

315The downturn in Strang's fortunes can be traced to the reversal of his stand on the practice of plural marriage. Most damaging was the method of compromise. Many of those who had come with him in the first instance had done so because of their opposition to polygamy. To many of them, it came as a hard blow to learn that after meeting Elvira Field, a young Michigan schoolteacher, Strang had not only secretly married her but had also disguised her as a clerk, taking her with him all over the eastern branches in 1849 under the name of Charles C. Douglas. Once the suspicions of many were confirmed, Strang announced a new revelation condoning the practice. But for many, the damage was irrevocable. If they found the doctrine detestable, then the deception was despicable. Despite these setbacks, Strang and his declining colony continued on Beaver Island until his assassination in the summer of 1856, after which mobs drove more than 2,000 of his followers from the Island. [^54]

315Very few of Strang's disenchanted followers ever came west. Along with others who believed in the Book of Mormon but could not follow Brigham Young, many eventually gravitated into the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, which young Joseph Smith III was persuaded to organize and lead in 1860. A demographic profile of the earliest RLDS membership shows a disproportionately large percentage of the total centered in eastern Iowa, Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin, and Missouri—"stay backs" from the exodus.

315Jonathan C. Wright, while back in Illinois in the winter of 1847-48 on his mission, used every stratagem in his power to revive the faithful. "Go immediately west," he warned his listeners, "for your salvation depended on it." [^55] But in Alton, Springfield, and elsewhere he found bitter opposition to plural marriage. "Cold and dead and some twice dead and plucked up by the roots," he wrote. Others were "cold as a frozen potato." [^56]

Whatever the real or perceived threat from Strang, by the spring of 1848 Mormon leaders were sounding confident, if for no other reason than that the Latter-day Saints had weathered a wilderness exile and located a new mountain home. It was all enough for Brigham to say, "We have now whipped all of our enemies with one hand tied behind us." [^57]

316The exodus may have lost more to indifference than to doctrinal discord. Many could ill afford the move west and, without local support or Church leadership, drifted away. Some were too sick to travel, while several decided not to leave their families. Others became rich while waiting in St. Louis or thriving on rich Iowa farmland and were hesitant to surrender what they had worked so hard to achieve. Such resented the constant call to sacrifice and "are fearful that they will be tithed too much. A number," wrote Orson Hyde in the spring of 1848, "are about ready to declare their independence, pay no more tithing and take no counsel but their own." [^58] And as Noah Packard said of many still in Iowa: "There is a number of people in this region of country [Grant County] that are or have been Latter-day Saints, but as the saying is, they most of them lie low and keep dark, some for the sake of popularity join other denominations." [^59]

316And for some, there may have been one too many real or imagined personal offenses—a wagon borrowed and never returned, a disproportionate share of the promised goods, a bishop who may have played favorites, or any one of the very human reasons that have always tested the soul of allegiance. Some had overestimated their leaders and allowed the resultant disappointment to derail their faith. Brigham constantly warned against the gullibility and naivete of his people. "Let them be good Saints in whom you have reason to repose confidence," he warned by letter and by sermon.

316Many have come into this Church with a large amount of means and property, and they have bestowed it on Tom, Dick, and Harry, who have afterwards treated them scandalously, and it not only stumbles and shakes their faith in those persons, but they lose confidence in all their brethren and lose the good spirit; this leads to apostasy. Therefore, I would say, be judicious and wise with your means. . . . I would thus caution you against the rocks and precipices and danger on which others have stumbled, and some have become wrecked, driven to and fro till totally engulfed in the great deep of unbelief. [^60]

316And on another occasion:

317If you have the good, charitable, mild, energetic Spirit of the Lord you will look over your brother's imperfections and look at your own, and you will find enough to do to wet your own garden, at least I have found it so with me. And if I had feeling[to[ward] my Brethren and they wronged me, I would go according to the laws of Christ and be reconciled, and have satisfaction. [^61]

317Charles Dana and Jonathan Wright's missionary efforts in Nauvoo's outlying communities may indicate that defection and stay back rates were higher outside of Nauvoo. A higher percentage of those in outlying communities than those in Nauvoo did not emigrate to the west. In addition to those who went with Strang, an estimated 2,000 to 3,000 never made it across the Mississippi River. [^62]

317"HAS THE LORD TURNED BANKRUPT?" — THE NAUVOO TRUSTEES

317While others were out filling short-term begging missions, there were three still in Nauvoo begging to be released from an extended special mission of their own. Appointed Nauvoo Trustees by the Twelve back on 4 January 1846, just one month before the first departures from Nauvoo, Joseph L. Heywood, John S. Fullmer, and Almon W. Babbitt had been empowered to represent the Church as well as many of its Nauvoo citizens. Their instructions had been to remain in the city and to supervise the many matters of unfinished business inevitably left behind in the wake of a forced evacuation. "I appointed the Trustees myself," Brigham noted, "Babbitt for lawyer, Fullmer for bulldog and growl, and Heywood to settle debts." [^63] What they had anticipated would take no more than a year to complete dragged on for over three. Living through the darkest days of a city in fast decline, the Nauvoo Trustees' work is an unheralded story.

The three men were as well suited for their assignments as they were different in temperament, background, and training. Joseph Leland Heywood, 31 years of age, was from Massachusetts. He moved to Quincy, Illinois, in 1838; there he entered into the mercantile business with his brother-in-law. Four years later, he converted to Mormonism but did not move to Nauvoo until 1845. For a short period of time he ran a store on Main Street. Heywood, who knew as many of the anti-Mormons as the Mormons, was the diplomat—an intelligent, well-educated man, tall and slim in stature, with a kind and affable disposition. He was also good with figures. He had the knack of defusing potentially explosive situations.

318 John S. Fullmer, 39 years of age in 1846 and the oldest of the three, was from Pennsylvania. He became quite a wealthy landowner in Nauvoo and fought in the Battle of Nauvoo. He was apparently a man of detail and assertion, one who could hold his own in any argument and give as much as he took.

318Almon W. Babbitt, the least likeable of the three, was a caustic, 32-year-old, ambitious lawyer. Babbitt had converted back in 1830, had been a member of Zion's Camp in 1834, and had assisted in the earlier closing up of Church affairs in Kirtland, Ohio. A cross of the brashness of a Sam Brannan and the ego of a George Miller, Babbitt was not fully trusted, even by his fellow trustees, and was suspected of advancing his own interests before those of the Church. Nevertheless he owned the legal skills necessary to settle in and out of court a host of complex issues. [^64]

318Their task proved overwhelming. Allowed to remain in the city with their families long enough to complete their assignment, their lives were in constant danger. Their first responsibility had been to confer with the Quincy and Carthage Committees, as representatives of the Twelve, and postpone the inevitable capture of the city. They needed to buy time for the departure of the poor and the sick and also to sell off properties to interested buyers at still-decent prices. Once the Battle of Nauvoo ended in September 1846, with its consequent destruction and devastation of property values, the task of disposing of Church and private real estate became even more difficult.

318In addition to selling Church properties, including the temple (see chapter 1), they were responsible for paying outstanding Church debts, contesting legal actions, helping the poor and destitute still languishing behind, and keeping a watchful and caring eye on Emma Smith, widow of the Prophet, and her immediate family as well her mother-in-law, Lucy Mack Smith.

They also represented the private business concerns of many former citizens. Properties were to be sold at the best price possible and the proceeds credited either against past debts or toward future purchases. Individual tithing accounts often needed settling; those who had been advanced Church teams and wagons on credit had no other form of repayment. Several men who had worked as laborers on the construction of the temple were still unpaid. And when time permitted, the trustees were also to push the cause of gathering, counter opposition, and allay discontent—and all this as a Church calling without remuneration.

319Misunderstood and unappreciated by their own people, whose property values plummeted as the city emptied, and distrusted by the anti-Mormons, who viewed them contemptuously as the last vestiges of an evil empire, the trustees inherited a lose-lose situation. Almost everyone with Nauvoo property and improvements got far less than they needed or deserved—no more than one-eighth the value and often far less than that at sale. [^65] Ill feelings inevitably developed.

319"The perplexity of business we can stand tolerably well," lamented Fullmer in a June 1846 letter,

319but when we do all that God gives us wisdom and liberty to do, and then to be reported, every now and then to [your] camp, for mal treatment, mal practice or some other mal, is going . . . rather too steep. But we know that we have a conscience void of offence and I believe that our President will do us justice. [^66]

319After Nauvoo's surrender, Heywood and Fullmer did all in their power to raise money to find food and supplies for the sick and dying. With Babbitt back east on other business, Fullmer remained home to deal with emergency matters while Heywood scoured up and down the Mississippi, in search of funds for the poor camps. Writing from St. Louis in October, Heywood painted a sad picture. "I am here for the purpose of soliciting aid for our destitute brethren and sisters embracing a great portion of the lame, halt and blind of the Church whose situation is totally deplorable scattered along the bank of the river opposite to Nauvoo." [^67]

Concerned that Strang was maneuvering for possession of the temple, all three trustees travelled to Voree in early January 1847 to visit a repentant Reuben Miller and other friends and to listen to Strang preach. Their purpose was to try to ascertain his real intentions and to discover Emma's. Emma, a close friend to William Marks, former Nauvoo stake president and a convert to Strang, had left Nauvoo at peril of her life and family during the Battle of Nauvoo to settle upstream temporarily in Fulton, Illinois. In Voree that January, Emma refused invitations to hear Strang preach and rejected every persuasion to join his cause. [^68] Always suspicious of Strang's pretentiousness and claims to leadership, Emma returned home to Nauvoo in the spring of 1847 with her three sons—Joseph, Alexander, and David—to take up residence once again in the charred and desecrated remnants of the City Beautiful.

320Meanwhile, Babbitt, seeing their inability to find western buyers for the temple, made a trip east to Kirtland and New York in an attempt to sell both the Kirtland and the Nauvoo Temples to eastern interests. More than anything else, a temple sale would signify a successful end to their assignment. [^69]

320Babbitt returned with mixed results at best. The good news, at least from his perspective, was that he had been able to sell some Kirtland properties while blocking the sale of the Kirtland Temple by opponents of the Church. The bad news was recognition of "some forty suits of different kinds commenced against the Trustees," some for moneys lost as far back as the Kirtland bank collapse in 1837. [^70]

320The worst news, at least in the eyes of his colleagues, was Babbitt's perceived bungling of a very real sale opportunity. "We both feel quite dissatisfied with the mission of Bro. Babbitt east," a tired Heywood wrote in April 1847. To their way of thinking, Babbitt had kept them uninformed of his real intentions and worse, had backed away from a chance to sell the Nauvoo temple for $100,000 for inexplicable reasons. "You can judge of our feelings when it seemed as if there was a reasonable prospect of sale," complained Heywood, "and those prospects were blighted by the inattention and darkness of mind of one in whom we had a right to confide." [^71]

320Whatever the origin and outcome of Babbitt's mission, Brigham chose not to chastise his unruly, independent-minded subordinate, at least not at this time, but on hearing of the failed sale, he turned defiant:

320Has the Lord turned bankrupt? Or are his children so needy that they are obliged to sell their father's house for a morsel of bread? And if they should sell, how much bread would they get, after they had paid some millions of unjust debts, mortgages, cancelled claims, demands, attachments, fines, forfeitures, stripes, imprisonments, massacres, lawsuits, judgments, and the whole etceteras that united mobocracy could bring against you, before you could get one dollar removed from the vault to a place of safety. We leave you to answer this question.

Brigham concluded his letter with instructions to rent the temple and then "repair forthwith to this place with all your surplus funds and the . . . Emma Smith, portrait by Lee Greene Richards books, records, papers, and moveable effects belonging to the Church." [^72] And by vote of the Twelve, "it was resolved unanimously that we have the utmost confidence in the faithful discharge of their duties as Trustees-in-Trust in Nauvoo . . . and we tender to them our thanks and pray our Father in Heaven . . . to bless and prosper them." [^73]

321Heywood, unfortunately, took ill in May of 1847 and was unable to move west. Instead, he went to Quincy for care and recuperation. Fullmer and Babbitt were also detained, largely because of the late arrival of Church-owned lumber (via the Mississippi River) from the Wisconsin pineries, the sale of which was to pay off several pressing debts. "Some of our creditors have been to visit us and although disappointed at our delinquencies, they still manifest every confidence in our integrity." [^74]

321The anxious, restless trio would almost certainly have left Nauvoo in the fall of 1847 and "let the owls and bats revel in the habitation of the saints" had it not been for another major obstacle. On 23 December 1847, the Reverend William Hany, a Methodist preacher, performed the marriage of Joseph's widow, Emma, then 43 years of age, to Lewis C. Bidamon in the Carthage courthouse. [^75] Their marriage sent immediate shock waves throughout the scattered Mormon communities, especially at Winter Quarters.

Brigham Young and Emma had long been in conflict over the sale of properties and the issue of plural marriage, which Emma would not believe her husband had ever practiced. Brigham and the Twelve and scores of other men and women believed otherwise. Both looked at the sale of properties in Joseph's name as trustee for the Church as belonging to themselves. Such disagreement festered until the two were hardly on speaking terms, each one feeling betrayed by the other. John M. Bernhisel remained the last, best connection between Emma and the fleeing Latter-day Saints, but when he left in the summer of 1847 only the trustees were left to take his place. And while they tried to keep in contact, Babbitt, in particular, was an offence to Emma. He only exacerbated an already strained relationship when, on hearing of her marriage to Bidamon, he allegedly charged over to her home in an outrage and accused her of forsaking the faith. [^76]

322The overriding sentiment among most Latter-day Saints on hearing of Emma's remarriage was one of disappointment, if not disbelief, mixed with pity and anger. She was still loved and respected and many sympathized with her at the tragic loss of her husband. But Emma's actions were indeed a mystery, even to her many defenders. In the darkest days of Nauvoo's decline and fall, when all were leaving everything and at peril of their lives and families, many wondered and some took offence at her inaction and ultimate desire to stay back. For all her hurts, were her sorrows any greater than theirs? Were her personal and doctrinal differences so irreconcilable as to sever years of friendship and association? Why, when so many were sick and dying, did she not lend her love and help as in the past? Her stubborn aloofness raised a cluster of questions and inflicted many wounds.

322And her marriage to Bidamon only deepened the collective disappointment. Though Bidamon was known by all alike as a friend to the Saints and a defender of Nauvoo, he had a less than sterling reputation and could not in any way be construed as a religious man. While some wondered how she could ever marry again, let alone to a nonbeliever, others were chagrined and crestfallen at what her marriage signified—a divorce with Mormonism, if not a repudiation of what her husband had lived and died for, a certain signal that she would never come west or bring her three sons. It was an irreconcilable parting of the ways.

Within days of their marriage, the Bidamons launched legal action to block any further sales of properties in Nauvoo—including the temple—that were in the name of Joseph as trustee. Their argument was that such transfer was illegal according to an obscure Illinois law that prohibited any religious corporation from holding more than ten acres of property. Acting under counsel of their own, the Bidamons argued that Joseph was not entitled to transfer such properties to the Church and that since many of the properties had been deeded to Joseph and Emma, she had prior claim to them. "This places [us] in the extremest difficulties as to title," Babbitt reported, "while it destroys the confidence of everyone and prevents those who would have purchased from doing so . . . a complete estoppel of our selling lands in the city." [^77] No doubt Emma's purpose in bringing such action was to reclaim properties she felt belonged to the family and to repay some of the $70,000 in personal debts left by her husband. The truth is that neither the Church nor Emma realized much from the Nauvoo sales. [^78]

323Recognizing the impediment this action placed against all further sales, Fullmer expressed resignation, dejection, and a mounting compulsion to get away. "I do hope that it may not be my lot to have to remain here till such decision is had," he pleaded. "My heart is in the west with the Brethren, and I hope that I shall, in some way, be able to remove my family thither. . . . God is the helmsman of our bark, and he will run her into port yet, and in a way that perhaps we cannot see." [^79]

323Fullmer and Heywood finally received the much wanted go-ahead to quit Nauvoo in the spring of 1848. Their official release followed on 1 August, when they were formally replaced by David Cowen and John Snider. [^80] Both men hurried to Winter Quarters in time to catch the last emigration train of the year, under the command of Willard Richards, and reached the valley 19 October 1848. Heywood became postmaster of the Great Salt Lake City the following spring and later served several other missions. Fullmer later moved to Davis County and eventually to Springville.

323Babbitt remained behind, attending to various Church matters and promoting his own political interests. Later he became secretary of the Territory of Utah. Babbitt was killed in an Indian attack while traveling on the plains in 1856. [^81]

323The mission of the Nauvoo Trustees was difficult and demanding. Clearly they realized only a small fraction of the true value of most of the lands they were able to sell. Neither did they capitalize on any real chance of selling the temple. Nevertheless, they appeared to have done much, perhaps the best they could under such strained conditions. They certainly enabled many to come west who might not otherwise have been able to do so, and they mitigated circumstances that might have ended in tragedy for many others. And the trustees were responsible for sending west various supplies, equipment, libraries, and countless personal effects. [^82]

323"COME AND RETURN TO OUR FATHER'S HOUSE"

Of all the Winter Quarters missions of 1847-48, none was more successful or gratifying than that assigned to Phineas Young. On returning from the Valley with the company of the Twelve, it was apparent that the time was ripe for him to make one last effort to reclaim his brother-in-law, Joseph Smith's scribe in translating the Book of Mormon and one of the Three Witnesses—Oliver Cowdery. Cowdery had made it known for some time that he was seriously considering returning to the fold after a separation of almost 10 years. After leaving the Church in Far West, Missouri, in 1838, Cowdery practiced law in Ohio from 1840 until 1847 and then moved to Wisconsin to join his brother. Only modestly successful in the law, Cowdery had kept in close and friendly contact with the Church through Phineas Young. At one point, late in the summer of 1843, he had even considered moving to Nauvoo. [^83]

324Oliver Cowdery

324After the death of Joseph Smith, an event that likely had a profound effect on him, Cowdery offered his services to the Twelve as an "agent to see President Polk on the subject of removal westward, if the council desired." [^84] Further evidence indicates that he seriously considered moving west to join the migrations. [^85] But plagued by increasingly poor health and financial setbacks, Cowdery chose not to come.

324Whatever his circumstance, by the time the Twelve returned to Winter Quarters, Brigham obviously felt that Cowdery would be receptive to a personal invitation. "As we have frequently heard you through our mutual brother, Phinehas H. Young," Brigham wrote in November 1847,

we improve the present moment . . . of expressing to you our unbounded confidence and joy in those principles and doctrines of the Church . . . which we have so long taught and practiced amid scenes of persecutions and blood, and many of which, in former days, we have listened to with delight from your lips, and to the truth of which, we have heard you testify with unshaken confidence and to say to you in the spirit of Jesus, and by the calling whereunto we have been called, "Come, for all things are now ready, and the Spirit and the Bride say Come and return to our Father's House, from whence thou hast wandered, and partake of the fatted calf, and sup and be filled." [^86]

325Cowdery responded directly in February, stating that he would visit the Mormon settlements early in the spring, "say as soon as the 6th of April, if possible." He likewise indicated he looked forward to "seeing many valuable old friends" and "of conversing on interesting subjects." [^87]

325Because of rapidly declining health and lack of means, Cowdery and his wife were unable to make it to the Bluffs that spring. Phineas himself went to Wisconsin in May to "bring him up" in the fall. The two men obviously discussed his return and many of the original differences which had led him out of the Church. Although it has been argued that Cowdery's real intent in returning was neither an endorsement of Brigham Young as President nor an acceptance of the direction of the Church but rather an attempt to regain leadership position and right many wrongs, the evidence suggests otherwise. [^88]

325The truth of the matter is that he had no other intention than to rejoin the Church as a humble member, despite past differences and hurts. He was too sick to do otherwise and may have recognized that his time was short. "His only ambition seemed to be to give himself and the remainder of his life to the Church," said Samuel W. Richards of Cowdery in 1848. [^89]

325Cowdery arrived in Kanesville some time in the middle of October and spoke to a large audience in the Kanesville tabernacle on 24 October. Wrote one eyewitness: "He bore a strong testimony to the authenticity of the Book of Mormon, and declared that an angel conferred the Priesthood on Joseph Smith and himself." [^90]

325George A. Smith, another witness of Cowdery's remarks, said that some time later, he and Orson Hyde spent an entire evening with Cowdery. "He told us he had come to listen to our counsel and would do as we told him. . . . He said that Joseph Smith had fulfilled his mission faithfully before God. . . . He was determined to rise with the church, and if it went down he was willing to go down with it." [^91]

325Cowdery's further comments during readmission hearings on his behalf some two weeks later are particularly helpful in understanding his true intentions. After speaking relative to his feelings, his long absence from the Church, and his reasons for leaving, he concluded:

326I feel that I can [now] honorably return. I have sustained an honorable character before the world during my absence from you. . . . I have ever had the honor of the kingdom in view and men are to be judged by the testimony given. I feel to sanction what has been said today. I am out of the church. I know the door into the church, and I wish to become a member through the door. I wish to be a humble, private member. I did not come here to seek honor.

326After his remarks and a great many questions from those in attendance, which queries Cowdery answered to the satisfaction of the entire Pottawattamie High Council, George W. Harris moved and E. M. Green seconded that "he be permitted to come in at the door he is so well acquainted with." About 2 P.M., 12 November 1848, in company with Reuben Miller who had also sought readmission of the same council, Cowdery was baptized under the hands of Orson Hyde. [^92]

326In retrospect, Cowdery's return, as important as it stands in the history of the Church, probably was as much the result of the personal ministry and unending interest of one man, Phineas Young, as any doctrinal or personal reconciliation. Phineas never gave up and repeatedly went far out of his way to persuade and inform. His was a mission of enduring importance. Unable to make the desired trek to the west, Cowdery wintered with his wife's relatives in Richmond, Missouri, some 250 miles southeast. Continued ill health forced him to stay in Richmond throughout 1849. He died 3 March 1850. [^93]

326The winter of 1847-48 was as busy a season as yet seen, despite the cold, and is important to this study for many reasons. Every effort possible was made to raise badly needed funds, reclaim doubters, put down contenders, sell off properties, and spur on the cause of gathering. With the various missions completed and Winter Quarters in the process of crossing east to the Iowa side, a general conference convened in April in the log tabernacle. Uppermost in their various sermons were plans and preparations for the 1848 migrations. The actual departure of the wagon trains waited for the arrival of several wagons from the Crosby settlements in the south and various shiploads of equipment from St. Louis. It would appear that the 1848 migrations were even larger than those of a year before—almost 2,000 souls in 623 wagons. [^94] And they all went west according to "The Word and Will of the Lord." Brigham Young left the Missouri for the last time on 26 May 1848, never to return from the valley he and so many others had come to call home.

327NOTES

327Apostle Orson Hyde, ecclesiastical leader over the Council Bluffs and Iowa settlements, on hearing of these early money missions, felt the cart was way ahead of the horse—"an imposition," he called it, without authority; he was displeased with Lorenzo Snow for sending them. "Mt. Pisgah and Garden Grove are celebrated for these kinds of missions and perhaps selfishness has prompted them," he said in a letter to Brigham (Orson Hyde to Brigham Young, 12 Nov. 1847, Brigham Young Papers).

327Brigham, however, was disinclined to censure the grit and tenacity of his people, especially when at the time he himself had been a thousand miles away in the mountains. He considered it better to commend initiative than to stifle it. Nevertheless, he did instruct them to turn over "all such money and goods or effects as you have collected" to Hyde at the appropriate moment (Brigham Young to Robert Campbell and Charles R. Dana, 6 Dec. 1847, Brigham Young Papers).

328The Beach and Eddy firm lasted only a couple of years afterward, apparently destroyed in the great St. Louis fire of 1850.

328That so important a document in Latter-day Saint history as the "General Epistle" of the Twelve had to be printed with "begging" funds is telling evidence of the very real poverty that gripped the Church at this critical time.

328Preston Thomas returned to the South later in 1848 to visit Lyman Wight at his settlement at Zodiac, Texas. Wight, once a trusted friend and confidant of Joseph Smith and an Apostle until his excommunication in 1848, had turned bitter against Brigham Young's plan of exodus. Once convinced that the presidency of the Church belonged to Joseph's son Joseph Smith III by right of blood line succession, Wight gave up that idea and came to see himself as the rightful heir. "If they wanted anything of him they must come and see him for he would not go to see them and that he considered them all apostates" (Journal of Preston Thomas).

For several months in late 1848, Lyman dispatched several missionaries of his own to the Kanesville area in a largely futile attempt to dissuade migration to the west and to increase acceptance of him as the new Mormon prophet. George Miller, on quitting the Mormon camps, visited with Wight and evaluated his claims closely before leaving him to follow Strang. "Lymanism," as his brand of Mormonism came to be called, eventually fell on hard times, and most of his followers eventually deserted him. Wight died in relative obscurity in 1858.

329For a more comprehensive study of Wight's Texas settlement and defection, see Bitton, "Mormons in Texas," Arizona and the West 2 (Spring 1969): 5-26. See also Bennett, "Lamanism, Lymanism and Cornfields," Journal of Mormon History 13 (1986-87): 45-59 for a look at Wight's proselyting efforts in the Kanesville area in 1848 and 1849.

329That later travelers used Clayton's work is abundantly proven. For one of scores of examples, see Journal of Silas Newcombe, 4 June 1850. Because of Clayton's painstaking detail and accuracy, his guide was used even more than were Fremont's earlier works and became a standard text for overland trail migration for many years.

329An unofficial and partial listing of those who served missions in the winter of 1847-48, in addition to those already mentioned, is as follows:

329

329#Phineas Young

329(General Church Minutes, 23 Nov. 1847).

330See also the reminiscence of W. W. Blair, 14 Feb. 1878, RLDS Church Archives, for an understanding of the general disrespect even those who stayed back had for William Smith.

Indications are that Babbitt was acting under secret commission of the Twelve, at least while he was in Kirtland. Unlike the Nauvoo Temple, which had been deeded to Joseph Smith Jr. as "Trustee-in-Trust for the Church and his successor as trustee for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," a matter then still unresolved—the Kirtland Temple deed read for disposal only by the "President of the Church or his successor, to the use of the members of the Church of Christ" (italics added). In other words, their organization of a new Kirtland church was little more than a legal maneuver to gain possession of the temple (see Minutes of the Twelve, 22 Jan. 1848, Brigham Young Papers; see also Reuben McBride to Brigham Young, 1 Nov. 1848, Brigham Young Papers.) According to McBride, Harris and McLellin would also try to persuade David Whitmer to join their cause.

---
Notas:
[^2] Throughout October, others of the original pioneer camp arrived back, including John Smith and Tunis Rappleye on 21 October and John Pack on 24 October (Historical Department Journals, 3-30 Oct. 1847).
[^5] For good accounts of the history of Nauvoo see the following works: Joseph Smith Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (1973), especially vols. 3-5 [cited hereafter as History of the Church]; B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. (1930), esp. vols. 2-3 [cited hereafter as Comprehensive History of the Church]; Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (1965); and David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (1974).
[^9] The killing of Jacob Weatherby is the only documented instance of a fatal encounter between Indians and Mormons in all of 1847. Having gone out after a frightened and disoriented Nancy Chamberlain (wife of Solomon Chamberlain), who was alone in a wagon west of the Elkhorn, Weatherby and three companions were fired on by three Omaha Indians. According to one account, one of Weatherby's friends "jumped out of the wagon and clinched two of the Indians [but] the third one shot Weatherby through the hip and bowels. The Indians then ran off as soon as the scuffle began." Weatherby died soon afterward and was buried in a buffalo robe near the Liberty Pole. Hosea Stout led a posse in search of the guilty party (Patty Sessions Journal, 20 June 1847).
[^19] Journal History of the Church, 9 Aug. 1846. This is a well-known and excellent resource available at the LDS Church Historical Department, consisting of scrapbook-like entries from private journals, letters, various writings of all kinds, newspaper clippings, and so on, compiled by date by former Assistant Church Historian, Andrew Jenson; cited hereafter as Journal History.
[^20] Charles R. King, "The Woman's Experience of Childbirth on the Western Frontier," Journal of the West 29, no. 1 (1990): 76-84. Years later, one observer could still say, "The learned profession was not so very learned. [Doctors were] to be sent for only as a last resort" (A. Britt, An America That Was: What Life Was Like on an Illinois Farm Seventy Years Ago (1964), 135, as quoted in King, 83).
[^21] Stampedes were a much dreaded occurrence in overland travel. One of the most chilling accounts is that given by a California forty-niner, Charles Edward Pancoast, while traveling up the Platte River in 1849: "In an instant, as if by magic, all the animals started simultaneously with a grand leap and flew down the river to the plain, the men in front shouting and scrambling to escape the solid mass of teams coming down upon them. Men could be seen dropping from the rear of wagons in all directions as they rumbled over the sands; I myself slipped through a two foot space between two wagons going at lightening speed. Some of the teams ran into a small creek and could not extricate themselves; others stopped from sheer exhaustion; still others ran two or three miles and were halted by the owners of tied horses that had not gotten away. Strange to say, no serious damage was done, except to the wagon of two Germans, which turned over and was irreparably smashed; the owners barely escaping with their lives. This was our first experience of a genuine stampede, not uncommon in the mountain countries of the west" (Charles Edward Pancoast, A Quaker Forty-Niner [1930], 198-99).
[^22] The new members of the company included Robert Crow, Elizabeth Crow, Benjamin B. Crow, Harriet Crow, Elizabeth Jane Crow, John McHenry Crow, Walter H. Crow, George W. Therlkill, Martilla Jane Therlkill (then seven months pregnant), Milton Howard Therlkill, James William Therlkill, William Parker Crow, Ida Vinda Exene Crow, Ira Minda Almarene Crow, Archibald Little, James Chesney, and Lewis B. Myers. Accompanying Myers were two Indian wives and a number of children (see William Clayton's Journal, 4 June 1847, 215).
[^23] Journal of Nelson Wheeler Whipple, 25 Feb. 1846, LDS Church Archives. "We thus kept a sharp look out for them for we knew as they had slain Joseph and Hyrum so they would slay Brigham, Heber, and the Twelve if they could."
[^28] The definitive works on the history of the Mormon Battalion are Frank Alfred Golder, The March of the Mormon Battalion from Council Bluffs to California (1928); Daniel Tyler, A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion to the Mexican War 1846-1847 (1969); John F. Yurtinus, "A Ram in the Thicket: The Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1975); and Norma Baldwin Ricketts, The Mormon Battalion: U.S. Army of the West, 1846-1848 (1996). See also Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 50-67.
[^29] The best study of Strang still remains Milo Quaife, The Kingdom of Saint James: A Narrative of the Mormons (1930). The most recent reinterpretation is Roger Van Noord's King of Beaver Island: The Life and Assassination of James Jesse Strang (1988). See also Doyle C. Fitzpatrick, The King Strang Story (1970); Richard E. Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 1846-1852: "And Should We Die . . ." (1987), 18-20; The Diary of James J. Strang, ed. Mark A. Strang (1961); William D. Russell, "King James Strang: Joseph Smith's Successor," in The Restoration Movement: Essays in Mormon History, ed. F. Mark McKiernan, Alma R. Blair, and Paul M. Edwards (1973), 231-56. Strang later removed his followers to Beaver Island in northern Lake Michigan, where his settlement realized only modest success.
[^31] Autobiography of Pioneer John Brown, 1820-1896, arr. John Zimmerman Brown (1941), 72-73. See also Jenson, "Day by Day," Deseret News, 31 May 1947. Lay and Crosby later died in California. Flake lived in Salt Lake City for most of his life, dying in Idaho Falls in 1903 at the age of 75.
[^40] William Clayton's Journal, 18 June 1847, 242. The crew left at the North Platte River crossing included some of the best carpenters and blacksmiths in camp: Thomas Grover, captain; John S. Higbee, assistant; Benjamin F. Stewart; James Davenport, blacksmith; William Empey; Luke S. Johnson; Appleton Harmon; Francis M. Pomeroy; and Edmund Ellsworth. Eric Glines decided, against counsel, to stay back with Grover's crew; he later changed his mind and hurried on by himself at considerable danger, catching up with the main camp several miles west.
[^42] Journal of Willard Richards, 14 Mar. 1847. It is interesting to note that in the dreams which Brigham Young said he had of Joseph Smith while preparing for the exodus, Joseph "stepped toward me, and looking very earnestly, yet pleasantly, said `Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. . . . Tell the brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it'" (Journal History, 23 Feb. 1847).
[^43] Little has been written about the costs of the original departures, although much is available on the costs involved in later migrations. This is particularly true of the Perpetual Emigration Fund and the financing of Mormon emigrant companies to Salt Lake City up until at least 1869 and the completion of the transcontinental rail-road. See Leonard J. Arrington's pathbreaking study, Great Basin Kingdom: An Economic History of the Latter-day Saints 1830-1900 (1958), 77-79.
[^55] For the exact wording of this "Memorial to the Queen for the Relief, by Emigration of a Portion of Her Poor Subjects," see J. B. Munro, "Mormon Colonization Scheme for Vancouver Island," Washington Historical Quarterly, 25, no. 3 (July 1934): 278-85. For a thorough and responsible study on British emigration, see Taylor, Expectations Westward, 18-47.
[^56] Journal of Jonathan C. Wright, 23 and 25 Feb. 1848. Samuel Thornton, another missionary who traveled back to Illinois, gave a more optimistic report than his counterpart, reporting that "the Saints generally remained in great anxiety to hear what to do, and rejoiced in the . . . spirit of the gathering." But even he admitted to baptizing "only one" in all his travels (Journal History, 12 Mar. 1848).
[^58] The Nauvoo Covenant resembled very closely the earlier Missouri Covenant of 1839, when Brigham Young at Far West, Missouri, proposed "that we this day enter into a covenant to . . . never desert the poor who are worthy, till they shall be out of the reach of the exterminating order of General [John B.] Clark." Some 214 men signed the covenant to assist others "to the utmost of our abilities." (History of the Church, 3:250-54).
[^59] There is some dispute over the name of this passerby. Most of the records refer to him as "Beaumont," although some refer to him as Charley Barkham (see Brigham Young letters, 5 May 1847). Erastus Snow records that the leader of the Beaumont company was a "Mr. Papan" who stayed on the other side of the river (see also Journal of Levi S. Johnson, 4 May 1847, Special Collections, Lee Library, Brigham Young University).
[^60] Addison Pratt, who left on a mission to the South Seas from Nauvoo in 1843 and did not return to his family, then in the Salt Lake Valley, until 1848, provides a revealing insight into the temporary lapse among the people in living the Word of Wisdom. On entering the valley, he found that "there seemed to be but two articles . . . and they were tobacco and coffee. The rule with some for selling tobacco was lay a silver dollar onto a flat plug and cut out the bigness of it for the dollar. I don't remember of ever seeing such a hankering after anything in my life as there was after that, and coffee was not much behind it. Notwithstanding, Br. Grouard and myself had urged an observance of the Word of Wisdom so strongly upon the natives of the South Sea Isles, I was surprised to see so little notice paid to it at the gathering place of the Saints" (The Journals of Addison Pratt, ed. S. George Ellsworth [1990], 368). For a full study of the history and development of the Word of Wisdom, see Paul H. Peterson, "An Historical Analysis of the Word of Wisdom" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972). It took almost a century before the Word of Wisdom took on the status of commandment within the Church.
[^61] Samuel Taylor argues in his controversial book The Kingdom or Nothing: The Life of John Taylor, Militant Mormon (1976) that both Taylor and Pratt had married plural wives during their return voyages, which was further cause of Brigham's unhappiness. If such was indeed the case, it only represented the conviction in fellow apostles' minds that they were all equal in authority, while underscoring Brigham's concern that until a new First Presidency was established, regulation of this and other practices was virtually impossible to control.
[^82] Journal of Lorenzo Snow, Summer 1846, LDS Church Archives. For more on the topic of death at Winter Quarters, see Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 131-47.
