Richard E. Bennett, We'll Find the Place: The Mormon Exodus 1846-1848 ( 1997)

334"WE HAVE NOW LAID THE FOUNDATION FOR OUR COMING DAY"

334The sun has risen beautiful. Nature smiles and Heaven whispers "all is well," far beyond the graves of our fathers, the land of nativity and the church bells of those who would oppress us in this blest land . . . for we are all here in a land not polluted by the Gentiles. It is the garden of the whole earth. . . . Come on, all of you. I will not tell you anything about the road but this I will say that the ox team salvation is a hard one. The road you will know when you see it for it is so much worse than you [have] ever seen that you could not believe me if I told you the truth. [^1]

334So wrote an exhausted and relieved Susanna Sheets to family and friends back in Winter Quarters in mid-October, shortly after her arrival in the Salt Lake Valley with the emigrant camp. "It was the promised land of peace and rest," another remarked. "Yes, indeed it was beautiful to us weary pioneers who had come, at the tiring pace of the oxen, that slow and dreary thousand miles from Winter Quarters. . . . To me it was not the desert that so many have called it." [^2]

334"HOW CHARMING TO WALK INTO A HOUSE"

What had once been mere dream and vision, the domain of the cricket and the rattlesnake, was quietly becoming a destination, a home in the making. Unlike their pioneer camp predecessors, the newly arrived emigrant companies could already see improvements. "Here we found a fort commenced and partly built by the pioneers, consisting of an enclosure of a block of ten acres with a wall, or in part of buildings of adobes or logs. We also found a city laid out and public square dedicated for a Temple of God. We found also much ground planted in late crops." [^3]

335The first emigration company to reach the valley was that of Captain Horace Eldridge who, with his 20 creaking wagons, was loudly cheered as they maneuvered the last couple miles down from the canyon out onto the valley floor, reaching the tiny settlement at 5 P.M. on 19 September 1847. [^4] Within three weeks, every other company in Pratt and Taylor's camp had arrived, swelling the little city's population from approximately 150 to almost 1,650 souls. It was a time of rejoicing, tearful reunion, and profound relief. As Mary Kimball put it: "We had been cooking by sage brush fires and setting our table out doors for 14 weeks. . . . How charming to walk into a house and sit down to a table once more." [^5]

335Yet the sight of the tiny settlement did not instill an overbrimming confidence. Notwithstanding all the declarations, prophecies, and confirmations, every thinking person knew that it was an uncertain proposition, that the coming year would prove everything. Still very much a mountaintop experiment, they were unsure whether the settlement would last and their dream become reality. Would the early crops thrive? Could they make it through a high mountain winter? Would the spring planting prove successful? In short, would they survive? The final chapter in their exodus drama had yet to be written.

Brigham's parting instructions, as he left for Winter Quarters, were calculated to ensure their very survival. "Cultivate the soil" was a recurring admonition; he knew that many in the advancing companies would arrive with depleted provisions. Regarding the coming season, he said, "we recommend that you begin to plant and sow such seeds as soon as the snow is gone in the spring, or even before spring so that we may know, by experiments, whether it is possible to ripen grain in the valley before the summer's drought." Irrigate wherever possible. Beware of prairie or valley fires. Refrain from trading with the native populations, at least within the fort. Send back wagons to help on the poor "thus fulfilling the covenant which we made in the temple at Nauvoo." And last but not least, "defile not your inheritances . . . for the Lord God will have a holy people and they shall build up a holy city unto Him." [^6]

336The decision by the Twelve to create a Salt Lake "Stake of Zion" was of more than passing consequence or symbolic importance. To John Smith, president, Charles C. Rich, first counselor, and John Young, second counselor, were assigned the responsibility for spiritual direction over the settlement and for overseeing the operations of the Municipal Salt Lake High Council (with its jurisdiction over nonreligious matters in the absence of any other government).

336Unlike either the Winter Quarters or the Pottawatamie settlements, where there were only high councils, the Salt Lake settlement was immediately formed into—or at least provision made for—a stake. Although the membership did not get to sustain the new presidency of the stake until the following October (and by that time an ailing John Smith was replaced by Charles C. Rich as president), the decision was of real ecclesiastical importance. It was a clear indication that their little settlement marked "the end of the road," their budding new City of Zion, and that they were finally in charge. [^7]

336The modern historian also owes much to Brigham's parting instructions. Although not one to spend time reading history, he was anxious to preserve an archive of their accomplishments. "As soon as the emigrating camps arrive at their destination," he directed, "let their several clerks return all their papers duly certified and signed by themselves and their captains to Brother Staines, their historian, who will receive and file all such papers and from them write a brief and explicit history of the movements of the whole camp." [^8]

336The city the arriving emigrants discovered was but a small fort enclosing 10 acres and some 30 log and adobe houses with a four-foot adobe wall almost completed around the perimeter. In addition, 84 acres of newly planted corn, potatoes, beans, buckwheat, and turnips had been cultivated; inheritance properties had been laid out in survey fashion stemming out from the temple block. Unfortunately, most of the late garden crops had not matured, except for "a few small potatoes from the size of a pea upward to that of half an inch in diameter." [^9]

Not everyone welcomed the new arrivals with open arms. All the crops were doing well, wrote one disgruntled settler, "until the first companies came in, who turned their cattle loose and devoured our crops that would have been fit to harvest in a few days and of course devoured our means of subsistence." [^10]

337How much of the blame for a stunted harvest can be laid at the hoof of stray cattle or on early frost is hard to prove, but certainly the arrival of so many new faces, although expected, played havoc with the original settlement plans—the existing accommodations were entirely inadequate. The initial expectation of, if not direction to, the stake presidency was to have sufficient building material on hand to accommodate the needs of the new arrivals. Furthermore, the newcomers were to have been settled along divisional lines, that is, by first and second divisions with 350 men and their families in the first and 200 other families in the second division. [^11]

337The press of erecting suitable accommodations in time for the coming winter, however, led to an abandonment of the original scheme. "The Divisions have not been located so much in a body as we intended," President Smith admitted.

337The first companies that came in were in a hurry to secure houses for the winter, bought buildings more or less furnished, and shares in the wall in the old fort, without any thought of their position when the Divisions should be righted up; others, as they came in, were in the hurry and anxiety and urged [us] to allot them their building places. Accordingly two more blocks on the south were surrounded and nearly taken up before the rear companies came in. [^12]

337The divisions were not housed as instructed for the same reason that the emigration camp had not been organized as counseled: the camp had not come by division or in adopted family order. Consequently, as everyone scrambled for a temporary roof over their head, the original plan of housing, more or less by adopted family, could not be put in effect and had to be postponed, at least until more permanent settlements could take place in the "lands of their inheritance." Although not a major disruption, it may have been a contributing factor to the ultimate disuse of the adopted family order. [^13]

Construction was well underway on a second and larger fort, on the south side and adjacent to the original fort, by the time of the first snowfall in early November. The South Fort was the same width but twice as long as the North Fort. "Our houses were built on the outside line [of the fort] . . . ," wrote Taylor, "with the highest wall outside, the roof sloping towards the interior. The windows and doors were placed on the side facing the enclosure, the outside being left solid, excepting loopholes—for protection. Our corrals, hay-stacks and stables were some distance behind and outside the fort." [^14]

338As in Winter Quarters, their new accommodations varied in size, comfort, and attractiveness. Some opted for the adobe house, and others chose to put up small log cabins, chinked with mud and straw. "We have a log house made of hewed logs, sixteen by eighteen and covered with planks and slabs," wrote one fortunate sister, better off than most.

338Our fireplace is made of clay pounded into one corner and the fireplace cut out just such shape as you please. The rest is sticks plastered outside and which makes it quite nice. We have quite a nice door made of fir boards which were sawed since we arrived. We have nothing but the boards of our wagon for floor yet. We have a window with five squares of ten by twelve glass and one of cloth pasted on. There is two beds at the east end of the room and curtains drawn across the room in front of the beds and a little chamber floor over the beds where we keep our provisions. . . . We expect to have a garden in front of our house. Our farming land is five or six miles from here. The houses are built adjoining each other in the form of squared enclosing ten acres each. [^15]

338Others had no choice but to live in their tents or wagons.

338Because of the flat-roof construction, by far the biggest complaint of most wives and mothers was not the cold, because there was enough kindling wood to keep the fireplaces crackling all winter, but water dripping from above. "It storms and the house leaks bad," Patty Sessions recorded. "We had a wet bad time one night. We sat up most all night. It rained down through the house so I dipped up much water in the house and carried it out. We had no floor and it was very muddy and our things wet. . . . I was up nearly all night to keep Mary and the babe and things dry." [^16]

338As the women improved tents and cabins, many of the men were busy in the fields. With little time to spare, by late fall they had planted another 2,000 acres of wheat. "Great numbers of plows are incessantly going," Taylor reported, "and [we] are only prevented by the inclemency of the weather which occasionally is too severe. . . . We expect to put in the spring about 3,000 acres of corn and other grain." [^17]

339These little improvements and hurried attempts at settlement represented the down payment on their future and their thin line of survival. As Ezra T. Benson put it: "We have now laid the foundation for our coming day." [^18] With winter fast approaching, the little colony looked to settle in, with provisions safely stored, nestled in the deep and unfamiliar shadows of the towering Wasatch Mountains. In the profound stillness and enveloping darkness of their mountain home, the Latter-day Saints waited and watched for the coming cold.

339"THERE IS SOME HERE THAT HAS THE HEARTACHE"

339While most looked on in faith, a few others were not quite so sure. Where were the promised crops? What if the winter killed off their cattle and milch cows? Where would they go if provisions ran out? For some, the valley was a disappointment, and others remained in a restless fear.

339The discontent that first winter can be traced to three factors: the lure of California, isolated soldier dissatisfaction, and ruined spring crops. Some thought Sam Brannan had been right when he mentioned under his breath before heading back to the coast that if this was not a God-forsaken country, it surely was a God-forgotten one! Why stay in the valley to freeze and starve when there was life and abundant opportunity further west?

339Brannan was not alone in singing the merits of California. Many in the Battalion, after reaching the coast, were loud in its praises. "I can look over the city [Los Angeles] and see the beautiful orchards," one soldier had written,

339The vines are hanging with grapes. The trees are loaded with fruit . . . peaches, pears, apricots, pomegranates, oranges, lemons, figs and many other fruits which we have not been used to. The country is, in my opinion, first rate for the Saints . . . plenty of everything seems to grace the land . . . and the cows look well. They are much better than in the States. [^19]

339The contrast between where they were and where they might have been could not have been more dramatic.

After leaving the valley on 9 August to return to California, Brannan met several returning members of the Battalion at Donner Lake. Convincing several to return with him, Brannan told them that Brigham had erred in settling in the Salt Lake Valley and predicted that sooner or later Brigham would have to lead the Saints over to California the coming year. [^20]

340The decision of four families to quit the little settlement in October can probably be traced to this "California Fever." Too late in the season to venture over the forbidding high Sierra, they decided to move north 40 miles and camp in the vicinity of Miles Goodyear's farm (Fort Buenaventura) at the mouth of Ogden Canyon (the present site of Ogden, Utah). Alarmed at this sudden action, and anxious to prevent further defection, the Salt Lake High Council, the only government in the valley, sent a posse after the disgruntled party "requesting them to return as soon as possible. . . . Their minds are somewhat embittered and we shall do all we can to stop them." [^21]

340While some sought the use of force to bring them back, worried no doubt about the potential for stirring up trouble with the Indian tribes, others wisely tried a saner course of action. From the beginning, several leaders had worried about the Goodyear farm as a potential competing settlement, an alternative to the Salt Lake location. Now, with some of the $5,000 in Battalion discharge pay recently brought back by Captain James Brown available, a solution presented itself. At a cost of $1,950, Goodyear, a master in the bargaining process, was happily persuaded to sell off his land (to which he held no clear title) and modest improvements and pursue his horse-trading business on a much wider scale than he had ever before imagined. Uncertain of the Mormon intentions and of their military muscle, Goodyear was as pleased to sell as his new neighbors were anxious to buy. Unfortunately, he had little time to enjoy his fortune, dying a year later. [^22]

340With nowhere else to go, the disgruntled caravan slowly returned to Salt Lake. Although a relief party was dispatched to California late in November for provisions (led by A. Lathrop, Orrin Porter Rockwell, and E. C. Fuller) none of those desperate to leave was allowed to accompany them. As one eyewitness put it: "There is some here that has the heartache. They say they will go to California, but the Council will not let them go until the Twelve comes out." [^23] Finally, in early March, long before the Twelve ever reached the valley, the unhappy settlers were allowed to move out. [^24]

The California Fever of 1847 soon transformed itself into the Gold Fever of 1848, an infinitely greater draw because of the discovery of placer gold by Battalion soldiers at Sutter's Fort in Sacramento Valley in February 1848. Square in the center of America's most famous gold rush, Brannan was in the right place at the right time and made a fortune. In the process, he became California's first millionaire.

341But even before his lucky day, Brannan had made up his mind never to return to the Wasatch and to take as many with him as possible. Never having openly promoted the Mormon cause after the arrival of the Brooklyn, Brannan was rapidly outgrowing his religion and everyone in it. And for those who had once stayed with him in the faith, it was a disappointing slide. "We live now in the midst of a heartless people," William Coray of the Battalion wrote in the spring of 1848, shortly after the initial tumult and excitement of John Sutter's discovery. "Our neighbors are made up of Missourians and runaway sailors, robbers and horse thieves. The basest gamblers constitute the aristocracy of the place. The Brethren who came out in the Brooklyn, with a few exceptions, mingle with them, and the Mormon girls, some of them, are married to drunken sailors and vagabonds." [^25]

341Coray then turned a critical pen on his former file leader.

341Mr. Brannan has taught this to them, by example and precept. I do not state this expecting that it will amount to a charge . . . but the facts you ought to know. He had collected $2,000 of the Company [Battalion pay] stating that he was owing the Church the same amount of tithing funds to bring off the ship. He has swindled them out of everything they had or could earn. . . . He has counselled his brethren to stay here, to lay out their money in the purchase of lots, ten or fifteen feet under water. This he advised me to do, a while ago. He undertook to build a meeting house worth $2 or $3,000 and wanted the Battalion to subscribe, as well as the others, but they went against it and it was no go. I have frequently heard him say, in preaching to the public, that the whole Kingdom of God was depending upon their or his movements in this place and I thought to myself, `it stands upon a tottering foundation' for it is a fact he has influence over but two or three of his own company. [^26]

Brannan never returned to the valley or to the Church. His colorful career and faith-to-fortune story later turned sour through mismanagement and wild speculation. Eventually he lost his fortune, fame, and family and died in poverty and neglect in 1889. Coray, reluctant in his criticism, was nonetheless accurate in his closing comment: "Speculation is his only study." [^27]

342The other related cause of unrest among some of the valley settlers, unlike Brannan and the California sun, was one more of their own making. For reasons already shown (see chapter 9), Pratt and Taylor had left Winter Quarters without bringing on as many of the Battalion families as instructed. The inevitable result was keen disappointment among a small number of the recently discharged soldiers who had just crossed the Sierra, expecting to greet their families again after a separation of 15 months and a march of over 2,000 miles. To wait another year was more than some could take. "Many of the Brethren that went in the Army have returned," wrote one settler. "Some have stayed in California, and some . . . that came here have apostatized, some going back to the States and some to California." [^28]

342A few of the more crestfallen secretly left camp on an almost suicidal midwinter march back to Winter Quarters, miraculously survived their trek, and reached their families at the Missouri half-starved and almost frozen to death (see chapter 10). Expressing the disappointment of some, one soldier put it this way: "If it were not that we know the gospel true there would be such a scattering as never was seen. Those boys who stood as saviors would have left the wealth of the church to their fate." [^29]

342In defense of their camp leaders, however, many Battalion families had refused to come west in the emigration camp and others had been unprepared for the rigors of the march. And once again, as in Winter Quarters, the need to care for the Battalion families, who in many ways paid the highest price for the success of the entire westward episode, prompted the calling of the first bishops in the Salt Lake valley—five of them at first—to watch over and provide for the needs of the members in both forts but more especially the wives and children of soldier fathers and husbands. [^30]

342Little wonder Brigham Young waxed eloquent in his praise of the Battalion and the sacrifices made by each man and his family.

The enlistment of the Mormon Battalion in the service of the United States, though looked upon by many with astonishment and some with fear, has proved a great blessing to this community. It was indeed the temporal salvation of our camp; and although it has been attended with perils and privation, still this has more or less been the lots of us all and it has proved a weapon of our defense, a blockade in the way of our worst enemies under which the widows, the poor, and the destitute and in fact all of this people have been sheltered. The unseen hand of Jehovah is over this people for good and in this thing we were enabled to outlast our enemies and the snare they laid for our feet became our anchor of safety for a season. [^31]

343While not all were happy with the prospects of staying on in the isolation of their new mountain home, for most it was relief and promise. "We are here in a land of peace and a land of plenty in every appearance [and] I wish you were all here," one woman wrote by candlelight on a cold January night. [^32] "I am happy to say that all things are getting on tolerable well," declared Bishop Hunter, despite the obvious lack of various staples. "I believe it to be a good grain country, and I know it to be a better grass country than I ever was in before." [^33] And in comparison to the death counts at Winter Quarters, "the health of the people is and has been generally good." [^34]

343Most settlers very willingly accepted Pratt's invitation to be rebaptized, as the pioneer camp had done five months earlier, to symbolize their loyalty and commitment. [^35] Sunday services were held outdoors, weather permitting, with several members holding small worship meetings of their own. On Thursday night, 14 October, "the choir met to sing for the first time in the valley," as James Smithies reported. "I opened the meeting with prayer and we had a good time. The Lord blessed us while we were together. After singing was over Bro. Hanson played us one or two tunes on the violin." [^36]

343Among the sisters, many of whom were plural wives of absent husbands, the same spirit of welfare, relief, spiritual instruction, and female bonding that had characterized their lives in Winter Quarters and Nauvoo asserted itself again within the walls of the two forts. "Attended a meeting of the mothers in Israel" recorded Eliza R. Snow,

343at Ellen's, after the close of which Ellen spake in the gift of tongues. It was a rich treat. . . . Had a delightful meeting of the little girls. Susan and Martha received the gift of tongues, Sarah Kimball improved upon hers. . . . Sis. Chase spoke in tongues and blessed us. Praise the Lord, O my soul. [^37]

Several day schools were conducted during the week in various homes for the children, and when they could celebrate, they surely did. Come Christmas morning, for example, their first in the valley, "They fired six guns, one to the east, one to the north, one to the west and three to the south. And they shaked the earth and broke several squares of glass in the windows. This afternoon we cast in our mites and had a good supper and we had a time of rejoicing afterwards." They even enjoyed a New Year's eve dance. [^38]

344"WE ATE UP THE LAST BREAD WE HAD IN OUR HOUSE"

344And so the winter wore on. Although not as severe a winter as many had expected or as harsh as the year following, spring could not come too soon. By early January, provisions were running so dangerously low that by order of the high council the settlement was put on strict rations, limiting each person to about one-half pound of flour per day. Wild game and foodstuffs were so scarce by the end of February that several families were forced to rummage the countryside for whatever vegetation might be edible. They even tried eating crows, thistle tops, bark—anything that might offer nutrition and fill an empty stomach. [^39]

344Acting on the advice of visiting Indian parties who saw their plight, several went in search of the sego lily bulb, a wild plant, whose roots were said to be more nutritious than others. "I went out to dig roots for this is our principal living," wrote one settler. "Roots and milk with a little meal." [^40] And if sego lilies ran short, any root would do. Remembered Priddy Meeks:

344We had to exert ourselves to get something to eat. I would take a grubbing-hoe and a sack and start by sunrise in the morning and go, I thought six miles before coming to where the thistle roots grew, and in time to get home I would have a bushel and sometimes more [of] thistle roots. And we would eat them raw. I would dig until I grew weak and faint and sit down and eat a root and then begin again. I continued this until the roots began to fail. [^41]

344One of the Battalion boys, an "adopted" son of Willard Richards, could only describe a bleak picture. "I am a soldier and the soldiers fare hard here this winter. There is some that has been three days without anything to eat save it be some roots." [^42]

Verging on starvation, some ate they knew not what. "A neighboring child came to the door to get some medicine for Bro. Cheny," recorded Lorenzo Young and wife. "He was poisoned by eating roots. In about one hour after [he] had called to the door . . . Bro. Cheny was in a fit. We ran to him as soon as possible and he spoke twice. We carried him to the house and did all we could for him. He lived about half an hour then died. It was one of the most melancholy scenes I ever passed through." [^43]

345The long, late winter placed undue expectations on the promise of spring. When the first sign of milder weather came in mid-March, they were busy planting—prematurely as they soon discovered. "People have commenced plowing and planting," as early as the first week of March, "but it freezes a little [at] night." [^44] Moderating late March weather prompted even more planting, but their eagerness was soon countered by April's fickleness and May's unseasonable cold. Isaac Haight recorded one disappointment after another:

345April 1: Weather cold and unpleasant. The ground covered with snow. Had a foot [of snow] this week. Our houses being flatroofed they leaked very bad which makes it very unpleasant. The wheat that was sowed last fall looks very discouraging for a crop but we trust in the Lord that had brought us here will sustain us and not let us perish. . . .

345

345April 6: Ground froze some last night. The buckwheat is killed and many things in the garden. . . .

345

345April 28: Frost again this morning. Things killed in the gardens such as beans, cucumbers, melons, pumpkins and squashes. Corn hurt and some wheat killed. [^45]

345Then, as if the frost was not damaging and discouraging enough, on the morning of 27 May came the sound of an approaching army—from the direction of the mountains where no army should have been able to pass. Like a plague out of ancient Egypt let loose on a modern Israel, an overwhelming infestation of large, black crickets descended on the valley floor, devouring every living plant in its way.

Wingless, dumpy, black, swollen-headed, with bulging eyes in cases like goggles, mounted upon legs of steel wire and clock-spring, and with a general personal appearance that justified the Mormons in comparing him to a cross of the spider and the buffalo, the Deseret cricket comes down from the mountains at a certain season of the year, in voracious and desolating myriads. . . . The assailants could not be repulsed. The Mormons, after their fashion, prayed and fought, fought and prayed, but to no purpose. The "black Philistines" mowed their way even with the ground, leaving it as if touched with an acid or burnt by fire. [^46]

346The foregoing account was given two years after the fact by Thomas L. Kane. Although prone to popularizing the plight of the Latter-day Saints, in this case Kane was not exaggerating. "We had not anticipated any further trouble," wrote one observer,

346but today [27 May] to our utter astonishment the crickets came by millions sweeping everything before them. They first attacked a patch of beans and in twenty minutes there was not a vestige of them to be seen. They next swept our peas. Then came into our gardens [and] took everything clean. We went out with brush and undertook to drive them but they were too strong for us.

346

34628 May: Last night we had a severe frost. Today crickets have commenced on our corn and small grain. They have eaten off 12 acres for Bro. Rosacrants, 7 for Charles and are now taking Edmunds.

346

34629 May: Today they have destroyed 3/4 of an acre squash [in] our place, 2 acres of millet and our rye and are now to work on our wheat. What will be the result we know not. [^47]

346Every defensive tactic was employed to stem the voracious black tide, including the use of sticks, clubs, brooms, brushes, and willows. Even a five-year-old was given a wooden mallet to smash them to death, although with strict orders not to venture too far out. [^48] Ditches were filled with water in an attempt to drown the pests. Fields were set afire in advance of the moving mass in an attempt to leave nothing for them to eat and confuse their movements. But all to no avail. If they moved on to the larger wheat fields with the same destructive effect, an already serious situation would turn ruinous.

346The twin blows of their spring misfortune continued uninterrupted for days. By day the crickets devastated field after field while by night the late season frosts killed the remaining young seedlings. For many, it was too much to bear. "This morning's frost, in unison with the ravages of the crickets for a few days past," wrote Eliza R. Snow, "produces many sighs and occasions some long faces with those that for the moment forget that they are saints." [^49] "Many of the saints began to think of leaving the valley, for fear of starvation," wrote another. [^50]

347Defeat of the Settlers/Arrival of the Gulls, sculpture by Charles B. Hall

347Sensing the rising disappointment and waning allegiance, Charles C. Rich called for a special outdoor meeting early in June, in part to dissuade large numbers of settlers from abandoning the valley. "It was a beautiful day and a very solemn one too," Priddy Meeks recalled. While standing in an open wagon, Rich counseled the people to stay on. As if on a belated cue, what came next, from high overhead, was the shrill sound of sweet deliverance.

At that instant I heard the voice of fowls flying overhead that I was not acquainted with. I looked up and saw a flock of seven gulls. In a few minutes there was another larger flock passed over. They came faster and more of them until the heavens were darkened with them and lit down in the valley till the earth was black with them; and they would eat crickets and throw them up again and fill themselves again and right away throw them up again. A little before sundown they left for Salt Lake, for they rested on a sandbar; a little after sunrise in the morning they came back and continued. I guess this circumstance changed our feeling considerable for the better. [^51]

348Wrote another eyewitness, "The first I knew of the gulls, I heard their sharp cry. Upon looking up I beheld what appeared like a vast flock of pigeons coming from the northwest. It was about three o'clock in the afternoon. . . . There must have been thousands of them. Their coming was like a great cloud; and when they passed between us and the sun, a shadow covered the field. I could see gulls settling for more than a mile around us." [^52]

348Some modern researchers have argued that the seagull salvation was discriminate, unseen by many and commented on by only a relatively small number of journal writers. [^53] It does appear that "the colonists exhibited a thorough matter-of-factness about the miracle" at the time. [^54]

348Actually it was not at all unusual for seagulls to visit the fields, even in large numbers. No doubt they had been doing so since the arrival of the first settlers. What was different here was that the birds were preying on the crickets, not on the fields; and that they continued to do so day after day; and that they gorged themselves, regurgitated, and returned to gorge some more; and that they did so in different areas of the valley. "The crickets continue to eat our wheat," wrote Daniel Spencer, "but a large quantity of sea gulls came on to our corn land on Mill Creek and ate up all the crickets in the neighborhood. . . . The gulls left the ground in two weeks from the time they lit on the land." [^55]

348Another early settler, William Leany, returning to his small acreage on South Mill Creek,

348noticed thousands of sea gulls dipping down to the earth as if turning summer saults [sic] and a Brother Jacob Secrist [sic] shouted "By heavens Bro. Leany, look how they are eating the crickets." And as soon as they were dead they seemed to light on the ditches and spew them up by double handfuls and go for more. [^56]

348

349

349

349If less dramatically than some earlier writers may have realized, the seagulls nevertheless began to turn the tide on the cricket hordes at the most critical time, enough to dent their progress and raise the hopes of the settlers. And timing proved to be everything. The crickets were destroyed. The grain crops were preserved and many once more looked forward in regained confidence, never to turn back.

349

349Describing the episode almost a year to the day later, A. J. McCall, a gold-seeker on his way to California, credited it to "the great flocks of curlew, a fowl as large as a partridge, which soon gobbled up the crickets and saved the crops. . . . It is no marvel that these misguided people should believe they were the special favorites of the Almighty." [^57]

349"WE FEEL THE TRYING TIME HAS PASSED"

349By mid-July, everything was looking brighter. The weather turned bright and warm. The entire settlement was busy plowing new fields, replanting old ones, improving housing, retrieving lumber from the valleys, constructing mills, and sending back spare teams and wagons to assist the oncoming emigrant trains. By the end of July, 450 buildings, including cabins, makeshift blacksmith shops, tanneries, shoemaker and tailor shops, and more dotted the valley floor. They also counted three saw mills, two grist mills for grinding wheat, and a thrashing machine "propelled by water [that] will thrash and clean in good order 200 bushels per day." [^58] The crop matured faster than expected; the first wheat was ground on 14 July. "It is very short for want of being irrigated in season yet some is very fine," wrote Haight. "The prospects for crops begin to brighten . . . enough to sustain the people here." [^59]

349All was so much on the mend that by early August Parley P. Pratt could write only good news to his oncoming file leaders.

349There were some 5,000 acres plowed, planted and sowed but owing to the destruction by grasshoppers, crickets and other insects we are not able to state how many acres will finally mature their crops. Our [spring] wheat harvest is over; the grain is splendid and clean but being mostly in shock and stack we cannot state the number of bushels; however . . . the wheat crop has done wonderfully well.

349

. . . Our main fence is twelve miles long, not quite finished owing to the press of other matters . . . green peas have been so plenty for a long time that we are becoming tired of them; cucumbers, squashes, beets, carrots, parsnips and greens are upon our tables as harbingers of abundance . . . and no one has starved. . . . We feel the trying time has passed . . . quiet union and peace prevail. [^60]

350It was all enough to celebrate! But rather than commemorate their arrival in the valley the year before (most had come at different times), they found abundant cause to celebrate their new harvests. [^61]

350To mark the occasion, the 10th of August was selected as a day of thanksgiving, a day "to celebrate the first harvest raised in the valley with songs of praise and thanksgiving." The entire population convened at the bowery on the temple block at 9 A.M., where a new Liberty Pole had been erected especially for the occasion. First to be hoisted to the top, against a backdrop of cannon fire and shouts of "Hosanna to God and the Lamb forever and ever, Amen," was a white flag, "our flag," as Levi Jackman put it, "not stained with any national device but pure and white [which] proudly floated in the pure, clean healthy northern breeze." [^62] Next, below their standard, amid further shouts of acclamation, were raised a sheaf of wheat, a bundle of barley, another of oats, and lastly one of corn. They then assembled within and all around the bowery to listen to remarks from Pratt and Taylor. "All went off in good order and feelings," remembered Haight, and "a splendid dinner was spread under the bowery for the occasion." [^63] After dinner, which lasted from noon till 2 P.M., the rest of the day was given over to dancing, instrumental music, "prayers and preaching." [^64]

350Sometime during their festivities, they sang Parley P. Pratt's new composition entitled "The Harvest Song," written specifically for the occasion and sung to the more familiar tune "How Firm a Foundation." His lyrics captured well the spirit of their gladness and freedom. [^65]

Let us join in the dance, let us join in the song, To the Jehovah the praises belong; All honor all glory we render to thee Thy cause is triumphant, thy people are free. The gentiles oppressed us the heathens with rage, Combined all their forces and hosts to engage; They plundered and scattered and drove us away, They killed their shepherd, the sheep went astray Full long in the desert and mountains to roam, Without any harvest without any home; They're hungry and thirsty and weary and worn, They seemed quite forsaken and left for to roam. But lo in the mountains new sheep folds appear, And a harvest of plenty our spirits to cheer; This beautiful vale is a refuge from woe, A retreat for the Saints when the scourges o'erflow. The States of Columbia to [pieces] may rend, And mobs all triumphant bring peace to an end; The star spangled banner forever be furled, And the chains of a tyrant encircle the world. The storms of commotion distress every realm, And dire revolutions the nations o'erwhelm; Tho Babylon trembles and thrones cast down be, Yet here in the mountains the righteous are free.

351The fact that no American flag was hoisted that day to the top of their Liberty Pole, itself an expression of their new freedom from outside rule, along with Pratt's lyrics, are both further evidence that they felt joy and enormous relief at being free from their persecutors and believed that the hand of the Lord would yet surely visit their oppressors.

351Irene Hascall worded it this way:

351This is our place of residence. It is in the midst of the rocky mountains surrounded on every side by impassable mountains and just one passage in and another on the west side which will not take much labor to stop an army of ten thousand. Now let the mobbers rage. The Lord has provided this place for us and if we are faithful the trouble and calamities of the Gentile nation will not harm. When all is past we will step forth from our hiding place, the secret chamber spoken of in the Bible. I wish you would come and stay with us. You would if you could see the future. But live in darkness, we know this is true, what you call Mormonism. [^66]

None of the above should be construed as an attempt by the Latter-day Saints to remain forever apart or to ever secede from the United States. Most well knew that the Manifest Destiny of American expansion was on the way west and that they, unwittingly perhaps, were part of it. Many of the returning soldiers were certain that their territory was about to become part of America. In fact, news of the war-ending Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in which Upper California had been ceded by Mexico to the United States would reach them early in the fall, if it had not already. [^67]

352The point is that for now they were safe and secluded and free to live and worship as they pleased. And if and when America must catch up to them, they would be in a position of political power as the first settlers, an advantage which they had never enjoyed before. In fact, Brigham and other leaders were at that very moment preparing a petition to Congress for a Mormon territorial government. Although their dream of popular rule would be marked with conflict and disappointment over the next half-century, they would now ensure every advantage possible. [^68]

352While preparing for the new arrivals, few were expecting the return of one man who had been away serving a mission to the Society Islands. Leaving his family, then in Nauvoo, on 1 June 1843, Addison Pratt had spent the past five years proclaiming the Book of Mormon in the Sandwich Islands (Hawaii), Tahiti, and a dozen other islands all over the South Pacific. His return, via California, to his new transplanted home in the mountains not only says much about the settlement but even more about the emotion of reunion as missionaries and soldiers returned to their families. "As we drew near the forts," he recalled,

352we began to meet our friends coming out to meet us. Bro. Haight told me he knew the house my family lived in and he would conduct me there. We found them in the South Fort, in a house with Sister Rogers . . . she had been confined the night before with a young child, and my wife who had been up with her had come into her travelling wagon that stood near the door and was still used to sleep in, to take a nap, as every house was crowded to overflowing.

352

My oldest daughter Ellen was down on her knees, scrubbing the floor. Bro. Haight stepped in and said, "Ellen, here is your father." She jumped up, as I stepped in after him, and caught hold of my hand, with an expression that was as wild as a hawk, and exclaimed, "Why, Pa Pratt!! have you come?" The next two, Frances and Lois, were soon on hand and looked equally surprised. The youngest, Ann, was out to play. She was soon called, and when she came in, she stood and eyed me a while with a very suspicious look, when one of her sisters tried to force her up to me, to shake hands, saying, "That is pa" when she jerked her hand away and said, "It is not" and left the room.

353

353Their mother soon came in. She looked quite natural and quite as young as when I left home, being more fleshy now, than then. At Winter Quarters she, with the rest of the family, all but the youngest, suffered under severe fits of sickness, and the scurvy deprived her of her upper front teeth, and when she spoke, her voice was unnatural. Except that, I could discover no change in her. . . . It was some like the meeting of strangers than the meeting of a family circle. I shall never forget it! [^69]

353Anxious to convince his youngest child of who he was, Pratt took her out to his wagon and opened a large chest filled with "a variety of curiosities, such as she had never seen before," including "the grandest selection of sea shells that had ever been seen by anybody." "`Don't you think I was a very kind Father to remember you when so far away, and make such choice selections and bring them to you?' She readily answered in the affirmative. I then added, `You believe now that I am your father do you not?' She readily answered, `Yes!!' Then said I, `Step forward and give me a kiss, and these things are yours.'" [^70]

353Meanwhile Brigham arrived in the valley with his division on Wednesday, 20 September, and was immediately escorted about the settlement by Bishop Hunter and some others. Heber C. Kimball and his division arrived four days later, on a Sunday. After adjourning the scheduled worship meetings in the bowery in order to give him and his company an opportunity to attend, another hymn, this one composed by Eliza R. Snow, was sung "by the whole choir" welcoming the two leaders and their respective companies into the valley. By the time Willard Richards and his division arrived three weeks later (11 October) 2,417 new faces were looking for a home. To meet the needs of the new arrivals, an addition to the city's east side was surveyed and a decision made to lay off two other cities, one 10 miles to the north and the other 10 miles to the south of the original settlement.

The final spike in this transcontinental story, the culmination of their new beginning, occurred at the semiannual conference of the Church which opened in the bowery on Friday, 6 October. Dedicated almost exclusively to such pressing temporal matters as housing, lands and inheritances, crops, continued explorations and much more, there was nevertheless more at stake than crickets and cucumbers. One unfinished matter of ecclesiastical business of enormous consequence to them and this study had yet to be addressed.

354This marked the first time for many in the audience to welcome Brigham Young not just as President of the Quorum of the Twelve but as President of the Church. Neither had Pratt and Taylor, as members of the Quorum of the Twelve, yet had the chance to sustain the concept of a reestablished First Presidency, let alone the specific men to fill it. Along with all the others in the emigration camp, they had been absent from the special conference at Council Bluffs the previous December where a new First Presidency had been sustained.

354The two had missed the extensive discussions back at Winter Quarters on the topic. How much they had discussed the matter while at the Sweetwater, as the two camps met, is not clear. It would appear, however, that up until two months before, the matter was still unsettled in Pratt's mind, at least. "We were somewhat startled to find the Twelve dispersed in a great measure," Pratt had written Brigham early in 1848 after hearing of the many begging missions east, "some to one and some to another point on the globe insomuch that a quorum of them will hardly be together very soon." [^71]

354The nature and content of the important discussions between Brigham and Kimball and Pratt and Taylor are not available. What is clear, however, is that whatever questions might have remained over the matter of succession in the Presidency, as well as the matter of valley inheritances, was reconciled. Consequently, after adjourning Saturday to allow the Battalion use of the bowery for a day of rest and recreation (which had been earlier postponed because of bad weather), the conference reconvened on Sunday, 8 October, at 11 A.M. in the bowery on the temple block. After singing and an opening prayer by John Taylor, Parley P. Pratt stepped forward and nominated Brigham Young as the President of the Church, with Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards counselors. All "carried without a dissenting voice." [^72] Pratt concluded: "We must say that it is as it should be." [^73]

354NOTES

355The Council of Fifty was composed essentially of the same men that made up the Twelve Apostles and the various municipal high councils. It was a debating society, a discussion forum for political considerations. It was the political arm for ecclesiastical discussion. But it wielded no authority at Winter Quarters, at Council Bluffs, or at Salt Lake. It convened at the wish of Church leaders. The Salt Lake Stake and high council answered to the new First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve.

356It should also be pointed out that a few others in 1848 had chosen to quit their westward trek even before arriving at the valley. Although efforts were made to change their minds, no physical force was ever used to stop them.

357The so-called Mormon Cricket, technically identified as Anabrus simplex, is 1.25 inches long. Traveling in hordes as big as a city block or more, they moved up to two miles per day. They not only consumed vegetation but other insect and animal life as well, including rattlesnakes, evergreen trees, and sagebrush (see Frank T. Cowan, Life Habits, History and Control of the Mormon Cricket, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture Technical Bulletin No. 161 [1929], 26-27). Such infestations are rare today because most crickets have been destroyed in the maze of irrigation ditches throughout the valley.

357Modern research has shown that this was probably not the first, nor would it be the last, incident of seagull-insect confrontation. As Hartley has shown, thousands of seagulls invaded grasshopper-infested fields near Mandan, North Dakota, in 1921, in Montana in 1924, in Saskatchewan in 1933, in Oregon in 1937 and 1947, and in Utah again in 1952 ("Mormons, Crickets, and Gulls," 237). What cannot be minimized, however, is that the miracle of the gulls came when it did, where it did. For this reason, the seagull remains the state bird of Utah.

---
Notas:
[^2] Throughout October, others of the original pioneer camp arrived back, including John Smith and Tunis Rappleye on 21 October and John Pack on 24 October (Historical Department Journals, 3-30 Oct. 1847).
[^5] For good accounts of the history of Nauvoo see the following works: Joseph Smith Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (1973), especially vols. 3-5 [cited hereafter as History of the Church]; B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. (1930), esp. vols. 2-3 [cited hereafter as Comprehensive History of the Church]; Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (1965); and David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (1974).
[^9] The killing of Jacob Weatherby is the only documented instance of a fatal encounter between Indians and Mormons in all of 1847. Having gone out after a frightened and disoriented Nancy Chamberlain (wife of Solomon Chamberlain), who was alone in a wagon west of the Elkhorn, Weatherby and three companions were fired on by three Omaha Indians. According to one account, one of Weatherby's friends "jumped out of the wagon and clinched two of the Indians [but] the third one shot Weatherby through the hip and bowels. The Indians then ran off as soon as the scuffle began." Weatherby died soon afterward and was buried in a buffalo robe near the Liberty Pole. Hosea Stout led a posse in search of the guilty party (Patty Sessions Journal, 20 June 1847).
[^19] Journal History of the Church, 9 Aug. 1846. This is a well-known and excellent resource available at the LDS Church Historical Department, consisting of scrapbook-like entries from private journals, letters, various writings of all kinds, newspaper clippings, and so on, compiled by date by former Assistant Church Historian, Andrew Jenson; cited hereafter as Journal History.
[^20] Charles R. King, "The Woman's Experience of Childbirth on the Western Frontier," Journal of the West 29, no. 1 (1990): 76-84. Years later, one observer could still say, "The learned profession was not so very learned. [Doctors were] to be sent for only as a last resort" (A. Britt, An America That Was: What Life Was Like on an Illinois Farm Seventy Years Ago (1964), 135, as quoted in King, 83).
[^21] Stampedes were a much dreaded occurrence in overland travel. One of the most chilling accounts is that given by a California forty-niner, Charles Edward Pancoast, while traveling up the Platte River in 1849: "In an instant, as if by magic, all the animals started simultaneously with a grand leap and flew down the river to the plain, the men in front shouting and scrambling to escape the solid mass of teams coming down upon them. Men could be seen dropping from the rear of wagons in all directions as they rumbled over the sands; I myself slipped through a two foot space between two wagons going at lightening speed. Some of the teams ran into a small creek and could not extricate themselves; others stopped from sheer exhaustion; still others ran two or three miles and were halted by the owners of tied horses that had not gotten away. Strange to say, no serious damage was done, except to the wagon of two Germans, which turned over and was irreparably smashed; the owners barely escaping with their lives. This was our first experience of a genuine stampede, not uncommon in the mountain countries of the west" (Charles Edward Pancoast, A Quaker Forty-Niner [1930], 198-99).
[^22] The new members of the company included Robert Crow, Elizabeth Crow, Benjamin B. Crow, Harriet Crow, Elizabeth Jane Crow, John McHenry Crow, Walter H. Crow, George W. Therlkill, Martilla Jane Therlkill (then seven months pregnant), Milton Howard Therlkill, James William Therlkill, William Parker Crow, Ida Vinda Exene Crow, Ira Minda Almarene Crow, Archibald Little, James Chesney, and Lewis B. Myers. Accompanying Myers were two Indian wives and a number of children (see William Clayton's Journal, 4 June 1847, 215).
[^23] Journal of Nelson Wheeler Whipple, 25 Feb. 1846, LDS Church Archives. "We thus kept a sharp look out for them for we knew as they had slain Joseph and Hyrum so they would slay Brigham, Heber, and the Twelve if they could."
[^28] The definitive works on the history of the Mormon Battalion are Frank Alfred Golder, The March of the Mormon Battalion from Council Bluffs to California (1928); Daniel Tyler, A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion to the Mexican War 1846-1847 (1969); John F. Yurtinus, "A Ram in the Thicket: The Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1975); and Norma Baldwin Ricketts, The Mormon Battalion: U.S. Army of the West, 1846-1848 (1996). See also Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 50-67.
[^29] The best study of Strang still remains Milo Quaife, The Kingdom of Saint James: A Narrative of the Mormons (1930). The most recent reinterpretation is Roger Van Noord's King of Beaver Island: The Life and Assassination of James Jesse Strang (1988). See also Doyle C. Fitzpatrick, The King Strang Story (1970); Richard E. Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 1846-1852: "And Should We Die . . ." (1987), 18-20; The Diary of James J. Strang, ed. Mark A. Strang (1961); William D. Russell, "King James Strang: Joseph Smith's Successor," in The Restoration Movement: Essays in Mormon History, ed. F. Mark McKiernan, Alma R. Blair, and Paul M. Edwards (1973), 231-56. Strang later removed his followers to Beaver Island in northern Lake Michigan, where his settlement realized only modest success.
[^31] Autobiography of Pioneer John Brown, 1820-1896, arr. John Zimmerman Brown (1941), 72-73. See also Jenson, "Day by Day," Deseret News, 31 May 1947. Lay and Crosby later died in California. Flake lived in Salt Lake City for most of his life, dying in Idaho Falls in 1903 at the age of 75.
[^40] William Clayton's Journal, 18 June 1847, 242. The crew left at the North Platte River crossing included some of the best carpenters and blacksmiths in camp: Thomas Grover, captain; John S. Higbee, assistant; Benjamin F. Stewart; James Davenport, blacksmith; William Empey; Luke S. Johnson; Appleton Harmon; Francis M. Pomeroy; and Edmund Ellsworth. Eric Glines decided, against counsel, to stay back with Grover's crew; he later changed his mind and hurried on by himself at considerable danger, catching up with the main camp several miles west.
[^42] Journal of Willard Richards, 14 Mar. 1847. It is interesting to note that in the dreams which Brigham Young said he had of Joseph Smith while preparing for the exodus, Joseph "stepped toward me, and looking very earnestly, yet pleasantly, said `Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. . . . Tell the brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it'" (Journal History, 23 Feb. 1847).
[^43] Little has been written about the costs of the original departures, although much is available on the costs involved in later migrations. This is particularly true of the Perpetual Emigration Fund and the financing of Mormon emigrant companies to Salt Lake City up until at least 1869 and the completion of the transcontinental rail-road. See Leonard J. Arrington's pathbreaking study, Great Basin Kingdom: An Economic History of the Latter-day Saints 1830-1900 (1958), 77-79.
[^55] For the exact wording of this "Memorial to the Queen for the Relief, by Emigration of a Portion of Her Poor Subjects," see J. B. Munro, "Mormon Colonization Scheme for Vancouver Island," Washington Historical Quarterly, 25, no. 3 (July 1934): 278-85. For a thorough and responsible study on British emigration, see Taylor, Expectations Westward, 18-47.
[^56] Journal of Jonathan C. Wright, 23 and 25 Feb. 1848. Samuel Thornton, another missionary who traveled back to Illinois, gave a more optimistic report than his counterpart, reporting that "the Saints generally remained in great anxiety to hear what to do, and rejoiced in the . . . spirit of the gathering." But even he admitted to baptizing "only one" in all his travels (Journal History, 12 Mar. 1848).
[^58] The Nauvoo Covenant resembled very closely the earlier Missouri Covenant of 1839, when Brigham Young at Far West, Missouri, proposed "that we this day enter into a covenant to . . . never desert the poor who are worthy, till they shall be out of the reach of the exterminating order of General [John B.] Clark." Some 214 men signed the covenant to assist others "to the utmost of our abilities." (History of the Church, 3:250-54).
[^59] There is some dispute over the name of this passerby. Most of the records refer to him as "Beaumont," although some refer to him as Charley Barkham (see Brigham Young letters, 5 May 1847). Erastus Snow records that the leader of the Beaumont company was a "Mr. Papan" who stayed on the other side of the river (see also Journal of Levi S. Johnson, 4 May 1847, Special Collections, Lee Library, Brigham Young University).
[^60] Addison Pratt, who left on a mission to the South Seas from Nauvoo in 1843 and did not return to his family, then in the Salt Lake Valley, until 1848, provides a revealing insight into the temporary lapse among the people in living the Word of Wisdom. On entering the valley, he found that "there seemed to be but two articles . . . and they were tobacco and coffee. The rule with some for selling tobacco was lay a silver dollar onto a flat plug and cut out the bigness of it for the dollar. I don't remember of ever seeing such a hankering after anything in my life as there was after that, and coffee was not much behind it. Notwithstanding, Br. Grouard and myself had urged an observance of the Word of Wisdom so strongly upon the natives of the South Sea Isles, I was surprised to see so little notice paid to it at the gathering place of the Saints" (The Journals of Addison Pratt, ed. S. George Ellsworth [1990], 368). For a full study of the history and development of the Word of Wisdom, see Paul H. Peterson, "An Historical Analysis of the Word of Wisdom" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972). It took almost a century before the Word of Wisdom took on the status of commandment within the Church.
[^61] Samuel Taylor argues in his controversial book The Kingdom or Nothing: The Life of John Taylor, Militant Mormon (1976) that both Taylor and Pratt had married plural wives during their return voyages, which was further cause of Brigham's unhappiness. If such was indeed the case, it only represented the conviction in fellow apostles' minds that they were all equal in authority, while underscoring Brigham's concern that until a new First Presidency was established, regulation of this and other practices was virtually impossible to control.
