Richard E. Bennett, We'll Find the Place: The Mormon Exodus 1846-1848 ( 1997)

359EPILOGUE

359We'll find the place which God for us prepared, Far away in the West, Where none shall come to hurt or make afraid; There the Saints will be blessed. [^1]

359This book deliberately ends in the predawn of Utah history and at the threshold of the great Mormon migrations that would see approximately 60,000 people come to Deseret, their new mountain Zion, between 1849 and the completion of the transcontinental railroad 20 years later. Like a tiny, swinging pedestrian bridge spanning the deep river gorge below, the Mormon Exodus of 1846-1848 was the tenuous, essential connecting link between a turbulent past in the East and a brighter future in the West. And it was a pathway laid at considerable sacrifice and breathtaking risk.

359An essential fact to remember is that there was no practical certainty that their journey would be successful and that their new settlement would prosper. The stakes were enormous! Had they failed in their march, had they failed to discover in time a new place and a new Zion—and convinced the membership to follow suit—it is entirely possible that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints would have broken up. As their leader put it:

If the Church is blown to the four winds and never gathered again, remember I have told you, how, when, and where to gather, and if you do not go now, remember and bear me witness in the day of judgment. When God tells a man what to do, he admits of no argument, and I want no arguments. [^2]

360The underlying theme of this entire study has been that the exodus of the Latter-day Saints was for the survival of the Church—Joseph Smith's grand enterprise, the message of Cumorah. Though patently obvious from a retrospective viewpoint, this imperative created drama, suspense, and a great deal of anxiety and trepidation. There was no survival, no future in their beloved "City of Joseph," and anyone anywhere close to the situation knew it. Mormonism was a despised, hunted, misunderstood, and maligned American religion, and America would have nothing to do with it. They had to either get out of Nauvoo or face extermination. Thus was born one of the great forced migrations in American history.

360Surely there can be no doubt that this was an exodus in every sense of the word—a "going out," a "mass departure," a "going forth of many persons," a forced migration of an entire people, a church on the move. There is no parallel to it in all of American history. And although the migrations continued for years after the last date covered in this book, by August 1848 the essentials of their exodus had all been put into place—a mass following, a successful trek across the desert of America, and a new settlement.

360At the outset of this study, it was argued that for the salvation of the Church at least seven things would have to happen. Obviously the first was to flee. And get out they did! Under the bold and daring leadership of Brigham Young, as adroit politically as he was careful spiritually, 12,000 Latter-day Saints made their way across Iowa and reached the Missouri River by the fall of 1846. And by the fall of 1848, some 4,200 of these had resettled in the Rocky Mountains; many more thousands were waiting their time to come. The dimension, coherency, and discipline of the migration, the going out as one, and the overall commitment of the people to make it succeed are a tribute to their faith and determination and a lasting salute to the leadership of Brigham Young and those others who assisted him. It was an exodus of necessity.

Once committed and on the way west, their urgent need was to find a place "to stick the stake," a new home large enough to accommodate their present and future needs, far enough away to ensure their space and freedom, and healthy enough to sustain their crops and support their living. While some of their number sought for California or Texas or the Tongue River, most followed their leaders to the valley of the Great Salt Lake, a spot they more or less had determined before crossing the Mississippi. Although some tried to dissuade them and others found it a disappointment, most made peace with the choice and waded into the desert experiment with abundant hope and energy.

361Much has been written about the triumph of discovery and of finding "the right place." And well it should be. Yet it may be that one of the more enduring characteristics of their long, dusty quest was not the finding of place but something less tangible—the discovery of mission and a rising awareness of fulfilling prophecy. To Orson Pratt and others, it meant hope, confirmation, and acceptation that their sufferings and persecutions, their wanderings in the wilderness, and everything they had stood for and believed was redeemed in this long tedious march to the valley. Such a sense of a modern Israel fulfilling ancient prophecy became a wonderful motivation, an inspiration, a timely glue that helped keep them together. This matter of evolving self-perception, their own interpretation of their expanding role, their unfolding errand into the wilderness, cannot be minimized as a vital factor in their success in finding and keeping their place. It was an exodus of redemption and of prophecy fulfilled.

361A third essential to their survival as a religious body was the restructuring of their government, the reestablishment of a new First Presidency, and more to the point the reconviction among the majority of the people that God had called a new prophet. The murder of Joseph Smith and the dissolution of the original presidency had wrought devastation in the hearts of many of his followers. Some could not be reconciled to leadership by the Twelve and sought solace elsewhere. Indeed, one argument of this study has been to show that although James Strang, Sidney Rigdon, and a handful of others laid claim to the leadership and future of the Church, it was Strang in particular who showed initial, surprising strength and worrisome appeal. And for a time, as the membership of the Church lay strewn and uprooted across the plains, the uncertainty of it all, the fear of the unknown, the cost in money and health and loved ones, and the absence of a prophet leader—all these contributed to a certain real hesitation and withholding of support.

Yet one very real heritage or result of the exodus was that it made a prophet of Brigham Young in a way perhaps no other circumstance could have. Surely it is not coincidental that he left Nauvoo as president of a depleted Quorum of the Twelve, a leader among equals, but came back to the Missouri as President of the Church with a strong and revitalized quorum. And as "The Word and Will of the Lord" had indicated, there would be no other quorum, no other authority greater than the Twelve, save the First Presidency. The trials and uncertainties of their westward march made of him an even greater leader than before. By the time they settled at the Great Salt Lake, for the vast majority there was no longer any doubt who should lead the Church. Much attention has been devoted to the several discussions and disagreements among many of Brigham's colleagues, in part to show that there was, at first, some uncertainty on the matter of a new First Presidency. This may have come as somewhat of a surprise to those who have long assumed that the reestablishment of this quorum was a foregone conclusion. Such active deliberations in tents, in wagons, and by the fire of the willow patch confirm the fact that this was no careless power grab.

362Some have argued that Brigham Young was a power seeker, anxious to take advantage and fill a vacuum of authority through the overbearing strength of his own personality. The historical evidence shows, however, that such was not the case, that his fellow leaders, men of strong mind and independent character, were not given to intimidation or browbeating, despite his chastisements and rebukes. When finally they concluded that Brigham should be the next President of the Church, they did so more or less willingly and accepted new mission assignments near and far under his direction. They may not have always liked his style, but they revered and respected him for what he had accomplished and, in the process, came to believe that God had invested the future of the Church in his hands.

Likewise, the unanimous support of the people, at least of those who were in the process of going west, of his leadership and of his Presidency was by no means a routine matter. The fact that most refused to follow George Miller or James Emmett at the Missouri, or Sam Brannan to California, or James Strang to Beaver Island is all-compelling evidence that they sensed in Brigham a man in whom they could put their trust and faith. While it is true that there were thousands who stayed back—many of whom in Illinois, Missouri, and Iowa eventually coalesced around the person of Joseph Smith III and the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints—most of the members were satisfied with Brigham's leadership. It was, then, an exodus of leadership—prophetic leadership—a willingness to accept a new First Presidency. And with it was laid the principle of apostolic succession and its corollary, apostolic supremacy over any and all other quorums or parties in the Church.

363The fourth fact of the exodus is that they came to see it as a refiner's fire, a biblical-type chastening of God's people. Early Latter-day Saint doctrine called for a tried and a tested people. But at no other time in their short history were they called on to receive such refining. Their belief explains the fact that while so many died at Winter Quarters and along the Iowa trail, there was never a hint of rebellion or of mass defection. In fact, their trials only deepened their determination. "We mean to conquer or die trying," [^3] was Brigham's challenge to the foe. Or as William Clayton put it in his anthem to their modern pilgrimage: "And should we die before our journey's through, Happy day! All is well!" [^4]

363If they were God's people, they would accept God's will. They had already learned this lesson a dozen years before in Zion's Camp. If they would not live and die for that which they so dearly believed, and take God's rebukes and redemptions, no amount of wagon trails would ever bring them success. Their many sermons and writings abundantly attest that either they would go as God's people or they would not go at all! It became an exodus of reformation.

363The corollary to this divine schooling on the high plains of America must surely be that if God would chasten them, a modern Israel, he would surely prove their oppressors and discomfort their enemies. Running through their many writings, as clear and as deep as their new irrigation streams in the valley, was their conviction that God would surely and eventually visit America in justice. The recurring renunciations of their past allegiances and the early celebrations of their newfound freedom are all abundant proof of an attitude of collective hurt and expectant retribution. Their several Liberty Poles, white flags of purity, Jubilees, harvest songs and poems and letters all point to a profound disappointment in civil authority and man-made governments—especially of the America they once knew and loved. It was an attitude that would soften only with the passage of time and the inevitable accommodation with the nation's expanding borders.

One of the enduring ironies of the exodus is that at the moment of their maximum distrust and open disdain of the United States, the Latter-day Saints were persuaded, once again by the artful negotiation of their leader, to join in the Army of the West in an extended and memorable march to California, a march of trial and sacrifice. Although it underscored their devotion more to their leader than to their country, this critical decision resulted in a desperately-needed infusion of cash and supplies, deterred political enemies bent on their discomfort, if not destruction, and did much to ensure the overall success of the enterprise.

364They would also go as a covenant people. Another central theme has been the fact that they saw their Nauvoo temple covenants and ordinances as an essential part of their success. Certainly the Nauvoo Covenant of October 1845, in which they promised to do all in their power to bring on the sick and the poor, was an enduring call to sacrifice that each one was reminded of repeatedly. In return, Brigham saw to it that certain temple blessings, particularly temple marriages for those about to go off to war, were quietly granted on an exigency basis. A practical leader, Brigham was never tied by tradition; he interpreted and applied doctrines to the solutions of immediate, practical problems.

364He also understood the motivating force and the defining power of covenants and of the place of temple worship when, on 26 July in the valley, he proclaimed with a wave of his cane the site of the new Salt Lake Temple—the covenant heritage of Nauvoo transplanted to the mountaintops. To have done otherwise would have betrayed the trust of his people, many of whom had spent months laboring on the construction of the Nauvoo Temple. Though the Salt Lake Temple would not be completed for almost half a century, the place of covenants and of the temple endowment was a unifying, motivating force, a central defining element to their faith. It was, then, an exodus of covenant.

364Neither can one ignore the all-important economic considerations. Having examined everything from temple sales to tithing, from battalions to begging missions, it is now clear how they paid for it all. Besieged and bankrupt, the Church was carried on the backs of its believers. Ultimately it was the incredible sacrifice of means and properties, time and talent, pleasures and comforts, and lives and liberties that made it all possible. Whether the soldier's wife foregoing her husband's discharge pay for the help of others, the father surrendering Church wagons in the mudflats of Mt. Pisgah, or the loss of friends and of entire families in the mud huts of Winter Quarters, this was and will forever be an exodus of endurance and sacrifice.

Of no less importance to the success of their cause was the rediscovery of the printing press. To thwart the early and impressive gains of Strang, if nothing else, and certainly to reestablish the doctrine of gathering and the resumption of the great British migrations, the ability to print was essential to their missionary and gathering success. The declaration and dissemination of printed epistles provoked the spirit of gathering on an international scale and signalled to many anxious, watching eyes that their westward experiment had succeeded. With donated funds from a handful of St. Louis members, they were finally able to break their silence and send out the word by missionary, poster, mail, and express. It became an exodus of "publishing peace."

365Finally, through it all there was the faith and hope of a deeply religious people. Their task was less to preserve a culture than it was to save a religion—not a routine migration of excited and courageous individuals to the west but a going forth to Zion of an entire faith. Because their people were of several lands, it was not an ethnic exercise as much as it was a spiritual one. And although Brigham became their prophet-leader and proved his qualities, the truth remains that this was a people who were wont to be led. These were men and women who believed deeply in their cause and in their faith and who would largely remain committed and together despite the deaths of Winter Quarters or the crickets of Salt Lake. It was, in the end, their exodus of faith.

365Fifty years ago, during the centennial celebrations of the arrival of the pioneers in the Salt Lake Valley, J. Reuben Clark, then of the First Presidency, penned the following lines, which are as appropriate now as they were then. It is only fitting that he should again have the final word.

365So through dust and dirt, dirt and dust, during the long hours, the longer days—that grew into weeks and then into months, they crept along till, passing down through its portals, the valley welcomed them to rest and home. The cattle dropped to their sides, wearied almost to death; nor moved they without goading, for they too sensed they had come to the journey's end.

365

365That evening was the last of the great trek, the mightiest trek that history records since Israel's flight from Egypt, and as the sun sank below the mountain peaks of the west and the eastern crags were bathed in an amethyst glow that was a living light, . . . they of the last wagon, and of the wagon before them, and of the one before that, and so to the very front wagon of the train, these all sank to their knees in the joy of their souls, thanking God that at last they were in Zion—"Zion, city of our God." [^5]

366NOTES

---
Notas:
[^2] Throughout October, others of the original pioneer camp arrived back, including John Smith and Tunis Rappleye on 21 October and John Pack on 24 October (Historical Department Journals, 3-30 Oct. 1847).
[^5] For good accounts of the history of Nauvoo see the following works: Joseph Smith Jr., History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. (1973), especially vols. 3-5 [cited hereafter as History of the Church]; B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. (1930), esp. vols. 2-3 [cited hereafter as Comprehensive History of the Church]; Robert Bruce Flanders, Nauvoo: Kingdom on the Mississippi (1965); and David E. Miller and Della S. Miller, Nauvoo: The City of Joseph (1974).
