Richard E. Bennett, We'll Find the Place: The Mormon Exodus 1846-1848 ( 1997)

381HISTORIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY

381Rather than provide a definitive historiographical essay to so large a body of writings on the Mormon exodus, the purpose of this short review is to highlight those works, published and otherwise, that were most helpful in the writing of the present study.

381PRIMARY SOURCES

381As the reader has by now discovered, this work is founded on primary documentation and archival materials, many of which have not been published previously. Of all such manuscript material, by far the most beneficial were the papers and correspondence of Brigham Young, housed in the Church Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Salt Lake City, Utah. This remarkable archive consists primarily of his incoming and outgoing letters, sermons, minutes of quorum meetings, hearings, financial records, and related items. No accurate account of this period in Church history is possible without utilizing this resource.

An extension of the Brigham Young papers are the General Church Minutes, a collection of minutes of meetings of senior quorums within the Church and of other discussions, sermons, and presentations during the period between the death of Joseph Smith in June 1844 and the reorganization of the First Presidency in December 1847. A remarkable resource, these detailed accounts give clarity and understanding of a difficult formative period.

382The individual writings and journals of several other prominent leaders have likewise been highly useful. Although some of these have been published in one form or another, I have relied on my study of the originals wherever possible. Especially helpful and noteworthy are such model journals as those written by William Clayton, Wilford Woodruff, Thomas Bullock, Horace K. Whitney, Erastus Snow, Willard Richards, Howard Egan, Patty Sessions, Eliza R. Snow, and Hosea Stout. The diaries and journals of other, lower-level leaders also proved of worth, including those of Charles R. Dana, William Appleby, and Norton Jacob. The letters of Irene Hascall are a proven resource.

382Other unpublished Church sources used in the work include the minutes of the Winter Quarters High Council from 1846 to 1848, of the Pottawattamie High Council from 1847 to 1852, and of the Salt Lake High Council from 1847 to 1848. Likewise, the records of clerks of various traveling companies were a valuable resource.

382Surprisingly beneficial was the vast scrapbook-like vertical file of diary entries, minutes, excerpts from correspondence, articles, editorials, and more that make up the Journal History, likewise found in the LDS Church Historical Department. Compiled by Andrew Jenson and his staff many years ago, this resource is unequalled for its breadth of coverage and scope of content. Though lacking in the letters of senior Church leaders, it is nonetheless an indisputable resource, an essential first stop on the road to serious study of nineteenth-century Mormon history.

382In addition to Mormon sources, a great many other archival records of contemporaries have been utilized to give balance and perspective. Among those most heavily relied upon were the journals and diaries of such other overlanders as Joseph W. Wood, Isaac Pettijohn, Joel Palmer, Charles Peabody, Silas Newcombe, William A. Hockett, Lansfield B. Hastings, and James Clyman. The locations of these journals are identified in the bibliography.

Besides the above journal collections, two particularly fruitful archival collections of letters and related materials were the James Jesse Strang Papers and the writings of Lilburn W. Boggs and his son, William Boggs. The study of the Strang papers at Yale and at Independence provided a deeper understanding and appreciation of the effort he made to create an alternative to Brigham Young's westward initiative.

383SECONDARY SOURCES

383The literature of the Mormon migration is its own large and growing library, as are the even more voluminous writings on the Oregon and California Trails. No accurate understanding of the Mormon movement, in context of the westward migrations of the time, is possible without the study of such essential works as John D. Unruh Jr.'s The Plains Across (1982), Merrill J. Mattes's The Great Platte River Road (1969), Andrew Child's Overland Route to California (1946), and Ray Allen Billington's and Martin Ridge's Westward Expansion (1982).

383Among those works providing a rich, comprehensive perspective, few yet rival the detail, color, and passion of B. H. Roberts's Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (6 volumes). Though somewhat dated, Roberts is still full of insight and scholarly observation, the essential introduction to the serious study of all of nineteenth-century Mormon history.

383Among the earliest works on the topic are Jules Remy's A Journey to Great Salt Lake (1861), Hubert H. Bancroft's The History of Utah (1889), and Henry Inman's and William F. Cody's The Great Salt Lake Trail (1898).

383Some of the better known studies in this century have been Cecil E. McGavin's The Mormon Pioneers (1947), Exodus to Greatness by Preston Nibley (1947), Wallace Stegner's well-known The Gathering of Zion (1964), and Joseph E. Brown's heavily illustrated The Mormon Trek West (1980). What Nibley lacked in critical writing he made up in detail and the inclusion of unpublished accounts, surprising in scope for a work written a half century ago.

383Stegner, not a Latter-day Saint, has written what is arguably the best, most readable study of the Exodus. Like Bernard DeVoto before him, Stegner found inspiration in the remarkable sacrifice of the pioneers. While saluting their courage and devotion, Stegner remained ever critical of their faith. A master at capturing the human drama, Stegner misunderstood the essential motivation, the spiritual underpinnings, even the ecclesiastical politics involved.

Other modern writers have included elements of the story in broader studies or biographies. Most noteworthy are Leonard J. Arrington in his classic work, Great Basin Kingdom (1958), and two of his biographical studies—Charles C. Rich (1974) and, more recently, Brigham Young: American Moses (1985). Stanley B. Kimball, the scholar of the trail itself, must also be mentioned not only for his editing of William Clayton's The Latter-day Saints' Emigrants Guide (1983) but also for his biography, Heber C. Kimball: Mormon Patriarch and Pioneer (1981). For trail aficionados, Kimball's maps, trail guides, and studies are unsurpassed for precision, insight, and exactness. Likewise, the scholarship of Dale L. Morgan—as evidenced in his The Great Salt Lake (1947), Overland in 1846: Diaries and Letters of the California-Oregon Trail (1963), and his numerous articles on related topics—has been highly beneficial. Morgan anticipated the findings from even the most recently discovered manuscript collections as perhaps no other writer.

384These represent just some of the works found to be most useful in the present study. All others are referenced in the bibliography itself.
