John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: The Second Semester ( 1995)

Orientation

Welcome Back!

Hey, everybody! How have you been? It's good to see you! I mean—uh—it's good to write to you! Wow, here we are again; can you believe it? Another book called What I Wish I'd Known in High School, but this time it's (drum roll, please) THE SECOND SEMESTER! (Cymbal crash.) Yes, friends, it's back-to-school time. It's time to take another exciting excursion on the Starship o' Knowledge, to learn new things, to think new thoughts, to boldly go where few teenagers have gone before. (I tried to arrange for an F-16 flyover at this point; let's see, how would that sound? Ffffffffff—no, that's tearing up a piece of paper; let's see, F-16s. . . . How about Rrrrroooor—no, that sounds like my stomach before lunch; SSSSSSHHHHHHH—no, that's a librarian. Okay, forget that part. Just imagine four F-16s flying overhead and being very loud and exciting, and imagine the pilots screaming, "Yeeeeeeeehaw!" as they pass by.)

Anyway, I'm glad you're back. It will be fun to talk with you again. There is so much to learn and explore and discover, and you, my fellow explorer, can do it all because you can read! Books are like mini-time machines that can take you wherever you want to go. I love the power of books. (You know, new books smell good, too. Go ahead, stick your nose in here and take a whiff. Isn't that nice?) So I guess we ought to make the same deal we did last time, okay? Read this instead of watching TV, and I'll do my best to make it more interesting, more exciting, and more testimony building than prime-time ever was. Is that a deal? Deal.

As you may know, last year Deseret Book and I produced a book called What I Wish I'd Known in High School: A Crash Course in Teenage Survival. It was a really fun experience, but something was missing. By the time I finished writing, I realized I had left so many things out—good things, important things! So this time, I've written about all those things and called it The Second Semester. And it's going to be fun. But it's also going to be a little more personal.

Let me explain. No, there is too much. Let me sum up. Once I attended a fireside. A wonderful talk was given, and there was a peaceful, thoughtful spirit in the chapel. Everyone in attendance was "turned inward": people were sitting quietly, thinking about personal, spiritual things. You know the feeling—I know this has happened to you. It was very interesting because the closing hymn was over, the closing prayer was said, but no one left. The dance was starting in the other room, but no one wanted to leave the chapel! The overwhelming feeling shared by everyone in the room seemed to be, "I want to soak this feeling in for a few minutes." It was written on every face. People whispered to one another. No one told them to whisper; they just did. Why do you suppose that was? The music began to play in the gym, but no one seemed to care. Some even got a pained look on their faces when they heard the music start, kind of a "well, back to the real world" look. I love it when that happens! I love it when the youth notice the difference between the feeling of the Spirit and the feeling of the "Top Forty." (I get that same "back to the real world" feeling every time I leave the temple and go back to my car.)

Now, here's the problem. A few youth still had unanswered questions. Important questions. I know they did, because it was written all over their faces. A few of us stayed in the chapel and talked. We had a wonderful discussion while the majority of the group jumped around in the gym.

There are some questions that people ask only when they are on that deep-down level. That's where those young people were. They wanted to know about heaven, about Heavenly Father, about Jesus. Some of them weren't sure what they wanted, except that they wanted more—more of that sweet feeling that seemed to stay in the room. They had a wonderful case of "celestial homesickness." Some of those great teens had questions that they didn't want to ask in front of the others. (I wonder how many questions about important things don't get asked because people are too afraid.) Would you like to know some of their questions? How about this one: "How do I repent?" Wow. Is that an important question, or what? A little more important than which fork to use on a date, isn't it? How about this one: "How do I know if I've felt the Spirit?" and, "How can I feel it more often?" I can't tell you how thrilled I was, having lived a few more years but remembering my teenage years like they were yesterday, to sit with those five or six young people and talk about the weightier things of the gospel for the next two and a half hours. I think I would rather do that than attend any youth conference dance, or any amusement park, or any movie, anytime.

Well, my friends, I've tried my hardest to find answers to the deep-down questions and put them in this little book. I'm giving you fair warning, because there may be times when you look up from the pages and say, "Wow. This is serious stuff!" And it is. I don't know much myself, so I've looked for answers in the scriptures and from the words of the prophets. If I missed any of your deep-down questions, those are the best places for you to look too.

Anyway, your mom will be so pleased that you're reading something beyond the scholarly TV Guide. You'll learn some doctrine, but we'll have some fun, too. Yes indeed, we'll take a lunch break and have some laughs. I promise.

Let's get to work! Put this book down, go get a highlighter, your scriptures, and a favorite beverage, and let's read. You might even want to take the phone off the hook. (Right, like you or anyone you know would really take the phone off the hook.) Anyway, turn off the TV and read, and I'll try to make it as interesting as I can.

Well, that's it for Orientation. It's back-to-school time! First period is about to start—I'll see you in class!
