John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: The Second Semester ( 1995)

Motivation 101

The Three Attitudes

And they were all young men, and they were exceedingly valiant for courage, and also for strength and activity; but behold, this was not all—they were men who were true at all times in whatsoever thing they were entrusted. —Alma 53:20

You know the story. You may have even lived the story. Big family leaves on big trip and leaves something big behind. It's happened to your family, it's happened to my family, and it happened to Lehi and Sariah and their family. "Oh, great. We traveled two hundred miles, but we have to go back and get the plates. You know, the brass ones. Boys, would you please go back and get the plates?"

What's the difference between Nephi and Laman and Lemuel? Notice the different responses to exactly the same request. The "attitude brothers," Laman and Lemuel, say it's too hard: "It is a hard thing [you] have required" (1 Nephi 3:5). (Our generation would probably ask, "Is this gonna be fun?") Nephi, however, says, "I will go and do" (1 Nephi 3:7). Same request, opposite attitudes.

In fact, as you go through the Book of Mormon, you'll find that Laman and Lemuel usually ended up doing the same things Nephi did—they just had a bad attitude about it. That "little" difference, that difference in attitude, seemed to be passed down through many generations who felt they were "wronged in the wilderness," and it ended up affecting the destiny of both the Nephite and Lamanite civilizations.

No one wants to be labeled by others. But whether we like it or not, we label ourselves by our attitudes and actions. Laman and Lemuel labeled themselves, Nephi labeled himself, and every day we label ourselves by the things we say and do.

But, hey, let's be fair. I mean, hello, walking—no, not driving, walking two hundred miles to go and get something (from someone who doesn't want to give it to you), and then walking another two hundred miles to bring it back is a pretty huge request! We might even call it, uh, inconvenient. Yes, four hundred miles round-trip is a long way, which makes Nephi's "I will go and do" response even more impressive. But it's not just the big things that show what's inside of us. We also tell on ourselves by the little things we do. President David O. McKay shared this interesting little poem in general conference back in 1969:

You tell on yourself by the friends you seek, By the very manner in which you speak, By the way you employ your leisure time, By the use you make of dollar and dime; You tell what you are by the things you wear, And even by the way you wear your hair, By the kind of things at which you laugh, By the records you play on your phonograph. You tell what you are by the way you walk, By the things of which you delight to talk, By the manner in which you bury deceit, By so simple a thing as how you eat. By the books you choose from the well-filled shelf; In these ways and more you tell on yourself. [^1]

As you know, earth life is full of rules, requirements, commandments, dress codes, honor codes, Morse codes, and so on. When someone starts explaining the rules, an amazing thing happens. Watch how people respond! People begin to "tell on themselves" by their reactions. You'll see obedient, "I-will-go-and-do" types; whining, "It-is-a-hard-thing" types; and everything in between. For now, we're going to narrow the field down to three different groups or attitudes. Yeah, that's it, we'll call them the "three attitudes." (You've heard of the beatitudes? Well, these are the three-atitudes.)

How Bad Can I Be?

I once attended a morality lesson during which anonymous questions were gathered in a shoebox and submitted to a panel of leaders. One of the questions, to our surprise, was, "How far can you go before you have to see the bishop?" Whoa. Nice attitude. Stated another way, the question was, "How bad can I be?" I guess this person wanted to know exactly where "bad" began so he or she wouldn't miss out on anything. A youth asking "How far can I go before it's bad?" is like a skydiver asking how close he can get to the ground before he has to open his parachute. The person who asked that question didn't realize that where "bad" really begins is in the heart, with a bad attitude, which reveals itself through bad behavior.

One way people show their membership in the "How-bad-can-I-be" group is by their strong reactions to things like dress standards, which are simply an attempt to draw the line on what is acceptable. They want to know exactly where that line is. For instance, they want to know exactly where the knee begins, or where "long hair" begins, so that they can get as close to being in violation of the code as possible and still be admitted to the dance. They may be secretly excited when they can "get away with" something, because that's the attitude: "What can I get away with?"

They tell on themselves another way by choosing music and entertainment that are right on the line as well. They say, "It wasn't that bad," or "I've seen other movies with a better rating that were worse." Once again, they live right next to the danger zone, not realizing that the most dangerous thing is the attitude itself.

They may say things like, "Hey, nobody's perfect"—which is true, but they're not trying to be perfect. They're not even trying to be good! They want to know how bad they can be. Elder Richard J. Clarke commented:

Those who excuse transgressions by saying, "Well, I'm not perfect" may be reminded that conscious sin is a long way from perfection. We would do best to consider this counsel of President Brigham Young. "Be . . . as perfect as [you] can, for that is all you can do. . . . The sin . . . is [not doing] as well as [you know] how" (JD 2:129-30). [^2]

If you were to ask someone with this attitude why they attend church or seminary, they might respond, "'Cause I have to." I have to do this, I have to do that. They see life as a big set of unfair rules, and obedience is an inconvenience and an irritation. Very un-Nephi.

How Good Are We Supposed To Be?

The next group wants to know, "How good are we supposed to be?" At first, that attitude might sound okay. But it isn't! Stay with me, and I'll tell you why. Members of this group want to do what they're supposed to do. In fact, if you asked them, "Why do you go to seminary?" they would say, "'Cause I'm post to." (Some people pronounce the word "supposed" as "post.") These are good people, honorable people. They do what they're "post" to, go to church and attend meetings. They're willing to be good. Good for them.

And, hey, being good is good! But that's all it is—good. It's not great, it's not valiant, it's just, you know, good. Sister Ardeth Kapp said:

It has been my observation, and it is my confession as a former participant, that many people drift along with the crowd in the Church. Many good people drift to sacrament meeting and Sunday School, even family home evening, and they drift through a casual study of the scriptures. . . . [They] step into the mainstream, getting deeply involved with Church activity and floating with the current, comfortable with a sense of false security that they are in the right place. [^3]

"See, here I am, bein' good, doin' what I'm post to. Call me the post-man, 'cause I do what I'm post to." Yup. It's good to be good, but it's better to be better than good.

Now, here's the problem. Sometimes, for this group, being good has its limits. They wouldn't want to go too far. I once challenged a group of teens to give up a certain prime-time soap opera. We discussed the thirteenth Article of Faith, "If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things." After realizing that many television programs failed to fit in those categories, most of the youth present willingly accepted my challenge. Others sat quietly, telling on themselves by the attitude written all over their faces. The message coming through loud and clear by their expression was, "I want to be good, but I don't want to be that good." Ouch! Did you catch how dangerous that is? Yes indeed. Heaven forbid we become too good—we might get too many blessings. Elder Carlos E. Asay told the young men in the priesthood session of general conference:

There is a lie—a vicious lie—circulating among the Latter-day Saints and taking its toll among the young. And it is that a "balanced man" is one who deliberately guards against becoming too righteous. [^4]

That's a lie I've heard myself, many times. It's not only false, it's very dangerous. When we want to be good but not too good, we may think we can choose which rules to obey and which not to obey. I'm not sure why, but every time I read the following quote to an audience, they laugh. I guess Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin shows us how silly "selective obedience" really is. Either that, or the laughter is the nervous giggles of the guilty.

They claim to be obedient to God's commandments but do not feel at all uncomfortable about purchasing food at the store on Sunday and then asking the Lord to bless it. Some say they would give their lives for the Lord, yet they refuse to serve in the nursery.

The Savior spoke very explicitly about people who "draw near to me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me." [^5]

After the last part of the quote, no one is laughing. Now, don't misunderstand, being good isn't bad, being good is good! But President Ezra Taft Benson said we need to be more than just good:

We have too many potential spiritual giants who should be more vigorously lifting their homes, the kingdom, and the country. We have many who feel they are good men, but they need to be good for something—stronger patriarchs, courageous missionaries, valiant genealogists and temple workers, dedicated patriots, devoted quorum members. [Okay, here's my favorite part:] In short, we must be shakened and awakened from a spiritual snooze. [^6]

When was the last time you used the word snooze? Right! You were describing to someone how hard it was to get up one morning, and you explained how you kept hitting the snooze button! President Benson uses a powerful metaphor: spiritual giants in a spiritual snooze. Too many people continually hit the snooze button on the clock radio of their personal spirituality. "I'll be better someday, but for now, I don't wanna be too good, I'll just snooze. Someday I'll start a scripture study program, someday I'll say my daily prayers, someday I'll do what I'm post to, but not now. I'll just snooze for a while."

Aaagh! When are we going to WAKE UP? Sorry, I got carried away for a minute there. Anyway, back to the point. If we don't want to be in the "How-bad-can-I-be" group, or the "How-good-am-I-post-to-be" group, then where should we be? It's time to talk about the third attitude, and you, my friend, know all about this group. It's the group where you can find fine teenagers like you.

I Want To Be Valiant!

I love this group, and I'll bet you're in it! This group doesn't ask, "How bad can I be?" They have absolutely no interest in what is bad. And good isn't enough for them, either. They want something better than simply good. Their question is on a higher plane: "Is it valiant? I want to be valiant. Is it better than average? Is it high quality? Is it extra-mile? Is it high class? That's where I want to be. That's where I belong. I want to be valiant." No one has to remind these young people about rules. No one has to tell these young men they need a necktie at the sacrament table, or these young women exactly where their knee is. They carry their desire to please God everywhere they go. It is constantly burning inside. Like the others, they tell on themselves. The quality of their spirits shines brightly through their attitude.

Valiant people have no problem with dress codes. They usually agree with them. And even if they don't agree, they follow them anyway. That's the way valiant people are. They're more interested in being obedient than in knowing all the reasons for the rules. Oooh, that sounded good, can I say that again? They're more interested in being obedient than in knowing all the reasons for the rules. They get up on Sunday morning and think to themselves, "What should I wear today? Let's see, I go to church to worship the Lord. What does the Lord deserve? He deserves the best. Yeah, that's it. Sunday best." Valiant young women dress carefully because they realize they can attract young men in one of two ways: to themselves, or to their bodies; to who they are inside, or to how they look on the outside. They also realize that inner beauty is more, yes, more powerful in the eternal scheme of things than external beauty will ever be.

If you were to ask an "Is-it-valiant" person, "Why do you go to seminary?" they would give you that "what-a-strange-question" look and answer, "Because I want to. I want to learn, I want to understand, I want my testimony to grow." And when they get to seminary, they stay awake, and they stay focused. They don't expect to be entertained. They expect to learn! And they don't just listen to their instructor, they help their instructor by being actively involved in the class. They are always a part of the solution, and never a part of the problem.

"Is-it-valiant" teenagers are missionaries from the moment they get up in the morning. They preach a sermon in everything they do, and their attitude radiates to everyone else. You can feel it when you're around them. Just being in their company makes you want to be better. President David O. McKay said:

Every man and every person who lives in this world wields an influence, whether for good or for evil. It is not what he says alone; it is not alone what he does. It is what he is. Every man, every person radiates what he or she really is. . . . It is what we are and what we radiate that affects the people around us. [^7]

You just can't hide it when you're valiant! It radiates! "Is-it-valiant" teenagers become excellent full-time missionaries, too. Mission presidents love them! Their desire to do right comes from inside. These elders and sisters work hard and obey mission rules, not because they have to, or because someone's watching, or because they're post to, but because they want to. There's no casual study of the scriptures for them. They hunger and thirst after righteousness and after knowledge (see Matthew 7:7). They can't get enough!

If you were to ask an "Is-it-valiant" person, "Why do you go to church?" they'd answer, "Because I want to. I want to be clean. I want to be valiant. I love Jesus. He is so wonderful. His life was so amazing. I want to think like him, and act like him, and be like him."

If you want to be valiant, and you need a model to follow, think about Jesus. Jesus was a teen at one time. We have hardly any information about his teenage years. All we really have is summed up in one scripture: "And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man" (Luke 2:52). But imagine you were able to go back in time, and you traveled back to Nazareth. Who's the first person you would look for? Let's say you were walking along a dirt road, and you met a young man. He was, say, sixteen or seventeen years old. He had dark eyes and auburn hair, and he was wearing typical clothes from that time. You stopped him to get directions and asked, "May I know your name?" He looked at you and answered, "My name is Jesus."

Think how this particular teen would have "radiated." Wow. If you ever wonder how to live your life, think about being the kind of young person Jesus must have been. He would have been valiant—obedient to his parents, a good worker, and kind and respectful to everyone. Valiant people focus on the Savior and try to live the words of a favorite Primary song, "So, little children, let's you and I try to be like him, try, try, try." [^8]

Did Jesus ever ask, "How bad can I be?" or "How good am I supposed to be?" Did he do things because he had to, or because he was supposed to? Let's ask President Howard W. Hunter: "He was perfect and sinless, not because he had to be, but rather because he clearly and determinedly wanted to be." [^9]

Why is it so important to be valiant? Do you really want to know? Our answer is in the scriptures. Explaining who will inhabit the terrestrial kingdom, the Doctrine and Covenants states: "These are they who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus; wherefore, they obtain not the crown over the kingdom of our God" (D&C 76:79; emphasis added).

Wow. I guess being valiant is pretty important. Like Nephi, Laman, and Lemuel, you will find that much of your life and your eternal destiny will be determined by your attitude. We'll talk more as this book continues about being valiant, about having our hearts changed so that we sincerely want to be valiant, all the time. And now that you've been introduced to the three attitudes, tuck them away in your mind because we'll be referring to them again.

We'll close with an appeal from President Howard W. Hunter:

We must know Christ better than we know him; we must remember him more often than we remember him; we must serve him more valiantly than we serve him. . . .What manner of men and women ought we to be? Even as he is. [^10]

Well, you've told on yourself again, because you just finished First Period. You must be reading this book because you want to. You must be one of those valiant ones, because you want to learn! So, my fellow Nephi, let's go on to Second Period—not because we have to, or because we're post to, but because we want to.

First Period Endnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Stephen E. Robinson, Believing Christ (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992), pp. 27-28.
[^2] Dallin H. Oaks, "Sin and Suffering," Brigham Young University seventeen-stake fireside, August 5, 1990.
[^3] Ezra Taft Benson, in Repentance (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), pp. 6-7.
[^4] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Trust and Accountability," Brigham Young University devotional address, October 13, 1992.
[^5] Dean L. Larsen, Ensign, May 1983, p. 35.
[^6] Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, May 1986, pp. 44-45.
[^7] Ezra Taft Benson, The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), p. 105.
[^8] 8. Children's Songbook (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1989), p. 55.
[^9] 9. Howard W. Hunter, Ensign, November 1976, p. 19.
[^10] 10. Howard W. Hunter, Ensign, May 1994, p. 64; emphasis added.
