John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: The Second Semester ( 1995)

Spiritual Health 101

Hand Soap and Heart Transplants

I say unto you, can ye look up to God at that day with a pure heart and clean hands? I say unto you, can you look up, having the image of God engraven upon your countenances? —Alma 5:19

If you were to look up the term Service Project in the dictionary of Latter-day Saint jargon, it might look something like this:

Service Project—Sur' vis Proj' ekt (Mormon): 1. An event usually advertised as "something really fun, but we're not going to tell you what it is." Followed by, "Wear grubbies and show up at the church. P.S. Bring a shovel." The Service Project is usually followed by a beverage and/or pastry (see Refreshments). 2. A few members may moan when hearing Service Project, but they always end up enjoying the experience.

One summer, I found myself involved in one of those service projects in San Antonio, Texas. About a hundred of us were busy painting a widow's home. We were having a good time. It's amazing how quickly you can get a major job done when there are a hundred people doing it. The "Is-it-valiant" group were working their hearts out, the "How-good-are-we-post-to-be" group were doing what they were post to, and the "How-bad-can-I-be" group were telling on themselves by playing around with the water hose. I was three or four rungs up a ladder painting one side of the house. (People driving by thought, "Hey, it must be the ladder-days." Ha, ha.)

Anyway, I was painting near the rain gutter, which I accidentally bumped kinda hard with my hand. Apparently the rain gutters hadn't been cleaned in a while, and bumping them showered my face with dirt and dust. I closed my eyes just in time, but the dirt went everywhere else, and I looked like I had been bobbing for potting soil. With the sleeves of my T-shirt I wiped the lovely combination of dirt and perspiration from my face. Yuck. By the way, did I mention how incredibly hot and humid it was that day? I didn't? Well, it was incredibly hot and humid that day. But I kept painting, because I knew there was a high-pressure shower and a big bar of deodorant soap in my future.

Things got worse before they got better. I continued to paint, finding in my path what looked like a vacant wasps' nest. It wasn't vacant. After my paintbrush sideswiped the nest, everything went into slow motion. "Willie the Wasp" did not appreciate having his mud porch freshly painted, so he flew out and landed on my hand. I remember thinking, "Oh, lookie there. There's a wasp on my hand." Then he stuck his little behind in, not on, the back of my hand. I thought to myself, "He's gonna sting me." (Aren't I quick?) He did. And it hurt. In a reflex action, I let go of the brush, which, on its way to the ground, hit a member of the teachers quorum squarely on the back. I felt awful. I stepped off the ladder, face filthy, hand throbbing, and apologized up and down to the young man whose shirt I had just ruined.

But we weren't done yet. Now we had to paint the metal bars around all the windows with a coat of black enamel. That was fine, except that I have a problem: whenever I'm working with a liquid, I always seem to get it on my hands. I remember when I was a kindergartner, whenever my family had pancakes for breakfast, the syrup would somehow magically creep up my fork and knife and get on my fingers. One morning at school someone asked, "Did you have pancakes for breakfast?" (I guess they could smell the syrup.) "No," I responded, "that's my new cologne, 'Evening of Maple.'" (Just kidding.) I learned while I was still young to wash my hands often so that I wouldn't carry the aroma of my most recent meal everywhere I went.

So now we're painting with black paint, and you can guess what happened. Yes, it crept up the brush and got all over my hands. Black paint. On my hands. Gross. When we arrived, the house was a mess and we were clean. Now we were a mess and the house was clean. All we did that afternoon was transfer messes! And I for one was anxious to transfer my mess again to a paint-thinner rag and a hot shower. Try to imagine it. It's hot. It's humid. Drops of perspiration and muck drip freely off my face, my T-shirt is soaked and filthy, and my hands are sticky with half-dried black paint. I was looking forward to a shower like it was the celestial kingdom.

What if the youth conference chairperson had stood up at that point and announced, "Brothers and sisters, we don't have time for you to take a shower before the fireside. Your clean clothes have been taken to the changing rooms at the church, and we'd like you to go straight there and put on your clean white shirts and your fresh clean dresses. Wear them over your filth and sweat, and go directly to the chapel for the fireside."

How would that make you feel—sitting there with clean, fresh clothes but feeling gross and sweaty and dirty underneath? Remember that feeling for a second, okay?

One time, when I was in college, I had to give a priesthood blessing at about 5:30 in the morning. A sister in my ward was really sick. We got dressed quickly and ran over to her apartment. My roommate did the anointing, and then it was my turn. I remember placing my hands on her head and then pausing. For whatever reason, I remembered the lyrics of a song my dad used to play on Sunday mornings. I remembered especially the chorus: "He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart." I looked it up later. The chorus is the answer to a question:

Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place?

He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart. (Psalm 24:3-4)

As I stood over this young woman with my hands on her head, I wondered, Are my hands clean? Is my spirit filthy and gross in any way? Do I really have the priesthood today?

That [the rights of the priesthood] may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, . . . the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen [or, "that's the end"] to the priesthood or the authority of that man. (D&C 121:37)

I reviewed my life for a moment. I thought about my sins, about my attempts to repent and change, about the purity of my heart and motives, and about my prayers the night before. Have I looked at a magazine that has stained my hands? Have I pushed a video into the machine that has soiled my spiritual fingers? You young men will do this every time you're asked to give a blessing. Every time.

It is a wonderful feeling to go through this thought process, look at your hands, and think, "I'm okay. I can do this." It's a wonderful feeling when you're asked to break the bread at the sacrament table to know that your hands are clean. It is wonderful to kneel before the ward and hear the words "O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son . . . " come out of a mouth that is clean, that does not use profanity or tell raunchy jokes or stories.

It's true. Nothing feels as good as the peace that comes with being clean. Nothing! There is no sin that feels as good as being clean. Nothing can compare with the feeling that if you were to die today, you could face the Lord with clean hands and a pure heart. That's what peace is.

Now, here's an important point to consider. Repentance is like soap. Repentance is like a hot shower that washes away all the sweat and the filth, leaving you fresh and clean. Some sins require very strong soap. But even that kind of soap is available from your bishop and from the Lord. Jesus is so powerful. Did you hear me? Jesus is so powerful. He can make us clean. He's the only one who can do that. No one else can bring us real peace. No one. We need Jesus. We all need him. We can't be with him again unless we're absolutely clean. We've talked about clean hands, but there's more.

Let's say you had to teach Sunday School one day, and you asked your class, "Why do we love Jesus?" What kind of responses would you get? Your list would probably look like this:

Because he died for us.

Because he loved us.

Because he makes it possible to return to our Father in Heaven.

Because he showed us how to live.

Because he can make us clean.

All of those answers are right. We must be made clean, because no unclean thing can enter into the kingdom of heaven, but there's more.

Sometimes we focus so much on the fact that Jesus can make us clean, and that he died for us, that we forget another powerful part of his wonderful atonement. It is amazing and miraculous, and we've talked a little bit about it already. Would you like to know what it is?

Remember that when I was about to give a blessing to that young woman in my ward, the scripture I thought of as I stared at my hands said, "He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart" (Psalm 24:4). Look at it closely. There's something more than just "clean hands" in that verse, isn't there? What is a "pure heart"? What exactly does that mean? Perhaps the atonement of Jesus does two things: it cleanses our hands and purifies our hearts. Clean hands and pure hearts are obviously not the same thing. If I'm cleansed from my sins but my heart isn't pure, then I'm just a sinner who hasn't sinned recently. [^1] That's not enough! Elder Dallin H. Oaks explained it beautifully:

A person who sins is like a tree that bends easily in the wind. On a windy and rainy day the tree bends so deeply against the ground that the leaves become soiled with mud, like sin. If we only focus on cleaning the leaves, the weakness in the tree that allowed it to bend and soil its leaves may remain. Merely cleaning the leaves does not strengthen the tree. [^2]

I love that analogy. (I think it's fun that Elder Oaks would use a tree as an example.) If the tree is cleaned, that's nice, we have a clean tree. But what happens when another storm comes? Right. The tree gets soiled again, and again, and again! The tree must be strengthened. It must be changed. Just cleaning the tree isn't enough! Clean leaves are like clean hands, and the strengthened tree is like a purified heart.

Let's talk about hearts for a minute. I gave my brother one of my kidneys a few years back. It was a remarkable experience, a miraculous experience. For a few weeks, my whole family felt very close. It was wonderful. I wouldn't want to do it again, though. Come to think of it, I don't think it's possible to do it again. I'm fresh out of spare kidneys. Kidneys are essential equipment, but what you, and I, and everyone else needs just as critically is a new heart. We all need a "heart transplant," and through the power of the Atonement, we can get one.

When the scriptures speak about the heart, they're normally not referring to the four-chambered pump. They're referring to our inmost desires and motives, or something even deeper, like our "nature." When we talk about purifying our heart, we're not talking about being cleansed for individual sins. We're talking about changing our "sinfulness," or our desire to sin. The brother of Jared explained it this way: "Because of the fall, our natures have become evil continually" (Ether 3:2). Do you see that? All of us have been affected by the Fall. We need a new heart.

Think for a moment: What would you give to be really close to God? Would you give your money? Hmmm, the Lord doesn't need your money. In fact, he doesn't need any worldly possessions. Would you give up the most worldly TV show you watch? Maybe a soap opera or two? Would you give up gossiping? Would you give up complaining or being rude to members of your family? Are there any other "favorite sins" you can think of? What is the price tag for this new heart transplant, anyway? Well, it's a high price. It's not just our favorite sins—it's all of them. It's our whole fallen nature.

A Lamanite king set a fine example of being willing to do anything to know God. His prayer is beautiful. It's interesting that one of the most inspiring prayers in all of the scriptures was offered by a Lamanite investigator:

Oh God, Aaron hath told me that there is a God; and if there is a God, and if thou art God, wilt thou make thyself known unto me, and I will give away all my sins to know thee. (Alma 22:18)

I love that. "I'll give away all my sins." King Lamoni's father wanted to pay the price. I'll give up my old heart for a new one that has no desire to sin. Sounds like a good trade, doesn't it? Who does that heart transplant? Can you do surgery on yourself? No. But the Lord performed many heart transplants. Let's hop in our scriptural time machine and make three stops through the Book of Mormon. The purpose of our trip is to discover who actually performs the heart transplants.

Stop One, about 124 B.C.: Look! King Benjamin is speaking to his people:

And they had viewed themselves in their own carnal state, even less than the dust of the earth. And they all cried aloud with one voice, saying: O have mercy, and apply the atoning blood of Christ that we may receive forgiveness of our sins [clean hands], and our hearts may be purified [pure hearts]; for we believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who created heaven and earth, and all things; who shall come down among the children of men. (Mosiah 4:2)

Stop Two, about 124 B.C.: Look! Now they're noticing their change of heart:

And they all cried with one voice, saying: Yea, we believe all the words which thou hast spoken unto us; and also, we know of their surety and truth, because of the Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent, which has wrought a mighty change in us, or in our hearts, that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually. (Mosiah 5:2)

Stop Three, about 83 B.C.: See that? Alma the Younger is speaking of the people who were baptized by Alma the Elder:

Behold, he [God] changed their hearts; yea, he awakened them out of a deep sleep [a spiritual snooze], and they awoke unto God. (Alma 5:7)

So how do we—you and I—receive this change of heart? How do we get to the point where the question we ask is not "How bad can I be?" but "How good can I be?" The answers are in examples 1-3 above. We desire to reach that point, we work for it, and we pray for it. Every day! And we have the faith that the Lord can take us there.

Please be careful that you don't get discouraged. Some people, like Paul, Enos, and King Benjamin's people, had their hearts changed in an instant. They actually lost their desire for sin in a split second. For others of us, it may take a lifetime. President Ezra Taft Benson made me feel much better when he explained:

But we must be cautious as we discuss these remarkable examples. Though they are real and powerful, they are the exception more than the rule. For every Paul, for every Enos, and for every King Lamoni, there are hundreds and thousands of people who find the process of repentance much more subtle, much more imperceptible. Day by day they move closer to the Lord, little realizing they are building a godlike life. They live quiet lives of goodness, service, and commitment. They are like the Lamanites, who the Lord said "were baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and they knew it not." (3 Nephi 9:20; italics added.) [^3]

Every time you pray, you can ask the Lord not only to cleanse you from your sins, but to change your heart so that you can lose your desire to sin. I like to use Nephi's words when I pray: "O Lord, . . . wilt thou make me that I may shake at the appearance of sin" (2 Nephi 4:31). Make me shake. Isn't that great? Once again, remember that every verse in the Book of Mormon was handpicked for us in our day. I think Nephi was sharing with us the way he prayed so that we could use it too. Why else would he tell us? Here's an example of how you might use Nephi's words:

O Lord, I'm going to school today, and in my gym class some guys always get out some bad magazines. O Lord, please make me shake! Please take away my desire to sin, please change my heart so that I have no more disposition to do evil but to do good continually. Please, Lord, make me shake at the appearance of sin!

Or how about this one:

O Father, I have some friends who like to gossip. Sometimes it's hard to get out of it. Sometimes, in a strange way, the gossip seems to make us closer, but I know it's wrong. O Lord, please make me shake! Please change my heart. Please help me lose all my desire to sin!

Do you see what I mean? You don't have to fight temptation all by yourself. The best way to fight temptation is to do everything you can and then add God's power. Pray for a new heart, plead for it, and believe God can give it to you—every single day. We need him every hour. Unfortunately, the adversary never gives up on us, and we must never forget to pray for power to overcome.

I often hear teenagers say, "My parents don't trust me." I love it when they say that! Because I love to show them this quote from President Gordon B. Hinckley:

I am reminded of what I heard from a man—a great, strong, and wise man—who served in the presidency of this Church years ago. His daughter was going out on a date, and her father said to her, "Be careful. Be careful of how you act and what you say."

She replied, "Daddy, don't you trust me?"

He responded, "I don't entirely trust myself. One never gets too old nor too high in the Church that the adversary gives up on him." [^4]

And the adversary won't give up on you, either. That's why we must never give up praying for assistance.

Now we need to talk about something that is very sad. As you know, there is a dangerous attitude that is spreading like a virus among many people. It's called the "sin now, repent later" idea. If you've been listening in general conference recently, you know this is true. Listen again:

There appears to be an increasing tendency and temptation for young people to sample the forbidden things of the world, not with the intent to embrace them permanently, but with the knowing decision to indulge in them momentarily as though they held a value of some kind too important or exciting to pass by. [^5]

Yes, one can repent of moral transgression. The miracle of forgiveness is real, and true repentance is accepted of the Lord. But it is not pleasing to the Lord prior to a mission, or at any time, to sow one's wild oats, to engage in sexual transgression of any nature, and then to expect that planned confession and quick repentance will satisfy the Lord. [^6]

People who embrace the "sin now, repent later" idea obviously believe in Jesus, but don't love him very much. Such people believe that the Atonement can "clean our hands," but they somehow forget or absolutely ignore the "pure heart" part. A heart that asks, "How bad can I be?" is not a pure heart. A heart that has "sought to do wickedly" (see 1 Nephi 10:21) and is "procrastinating the day of repentance" (see Alma 34:34) is not clean. I'll show you what I mean.

Wherefore, if ye have sought to do wickedly [asking "how bad can I be?"] in the days of your probation, then ye are found unclean before the judgment seat of God: and no unclean thing can dwell with God; wherefore, ye must be cast off forever. (1 Nephi 10:21)

Uncleanness is not what we're after. Filthiness isn't fun. We want to be clean. I'm convinced that most of the youth reading this book really desire to be clean. I am thrilled, dazzled, and often intimidated by some of the young people I've met in this church. I recall attending a youth conference at a small university near Arkadelphia, Arkansas. Several stakes were in attendance. The youth were so excited to be there! They had never been surrounded by so many Latter-day Saints in their life! When the time for workshops came, they sat in the front. They opened their scriptures and sat on the edge of their seats. They listened, they took notes, they smiled. I was a new teacher, and I was overwhelmed. I just loved them—and I knew that the Lord loved them even more.

Later, I sat in amazement and witnessed a testimony meeting that lasted for four hours. Young people, eager to share their feelings, were lined up on both sides of the auditorium, and the lines were still there when the meeting had to be closed. I was so overwhelmed I couldn't speak. I guess at that moment I began to understand what prophets had been saying for years: "God has saved for the final inning some of his strongest children, who will help bear off the kingdom triumphantly." [^7] I was reminded of the hymn we sing, "As Zion's youth in latter days, we stand with valiant heart" (Hymns, no. 256; emphasis added). And they did.

It seemed to me that many of those young people had already received a heart transplant. Even at their young age, it seemed they had lost their desire to sin. They came to earth with the potential to be valiant, and they gave up their old heart and their desire to sin for a new heart that just wanted to be pure.

You see, repentance is a process, and repentance has steps, but it's also an attitude. Some people want to repent, but they're not repentant—in other words, they feel they should go through the steps of repentance because they're "post" to, or because that was part of their plan, but they haven't really been convinced of the awfulness of sin and rebellion against God. They want to repent, but they have no plans to change their attitude, at least not yet. They want clean hands, but their hearts are not yet pure.

They are confused. Somewhere, they got the idea that the choice is between repenting or not repenting. That's not the choice. The choice is "repent or suffer." And we're not talking about just any kind of suffering, but the kind Jesus endured, "which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit" (D&C 19:18).

When people really want to repent, they, well, really want to repent! They are more concerned with what Father in Heaven thinks than with what their friends or the world will think. The embarrassment doesn't stop them, the "what will the bishop think" doesn't stop them; they won't let anything stop them. Their hearts want to be clean and at peace, and they're willing to give whatever it takes. They, like King Lamoni's father, are willing to "give away all [their] sins to know [God]" (Alma 22:18).

It's amazing to think that there will come a day when we will stand before the Lord, face to face, and account for our lives. We will remember everything, and we will have to account for it. When I think about that day (which may be closer than we think), Alma's question becomes the most important question of all:

I say unto you, can ye look up to God at that day with a pure heart and clean hands? I say unto you, can you look up, having the image of God engraven upon your countenances? (Alma 5:19)

Alma gives us the other option if we don't repent:

For our words will condemn us, yea, all our works will condemn us; we shall not be found spotless; and our thoughts will also condemn us; and in this awful state we shall not dare to look up to our God; and we would fain be glad if we could command the rocks and the mountains to fall upon us to hide us from his presence. (Alma 12:14)

Can you imagine being so ashamed that you want the mountains to fall on you to hide you? Wow. Let's take another look at that scripture and include some modern terms that show a heart that isn't pure:

For our profanity and gossip will condemn us, yea, all our deliberate sin will condemn us; we shall not be found spotless; and our off-color TV shows and movies will also condemn us; and in this awful state we shall not dare to look up to our God; and we would fain be glad if we could command the rocks and the mountains to fall upon us to hide us from his presence.

Whoa, that's sobering. Alma really says it well, "In this awful state we shall not dare to look up." Ouch.

Sometimes I think about all the things I want. I wish I were six foot four, I wish my job paid better, I wish I had a newer car. But then I go to church, or anywhere else where the Spirit is present, and something changes inside. In those times, if you were to ask me what I want more than anything else in the world, I could tell you in five words: "I want to look up."

Well, my friend, I'm going to heaven, and I'm taking my wife with me (as soon as I find her). And I want you to be there too. There is no way I'm going to let this filthy and disgusting world stain my hands and poison my heart. Let's all go back, okay? Nephi was so positive when he said, "And I pray the Father in the name of Christ that many of us, if not all, may be saved in his kingdom at that great and last day" (2 Nephi 33:12; emphasis added). I hope that all of us—you and me, my friend—at that amazing and wonderful day can come into Jesus' presence and "look up" with clean hands and a pure heart.

Well, it's almost time for Third Period. I'll see you then.

Extra Credit

Life in Christ, Robert L. Millet (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990), especially chapter 9.

Second Period Endnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Conviction of and sorrow for sin Conviction of and Sorrow for Sin Now add twelve to it: 5 + 12 =17 Theodore M. Burton, in Repentance (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), pp. 10-11.
[^2] Abandonment of sin Abandonment of Sin Subtract four from it: 17 - 4 =13 Book of Mormon Student Manual, Religion 121-122 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1979) p. 201; emphasis added.
[^3] Confession of sin Add six to it: 13 + 6 =18 Confession of Sin Ibid, p. 201.
[^4] Restitution for sin Subtract five from it: 18 - 5 =13 Restitution for Sin Spencer W. Kimball, The Miracle of Forgiveness (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969), p. 179.
[^5] Doing the will of the Lord Add ten to it: 13 + 10 =23 Do the Will of the Father Vaughn J. Featherstone, in Repentance, p. 58.
[^6] Now subtract four from it: 23 - 4 =19 Recogition of the Savior Henry B. Eyring, "Come Unto Christ," Brigham Young University seventeen-stake fireside, October 29, 1989.
[^7] Add ten to it: 19 + 10 =29 Richard G. Scott, Ensign, May 1986, p. 12.
