John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: The Second Semester ( 1995)

Purity 101

How Do I Repent?

Every soul confined to a concentration camp of sin and guilt has a key to the gate. The adversary cannot hold them if they know how to use it. The key is labeled repentance. —Boyd K. Packer

This chapter is going to be a challenge. I wonder if you would mind helping me with this one. Before I write much more, I need some input from you. I need to know if you're understanding what I'm writing. How can we do that? Hey, I have an idea! Would you like to go on a field trip to my computer room in Provo, Utah? Wow, such excitement! Do you think you could somehow climb through this book and come out of my computer and sit here for a second and help me write this? Go ahead, just stick your face in the book, or close your eyes and say, "Oh, Auntie Em, there's no place like home," or something. Are you ready? Go ahead, try it . . .

Wow—you did it! Are you okay? Little kink in your neck there? Oooh. Sorry about that. Here, here's a Pop Tart. Feel better? Good. Thanks for joining me. Do you like my computer room? Yeah, I know, lots of books, huh? I love books. This will be so much fun, having you sit right here! Now, if I'm explaining something and you're not getting it, just give me a confused look, okay? Great.

You see, I believe that teenagers like you who take the time to read Church books are the cream of the crop. They are wonderful. My guess is that a teenager like you is doing pretty well in keeping the commandments and everything, and might not think he or she needs to read a chapter on repentance. On the other hand, everyone needs to repent. And knowing what the steps are might help us . . .

Hey, did you hear that? I think the mail truck is here. Should we go outside and get the mail? I love getting the mail. Let's go. You can leave that unlocked; we're coming right back.

Wow, isn't it nice out today? It's hard to stay inside and work on the computer on a day like this, isn't it. It's lookin' like barbecue and volleyball time to me . . . is that it? Did you get it all out? Looks like mostly junk mail, huh. Let's see, sweepstakes entry, chuck that; do I need a credit card at only 9.9 percent interest? No, chuck that. Catalogs, no, I have everything I need, chuck that. My car is due for another oil change and filter, and—oh, there's a personal letter. Another Dear John, no doubt. Let's go back inside and read it. (Yes, this is an actual letter I received.)

Dear Brother Bytheway:

I cannot begin to tell you my failings, the list would be too long. I hate being wicked and un-Christlike. I want to be clean and Christlike. I wish I could feel comfortable talking to my bishop, but I cannot.

How can I be forgiven? How do I repent? These questions may sound stupid, but I do not know how to repent. I love my Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ with all my heart. I want to return to my eternal family so much. This Church is as true as true can be. I know the Book of Mormon is true because I have prayed about it and I know.

I have hated my life so much sometimes that I just cry and wish I was dead. I want to serve a mission, be married in the temple, and replenish the earth. I cannot do any of these things until I learn how to repent. I want to be clean and I want to feel loved every day of my life. Please, help me to repent.

Thank you for listening.

Love,

Nicole [not her real name]

I'm so proud of Nicole for asking, "How do I repent?" I wonder if she realizes how much progress she has made already. She's not resisting repentance—she wants it. It sounds like she's already working on the first step.

Let's try to answer Nicole's letter. First we'll talk about the steps of repentance, then we'll try to answer some commonly asked questions about repentance . . . what's that? You say you brought some commonly asked questions with you? Oh, good! Hey, you know, you're kind of representing everybody who's out there reading this book. Kind of a "field trip by proxy." That's great. Hand me any of those questions as we go along, okay?

First off, could you reach over and grab that little paperback book, Faith Precedes the Miracle, by Spencer W. Kimball? It has a wonderful explanation of the steps of repentance. Let's turn to page 180:

Repentance could well fall into five steps:

President Kimball goes into more depth, but let's stop here for a minute. I have a feeling that many people, adults and teens alike, stop right there and think that the "steps of repentance" are repentance. They're not! The steps are just the tip of the iceberg. Have you heard that expression before? The tip of the iceberg, the visible part, is not the iceberg—it's evidence that there's something much larger beneath the surface. In the same way, the steps of repentance by themselves are not repentance. A superficial run-through of those steps is not repentance. True repentance is a deep, involved process. When someone is truly repenting, yes, they will go through the steps of repentance, but those steps are merely the visible evidence that something much larger is going on beneath the surface.

And what is that "something much larger" going on beneath the surface? Well, to use the words we've already used in this book, it's the heart transplant, the "change of heart." It's going from the "How-bad-can-I-be" attitude, or the "How-good-am-I-post-to-be" attitude, to the "I-want-to-be-valiant" attitude. It's when we begin to love righteousness more than sin.

Now, back to the steps of repentance. Elder Theodore M. Burton said this:

Many times a bishop will write: "I feel he has suffered enough!" But suffering is not repentance. Suffering comes from lack of complete repentance. A stake president will write: "I feel he has been punished enough!" But punishment is not repentance. Punishment follows disobedience and precedes repentance. A husband will write: "My wife has confessed everything!" But confession is not repentance. Confession is an admission of guilt that occurs as repentance begins. A wife will write: "My husband is filled with remorse!" But remorse is not repentance. Remorse and sorrow continue because a person has not yet fully repented. But if suffering, punishment, confession, remorse, and sorrow are not repentance, what is repentance? [^1]

Good question. What is repentance? Here, have another Pop Tart, and let's go back to President Kimball. He said that the first step of repentance is conviction of and sorrow for sin.

That doesn't mean just saying, "Oh, I'm supposed to be sorry? Oh, okay. I'm sorry." It's a little more involved than that. Go ahead and read President Kimball's explanation:

To be sorry for our sin, we must know something of its serious implications. . . . We are sorry. We are willing to make amends, pay penalties, to suffer excommunication, if necessary. . . .

If one is sorry only because his sin was uncovered, his repentance is not complete. Godly sorrow causes one to harness desire and to determine to do right regardless of consequences; this kind of sorrow brings righteousness and will work toward forgiveness. (Page 180)

That's what it means to really be sorry. You'd be willing to do anything needed to get things cleared up. Yes, even seeing the bishop. Some people carry around serious burdens and regrets for years because they're too embarrassed to talk with their bishop. They are worried that their parents or friends will find out, and I guess that's understandable. But if we're more worried about what our peers think than what the Lord thinks, we're not truly sorry. When we are filled with godly sorrow, we will be willing to do anything the Lord requires.

So, guilt can be good! My car has a little warning light that says, "Service Engine Soon." Some maintenance on my car I can do myself, but other things require outside help. Sorrow and guilt are like a little warning light telling us there's something wrong that needs to be fixed. And, as with my car, some repairs we can't do by ourselves. We'll talk more about that when we get to confession. Just remember, acting sorry is not the same as being sorry. Okay, let's go back to President Kimball and talk about the second step:

One discontinues his error when he has a full realization of the gravity of his sin and when he is willing to comply with the laws of God. The thief may abandon his evil in prison, but true repentance would have him forsake it before his arrest and return his booty without enforcement. The sex offender as well as any other transgressor who voluntarily ceases his unholy practices is headed toward forgiveness. (Page 180)

Let's look at that last phrase again: "any . . . transgressor who voluntarily ceases his unholy practices is headed toward forgiveness." President Kimball touches on two important concepts there. First, if you go voluntarily to confess, it's much better than if you had no intention of confessing and you just got caught. The second idea is that a person who ceases sinning "is headed toward forgiveness." In other words, repentance isn't over yet, but the person is on the path.

Let me explain with a little math problem. You see—uh-oh, you've got that confused look. What does math have to do with abandoning a sin? You'll see what I'm doing in a minute. Let's say you have a math problem. You're supposed to take a number, and add and subtract some other numbers. We'll start with the number 5. Now watch this carefully, okay?

Start with five: 5

Have you noticed anything? Look closely. Right! We made a mistake back there on step 3. Thirteen plus six equals nineteen, not eighteen. We can continue with step 4 and keep going as long as we want to, adding and subtracting more numbers, but it won't come out right, because we made a mistake on step 3.

The point is, some people believe that if they simply stop doing the sin, that's repentance. "Well, I haven't done that for a long time, so I'm probably forgiven." It doesn't work that way. You have to go back and correct the mistake. Like in our math problem, if you don't go back and correct the mistake, you'll never come out right in the end. Forsaking the sin is not enough. You have to completely correct it by repentance. Get it?

It is important to forsake our sins, though. The Lord said, "Go your ways and sin no more; but unto that soul who sinneth shall the former sins return" (D&C 82:7).

That idea scares a lot of people. They don't want to sin anymore, but they're afraid that they might, somewhere down the road. This is one of those instances where I believe the Lord looks on our hearts. He knows we can't become perfect overnight. But if we're fully committed in our heart not to sin again, I believe the Lord accepts that kind of repentance. On the other hand, if our heart is saying, "I just want to get through these steps and see what happens," then perhaps we're not really sorry.

What's that? Oh, good, you have a question from one of your classmates. Let's read it:

The part about forsaking the sin and never doing it again always scares me. For example, if I get mad at my sister, and I repent, how can I know I will never get mad at her again? How can I be sure? It makes it so I don't want to repent because I can't promise it won't happen again.

Hmmm, that's an excellent question. I think we can answer it from the scriptures. In Mosiah 26:30, the Lord told Alma, "Yea, and as often as my people repent will I forgive them their trespasses against me." Let's read that again slowly: "As often as my people repent will I forgive them their trespasses against me."

Does this seem a little confusing? On the one hand we're saying, "If you sin and repent, you can't do it again," and on the other hand we're saying, "but if you do, you can repent." I have had this question myself, but I found the answer in my Book of Mormon Student Manual. Let's read what it says about Mosiah 26:30:

How Long-suffering Is the Lord?

Even though a mighty change occurs at rebirth, no one becomes perfect overnight. So the principle of repentance is needed as one endeavors to go on unto perfection (Hebrews 6:1) and as he endures to the end. Satan would have him believe that, once forgiven, any misstep is fatal and irreparable. But this passage shows that Satan is a liar. Every young person should have this passage memorized as a source of hope. But he should understand that it is not a license to commit willful sin or try to take unrighteous advantage of the Lord's mercy, for the Lord has also said, "but unto that soul who sinneth shall the former sins return." (D&C 82:7.) Though at first these two scriptures (Mosiah 26:30; D&C 82:7) may seem contradictory, together they teach the true mercy and justice of the Lord. [^2]

Does that help? So you repent with all your heart, and you don't plan on repeating that sin. But if you do, you start the repentance process again. The main question becomes, what's in your heart? Did you approach it with a lazy, "I'll-probably-do-it-again" attitude, or was it a serious, "I'm-really-going-to-try-to-forsake-that-sin" attitude? The Lord doesn't require you to be perfect right now, but he wants you to be trying. Make sense? Okay, step three from President Kimball:

The confession of sin is an important element in repentance. Many offenders have seemed to feel that a few prayers to the Lord were sufficient and they have thus justified themselves in hiding their sins. The Proverbs tell us:

"He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy." (Proverbs 28:13.)

"By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them." (D&C 58:43.)

Especially grave errors such as sexual sins shall be confessed to the bishop as well as to the Lord. There are two remissions that one might wish to have: first, the forgiveness from the Lord, and second, the forgiveness of the Lord's church through its leaders. (Page 181)

Okay, let's talk for a minute. All sins, great or small, must be confessed to the Lord. As you've probably already figured out, the Lord knows what your sins are. You're not going to surprise him or tell him anything new. But you still need to acknowledge to the Lord that you have sinned. You also need to confess to anyone you may have hurt or injured because of your sin. And, as President Kimball mentioned, especially serious sins need to be confessed to the bishop. Why? Well, the Lord said to Alma, "If he confess his sins before thee and me, and repenteth in the sincerity of his heart, him shall ye forgive, and I will forgive him also" (Mosiah 26:29).

Why does the bishop have to be involved? The simple answer is that the bishop can help guide you through the repentance process. But there's more; let's take another look at my excellent Book of Mormon Student Manual:

When a member's sins have been discovered by or reported to Church leaders, they are duty bound to take action for three reasons: [1] to preserve the good name of the Church [to show the world that it does not condone sin], [2] to help the sinner, [3] and to assure the righteous that Church leaders are not trying to hide or overlook the sins of some while punishing the sins of others. A confession of guilt is required on these occasions as part of the proof of repentance. [^3]

In case you're still not sure why the bishop needs to be involved, I'll put it another way. One time I had a persistent sore throat. I tried everything to get rid of it: gargling, lozenges, plenty of liquids, throat sprays, everything! But it wouldn't go away. Finally I got smart and went to the doctor. He had medicine that I couldn't get on my own. Did you hear that with your spiritual ears? He had medicine that I couldn't get on my own, and he had authority to get that medicine for me. Can you imagine me saying, "Well, I'd like to get rid of this sore throat but I just can't go see a doctor." Think of it this way: saying, "I can't go see the bishop, I'm too ashamed!" is like saying, "I can't go see the doctor, I'm too sick!"

Of course, anyone grappling with major sins may feel reluctant to confess to the bishop. But everyone I know who has actually followed through, confessed to the bishop, and repented has said that although it was difficult, it was a wonderful and positive experience. And they always came out of the bishop's office rejoicing, feeling renewed gratitude for the Atonement, and feeling like a tremendous load had been taken from their shoulders. Most of them say, "I wish I had gone sooner." And so does the Lord. He invites us to repent, to procrastinate no more, and says, in effect, "Put the weight on my shoulders."

Oh good, here's another question from out there in reading land:

Exactly what sins have to be confessed to the bishop?

Good question. As a rule of thumb, if you think a sin is serious but you're not sure if you should talk to the bishop, talk to the bishop. In another book, The Miracle of Forgiveness, President Kimball gave a fairly specific list:

The confession of . . . major sins to a proper Church authority is one of those requirements made by the Lord. These sins include adultery, fornication, other sexual transgressions, and sins of comparable seriousness. [^4]

As you can see, for the most part, the sins involving sexual purity are the ones that need to be confessed to the bishop. Oh, here's another comment from the class:

I feel like I need to talk to my bishop, but I'm too embarrassed. He's my relative, and I'm afraid my whole family and everyone else will find out.

These are some of the toughest issues to deal with, and the answers may sound harsh, but they are true and crystal clear. First of all, the bishop is under a sacred obligation to keep confessions confidential, and to discuss them only with those who were directly involved. (Now, I know we've all heard horror stories, but if those stories are true, they are the exception and not the rule.) If your personal situation makes you feel that it is not possible for you to go to your bishop, then make an appointment with the stake president and clear things up. Don't procrastinate and stew and figure out all the worst things that could happen. The worst has already happened, and now it's time to seek forgiveness and put it behind you.

And about the embarrassment thing—you can have a little embarrassment now or a lot of embarrassment later. Brace yourself; this is harsh, but it's the way things are.

And the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities shall be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed. (D&C 1:3)

And those who are not pure, and have said they were pure, shall be destroyed, saith the Lord God. (D&C 132:52)

If you need to repent, this is no time to try to hide your sins. It won't work. It's the height of foolishness to think you can hide your sins from God. If you really want repentance, if you really want to feel clean, no amount of anticipated embarrassment will keep you from the bishop's office. And once you are there, tell him everything! Elder Vaughn J. Featherstone has said:

A bishop may be deceived, but the Holy Ghost cannot. . . . What a tragedy when someone finally gets enough courage to go to the bishop and then leaves his office having only partially confessed. [^5]

President Kimball continues:

The bishop may be one's best earthly friend. He will hear the problems, judge the seriousness thereof, determine the degree of adjustment, and decide if it warrants an eventual forgiveness. He does this as the earthly representative of God, who is the master physician, the master psychologist, the master psychiatrist. If repentance is sufficient, he may waive penalties, which is tantamount to forgiveness so far as the church organization is concerned. The bishop claims no authority to absolve sins, but he does share the burden, waive penalties, relieve tension and strain, and he may assure a continuation of church activity. He will keep the whole matter most confidential. (Page 182)

You probably already know what restitution means; another word for it might be restoration. When we repent, we try to "restore" what was taken away. Let's continue reading from Faith Precedes the Miracle:

When one is humble in sorrow, has unconditionally abandoned the evil, and confesses to those assigned by the Lord, he should next restore insofar as possible that which was damaged. If he burglarized, he should return to the rightful owner that which was stolen. Perhaps one reason murder is unforgivable is that having taken a life, the murderer cannot restore it. Restitution in full is not always possible. Virginity is impossible to give back.

However, the truly repentant soul will usually find things that can be done to restore to some extent. The true spirit of repentance demands this. Ezekiel taught:

If the wicked . . . give again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live. . . . (Ezekiel 33:15.) . . .

A pleading sinner must also forgive all people of all offenses committed against himself. The Lord is under no obligation to forgive us unless our hearts are fully purged of all hate, bitterness, and accusations against others. (Pages 182-83)

You may have wondered why adultery is a sin next to murder. When you think about restitution, it may help you answer the question. A murderer cannot restore life, and one who commits a sexual sin cannot restore purity. But the Lord, because of his mercy, still allows a way to make restitution from the serious sin of unchastity through the wonderful and powerful doctrine of repentance. Much of that restitution comes from the next step.

After all we've talked about, it may seem like the most difficult part of repentance is over. It isn't. Confession takes real courage, but the hardest part is yet to come. President Kimball continues with step five:

The Lord in his preface to modern revelations gave us the fifth and one of the most difficult requirements to forgiveness. He says:

"For I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance; Nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven." (D&C 1:31-32; emphasis added.)

Under the humiliation of a guilty conscience, with the possibility of detection and consequent scandal and shame, with a striving spirit urging toward adjustment, the first steps of sorrow, abandonment, confession, and restitution must now be followed by the never-ending requirement of doing the commandments. Obviously this can hardly be done in a day, a week, a month, or a year. This is an effort extending through the balance of life. (Page 183)

So there's the toughest part: Do the will of the Father, and live the gospel from now on! It reminds me of Jesus' words to the woman taken in adultery: "Go, and sin no more" (John 8:11).

We've managed to cover the five steps of repentance outlined by President Kimball. Does it all make sense? It's a sobering subject, isn't it. It would be a lot simpler to just avoid sinning. I like President Ezra Taft Benson's comment, "It is better to prepare and prevent, than repair and repent."

Let's take some more questions from the field-trip group:

How do you know when you're forgiven? How long does it take?

Well, that's a good one. As you know, we live in a world of drive-through dining, instant cocoa, and microwave dinners. We want everything right now! But there are a few things that cannot be rushed, that will always take time. How much time? With repentance, it's not possible to give a blanket answer. We cannot dictate our timetable to the Lord. He will answer our prayers in his own way and in his own time, but we have a few hints from the scriptures. Enos prayed all day and into the night to receive forgiveness of his sins. And Alma the Younger, in one of the most wonderful stories of repentance ever told, said that he was "racked . . . with the pains of a damned soul" for three days and three nights before he received forgiveness (Alma 36:16).

Elder Henry B. Eyring told of a young man who had gone through deep and painful repentance. This young man was scheduled to be married in the temple, but he wanted to know he was forgiven. He wanted to be the best he could be for his new bride. He asked Elder Eyring, who was his bishop at that time, how he could be sure the Lord had forgiven him. Bishop Eyring said he would try to find out. A few days later, the bishop was in the company of then Elder Spencer W. Kimball (whom we've quoted so much in this chapter). He explained the situation, and asked:

"How can he get that revelation? How can he know whether his sins are remitted?"

I thought Elder Kimball would talk to me about fasting or prayer or listening for the still small voice. But he surprised me. Instead he said, "Tell me something about the young man."

I said, "What would you like to know?"

And then he began a series of the most simple questions. Some of the ones I remember were:

"Does he come to his priesthood meetings?"

I said, after a moment's thought, "Yes."

"Does he come early?"

"Yes."

"Does he sit down front?"

I thought for a moment and then realized, to my amazement, that he did.

"Does he home teach?"

"Yes."

"Does he go early in the month?"

"Yes, he does."

"Does he go more than once?"

"Yes."

I can't remember the other questions. But they were all like that—little things, simple acts of obedience, of submission. And for each question I was surprised that my answer was always yes. Yes, he wasn't just at all his meetings: he was early; he was smiling; he was there not only with his whole heart, but the broken heart of a little child, as he was every time the Lord asked anything of him. And after I had said yes to each of his questions, Elder Kimball looked at me, paused, and then very quietly said, "There is your revelation." [^6]

Isn't that an interesting story? I love it. But let's be careful. Is Elder Eyring saying that all you have to do to be forgiven is go early to meetings and smile a lot? Of course not! This is a perfect example of the "tip-of-the-iceberg" concept we talked about earlier. The simple acts of obedience by this young man were evidence that something much larger was going on beneath the surface. His heart was changed. He wanted to be valiant! He wouldn't think of asking, "How bad can I be?" He wanted to be the best he could be.

If you want to learn more about repentance, go to the Book of Mormon. Alma teaches us so much about repentance in Alma 36. For example, we know that the Lord will not remember our sins when we sincerely repent: "Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more" (D&C 58:42). But what about us? Do we remember them? Let's read from Alma:

Now, as my mind caught hold upon this thought, I cried within my heart: O Jesus, thou Son of God, have mercy on me, who am in the gall of bitterness, and am encircled about by the everlasting chains of death.

And now, behold, when I thought this, I could remember my pains no more; yea, I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more.

And oh, what joy, and what marvelous light I did behold; yea, my soul was filled with joy as exceeding as was my pain! (Alma 36:18-20; emphasis added)

It sounds to me as if we will remember our sins, but the memory of them will not cause us pain anymore! Perhaps this is another way we can know we are forgiven. We'll remember our sins, but we will know we have sincerely repented and put them behind us. We won't be "harrowed up" by their memory anymore.

In another place in the Book of Mormon, we read that King Benjamin's people knew they were forgiven because they felt peace:

And it came to pass that after they had spoken these words the Spirit of the Lord came upon them, and they were filled with joy, having received a remission of their sins, and having peace of conscience, because of the exceeding faith which they had in Jesus Christ who should come. (Mosiah 4:3; emphasis added)

A young friend of mine wrote, "I hope that through all I have experienced I may be able to influence others to steer clear of sin. It is not a happy path. It may seem fun, but one mistake leads to others, and it's just a slippery slide that ends in the mud, and it's so hard to climb out."

She's right. Sin is like mud. Elder Richard G. Scott gave a very beautiful and tender talk called "We Love You—Please Come Back." He talked about mud too, and how we should deal with our memories of past mistakes:

If you, through poor judgment, were to cover your shoes with mud, would you leave them that way? Of course not. You would cleanse and restore them. Would you then gather the residue of mud and place it in an envelope to show others the mistake that you made? No. Neither should you continue to relive forgiven sin. Every time such thoughts come into your mind, turn your heart in gratitude to the Savior, who gave His life that we, through faith in Him and obedience to His teachings, can overcome transgression and conquer its depressing influence in our lives. [^7]

Nine years later, Elder Scott gave another beautiful talk about repentance. He used President Kimball's five steps and then added a sixth:

Of all the necessary steps to repentance, I testify that the most critically important is for you to have a conviction that forgiveness comes because of the Redeemer. [^8]

As you grow older, you will find that you become more and more sensitive to the fact that sin separates you from God. And because of this, you'll become more and more grateful for Jesus Christ, and for his power to rescue us, and help us, and cleanse us. I am comforted by the words of one of my most honored and respected heroes, Nephi. He was amazing to me. Someone once said, "The closer we get to God, the further away we'll realize we really are," and I think of that whenever I read Nephi's lament:

O wretched man that I am! Yea, my heart sorroweth because of my flesh; my soul grieveth because of mine iniquities.

I am encompassed about, because of the temptations and the sins which do so easily beset me.

And when I desire to rejoice, my heart groaneth because of my sins; nevertheless, I know in whom I have trusted.

My God hath been my support. (2 Nephi 4:17-20)

There's that last step. We must focus on Jesus, and when we do, our love for him will grow, because we will always remember him and what he has done for us to make us clean.

Wow, this has been a long one. Any more questions?

Sometimes when I read or hear stories about repentance, it sounds so hard. I want to know how willing God is to forgive us.

God does not want anyone to suffer. He wants us to repent. Jesus has already suffered for us if we repent. There are so many scriptures I could show you to answer this question, but none better than Luke 15, the story of the prodigal son. Read this carefully, and you'll be able to see for yourself how willing Heavenly Father is to take us back from sin when we repent:

And he said, A certain man had two sons:

And the younger of them said to his father, Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth to me. And he divided unto them his living.

And not many days after the younger son gathered all together, and took his journey into a far country, and there wasted his substance with riotous living.

Sorry to interrupt, but what does "riotous living" mean? Right. He was living a sinful life. Okay, keep going.

And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that land; and he began to be in want.

And he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country; and he sent him into his fields to feed swine.

And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat: and no man gave unto him.

And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger!

Isn't that a great phrase: "He came to himself"! In other words, he figured out how empty and hollow and wrong his life had been; he realized the happiness of righteousness and honor and loyalty and family. Okay, back to the story . . .

I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee,

And am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants.

And he arose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.

Are you listening? "When he was yet a great way off, his father saw him." Remember that, okay?

And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.

But the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet:

And bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat, and be merry:

For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found. And they began to be merry. (Luke 15:11-24)

What does all this mean? To begin with, obviously the father in this story represents our Father in Heaven. Now, I have a question for you. You remember that the prodigal son's father saw him when he was "yet a great way off." So, where was his father? Was he in the house, doing something else, not caring about whether his child ever returned? No, no. His father was looking for him, searching the horizon, waiting, watching, and wondering, "Will he ever come back?" And one day, the son turned around and began the journey home. And as soon as his father saw him, he ran. He didn't stay on the porch and wait for his son to walk all the way back, and he didn't just walk out to meet him. He ran! Then, together, they walked home. Do you see what is being taught here?

How willing is our Father to forgive us? He is so willing that when we "arise, and come to our Father," he will run out to help us come back. Is our repentance finished? Not at all. But once our Father in Heaven sees that we have turned around and are heading home, he will run out to be with us to help us through each of the steps of repentance. What love he must have for us, to run to us and bring us home!

Well, I hope we answered Nicole's questions—and maybe some of yours, too. Just remember that repentance isn't just some steps. Real repentance is hard. It hurts. As President Kimball once said, "If a person hasn't suffered, he hasn't repented. . . . The Savior can do almost anything in the world, but he can't forgive somebody who hasn't repented." [^9] Wow.

Did you just hear something outside? It sounds like the mail truck is here again. That's unusual. Twice in one day? Oh, well, I guess it's not any more unusual than you climbing through your book and going on a field trip with the author, huh? What a strange book this is. Well, let's go get the mail.

Oh, look, it's another letter from Nicole, and it was written several months after the first one. Maybe we were in some kind of time warp when we were writing. Go ahead and read it. What does she say? (Yes, this really is a second letter from the same young woman.)

Dear John:

. . . As I said before, I was having a lot of problems with my life. I loved the Lord but I was not happy. I had sinned and I felt like just asking for forgiveness was not enough. I had to do more. I got a lot of strength and help from my seminary teacher. He suggested I talk to my bishop. When I told him my feelings, he called my bishop and arranged an appointment. From there, there was no backing down. I wanted it bad enough that I wouldn't back down either.

My bishop was very understanding. . . . Since then, my bishop has become a dear friend I can go to in times of need. I really did feel good afterwards. I believe now that he has the true healing power of God. . . .

Your sister in the gospel,

Nicole

Isn't that great? She followed through and now she is so much happier. It reminds me of a scripture: "Likewise I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner who repenteth" (JST, Luke 15:10).

I guess that's a nice way to end Third Period. The older I get, the more I realize how much I really need the principle of repentance. I am grateful to President Spencer W. Kimball who wrote so much about repentance so that we could all understand. And most of all, I am grateful for the Savior, who suffered in Gethsemane and on Golgotha, and took all of our pains, sicknesses, transgressions, and sins upon himself, so that we could repent and change and be clean, and be able to "look up" to him again someday.

Well, I guess our field trip is over. See if you can figure out how to climb back through that book. Thanks for coming! And I'll see you in Fourth Period.

Extra Credit

Faith Precedes the Miracle, Spencer W. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972).

The Miracle of Forgiveness, Spencer W. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969).

"Finding Forgiveness," Richard G. Scott, Ensign, May 1995, pp. 75-77.

Believing Christ, Stephen E. Robinson (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1992).

Within Reach, Robert L. Millet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1995).

Third Period Endnotes

Division page quotation: Boyd K. Packer, Ensign, May 1992, p. 68.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 Nephi 16:18. (Wow, comedy with footnotes! What a ground-breaking book!)
[^2] Alma 31:21.
[^3] Alma 63:5.
[^4] Helaman 3:23.
[^5] Alma 18:7.
[^6] Ether 2:17.
[^7] Doctrine and Covenants 38:18.
[^8] 1 Nephi 3:24.
[^9] Mosiah 18:30.
