John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: The Second Semester ( 1995)

Lunch Break

A Visit to Zarahemla Burger

Well, we covered some pretty heavy subjects in the last three classes, so I think you deserve a break today. Whaddaya say we go get some lunch? Do you like fast food? Good—I'll drive.

"Hi, Honda, I'm home!" Hop in, it's unlocked. So, do you like my car? What's that you say: It's so clean? Well, my father looked at me one day with that "you'd-better-listen-up-because-this-is-profound" look and said, "A clean car is a happy car." Of course, I was deeply touched, and my life was changed forever.

So, where do you want to go? Do you want me to choose? Okay. As you've probably guessed, this is no ordinary lunch break. In fact, when we're done, you may feel as if you didn't eat a thing. But because this is no ordinary lunch break, we can do some out-of-the-ordinary things. You see, we're sitting in an imaginary Honda, but we're also in the middle of a book. It's kind of an off-the-wall book, yes, but it's still a book. Remember in the Orientation, where we learned that books are like mini time machines? Well, it's true. We can go anywhere (or should I say anywhen) we want to.

We can even go get fast food in 90 B.C. if you want. Do you believe me? Push in that lighter thingy, close your eyes, and think, "Ancient America, 90 B.C." When it pops out, we'll be there. (In the meantime, imagine a harp playing "going-back-in-time" music.) Click . . . POP!

Okay, open your eyes. (How did you read this with your eyes closed?) We made it! What do you think? Pretty weird, huh? Oh, wait, I forgot something. We have to talk a little differently, okay? Let's see, I gotta get in the mood here. . . . Behold, I see the place of feeding, and it is exceedingly close. Yea, it is called Zarahemla Burger. Behold, I will pull into the drive-up window, near the speaker, and we will place our order.

Behold, welcome to Zarahemla Burger. May I take your order, please?

Yes—I mean, Yea, we are exceedingly hungry. I'll have an Ammon Cheese, a cold Laman-ade, and an order of Nephries. But behold, this is not all. My friend has to order too. Canst thou wait whilst my friend decides?

Behold, I will wait even until thy friend orders. Just speak when ready, and I will record all thy words, and will give thee thy price.

Well, what dost thou desire? It's hard to read that reformed Egyptian menu, isn't it? I'll ask her for some help.

Behold, canst thou tell me all that thy restaurant offers?

Behold, we have many selections from the Nephi's Broken Bow [^1] Vegetarian Section. Thou mayest start with a Sariah Salad . . .

Dost thou have dressing with that?

Yea, we have Rameumptom [^2] Ranch, Hagoth [^3] Thousand Island, and Gadianton [^4] dressing.

Gadianton dressing—what's in that?

I cannot tell thee; it is a secret combination.

Oh, okay. Dost thou still have lamb chops?

Nay, for behold, all of our sheep have been chased away from the waters of Sebus. [^5] But behold, Ammon is out gathering the flocks to the place of water. Soon we will have leg of lamb again. (Apparently, we will also have Arm of Bandit, but I doubt that will be on the menu.)

Wow—uh—okay, canst thou describe the Brother of Jared Burrito?

Yea, it is peaked at the ends, and tight like unto a dish. [^6]

What about the Promised Land Breakfast?

Yea, it is just flowing with milk and honey. [^7]

And what's the Brass Plate Special?

Behold, it is exceedingly good. People have come back two hundred miles to get it. [^8]

I think we'll just have another Ammon Cheese, with a Laman-ade and Nephries.

Wouldst thou like that in our Ish-meal combo? Behold, it is cheaper that way.

Yea, that is acceptable. Behold, what are thy drink sizes? For verily we have traveled far.

We have small, medium, large, and our 32-ounce Waters of Mormon. [^9] Surely it will quench thy thirst.

Behold, I believe all thy words, but please don't call me Shirley. We'll have two Waters-of-Mormon Laman-ades. Wilt thou accept a check?

Yea: cash, checks, and the Amaron [^10] Express card.

Behold, that sounds good. Thank thee.

Please pull forward, and it will come to pass that I will give thee thy total at the place of payment. . . . Behold, the total comes to one senum. [^11]

One senum, okay, here you go—I mean, um, here thou goest.

Behold, here is thy food, and here is thy change—a shiblum and a leah. Have a nice day, and may it come to pass that we will see thee again at Zarahemla Burger.

Thou wilt. Thank thee and farewell!

Hey, that was fun. Let's park the car and go sit at the table underneath that tree. Our visit to Zarahemla Burger wouldn't be complete unless we play the games they print on these bags. It looks like you got the "exceedingly simple" games, and I got the "exceedingly challenging" games. Let's try yours first:

Exceedingly Simple Game #1

There is a cleverly hidden message inside this baffling word puzzle! See if you can find it!

(Time limit: 20 minutes.)

Exceedingly Simple Game #2

Exceedingly Challenging Game #2

So, did you enjoy the games? Did you like your Laman-ade? Ah yes, the only drink that rebels when you try to swallow it. Next time we'll try the Lemuel-lime, "the beverage with an attitude." But now I think it's time to get back to class. 'Bye, Zarahemla Burger! Push the lighter thingy in again, close your eyes, and think "Back to Fourth Period."

Click . . . POP! Here we are, back to the real world. We'll visit our imagination again before this day (this book, I mean) is over. I'll see you back in class!

Lunch Break Endnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Speaks peace to the mind The Spirit speaks peace to the mind. The Spirit can bring peace, calmness, and tranquillity. It can remove turmoil and anxious feelings. The Lord answered one of Oliver Cowdery's prayers by sending a feeling of peace. This is interesting: Later, the Lord gave Oliver a revelation to inform him that he had already received a revelation! Boyd K. Packer, Ensign, January 1983, P. 53.
[^2] Causes the bosom to burn The Spirit causes the bosom to burn. After Jesus was resurrected, he walked with two of his disciples on the road to Emmaus. He talked with them for a while, and then left. They didn't recognize him when he was with them, but after he left they said, "Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?" (Luke 24:32). Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, 1:120; emphasis in original.
[^3] Tells us in our minds and our hearts The Spirit tells us in our minds and hearts. I spent a lot of time on this one earlier in the chapter, because I believe it is the most common way we feel the Spirit. When the Spirit speaks to our minds and hearts, we are "enlightened" and things become clear. The Lord told Oliver Cowdery, "Yea, behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart" (D&C 8:2). Not only do things make sense in our minds, but they feel right in our hearts. I think that's why the scripture says mind and heart. Neal A. Maxwell, Ensign, November 1976, p. 14.
[^4] Comes as a voice in the mind The Spirit comes as a voice in the mind. President David O. McKay has said that the Holy Ghost speaks through the conscience of the members of the Church who are in the line of their duty. Most people's thoughts are in their own voice, and when thoughts come into your mind, it may be hard to distinguish between your own voice and the Spirit of the Lord. Others times it may be very clear that the "voice" came from somewhere else. Brother Jensen continues: Albert E. Bowen, cited by Dean L. Larsen, Ensign, November 1989, p. 62.
[^5] Leads us to do something The Spirit leads us to do something. This is another common way that the Spirit influences us. I'm sure you've heard stories about someone who "felt impressed" to make a phone call, or visit someone, or do a favor for someone, and it turned out that the person really needed that service at that time. You may have even been led by the Spirit to say "hi" to someone at school, or to keep someone company who was having a hard day. The Spirit can lead you to do these things. Boyd K. Packer, Ensign, January 1983, p. 56.
[^6] Occupies our minds and presses upon our feelings The Spirit occupies our minds and presses upon our feelings. I love to read Joseph Smith's testimony. You'll remember that he read from the book of James, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God" (James 1:5). Once he'd read that verse, he couldn't get it out of his mind! Listen to his own words: Jay E. Jensen, Ensign, April 1989, pp. 21-22.
[^7] Constrains us from dangerous or improper things The Spirit constrains us from dangerous or improper things. Many years ago, my brother David was driving to a party up Emigration Canyon. Suddenly, a feeling came over him that he should turn around and go home. So he turned around and headed back. But then he started to think, "They're expecting me, they're waiting for me, and they'll be worried if I don't show up," so he turned around and started back up the canyon. The feeling came again, "Turn around and go home." So he turned around and headed home again. But the same objections arose in his mind. This time David stopped the car, knelt down, and prayed. He told the Lord that he felt he was getting promptings from the Spirit, but that people were waiting for him, and he needed to go. He told the Lord, however, that if he felt the prompting again, he would head home with no more questions. The Lord seemed to let him continue this time, but David knew something was wrong at that party, because the Lord had warned him. When David arrived, he found that there was something wrong, and that he needed to get out of there. He stayed long enough to persuade two of his friends to get in the car, and the three of them drove home. Ibid., p. 23.
[^8] Wilford Woodruff, Doctrine and Covenants, Official Declaration 1.
[^9] Marion G. Romney, Ensign, May 1981, p. 91.
[^10] Omni 1:4.
[^11] 11. Alma 11:3.
