John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: The Second Semester ( 1995)

Listening Skills 101

Recognizing the Spirit

God does not send thunder if a still, small voice is enough. —Neal A. Maxwell

Have you ever felt like a spiritual amoeba? Have you ever said, "How come I never have any spiritual experiences?" Perhaps you've wondered if you've ever really "felt the Spirit" at all. Well, my guess is that you've had many spiritual experiences—you just haven't recognized them as such. I hope Fourth Period will help.

I remember a very interesting poster I saw a few years ago. It was a drawing of an old man dancing around some train tracks holding a small radio near his ear. Underneath the picture it read: "Those who danced were thought to be quite insane by those who could not hear the music."

I've thought about that poster many times as I've sat in youth testimony meetings and heard a fine young man or a fine young woman (like you) talk about how their friends think they're strange because they get up long before sunrise and go to seminary. Or about their friends who don't understand why people like us would even consider going on a mission for no pay. Or they wonder why we won't drink, or party, or why we want to save our affections before marriage. I suppose they think we are quite insane, because they cannot "hear the music." Well, our job is to help them hear the beautiful music of the gospel. Many of them would like to "tune in" to this station on their spiritual radio, but they "know not where to find it" (see D&C 123:12).

What is that music? What is it that pulls us out of bed for early-morning seminary? (No, not your mother, that's not what I mean.) What is that feeling inside that makes us want to be better—not better looking, or more popular, but just better? Back in the Orientation part of this book, I mentioned a fireside I attended, remember? There was such a nice, calm feeling in the chapel that no one wanted to leave. The fireside was over, and the dance was starting in the gym, but no one seemed to want to go. I believe that many of the youth in attendance were feeling the Spirit. I also believe that many of them had felt it before, but this time, they recognized it. They knew it felt different than the feeling of watching a movie or jumping around at a dance. It was a quiet feeling, but it made you think. It made you think about where you were going in your life, and it even told you things that you should do. I could see it in their faces. Inside, I know they were feeling things like, "I need to say my prayers," or "I need to change my attitude," or "I want to be clean." I believe that most of the youth stayed in the chapel—when refreshments, socializing, and dancing were only a few steps outside the door—because they wanted to remember. They knew they were feeling something real, and they wanted to remember what it felt like. I don't blame them! Strong, impressive spiritual experiences really don't come very often.

Sometimes, at firesides or in sacrament meetings or other places, we get the wrong message. Speakers in Church meetings often share their most powerful spiritual experiences, or the most powerful spiritual experiences of someone else. Those experiences are nice, and they inspire us. But if we're not careful, we may think, "Wow. Nothing like that has ever happened to me. I guess I've never felt the Spirit."

That's the wrong message to get. We enjoy hearing about other people's spiritual experiences, but we must be careful to remember that really powerful spiritual experiences don't happen very often. We shouldn't be discouraged! Listen to this next quote: "I have learned that strong, impressive spiritual experiences do not come to us very frequently." Who do you suppose said that? Me? My home teacher? Someone who doesn't feel the Spirit very often? No. It was an apostle, Elder Boyd K. Packer! This is an apostle saying that strong, impressive spiritual experiences do not come to us very frequently! Listen to what else he taught:

The Spirit does not get our attention by shouting or shaking us with a heavy hand. Rather it whispers. It caresses so gently that if we are preoccupied we may not feel it at all. . . .

Occasionally it will press just firmly enough for us to pay heed. But most of the time, if we do not heed the gentle feeling, the Spirit will withdraw and wait until we come seeking and listening. [^1]

So the Spirit does not always speak with a loud and booming voice. More often, it is a still small voice. In fact, it's so still and small that "if we are preoccupied we may not feel it at all." Wow.

May I be bold for a minute? Do you think we could ever feel the Spirit in the middle of watching some empty and idiotic TV show? Or during an immoral or violent movie? What about a few hours later, when the images and feelings from those shows are still with us?

As you know, you feel more comfortable with some people than with others. Some people you can be with all day long, and they never make you feel uncomfortable. We have a word for such people: we call them "friends." I had missionary companions who were friends. Some of them were Filipino elders. We were different in so many ways! Our backgrounds, our eating and sleeping habits, the way we talked or expressed ourselves were all different. But I felt totally comfortable with them, and they with me. Why? Because Elder Perez and Elder Casinillo knew that I would never tell an off-color joke, or offer them a beer, or anything like that. We had the gospel in common, and that was all we needed.

Now, are you ready for a new thought? Here it comes. Do you think the Spirit of the Lord might be like that? Do you think that the Spirit of the Lord may simply feel more comfortable dwelling with some people than with others? Back when I was a junior in high school, I attended a camp with some other students. One of the camp counselors used the most profane and disgusting language I had ever heard in my life. I remember having to leave his presence several times because I literally became sick to my stomach. I didn't know that mere words could make me sick.

Similarly, if someone's thoughts are full of prime-time filth and immoral song lyrics, do you think the Spirit can feel comfortable with that person? To put it a little irreverently, I think it would make the Spirit sick, and cause him to leave.

Someone once said that the gospel is here to "comfort the afflicted, and afflict the comfortable." This next quote from Brigham Young has a tendency to "afflict the comfortable." Brace yourself (this is great):

Pray the Lord to inspire your hearts. Ask for wisdom and knowledge. It is our duty to seek after it. Let us seek, and we shall find. . . . But as for His coming down here to pour His Spirit upon you, while you are aiming after the vain and frivolous things of the world [Baywatch, for example]; indulging in all the vanity, nonsense, and foolery which surrounds you [Models Inc.]; drinking in all the filthy abomination which should be spurned from every community on the earth [Melrose Place]—so long as you continue in this course, rest assured He will not come near you. [^2]

As you may have guessed, Brigham Young didn't mention those TV shows in his quote. I inserted those. (If you don't recognize them, they've probably been cancelled—I hope.) And no, I've never seen those shows, only the commercials that highlight the featured immorality of the latest episode:

Tonight, in an all-star line-up, you'll never guess who winds up with who. . . . Yes, tonight, the truth and values you embrace will be mocked on every hand! Get hooked! Join us at 8:00 Central/7:00 Pacific.

Okay, they don't really say that, but they might as well. But let's rewind for a second, and go back to the Brigham Young quote—did you hear that last part? "Rest assured—[the Spirit] will not come near you!" Why not? Because it would be too "uncomfortable." So what's the point of all this? The point is, we need to do the work necessary to be prepared to feel the Spirit of the Lord before we can feel it. We need to be doing our best to keep the commandments. We need to be in places where the Spirit can come. We need to be clean! To be filthy is to be weak:

And they saw that they had become weak, like unto their brethren, the Lamanites, and that the Spirit of the Lord did no more preserve them; yea, it had withdrawn from them because the Spirit of the Lord doth not dwell in unholy temples. (Helaman 4:24; emphasis added)

And he doth not dwell in unholy temples; neither can filthiness or anything which is unclean be received into the kingdom of God; therefore, I say unto you the time shall come, yea, and it shall be at the last day, that he who is filthy shall remain in his filthiness. (Alma 7:21; emphasis added)

How Does the Spirit Speak to Us?

As a junior in high school, I found myself one afternoon at the bowling alley with some friends. I rented a pair of lovely, high-fashion bowling shoes, chose a bowling ball, and waited for my turn. As I stood ready to deliver my ball down the lane, I noticed the little lighted number "11" at the end of the lane just above the pins. I was puzzled. Usually, you'll see a little number 1, indicating that this is your first ball. Well, to me, it looked like an 11. I squinted, and contorted my face, and the little green number 11 "morphed" into a number 1, and then back to a number 11. This was the first time I realized I needed glasses. I had always wanted to be a fighter pilot, but without 20-20 vision, I would have to settle for something else (but that's another story).

A few days later, I stood in the eye doctor's office and put on my new glasses for the first time. It was great. I looked out the window at billboard advertisements, and I was surprised at how sharp and clear they appeared. I could read the stenciled letters on the dumpster in the parking lot! And the next time I went bowling, I watched that 11 merge into a sharp and clear number 1. I repeatedly took off and put on my glasses and watched the number go from blurry to clear.

Why the bowling story? Well, I think one of the most common ways we feel the Spirit is that it makes things go from blurry to clear—just like putting on glasses. When the Spirit is with us we can "see" better than before. The word often used in the scriptures is enlighten.

Verily, I say unto you, I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy. (D&C 11:13; emphasis added)

Behold, thou knowest that thou hast inquired of me and I did enlighten thy mind; and now I tell thee these things that thou mayest know that thou hast been enlightened by the Spirit of truth. (D&C 6:15; emphasis added)

For by my Spirit will I enlighten them, and by my power will I make known unto them the secrets of my will—yea, even those things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor yet entered into the heart of man. (D&C 76:10; emphasis added)

For my Spirit is sent forth into the world to enlighten the humble and contrite, and to the condemnation of the ungodly. (D&C 136:33; emphasis added)

I've often sat in meetings where I felt "enlightened." There was no burning feeling, and no glorious vision, but the Spirit was present nonetheless. Inside, I felt enlightened, instructed. Everything became clear. "John," my thoughts would say, "you need to do better on your scripture reading." Or, "John, you need to do better in your prayers." Nephi's younger brother Jacob taught, "The Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not. Wherefore, it speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be; wherefore, these things are manifested unto us plainly, for the salvation of our souls" (Jacob 4:13). That's the way it is. The Spirit makes things plain.

I have also noticed that when I feel "enlightened," I sometimes feel a little bit scolded. The Spirit seems to be saying, "John, you can do better, and you know it." I guess I don't mind being scolded in these situations. Elder Neal A. Maxwell said, "When conscience calls to us from the next ridge, it is not solely to scold but also to beckon." [^3] That "scolding" is the Spirit beckoning me to do better. "C'mon, John. Come up to higher ground. You can do better. You can be better!" I absolutely love it when I have this feeling. I know I make my best decisions under its influence, and I want to feel it as often as I can. That's why this is one of my favorite quotes:

Men are mortal and beset by human frailties. . . . When they are under the influence of an exalted occasion, they make high resolves. They firmly determine to avoid past mistakes and to do better. But gone out from under the spell of that influence and absorbed in the complicated pursuits of life, they find difficulty in holding fast to their noble purposes. . . . So it is essential that they come again, and frequently, under the influence which kindles anew the warmth of spirit in which good resolutions are begotten, that they may go out fortified to withstand the pressures of temptation which lure them into false ways. Happily, if they refresh themselves frequently enough under ennobling influences, the spirit of repentance will be at work with them, and they will make conquest of some temptations—rise above them—and advance thus far toward their final goal. [^4]

That was a long quote, but did you catch the main message? "Come again, and frequently!" To me, this quote says that if we want to feel those "enlightening" moments, we need to take advantage of every chance we have to feel the Spirit—every opportunity to attend a fireside, a standards night, our Sunday meetings, and our family home evenings; every opportunity we have to attend seminary, read our scriptures, listen to good music, watch Church videos. Every opportunity we have to make our thoughts go from blurry to clear, we need to take it!

When it comes to matters of the Spirit, we need to be careful not to compare ourselves to others too much. Some people seem to think that the Spirit affects everyone the same way. For example, some may believe that "whoever cries the most is the most spiritual," and that's not necessarily true. For some people, the presence of the Spirit may bring tears. For others it doesn't. You may feel the Spirit very strongly and not shed any tears at all. Some may confuse strong emotion for the Spirit. Elder Boyd K. Packer said:

The spiritual part of us and the emotional part of us are so closely linked that it is possible to mistake an emotional impulse for something spiritual. We occasionally find people who receive what they assume to be spiritual promptings from God, when those promptings are either centered in the emotions or are from the adversary. [^5]

If I had one thing to say to teenagers about recognizing the Spirit, it would be this: "Be patient, be clean, and don't give up." This is a difficult topic to write about, because I feel like I'm just beginning to understand how the Spirit works in my life—and I'm already ___ years old! (I'm not going to tell you how old I am, but if you're a teenager, I'm older than you.)

In the April 1989 Ensign, there is an excellent article titled "Have I Received an Answer from the Spirit?" In this article, Brother Jay E. Jensen outlines several different ways the Spirit may communicate with us. The Spirit:

As we go through this list, I bet you'll remember times when the Spirit has helped you. Let's talk about each one for a minute.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, if you desire a further witness, cast your mind upon the night that you cried unto me in your heart, that you might know concerning the truth of these things.

Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater witness can you have than from God?

And now, behold, you have received a witness; for if I have told you things which no man knoweth have you not received a witness? (D&C 6:22-23)

Jesus is the "Prince of Peace" (Isaiah 9:6), and he spoke to his disciples about peace:

Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. (John 14:27)

Don't be too discouraged if you've never felt this warm feeling. Because of the wonderful counsel given to Oliver Cowdery in Doctrine and Covenants section 9, many have felt like spiritual misfits if they have never experienced the "burning in the bosom." In the article mentioned above, Brother Jensen relates the following story, shared by a member of the Quorum of the Seventy:

One of the Quorum of the Twelve came to tour the mission over which the Seventy was presiding. As they drove to the next zone conference, the Apostle turned to him and said, "I wonder if you might have left an impression in the missionaries' minds that has created more problems than you can resolve. As I have traveled throughout the Church, I've found relatively few people who have experienced a burning of the bosom. In fact, I've had many people tell me that they've become frustrated because they have never experienced that feeling even though they have prayed or fasted for long periods of time."

He explained that Doctrine and Covenants 9:7-9 was given in response to the process of translating sacred records. There the burning of the bosom was appropriate. The principle can apply to personal revelation, he said, but more precisely it related to the translation of the Book of Mormon. He counseled the mission president to refer missionaries to other scriptural references about the Holy Ghost. For example, he cited the verse "Did not I speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater witness can you have than from God?" [^6]

At times, a person may actually hear an audible voice; at other times, a person may have an impression or a thought come into his mind expressed in one or more complete sentences. Enos reported that while he was "struggling in the spirit, behold, the voice of the Lord came into [his] mind." (Enos 1:10.) [^7]

I remember attending a very rowdy Scout meeting one Tuesday night many years ago. Our Scoutmaster was doing his best to teach us about the Citizenship in the World merit badge, but we were bouncing off the walls. He did what he could to explain the requirements, but we were being totally obnoxious. He finally finished and asked someone to give the prayer. With my head bowed, I remember feeling like something was wrong. I watched my Scoutmaster putting away his things after the prayer, and I felt bad. Something—I believe it was the Spirit—told me that he felt like he had failed. I determined that I would go home and work on that merit badge until I earned it. I wanted my Scoutmaster to know that I did not ignore all his work that night.

The Lord told Hyrum Smith:

And now, verily, verily, I say unto thee, put your trust in that Spirit which leadeth to do good—yea, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously; and this is my Spirit. (D&C 11:12)

That may seem like a simple scripture, but it's important to emphasize that the Spirit leads us to do good. If someone says something like, "The Spirit led me to slug my little brother," or "The Spirit told me not to listen to the prophet," I think you can know it's not the Spirit of the Lord. The prophet Mormon gave us a key for how to judge if a prompting comes from the Spirit of the Lord or the spirit of the devil:

But behold, that which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually; wherefore, every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve him, is inspired of God. . . .

But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil; for after this manner doth the devil work, for he persuadeth no man to do good, no, not one; neither do his angels; neither do they who subject themselves unto him. (Moroni 7:13, 17)

Some people are deceived and even leave the Church because they are confused in this area. They may think they have been given a "higher law." They may suddenly feel that they are more entitled to inspiration than the leaders of the Church. The Spirit would not tell anyone to go against the prophet and leave the Church. Sorry, folks, it's just not going to happen. If they knew the scriptures, they would know they had been deceived. Remember, as the Primary song says, "Follow the prophet"! President Wilford Woodruff said:

The Lord will never permit me or any other man who stands as President of this Church to lead you astray. It is not in the programme. It is not in the mind of God. If I were to attempt that, the Lord would remove me out of my place, and so He will any other man who attempts to lead the children of men astray from the oracles of God and from their duty. [^8]

One of the reasons I love to watch general conference is because I know that if I listen to the prophet, and follow him, I will not be led astray.

Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did. (Joseph Smith-History 1:12)

The Spirit of the Lord was telling Joseph that this verse was important. Many sections of the Doctrine and Covenants were revealed after the Prophet was impressed to meditate and ponder about a certain subject for a long time.

In the same way, if you seem to be reflecting on something again and again, maybe the Lord is trying to tell you something too.

When I was on my mission, many times I would get a feeling that I shouldn't go to certain places. Sometimes I would think, "Was that my own thoughts or the Spirit?" When the feeling seemed to come out of nowhere, I obeyed. I don't know what would have happened if I had ignored the Spirit on those occasions, but that's not the point. The point is, follow the Spirit when it constrains! It's smarter than you are!

A Few Closing Thoughts

As I have tried to learn how to recognize and use the Spirit in my life, I have been motivated by the words of Nephi. I have heard people say, "I don't think I've ever felt the Spirit, and I'm not going to do anything until I do!" or "I'll wait until the Lord tells me exactly what to do." Nephi, on the other hand, had a different approach. He was willing to move, full of faith that the Lord would guide him when he needed it. In 1 Nephi 4:6 we read, "And I was led by the Spirit, not knowing beforehand the things which I should do" (emphasis added). Nephi was a man of action. Nephi said, "I will go and do," not "I will sit and stew." Elder Marion G. Romney agreed with this approach: "While the Lord will magnify us in both subtle and dramatic ways, he can only guide our footsteps when we move our feet." [^9] If you want to feel the Spirit, you've got to move your feet!

Remember to be patient. Sometimes it seems as if the Lord waits until the last possible second before sending his inspiration. "And it shall be given thee in the very moment what thou shalt speak and write" (D&C 24:6). There have been times in my life when I have begged and pleaded for guidance and felt as if I received nothing. Months later I have looked back and realized that I was being guided all along—that my prayers had been heard by the Lord. I realized that "as often as [I] inquired . . . [I] received instruction of [the] Spirit" (D&C 6:14). So be patient, purify your life, and keep the faith. The Lord will speak to you in his own way and in his own time.

There's one more important thing about the Spirit that I'd like to mention before we're done. Some people think the Spirit is just a "good feeling." And it is, but it's more than that. If the Spirit were only a good feeling, it would be nothing more than "background music" to life. But the Spirit is much more than background music. I believe the Spirit is more like the phone ringing. It needs to be answered! My seminary-teacher friend Bill Carpenter is fond of saying, "The Spirit of the Lord is a call to action, and the action you take is your answer to God." I agree. Whenever I've felt the Spirit, I've always felt as if I should do something! I've felt that I should take action in some way. I've felt that I want to repent, be clean, and change my heart and motives. And the action I take is my answer to God. So when you hear the phone ringing, answer it!

Learning to recognize and understand the Spirit is perhaps one of the most important goals you will ever have in your life. As President Ezra Taft Benson has stated, "The Lord can make a lot more out of your life than you can." You will need to know how to follow the Spirit to receive that help. When you live your life by high standards, and desire with all your heart to be valiant, you will eventually gain respect from the people you admire most. Others may think you are insane, but that's only because they can't hear the music. Stay tuned—or, in other words, stay "in tune"—and you will be able to hear the soothing and motivating music of the Spirit. It will guide you through all of life's hazards, and take you all the way home to your Father in Heaven.

Extra Credit

"Have I Received an Answer from the Spirit?" Jay E. Jensen, Ensign, April 1989, pp. 21-25.

"Revelation," Dallin H. Oaks, New Era, September 1982, pp. 38-46.

"I Have a Question," Dallin H. Oaks, Ensign, June 1983, p. 27.

"Learning to Recognize Answers to Prayer," Richard G. Scott, Ensign, November 1989, pp. 30-32.

"Prayers and Answers," Boyd K. Packer, in That All May be Edified (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), pp. 9-15.

"The Candle of the Lord," Boyd K. Packer, Ensign, January 1983, pp. 51-56.

"Understanding Personal Revelation," talk on cassette, Joseph Fielding McConkie (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1991).

"Receiving Answers to Our Prayers," talk on cassette, Gene R. Cook (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1991).

Fourth Period Endnotes

Division page quotation: Neal A. Maxwell, Ensign, November 1976, p. 14.

---
Notas:
[^1] Heber J. Grant, Gospel Standards (Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1942), p. 26.
[^2] H. Burke Peterson, Ensign, June 1981, p. 73; emphasis added.
[^3] Howard W. Hunter, Ensign, November 1977, p. 52.
[^4] Words of Joseph Smith, Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, comp., eds. (Orem, Utah: Grandin Book Co., 1993), p. 15.
[^5] Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), pp. 121-22.
[^6] Bruce R. McConkie, in Prayer (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1977), p. 10.
[^7] H. Burke Peterson, Ensign, November 1981, p. 35.
[^8] Bruce R. McConkie, in Prayer, p. 12.
[^9] H. Burke Peterson, in Prayer, p. 108.
