John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: The Second Semester ( 1995)

Communications 101

Improving Your Prayers

Prayer can solve more problems, alleviate more suffering, prevent more transgression, and bring about greater peace and contentment in the human soul than can be obtained in any other way. —Thomas S. Monson

Let's play a guessing game, okay? I'm thinking of something—an event. Your job is to guess what it is. Are you ready? I'll give you a few clues:

Because of this event, you are reading this book.

Because of this event, hundreds of thousands of the world's best teenagers get up before the sun rises and go to seminary before school starts.

Because of this event, thousands of men, women, and children endured unbelievable hardship and walked across a continent.

Today, even as we speak, fifty thousand young men and women have left their homes to teach people all over the world about this event for no pay.

Because of this event, millions are familiar with the names "Nephi," "Alma," and "Moroni."

Because of this event, the whole world has been changed. The priesthood of God has been restored, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins is available, and families can be sealed together forever.

Because of this event, millions of people will endure whatever persecutions or hardships come their way as they watch and wait for the second coming of Jesus Christ to the earth.

What is this remarkable, amazing, powerful event that has changed the whole world forever?

The prayer of a teenager.

That's it. The prayer of a fourteen-year-old farm boy back in 1820 changed the world, and it will never be the same. The point? Don't ever underestimate the power of prayer. The Father and the Son appeared to Joseph Smith in the spring of 1820 because of his faithful response to a beautiful scripture: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him" (James 1:5).

Sometimes it seems like the answer to every question in Sunday School is "pray and read your scriptures." Well, that's good advice, because that's exactly what young Joseph Smith did, and because he did, the world is a different place today.

Don't Ever Stop Praying

Prayer is so important that if you're not praying twice a day, the President of the Church may be fearful for you! Are you on his worry list? This is what President Heber J. Grant said:

I have little or no fear for the . . . young man or the young woman, who honestly and conscientiously supplicate God twice a day for the guidance of His Spirit. [^1]

I believe there's more to that quote than meets the eye. Is President Grant saying that all you have to do is pray twice a day and everything will be fine? No—he said he has little fear for you if you are already praying twice a day. What's the difference? I'll tell you. Usually, when people are having a tough time, struggling with sin, or bordering on inactivity, what's one of the first things they stop doing? Right! They stop praying. I've met many young people who are still attending seminary and church, but who have stopped praying. Everything may appear fine on the outside, but inside they are struggling. I think that President Grant is saying that if you are praying twice a day, he has little fear for you because the other things in your life are probably all right.

Why do people stop praying? I don't know—there are probably as many reasons as there are people. But I would like to make a guess at one of those reasons. I met a young woman once who said she hadn't really prayed in months. She said the blessing on the food when she was asked to, and she said opening prayers in seminary and Sunday School classes, but she offered no personal prayers. When I asked her why, she looked at the ground and explained, "Well, I've made a lot of mistakes in my life, and I've done some things, and I don't see why Heavenly Father would listen to me, 'cause I've done so many dumb things."

"Yes indeed, friends, Heavenly Father will only listen to perfect people, so I guess it's no use." If that were the case, who could pray? I couldn't. Nobody could! We make the dumb but common mistake of assigning God some truly imperfect traits if we think he listens only to perfect people. What kind of a father would that be? It's Satan who wants you to believe that way. He wants you to think that you can't pray unless you're perfect. Let's listen again to one of the people I respect most—Nephi:

For if ye would hearken unto the Spirit which teacheth a man to pray ye would know that ye must pray; for the evil spirit teacheth not a man to pray, but teacheth him that he must not pray.

But behold, I say unto you that ye must pray always, and not faint. (2 Nephi 32:8-9)

In other words, if you ever have that feeling that you can't pray, now you know where it comes from. It isn't from God. He always wants you to pray. It comes from "the evil spirit."

Of course, it's easier to say that than to believe it. When we've made a big mistake, or when we've sinned, it's much harder to pray. I know that. But that's also the most important time to keep in touch with our Heavenly Father. He knows what we've done. We're not going to surprise him.

If you find that it's really hard to pray, don't tell your friends, tell your Father! You might say, "Heavenly Father, this is really hard for me to do. I know I'm not perfect, and I've made some mistakes, but thou hast a commandment to pray, so here I am." That kind of prayer is remarkably similar to a prayer spoken by the brother of Jared. Listen to how humble he is:

Now behold, O Lord, and do not be angry with thy servant because of his weakness before thee; for we know that thou art holy and dwellest in the heavens, and that we are unworthy before thee; because of the fall our natures have become evil continually; nevertheless, O Lord, thou hast given us a commandment that we must call upon thee, that from thee we may receive according to our desires. (Ether 3:2)

What if the brother of Jared had thought, "Oh, well, I'm not worthy, so I won't pray." Or, "I'll just forget about praying until I'm perfect." As a matter of fact, it so happens that the brother of Jared did forget to pray for a while, and what do you think happened? He got scolded for three hours!

And it came to pass at the end of four years that the Lord came again unto the brother of Jared, and stood in a cloud and talked with him. And for the space of three hours did the Lord talk with the brother of Jared, and chastened him because he remembered not to call upon the name of the Lord. (Ether 2:14)

Perhaps you're thinking, "Well, I'm not as important as the brother of Jared. I still wonder if God hears my prayers." You know, I'm glad you said that, because I've just been waiting to give you another quote. Presiding Bishop H. Burke Peterson said this:

I want you to know that I know that whenever one of Heavenly Father's children kneels and talks to him, he listens. I know this as well as I know anything in this world—that Heavenly Father listens to every prayer from his children. I know our prayers ascend to heaven. No matter what we may have done wrong, he listens to us. [^2]

So let's just dispense with the ridiculous little "I-don't-think-God-listens-to-me" comments. I've had it with that stuff! It's not true now, and it never was true. The important thing is that you pray. You don't have to be perfect to be heard, and you don't have to pray perfectly. For now, the most important thing is that you try, okay? Now, let's get down to business.

We Know We Can Do Better in Our Personal Prayers

A young woman once told me, "I pray, but I don't feel anything." At first I wanted to say, "Well, welcome to the club." As we learned in fourth period, strong and impressive spiritual experiences do not come to us very often. Perhaps you're different from me, but I would say I only feel things in my prayers maybe 2 or 3 percent of the time. Not very often. But I know God is there, and I will never stop praying.

This chapter is not intended to teach anyone how to pray. I imagine whoever is out there reading this book already knows the basic steps to prayer. This chapter is intended to motivate us to try harder, and to make our personal prayers a more important part of our day. The problem is, sometimes you and I (guilty sigh) are simply not doing our best in our personal prayers. We've fallen into a routine. What we need is a gentle (or maybe a not-so-gentle) reminder of what we already know. Sometimes we're simply not concentrating on improving the quality of our prayers.

Let's imagine it. You get home late, you kneel down by the side of your bed—wait a minute, you are kneeling, aren't you? You're not just lying on your back and looking toward heaven and expecting to stay awake? If you're praying like that, you'll fall asleep in the middle of your prayers. Then you'll wake up and look at your clock at 2:00 A.M. and say, "Um . . . um . . . Amen! Wow, that was a long one." I don't think that counts for much.

Okay, so you kneel down by your bed. A note of caution here: when you kneel down, don't just do a "face plant" into the mattress. I've done that before when I've started to pray, but sometimes, when I'm really tired, my thoughts begin to drift. At first I'm praying, but after a while I become lost in La-La Land. And I hate to tell you this, but I've thought and said some of the weirdest things in the middle of my prayers. How embarrassing! Has that ever happened to you? When you finally realize where you are, that you're on your knees next to your bed, it hits you that you were in the middle of praying! Isn't it embarrassing at that point when you have to say, "Oh . . . sorry, Heavenly Father—um—bless the sick and the afflicted . . . " This may be a little irreverent, but I wonder if Father isn't thinking, "I'd like to afflict you! Then maybe you'd remember me, and pray with a little more intent!"

And thus we see that except the Lord doth chasten his people with many afflictions, yea, except he doth visit them with death and with terror, and with famine and with all manner of pestilence, they will not remember him. (Helaman 12:3)

You've probably heard the saying, "There are no atheists in foxholes." Yup. When the crisis is on, watch people get religious. We must be sure that we are praying not only in the tough times, but when things are easy and life is good. Elder Howard W. Hunter said:

If prayer is only a spasmodic cry at the time of crisis, then it is utterly selfish, and we come to think of God as a repairman or a service agency to help us only in our emergencies. [^3]

Imagine if you were looking down on this world, and knew that only a small fraction of your children would kneel and talk to you at the end of the day. That's a sad thought, isn't it? Let's you and I commit to pray morning and night, in good times and bad, okay?

Open the Door!

At one time or another, you've probably seen a painting of Jesus knocking on a door. I can recall three different versions of that painting. We had one in our house when I was growing up. I remember my dad asking me when I was very young, "John, what is different about this door?" I looked at it as closely as I could, but couldn't find anything unusual. "Keep looking," my dad said. Finally, I noticed that there was no doorknob! I said, "Oh, there's no handle!" And my dad said, "That's right. Do you know why?" I didn't, but I studied it some more, and finally my dad said, "If you want Jesus to come in, you have to open the door." The scripture that inspired that painting comes from Revelation 3:20: "Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him."

In other scriptures, the situation is reversed: We are at the door, and we do the knocking. For example: "Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you; seek me diligently and ye shall find me; ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you" (D&C 88:63). There are some wonderful principles in there. Let's examine this scripture in a more visual way:

Now, what have you noticed? With every action you take, you move closer to the Lord, and he can move closer to you! But there's something more important. In every case, guess who has to move first? You do! Someone once said, "If you feel farther away from God today than you were yesterday, you can be sure who moved." It's true. If you want to be closer to the Lord, you have to move closer! You may be asking, "How do you seek, ask, and knock?" Good question. Now we'll give some examples and become even more visual:

See how that works? Now, I know that you are a very polite person, and you would not barge in on a party where you were not invited. In the same way, Heavenly Father respects our free agency enough that he will not go where he's not invited. He will wait for us to move closer to him through obedience and prayer. And when we do, he has promised he will move closer to us.

The opposite is also true. You've seen how obedience can bring us closer to the Lord. What do you suppose disobedience would do? Let's take a look.

then we "draw away" from God! And we distance ourselves from the influence of his Spirit. Remember? "The Spirit of the Lord doth not dwell in unholy temples" (Helaman 4:24). With every activity, every day, we either draw closer to God or move farther away from him.

Be Persistent and Consistent

One day I was waiting in line at the grocery store. I was behind a mom and a little boy. Moms are known for being able to do about 47 million things at once, and this mom was no different. She was conversing with the cashier, filling out a check with her right hand, and with her left hand holding by the wrist a hyper little boy who was struggling to get away. He was just out of reach of a display of candy bars. When he realized that he couldn't reach them by himself, he stopped trying to pull away, stepped close to his mother's side, and started tugging on her coat. "Mom?" (tug, tug, tug, tug). "Mom?" (tug, tug, tug). "MOM!" (tug, tug). At this point, the little boy put all his weight on his left foot, fixed his gaze on the ceiling, and put it on automatic: "Mom (tug) Mom (tug) Mom (tug) Mom (tug) Mom (tug) Mom (tug) Mom (tug) Mom (tug) . . . " Finally the mother, obviously ruffled, turned and answered, "What?" At this point the boy pointed to his left and said something like, "Nestle's Crunch!" I almost broke out laughing. Then I thought, "How perfect! I could use this in a talk!" (That's why I'm telling you about it now.) I'm hoping that you listened to that story with your spiritual ears, and you know what I'm going to say.

The boy wanted something, and he knew he couldn't get it by himself. He looked to a higher power, but got no response after a few tries. Very determined, he fixed his eyes upward and tugged and tugged until he got an answer. As I witnessed this event, I was reminded of something Joseph Smith said: "Weary [the Lord] until he blesses you." [^4] Isn't that interesting? "Weary the Lord." In other words, be persistent. Let him know you're there! Sometimes, in our prayers, we say, "Father?" (tug, tug, tug, tug). "Father?" (tug, tug, tug). "FATHER!" (tug, tug). Then we say to ourselves as we hit the pillow to go to sleep, "He just doesn't answer my prayers." Hmmm. I think we need to be more like that little boy and "weary the Lord." The boy knew that if he tugged long enough and hard enough, he would get his mother's attention. In the same way, if we tug long and hard, I believe the Lord will, in his own way and time, send us an answer. (See Luke 18:1-8.)

Perhaps the Lord will let us pray for a certain blessing for weeks, months, or even years. But this kind of struggling will build our faith and our spiritual muscles, and make us more humble and aware of our dependence on him. At these times we need to trust him, and believe in him, and "be still and know that [he is] God" (D&C 101:16).

Avoid Vain Repetition

You've probably heard the story of the man who was asked to offer a prayer at a prison. Because he was in the habit of using some of the same words and phrases in his prayers, he said, "We're thankful for this beautiful building we have to meet in, and we hope that those who are not here will be here next time . . . " Oops. Brother Jack Marshall talks about how we might prepare an ice-cream sundae, full of fat and refined sugar, and drenched with chocolate syrup. Then we bow our heads and ask the Lord to bless it to "nourish and strengthen our bodies." Oops again.

"Vain repetition" means using the same phrases over and over in our prayers without really meaning or thinking about what we are saying. Of course, it is fine to thank the Lord for a beautiful building to meet in, and to ask him to bless our food that it will nourish and strengthen us, if that's what we really mean. The key is sincerity. When prayers become just a habit, and we don't invest any real concentration and effort, then we are guilty of vain repetition. President Ezra Taft Benson said:

Our prayers should be meaningful and pertinent. . . . Do not use the same phrases at each prayer. Each of us would become disturbed if a friend said the same words to us each day, treated the conversation as a chore, and could hardly wait to finish in order to turn on the TV and forget us. [^5]

I remember that, as a boy, I felt I should go down the list of everyone in the family and ask the Lord to bless them. After a while, I thought of a more "efficient" prayer. I remember telling my older brother how quickly I could bless a large number of people. I would say, "Please bless everyone I know, and everyone I've ever seen." Fortunately, I grew up, and I no longer treat the Lord like a servant who needs a "to-do" list from me.

Sometimes, when things are tough in my life, I don't even know what to say in my prayers. And do you know what? That's okay. Sometimes we don't even need words to pray.

Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. (Romans 8:26)

Even if we can't find the words, the Lord knows what we need. And this kind of prayer, though it may be more feelings than words, will reach heaven much easier than one full of vain repetition. Once again, the test is our sincerity, our intent. Mormon warned:

And likewise also is it counted evil unto a man, if he shall pray and not with real intent of heart; yea, and it profiteth him nothing, for God receiveth none such. (Moroni 7:9)

Who Listens To, and Who Answers Our Prayers

A young woman wrote and asked me, "Do Heavenly Father and Jesus listen when we pray, or just Heavenly Father?" Good question. We know that Jesus prayed very often while he was on the earth, and he told the Nephites, "Therefore ye must always pray unto the Father in my name" (3 Nephi 18:19). We know that we address our prayers to our Father in Heaven. As to whether Jesus hears them too, let's read what Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote:

It is true that when we pray to the Father, the answer comes from the Son, because "there is . . . one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus." (1 Timothy 2:5.) Joseph Smith, for instance, asked the Father, in the name of the Son, for answers to questions, and the answering voice was not that of the Father but of the Son, because Christ is our advocate, our intercessor, the God (under the Father) who rules and regulates this earth. . . .

But what we must have perfectly clear is that we always pray to the Father, not the Son, and we always pray in the name of the Son. [^6]

We don't know exactly how, but in some way our prayers are conveyed to the Son so that he may answer us. He also sends the Holy Ghost, or the Comforter, to answer our prayers. Jesus said, "But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you" (John 14:26).

What Should We Pray For?

As a little boy, I remember praying very hard one night for a bicycle. I bowed my head and prayed very earnestly for a bike to be sitting in my room when I looked up. I'd pray, and look up, then I'd pray some more, and look up. I prayed for quite a while, as I remember, while my brother slept in the bunk below. (I don't know how I would have explained it to him if a bike had appeared.)

I have since learned that we must be careful what we pray for, and that we should always add "Thy will be done" in our prayers. Sometimes we pray for things that wouldn't be good for us, and fortunately, in those cases, we often don't get what we want. (You may have heard a country music song called "Thank Heaven for Unanswered Prayers.")

At a youth conference testimony meeting, a young woman told how she prayed every night to have a boyfriend. She was only fifteen, and not even old enough to begin dating, but she prayed and prayed and prayed to have a boyfriend. She thought this would make her happy. She said that the Lord finally answered her prayers by telling her that she "wouldn't be able to handle the things that would come with having a boyfriend." This was her personal answer to the question, "Why can't I date before I'm sixteen?" I was impressed with her honesty and sincerity. She learned that the Lord knew better than she did what would be right for her.

This brings up another important point: We are not promised that we will receive everything we pray for, but we are promised every right thing we pray for.

Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you. (3 Nephi 18:20; emphasis added)

Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name it shall be given unto you, that is expedient for you. (D&C 88:64)

Do you know what expedient means? Hang on, I'll get the dictionary. . . . It says, "useful for effecting a desired result." Because Heavenly Father knows us better than we know ourselves, he also knows what's best for us, and what our "desired results" ought to be. Though at times it may seem he is not answering our prayers, it may be that he wants us to wait for something even better. Jesus taught:

What man is there of you, who, if his son ask bread, will give him a stone?

Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?

If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father who is in heaven give good things to them that ask him? (3 Nephi 14:9-11)

What a beautiful thought. Our Father in heaven is willing to give good gifts to them that ask him. So what should we ask for? Do you want a list? Okay, fine, I'll give you one. Actually, it's Amulek's list from Alma 34, and it's great.

Yea, cry unto him for mercy; for he is mighty to save.

Yea, humble yourselves, and continue in prayer unto him.

Cry unto him when ye are in your fields, yea, over all your flocks.

Cry unto him in your houses, yea, over all your household, both morning, mid-day, and evening.

Yea, cry unto him against the power of your enemies.

Yea, cry unto him against the devil, who is an enemy to all righteousness.

Cry unto him over the crops of your fields, that ye may prosper in them.

Cry over the flocks of your fields, that they may increase.

But this is not all; ye must pour out your souls in your closets, and your secret places, and in your wilderness.

Yea, and when you do not cry unto the Lord, let your hearts be full, drawn out in prayer unto him continually for your welfare, and also for the welfare of those who are around you. (Alma 34:18-27)

By now you may be saying, "John, I don't have any fields, and I don't have any flocks, and I don't have any crops." Well, neither do I. So, let's do as Nephi recommended, and "liken all scriptures unto [ourselves]" (1 Nephi 19:23). What do you have? You may not be able to pray in your field over your flocks, but can you pray in school over your books? You may not work with crops in your field, but you may have peer pressure where you do work. You may not have your own household, but imagine the power you can have in your own family if, when you offer the family prayer, you mention your parents and each of your brothers and sisters by name, and lovingly pray for them. And if there isn't regular family prayer in your home, imagine the power you can have to bless your family if you organize it. Be a Nephi and take charge! Da-da-da-dat, da-dah! (That was the sound of a bugle playing "Charge!")

Get in the Habit

Evening prayers have never been a problem for me. I never forget. But there was a time, I'm embarrassed to admit, when I would forget, skip, or run out of time for my morning prayers. Finally I formed a habit. You need to find your own way, of course, but this is what I do. The instant I get up, I drop to my knees and pray. If I try to wait until I'm dressed, or showered, or something like that, I always seem to run out of time. So I say my prayers first thing.

That method works for me. You'll have to find one that works for you, but find one! You can't afford to miss that morning time with your Father in Heaven. Elder H. Burke Peterson shares with us how he formed a good habit:

When I was a boy, I couldn't always remember to say my prayers at night. I wanted to, but sometimes I would forget because I'd be too sleepy. When I got older, I had a great idea.

If I were you, I would go out in the field and find a rock about the size of your fist. I'd wash it clean and put it under my pillow. Then, when I would get in bed at night and drop my head on my pillow—crack! I would remember to get out of bed and kneel down by it. I would then put the rock on the floor by my bed and go to sleep. Then, in the morning, I would jump out of bed, and as my foot would come down on the rock—"Ouch!" And I would remember to kneel down and say my morning prayers. Sometimes we need reminders to form good habits. [^7]

Because of Bishop Peterson's talk, many young people throughout the Church have made "Prayer Rocks" to help them remember to pray. (Other ideas, like the ill-fated "Prayer Cactus," didn't catch on as well.)

Should I Ask a Blessing on the Food in a Restaurant?

I love teenagers because they ask the most interesting questions! Do you bless the food when you're on a date? If you pray over your food in a public place, will it show your obedience to the principle of prayer, or might it just look like you are showing off? Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote:

The practice of the Church in our day is to have family prayer twice daily, plus our daily personal prayers, plus a blessing on our food at mealtimes (except in those public or other circumstances where it would be ostentatious or inappropriate to do so), plus proper prayers in our meetings. [^8]

There's a key. Be careful about praying in public if it feels inappropriate or ostentatious. Do you know what ostentatious means? Me neither. Just a second and I'll go look it up—ah ha, my dictionary says it means a "showy display." Yes, indeed. The "I'm-more-spiritual-than-you-are" display is not appropriate. So you'll just have to use your best judgment on this one. (My friend Brad Wilcox does what he calls the "Bayer Prayer." He bows his head and rubs his temples as if he has a headache that needs an aspirin, and offers a silent prayer on his food.)

The Best for Last

As you know, the best place to learn about prayer—or any other subject, for that matter—is in the scriptures. So, to conclude this chapter, I'm going to include some classic scriptures about prayer. The Savior was an incredible teacher. He could teach great principles in just a few words. Listen to how beautifully Jesus taught the Nephites:

And when thou prayest thou shalt not do as the hypocrites, for they love to pray, standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.

But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly.

But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen, for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.

Be not ye therefore like unto them, for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of before ye ask him. (3 Nephi 13:5-8)

I have found that one of the best and fastest ways to get to know people is to ask them what their favorite scriptures are. These next verses are some of my very favorite. One of the first times I felt the Spirit, and knew I was feeling it, was when I was reading this passage of scripture. I was a sophomore in high school, and we were studying Church history and the Doctrine and Covenants in seminary. Just before bedtime one night, I was reading these verses in my Doctrine and Covenants:

Pray always, and I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and great shall be your blessing—yea, even more than if you should obtain treasures of earth and corruptibleness to the extent thereof.

Behold, canst thou read this without rejoicing and lifting up thy heart for gladness?

Or canst thou run about longer as a blind guide?

Or canst thou be humble and meek, and conduct thyself wisely before me? Yea, come unto me thy Savior. Amen. (D&C 19:38-41)

Did you catch that? You can become as rich as you want to in this world, but the Lord says you will have more joy if you will just "pray always." And can you read that without rejoicing? Wow. One of the weapons you'll need in your personal battles against Satan is prayer. Here's another great verse from the Doctrine and Covenants:

Pray always, that you may come off conqueror; yea, that you may conquer Satan, and that you may escape the hands of the servants of Satan that do uphold his work. (D&C 10:5)

At the beginning of this chapter, we looked at James 1:5, the scripture that led Joseph Smith to pray. In James 1:6, it says: "But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering." We must learn to pray more earnestly, with more faith, with real intent, and with all of the energy and strength of our souls. Mormon taught, "Pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart" (Moroni 7:48).

Earlier, I joked about some of our half-hearted prayers—the "face-plant-in-the-mattress" thing. I'm embarrassed about those times when my prayers weren't with "real intent." Writing and researching for this chapter has helped me want to do better. I especially felt a new resolve to try harder when I read this beautiful counsel from Elder H. Burke Peterson:

As you feel the need to confide in the Lord or to improve the quality of your visits with him . . . may I suggest a process to follow: go where you can be alone, where you can think, where you can kneel, where you can speak out loud to him. The bedroom, the bathroom, or a closet will do. Now, picture him in your mind's eye. Think to whom you are speaking. Control your thoughts—don't let them wander. Address him as your Father and your friend. Now tell him things you really feel to tell him—not trite phrases that have little meaning, but have a sincere, heartfelt conversation with him. Confide in him. Ask him for forgiveness. Plead with him. Enjoy him. Thank him. Express your love to him. Then listen for his answers. Listening is an essential part of praying. Answers from the Lord come quietly, ever so quietly. In fact, few hear his answers audibly with their ears. We must be listening carefully or we will never recognize them. Most answers from the Lord are felt in our heart as a warm, comfortable expression, or they may come as thoughts to our mind. They come to those who are prepared and who are patient. [^9]

I don't know if there is any way I can express how grateful I am that a fourteen-year-old boy offered a prayer in a sacred grove so many years ago. That prayer, and everything that has happened since, has changed my life. Because of that prayer, Samuel Alexander Pagan Kelsey and his wife, my fourth great-grandparents, crossed the plains and came to Utah. Because of that prayer, my father joined the Church when he was twenty-four years old. Because of that prayer, my brother David was given a powerful blessing with the priesthood of God before he underwent a kidney transplant. Because of that prayer, I had the opportunity to serve a mission in the Philippines. Because of that prayer, I get to spend time with my favorite people in the world—wonderful teenagers like you. I am very, very grateful. Don't ever underestimate the power of prayer!

See you in Sixth Period!

Extra Credit

Prayer, various General Authorities (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1977).

"Learning to Recognize Answers to Prayer," Richard G. Scott, Ensign, November 1989, pp. 30-32.

Fifth Period Endnotes

Division page quotation: Thomas S. Monson, Ensign, June 1986, p. 2.

---
Notas:
[^1] Tom D. Crouch, The Bishop's Boys: A Life of Wilbur and Orville Wright (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1989), p. 57.
[^2] Robert D. Hales, Ensign, May 1990, p. 39.
[^3] Howard W. Hunter, Ensign, November 1977, p. 52.
[^4] Words of Joseph Smith, Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, comp., eds. (Orem, Utah: Grandin Book Co., 1993), p. 15.
[^5] Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974), pp. 121-22.
[^6] Bruce R. McConkie, in Prayer (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1977), p. 10.
[^7] H. Burke Peterson, Ensign, November 1981, p. 35.
[^8] Bruce R. McConkie, in Prayer, p. 12.
[^9] H. Burke Peterson, in Prayer, p. 108.
