John Bytheway, What I Wish I'd Known in High School: The Second Semester ( 1995)

Geography 101

The Imagi-Nation

You see things and you say, "Why?" But I dream things that never were, and I say, "Why not?" —George Bernard Shaw

We're going on a trip! Yes, we're going to see another nation. It's not a European nation, or an African nation, but a nation more interesting and exciting than anything you've ever seen. Airfare is free, you never get jet lag, and you can be there in a second. In fact, you can leave whenever you want, on a moment's notice! You can go there when you're feeling bad, or when you're feeling glad. Where is this nation? It's in the "State of Mind" right there in your head. It's the Imagi-Nation.

The Imagi-Nation is your own private country. You own it! It's every bit as beautiful and exciting as you can—um—imagine. You've been there before, but you may have forgotten a few things.

Some people stop traveling to their Imagi-Nation as they get older. They say it's only for kids. They prefer a place they call "Reality." It's another nation in the State of Mind. Those who live there want everyone else to live there too. They say, "C'mon, get back to Reality."

Other people live in a place they call "The Past." You've probably heard someone say, "Hey, you're living in The Past!" Well, that's what they mean. It's the third nation in the State of Mind. Some people never seem to leave The Past. They don't try to go anywhere else, because they believe things will always be the way they've been in The Past. So they give up their passport, and never visit their Imagi-Nation. If you stay in The Past too long, you might get depressed. My advice is, don't live in The Past.

Where do most people live? I'm not sure. Probably in The Past with a daily commute to Reality. The most successful and happy people in the world, however, young and old, spend a lot of time in their Imagi-Nation.

Imagi-Nation is divided into counties called "Dreams," cities called "Goals," and freeways called "Success." (Notice that "Success" is a freeway, not a city.) In Reality, freeways go from city to city, with a new city always ahead. In Imagi-Nation, Success means going from goal to goal, with a new goal always ahead! You can never see all of your Imagi-Nation, but boy-oh-boy, it's sure fun trying. No matter how far you travel, there's always more Imagi-Nation left!

There's something very special about your Imagi-Nation. You can bring things from there into Reality. In fact, almost everything you find in Reality came from Imagi-Nation. You can make the things you imagine become real; some people call this "making your dreams come true."

One day, a little boy was wandering around in his Imagi-Nation, and his teacher had to bring him back to Reality. It happened at the Jefferson School in Cedar Rapids in 1878. Miss Ida Palmer, the teacher, noticed a seven-year-old boy hunched over his desk fiddling with two pieces of wood. He was definitely somewhere in his Imagi-Nation. Miss Palmer asked him what he was doing. He answered "that he was assembling the parts of a flying machine, a larger version of which might enable him to fly with his brother." Miss Palmer knew the wonders of Imagi-Nation, so she didn't take the craft from the little boy, but she did tell him to come back to Reality. Later, Orville and his brother Wilbur visited Imagi-Nation again. And on December 17, 1903, the Wright Brothers flew a part of their Imagi-Nation into Reality. [^1]

You too can make your dreams come true. If you can make it in your Imagi-Nation, you can make it in Reality. But, as with any trip, you have to do some planning. In Reality, you can go to a gas station and get a map to help you plan your journey, to make sure you don't miss the best stops along the way. There are plenty of gas stations in the Imagi-Nation too, and they all have maps. Gas stations give us the fuel to travel, and maps tell us the best cities to visit. Gas stations are the Church, and maps are the gospel. The gospel map gives us a recommended tour, with stops along the way. You can visit any place you want in your Imagi-Nation, but the gospel map says, "Whatever you do, don't miss these cities!"

Some people travel without maps. They have no plans for their journey. It's unbelievable, but some people spend more time planning a picnic or a trip to the store than they do planning their whole lives! You, however, are different. You have a map with specific goals. And somewhere on your map there is a drawing of a compass that tells you where "north" is, that gives you direction. You see, some people live in their Imagi-Nation, but they go in the wrong direction. Big mistake.

What direction should we take when we enter our Imagi-Nation? I'll tell you: "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you" (3 Nephi 13:33). That short scripture, which is also found in Matthew 6:33, is the greatest success formula there is. Seek the kingdom of God first. What good does it do to work hard and set and achieve goals if you're moving in the wrong direction? Set goals for graduating from seminary, for receiving your Young Women Recognition Award or Eagle Scout Badge. Then set goals for your mission, marriage in the temple, and education. When you move in the right direction, the Lord will help you achieve your goals. If you start now, by charting your course and living by a plan, you'll have a full and rich life with many exciting stops along the way!

In Reality, it's easy to tell when you've arrived at a new city. There's always a sign that says, "Welcome to ________." And in Imagi-Nation, it's easy to tell when you've reached a new goal. If you've set a goal to receive your Young Women Recognition Award, or your Eagle Scout, there will come a time when you know you've achieved it. There are other kinds of goals that are harder to get a handle on. For example, what about the goal of being righteous? Can you suddenly check a box and say, "Okay, I'm righteous"? No. Why? Because righteousness is not that kind of goal. It's more like a way of life—a direction, or a mode of travel. You see, there are "do" goals, and there are "be" goals. Things that you do, you can check off when you're done. Things that you want to be are a little harder to measure, but they are still important.

Last semester, in What I Wish I'd Known in High School: A Crash Course in Teenage Survival, we talked mostly about "do" goals. This time we've been talking and will talk more about "be" goals, or direction goals. And that brings us to the next question:

Are You Everything You Want To Be?

When I was only ten years old, I admired a sixth-grader in my elementary school very much. His name was Christian. He was always nice to everyone. He always seemed to be happy. He was outgoing, too. I'm not sure if I could have described why I admired him when I was ten, but now I know the right words. It's as simple as this: Christian was righteous. He was good. He glowed with the light of Christ. Can a twelve-year-old do that? You bet. Christian did. I wanted to be like that. I guess Christian was one of my first "role models."

Just before I entered seventh grade, my family moved to another part of town, but I never forgot about Christian. I still wanted to be like him. As the years went by, I remember writing down my feelings and goals from time to time, and when I did that I would think about Christian and other people I admired.

In junior high and high school, I found someone else to admire. He was outgoing and happy and good too, like Christian. His name was Richard. Richard was popular—but unlike some of the others in the popular crowd, he was friendly with all the different social groups in the school, and everyone was friendly with him! Why? Because people of all kinds are drawn to goodness and righteousness. People are drawn to people who are happy. And nothing makes a person as happy as living the gospel can.

How about you? Is the person you really want to be hiding somewhere in your Imagi-Nation? You can be that person in Reality if you really want to. People do it all the time. Let me tell you about Lynette from New Mexico. No, I have a better idea—I'll let Lynette tell you about Lynette! Let's read her letter together:

As a freshman and sophomore I found myself in a clique which included myself and two other Mormon girls. Starting at a new school with new friends and a whole new life it seemed like the perfect answer, not to mention the fact that "cliques" give the feeling of stability and friendship from others in the group. Well, things seemed great at first, and high school couldn't be better until I learned more about the people in my clique and how others were looked down upon and pushed away by one of the girls in the group, which made the whole group look bad. Every day it would get worse and I would just stand there in silence, partly because I knew that it was "safe" in a clique and I didn't want to be an outcast. Things went on like this for the first two years of my high school life, and people at school were always nice to me when I was not with my friend who was always negative. Yet when I was around her I was looked at as a part of this group, and therefore I was also thought of as mean and negative.

Excuse me, but I need to interrupt and make a comment. This is the point where Lynette started to ask, "Am I everything I want to be?" Okay, keep reading. We now return you to your regularly scheduled letter:

It wasn't until the summer before my junior year that I decided that the way things were going and the way people were being treated was not something I was willing to let keep happening. . . . I decided to break away and be my own person. Junior year began, and I slowly started to break away from the group, which was very difficult. But in the long run it was worth it. As I slowly broke away from the clique I decided that instead of joining a new one and having the same thing happen I would try something else. From that day forward I promised myself and Heavenly Father that I would go to school every day and try my best to treat everyone (no matter who they are or what they look like) with the highest love and respect possible. Instead of joining a clique I would just be friends with everyone equally. I would go around to each individual clique and visit with people every day and talk to them and get to know them as my brothers and sisters and children of God.

I'm moving on to my senior year now, and my life couldn't be better. This past year has been filled with trials and struggles, yet with the wonderful friendships that I have built with people—being able to see them for who and what they are—those trials have been so much easier to handle and conquer. Life just seems to take on a new meaning.

I must admit that it wasn't easy to break away from security and comfort, even for an outgoing person (which is how I consider myself). Not having a best friend in the world can be hard at times, when you need a shoulder to cry on. But in the end I can guarantee you that when you are nice and a friend to everyone, as opposed to just those in your little clique, life will be so much better and can bring you so much more joy than you'll ever know. There are so many wonderful people out there who are just waiting for a friend.

Isn't that great? Lynette took a hard look at herself, and at her life, and asked, "Am I everything I want to be?" And the answer was "no." So she changed. She put The Past behind her, she saw what she wanted in her Imagi-Nation, and she brought it into Reality.

Well, are you everything you want to be? How would you like to be different? If you can see it in your Imagi-Nation, you can make it in Reality. One of the cop-outs we hear all the time is: "That's just the way I am." If you're like me, whenever you hear someone say that, you want to respond, "No, you're just the way you've chosen to be." I know people who seem to be happy all the time, and yet they have major trials and difficulties in their lives. How do they do that? Well, at some point, those people made a conscious decision to be happy no matter what. They no longer say things like "He makes me so mad" or "This weather depresses me." They have taken control of their feelings.

On top of your TV or VCR, there's probably a remote control. With a remote control, you can "control" your TV from a "remote" location. If the TV is too loud, you can turn the volume down or even push the "mute" button. (I've tried pointing the remote at people in my apartment and pushing the "mute" button when they get too loud, but it doesn't work.)

When you let others control how you feel, it is as if you have given out a remote control that has a button on it for each of your moods. If you walk past someone in the hall, and they don't say "hi," do you let that affect your mood? If so, you have given away your remote control—and as long as you let others keep it, they will keep affecting your moods. Does that make sense?

Some people give their remote controls to the dumbest things. For example, would you give a personal remote control to the Big Dipper? Some people have. It's called astrology. "Gee, I'd better check my horoscope to see what's going to happen to me today, so I'll know what kind of a mood to be in." Yup, they have given a remote control to big balls of burning gas billions of miles away. Brilliant move. These people are not living in Reality or the Imagi-Nation. It's more like the "Halluci-Nation."

Anyway, here's the point: You need self-control, not remote control. Take back the remote! If you want to make a major stride forward as a teenager, decide now that you will be the kind of person you want to be, and that you will stop blaming everyone and everything outside of you for your moods and circumstances. Of course there are trials in life, but there are a million examples of people who have succeeded in spite of their trials. You can too! Or you can (as many people do) blame the government, high taxes, bad weather, your family, your genes, your teacher, your luck, your birth order, or the Big Dipper for your problems.

I have a friend named Greg. I heard him teach a class once in which he shared his amazing personal story of "taking back the remote." I should start by saying that Greg looks like one of those guys on the cover of a J. Crew catalog. No exaggeration. I wouldn't know, but the girls all say he's "gorgeous." Now you'll understand why this story was so amazing to me.

Greg told of a time back in his early high school years when he had no friends and was very overweight. He didn't feel all that good about himself, and he just kind of moved along through life like everyone else. One day something interesting happened. There was a popular girl at his school who walked up to Greg and simply said, "Greg, are you everything you want to be?" (That's where I got the idea for this part of the book!) Deep inside, Greg answered to himself, "no." He knew he could be better. This simple question from a wise young woman served as a wake-up call for Greg. He knew he was more than he was demonstrating. Greg took back the remote. All that summer, he worked. He exercised like crazy and lost a lot of weight. He changed his diet and built up some muscle by working out. When Greg went back to school in the fall, he looked totally different. Nobody recognized him! They thought he was a new kid who had just moved in. He made a lot of friends, and soon became one of the most popular boys at the school.

Greg explained humbly that he kind of got caught up in his newfound popularity. After a while, unfortunately, he wasn't treating people as well as he should have. Once again, this amazing young woman came to Greg and asked him the same question: "Greg, are you everything you want to be?" And once again, Greg answered "no." He looked deep inside. He had already changed his appearance, but perhaps there was more remodeling to be done. Now he had to work on his heart. He decided he would talk to everyone, not just those in the popular group, and he would start treating everyone with kindness and respect. And he did!

I really love this story. It happened because a young woman consistently asked that wonderful question: "Are you everything you want to be?" and because an honest young man was willing to answer the question, then take charge and change what needed to be changed.

Daily Reminders

How do we make sure we're going in the right direction as we travel through the Imagi-Nation? Well, asking ourselves certain questions every day, like the one Greg's friend asked, can really help. In my own life, I try to remind myself every day of certain things. On my bathroom mirror, I have a picture of the Christus, the beautiful statue of the Savior in the Temple Square visitors' center. Underneath it are printed the words, "He is so powerful." This is a daily reminder to me to have faith in Jesus Christ. I love him, and I know that he has the power and the will to order all things for my good as fast as I am able to receive them. (See D&C 111:11.)

Daily reminders help keep us moving in the right direction. One of the reasons we're told to read the scriptures every day is because doing so will allow the Spirit of the Lord to be with us every day. The same applies to daily prayers.

May I suggest a daily reminder that you might like to use? I was once watching a television show about the Notre Dame football team. When the team leaves the locker room to go out onto the playing field, they go down a long staircase. Above the stairs is a sign that reads, "Play like a champion today." Each player, as he goes down the stairs, reaches up and touches the sign. Why? you ask. Because just looking at the sign might not have the same impact as touching it. Touching the sign forces them to concentrate and internalize the message, "Play like a champion today!"

I love this idea, and I've thought about it a lot. I thought about how I might make a similar sign, and I remembered a classic talk given by Presiding Bishop Robert D. Hales. He said:

As a young man, I had an opportunity to serve in the U.S. Air Force as a jet-fighter pilot. Each unit in our squadron had a motto that would inspire its efforts. Our unit motto—displayed on the side of our aircraft—was "Return with Honor." This motto was a constant reminder to us of our determination to return to our home base with honor only after having expended all of our efforts to successfully complete every aspect of our mission.

This same motto, "Return with Honor," can be applied to each of us in our eternal plan of progression. Having lived with our Heavenly Father and having come to earth life, we must have determination to return with honor to our heavenly home. [^2]

I think it would be a wonderful idea if each of us displayed a "Return with Honor" sign in our room, right next to the light switch so we would see it every day when we left. We could even touch the sign when we leave, and have the conviction to return not only to heaven, but to our bedroom each night as clean as we were when we left in the morning. Actually, if you were here with me right now, you would see two signs on my wall: "PLAY LIKE A CHAMPION TODAY" and "RETURN WITH HONOR." These daily reminders inspire me and help me to stay on course and heading in the right direction.

The nice people at Deseret Book went to work and inserted a "Return with Honor" sign at the end of this chapter that you can use in your room. Just cut along the dotted line and hang it right up there. And you can add your own daily reminders if you want!

Summary

I've told you about some of the people I admire—people like Christian, Richard, Lynette, and Greg. I'm sure you have a list of your own. And who knows—I'll bet there's someone out there watching and admiring and learning from you! So do your best and don't let them down.

If you're living in The Past, now is the time to stop! The wonderful message of the gospel is that you can change, and repent, and be better every day. We all have to come back to Reality from time to time, but make sure you spend a lot of time in your Imagi-Nation. Are you everything you want to be? Not yet? That's okay; most people aren't. But you can get to work on it.

You know better than anyone else in the world what your weaknesses are. You also know better than anyone else in the world how much better you could be if you really tried. I know you've had moments when you've thought about trying to be better. You know that, don't you. Will this be the day that you decide to be better than you've ever been before? Will this be the day that you actually believe what prophets have said about you and your generation? Will this be the day that you begin to be the way you've always known you can be? As Robert Louis Stevenson said, "You cannot run away from weakness. You must sometime fight it out or perish, and if that be so, why not now, and where you stand?" What a penetrating question: "Why not now?" Why not, when you're finished reading this chapter, get out a paper and pencil and write down all the things you want to become! Why not now? Design the kind of life you want, visualize the kind of person you want to be in your Imagi-Nation, and you can make it happen in Reality!

Extra Credit

As a Man Thinketh, James Allen (New York: Barnes & Noble Inc., 1992).

Sixth Period Endnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Bruce R. McConkie, The Mortal Messiah, 4 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1979-81), 1:98-99.
[^2] Truman G. Madsen, Joseph Smith the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), p. 99.
