Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Preface

Someone once wrote an interesting article entitled "How to Get More Out of a Book Than There Is in It." If one is a good reader, he may be able to get out of a book all there is in the book, but with a little imagination and some ability to analyze, he may get much more. The article pointed out that every good reader has the experience of having his mind strike some particular idea, causing it to ricochet out into space. Under some circumstances, one should not be too quick to draw his mind back into the book, because frequently if he gives his mind a little rope it will lead him to some related ideas that will be very helpful.

Most great men discover that their most important ideas are those that they themselves think. And as a mind follows its own chain of thoughts that are linked together, it will make some inspiring discoveries. Then when it has exhausted itself, it can be drawn back into the book to continue its reading. In that way, a person can get out of the book all that there is in the book; in addition, the book will cause him to make some decisions about a great many things that are not in the book. This business of managing one's thoughts is one of our most profitable enterprises.

Sir Isaac Newton once explained that he had discovered gravity by thinking about it all of the time. By this thinking process he discovered a great many things that had never been written in books. The point is that if Sir Isaac could discover gravity by thinking about it, we can also solve some of our problems that are just as important by that same procedure.

One of the first and most important steps leading to any success is to think about it. This process also leads to understanding it and believing in it and taking action about it. And when we have good ideas leading to good activities, then accomplishment is placed within our easy reach. When Lord Bacon said "Knowledge is power," he had in mind that kind of knowledge which is supported by some strong motivations.

Ralph Waldo Emerson has often been referred to as being one of the greatest thinkers that America has ever produced. And in one of his wisest statements, he said that his greatest personal need was for someone to get him to do those things that he already knew that he ought to do. This is one of the most urgent needs that most of us ever have, and we should learn to work at it a little more effectively.

Knowledge by itself is wonderful, and yet none of us ever come very close to living up to those truths that we are already completely familiar with.

As Moroni, the last of the prophets of pre-Columbus America, was finishing his great volume of scripture in preparation for its transmittal to us, he wrote a note through which he now speaks to us, in which he said: "Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall receive these things, . . . that ye would . . . ponder it in your hearts." (Moroni 10:3.)

The dictionary says that to ponder is to appraise and to evaluate. It is to weigh an idea in our minds and then to analyze it in order to determine its most constructive use. To ponder is to examine carefully, to view with deliberation and careful consideration. The dictionary says that we may ponder over, or ponder on, or ponder about. By our pondering we may get answers on the most momentous issues so that we are prepared to take action right down the road toward the target.

The great apostle Paul was a ponderer, and he said, ". . . whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report . . . think on these things." (Philippians 4:8.) And with a good pondering program we are able to get more out of situations and things than there is in them, and this is the process by which we lift ourselves above the ordinary.

Many people have referred to Alexander Hamilton as a genius. And Alexander Hamilton tells us how he became a genius. He said: "Men give me some credit for genius, but all of the genius I have lies in this: When I have a subject in mind, I study it profoundly; day and night it is before me. I explore it in all its bearings. My mind becomes pervaded with it. The result is what some people call the fruits of genius, whereas it is in reality the fruits of study and labor." Study by itself may not be very important, but a good study habit can make us almost all-powerful. Then about the other part of Mr. Hamilton's formula, Leonardo da Vinci said, "Thou O God doth sell us all good things at the price of labor."

The great driving forces of the world are not only intellectual; they are primarily moral and emotional. When our minds are made up, our emotions aroused, and our souls set on fire, then every accomplishment is placed in our own hands. Mere ideas as such may not be worth a dime a dozen, as there are millions of really great ideas that are wasting away in our success books. There are dozens of great programs gathering dust in our libraries. There are hundreds of pages that contain the word of God himself that presently are unknown to and unused by us. However, even the greatest ideas don't do us very much good unless we digest them, get them circulating in our bloodstream, and make them a part of our bodily strength.

Victor Hugo has said that nothing is as powerful as an idea whose time has come. And an idea's time comes only when it has been harnessed and set to work. Therefore, we ought to get out the great success books and practice the art of pondering and accomplishing. This can give us a more productive appetite for study, investigation, thinking, learning, believing, motivating, and practicing.

The chapters of this book were written on a one-a-week basis. There are some who may want to read them on that same schedule. If what is found in this book does not satisfy you, so much the better. You may rewrite the chapters to your own specifications in such a way that they will leave nothing to be desired. By our effective pondering processes we are able to make some firm decisions and form some strong motives on the important issues. Then we may realize Mr. Emerson's ambition of getting ourselves to do the things that we ourselves know that we ought to do. This will put us well on our way toward becoming a genius in carrying forward our part of the work of the world and also in doing that part of the work of the Lord that he has given us to do.
