Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Principles, Promises, and Powers

EVERYONE WHO dwells upon our great earth is involved from his first minute of life to his last in this all-important process of making the most of himself. He also inherits a full responsibility for that part of the work of the world that life has given him to do. This great gift of human life should not be taken lightly, as it is a very important one. Life was given for a purpose, and it entails many responsibilities that are wonderfully and terribly important.

President Joseph Fielding Smith once said that in one very important way this short period of mortality is the most important part of our total eternal lives. Our presence in this mortal probation indicates that we passed with flying colors the requirements of our long and important first estate. And if we make the most of these intermediate years of our second estate, then we can look forward to a brilliant, everlasting, successful, and happy third estate where we will have glory added upon our heads forever and ever. Therefore, the big question that will determine much of the value of not only what has gone before but also what will come after depends upon what we do now. It is thought that the three all-important key words that will represent the quality of our eternal success are Principles, Promises, and Powers. And to get the most good out of ideas, we need to learn as much as possible about each of them.

Just think what advantage it gives us when we understand the principle on which our desired success is based. And then we add another part of the success triumvirate when we develop the power to effectively carry out the principle. Both of these are focused in those great promises that God has made for our ultimate accomplishment and happiness.

God is all wise; he has all knowledge. He is the author and master of the fundamental principle on which every achievement is based. But no success is ever predicated on weakness, and one of the important characteristics that makes God God is that he has all power. And we close the Lord's prayer by saying to him, "For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen." (Matthew 6:13.)

God started us on our journey of learning correct principles when he permitted our first parents to eat from the tree of knowledge of good and evil that God himself had planted in the Garden of Eden. And after man had eaten, God said, "Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil. . . ." (Genesis 3:22.) And I would like to point out in passing that the right kind of knowledge still tends to have that effect upon people. To know good from evil still tends to make men and women become as God. But even though many of us know what is right, we may still miss the mark by shooting under it because we are too weak to carry out the divine program. And more than about anything else, most of us need that great power to do. The apostle Paul said to Timothy, ". . . be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might." (Ephesians 6:10.) Whether we realize it or not, that is one of our greatest ideas.

Isaiah talked about an interesting combination of principles and powers when he said, "Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil; Learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow." (Isaiah 1:16-17.) This requires both of these great abilities for knowing and doing. We need to understand the great principles on which all success is based. And we need the powers necessary to bring them about. We have some great powers of the mind and spirit that need to be developed. Most of us also have some unused heart powers. We have been given some miraculous "will power."

Someone has said:

The human will, that force unseen,

The offspring of the human soul,

Can hew away to any goal

Though walls of granite intervene.

Be not impatient in delay

But wait as one who understands;

When spirit rises and commands,

The gods are ready to obey.

Surely no one who craves excitement or information or opportunities could help but feel grateful for the privilege of living now. Our great knowledge explosion gives us the ability to know almost everything we want to know about almost anything that we want to know about. Because of the restoration of the gospel, we have new and everlasting promises that make learning the principles and developing the powers extremely worthwhile. He has promised us the greatest blessings. We may know about God and the details of his program for our salvation, and the power is available for us to reach almost any objective, including those that reach beyond the boundaries of this life. What a day, what an opportunity, and what a challenge! His principles are wise, his promises are sure, his powers are great.
