Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Objectives and Responsibilities

THERE IS one thing that I believe in more than about any other thing and that is the proposition that "the one business of life is to succeed." I am perfectly confident that God did not go to all of the trouble of creating this beautiful earth with all of its laws, resources, utilities, and opportunities without having in his mind some very important destiny for those whom he would permit to live upon it. I am equally certain that God did not create us in his own image, endow us with these potentially magnificent brains, these miraculous personalities, this astonishing power to grow, and this godly ability for procreation, and then expect us to waste our lives in failure.

God did not give us these godly ambitions to mock us. He did not build a stairway leading nowhere. However, the greatest waste there is in the world is not the devastation that goes with war; it isn't the cost of crime; it isn't the erosion of our soils or the depletion of our raw materials or the loss of our gold supply. The greatest waste there is in the world is that human beings, you and I, live so far below the level of our possibilities. Compared with what we might be, we are just partly alive. The most widespread disease in the world is the inferiority complex. We load ourselves up with guilt, lethargy, weakness, and sins by thinking little thoughts and living too much of our lives on that low level of fractional devotion, marginal morals, and misunderstandings that result in our turning in too many minimum performances in our lives.

There is a cure for our problems if we follow that great line in the scripture which says, "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.) We must not contaminate our success with the destructive belief that God is dead or that he has lost interest in us or that he has given up in his purpose. By indulging in any of these, we do ourselves a damaging injustice. It is important for us to remember that God is God and beside him there is no Savior. How important to have him as our guide when he has all knowledge, he has all power, he is all good, he has all wisdom. He is not only our Eternal Heavenly Father, but he also has an incomparable program for our eternal progression, our eternal glory, and our eternal happiness.

The great God who fashioned us in his own image and created this earth as a place for us to serve our mortal probation does not deal in trifles. He does not waste his time working on unimportant projects that are not worthwhile. We may desert him, but his purposes will not fail nor will any of his programs fizzle out and come to naught. And as the apostle Peter said, God has given to us "exceeding great and precious promises: that by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature. . . ." (2 Peter 1:4.) And the greatest of all human opportunities is that we shall put ourselves in harmony with his program and make the greatest capital out of his excellence and magnificence.

To reach our maximum destiny, we must believe in him who created us. And we must also believe in ourselves. God has said, ". . . this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) But to achieve the best results, he must have our complete cooperation based on an effective understanding of his program. We should know what his objectives are for our lives and what our responsibilities are in carrying them out. When we fill our lives with sins and weaknesses, we are bound to miss the mark by erring in our aim.

Jesus announced the purpose of his own mission by saying, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly." (John 10:10.) And for us to get the most comprehensive and comprehending view of the magnificence and desirability of that intended abundance for both here and hereafter is one of the greatest of all possible objectives. It is interesting that it has always seemed very difficult for us to believe in our own importance or our destiny.

The Pharisees accused Jesus of blasphemy when he told them that he was the Son of God. Then in trying to get them to understand their real situation he quoted their own earlier scripture that projected one of those precious promises in which it was said, "Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High." (Psalm 82:6.) Then he said, "If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the scripture cannot be broken: Say ye of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?" (John 10:34-36.) He was saying to them, "Ye are the children of God, and according to the divine law of heredity the offspring of God may sometime hope to become like their eternal parents." He has outlined for us a great program of eternal progression. Even God does not stand still. The poet said:

We serve no God whose work is done,

Who rests within his firmament;

Our God his work has just begun

Toils evermore with powers unspent.

However, it has always been the besetting sin of the inhabitants of our world to belittle their own importance, to disbelieve in their own destiny, and to destroy their own chances for glorious eternal success. Throughout the holy scriptures and through the work of the Church and by the whisperings of the Holy Spirit, God is pleading with us to make the most of our own possibilities.

In that great Sermon on the Mount when Jesus said, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect" (Matthew 5:48), he was saying to us, "Ye are the children of the Most High, so go out there and amount to something." It was for this purpose that he put in each one of us this magnificent upward reach, this great self-improvement instinct, this ambition to aspire heavenward. The primary thing that our parents, our teachers, and our employers are also saying to us is, "Go out there and amount to something." This is also the message that we get from our conscience, our ambition, and our faith. And it is thought that the most profitable of all success procedures would be for us to sit down and read his sacred promises and determine what God's real objectives for our lives are, what they ought to be in our own hearts and ambitions, and what responsibilities we bear in relationship to them.

James G. Harboard was a very successful general in World War I. Before going into the service, he had been the president of the Radio Corporation of America. After the termination of his military service, he went back to RCA as chairman of the board. And he once said that before anyone under his direction undertook any accomplishment, either in business or the military, he must do four things in writing:

When we form the habit of writing our objectives down in detail, we usually do a much better job of thinking them through and making them definite and decisive in our own minds. Then we accept them as our own, we believe in them, and we prepare to do something about them. But, of course, we should also be fully aware of all of the possible resources that are available to us in bringing about the greatest possible accomplishment. We should also be conscious of those opposing forces that will tend to prevent us from achieving our goals. And finally we ought to formulate an effective permanent plan giving all of the details for the accomplishment.

Someone has said that planning is the place where man shows himself most like God. Nothing is more godlike than the planner, the thinker, the organizer. He is the one who draws the blueprint for success. He is the one who builds the roadway on which accomplishment will travel. It is likely that our greatest opportunity is to have a good set of definitely worked-out objectives that are fully believed in and about which firm determinations have been made. There is an old axiom that says, "All the world stands aside for the man who knows where he is going and how he is going to get there."

And when we come into this great world of benefits and opportunities we must also carry a share of the responsibilities for bringing them about. These two must always go together. No one gets very far who insists on having all of the benefits without carrying any of the responsibilities. And when we enthusiastically accept the responsibility, we get a much greater proportion of the benefits. Under the overruling program of our free agency, God has set up at least four great institutions to help bring about his objectives for us. These are all pointed toward the greatest of all objectives, which is, that if we are faithful, then the offspring of God have his promise that they may sometime hope to become like their own eternal parents.

These four primary inventions of God designed to help us accomplish our purposes are:

The Lord has said that all things unto him are spiritual and that he has never given any command that was temporal. In this same spirit, Elbert Hubbard once said that "business is the process of ministering to human needs. Therefore," said he, "business is essentially a divine calling." The farmer who grows the food to maintain the lives and health of our families is ministering to a human need, and therefore he is entitled to say that he is engaged in a divine occupation. The doctor who provided me with nine blood transfusions was ministering to a human need, and therefore he is entitled to say that he is engaged in a divine calling. And as we take hold of our share of the work of the world, we ought to think about it in that way and do it in that spirit.
