Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Principles

MANY YEARS ago while taking some college courses concerned with educational training, I was enrolled in a class where one of the prescribed textbooks was entitled Principles of Education. This book was written by a man who had had some very successful teaching experience. He had also done extensive research and spent a great deal of time trying to learn how to solve the problems involved in acquiring a successful education. A few years later in my life, I read another book that was entitled The Principles of Successful Salesmanship. And since that time, I have become aware of the importance of this great word principle in every one of our projected successes.

The dictionary says that a principle is some fundamental truth that never varies. It is a governing law that can be depended upon. It is a settled, proven rule for successful action. It also has reference to a divine doctrine. It is one of those attitudes or beliefs that exercises a directing influence in our lives and behavior. It is a fundamental proven assumption and a dependable maxim or axiom. Sometimes we hear people say, "It is the principle of the thing," and usually we ourselves are good or bad, successful or unsuccessful, according to those principles that we believe in. Our most important talents are our religious talents, and our most important principles are our religious principles. Thomas Carlyle once said that a man's religion is the most important thing about him. That is what he thinks about and believes in and works at and fights for and lives by.

Dr. Henry C. Link once made a helpful success statement when he said, "Nothing puts so much order into human life as to live by a set of sound principles." And certainly the most sound of all the great principles to be found in the world are the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. In any area of our projected accomplishment, the principles of the gospel furnish us with our most profitable human concepts and our finest success ideas. Dr. Link himself grew up in a religious household, but as he climbed the educational ladder, he decided that he might make a more intellectual approach to life through his education. And, therefore, he somewhat relaxed his hold on his religion. However, when he was thirty-two years of age, with his Phi Beta Kappa key on his chest and his name in Who's Who in America, he became the head of the Psychological Service Center of New York, where it was his job to advise thousands of troubled people as to how to solve their problems. Then he made one of the greatest of all discoveries, and that was to the effect that the difficulties of every person in the world can best be solved by following the principles enunciated in the religion of Christ. As a consequence of his discovery, he wrote his great book entitled The Return to Religion.

Just suppose that everyone in the world enthusiastically believed in and lived each one of the Ten Commandments, the Sermon on the Mount, the Word of Wisdom, and all of the other great laws of God. Then almost all of our problems would almost immediately disappear. If we followed the morality, the fairness, the honesty, the industry taught in the holy scriptures, the great divorce carnage that now desolates our land could be immediately wiped out. To follow the scriptures, obey the laws of the land, and utilize the other important principles of success would prosper us in our occupations, make us happy in our families, and give effectiveness to our social relationships. Following these great Christian principles would make us good citizens and pleasant neighbors, and would also lead us along that straight and narrow path to the celestial kingdom.

There is a life-saving Article of Faith in which we say, "We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are: first, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Article of Faith 4.) In another one we say, "We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men; indeed, we may say that we follow the admonition of Paul—We believe all things, we hope all things, we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things." (Article of Faith 13.) In giving the Word of Wisdom, the Lord said that it was "given for a principle with promise" and that it was "adapted to the capacity of the weak and the weakest of all saints, who are or can be called saints." (D&C 89:3.) But every one of the principles of the gospel has a promise attached, and all of them are "adapted to the capacity of the weak and the weakest of all saints, who are or can be called saints" if we have the spirit of the gospel.

In speaking about the principle of tithing, the Lord has said that if we obey it, he will open the windows of heaven and pour us out a blessing that there will not be room to receive it.

The people who keep the Sabbath day holy will be a different kind of people than those who do not. From the top of Mount Sinai God said, "Honour thy father and thy mother"; then he attached the promise when he said, "that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee." (Exodus 20:12.) We have many other thrilling principles that can raise our life to any accomplishment. Ralph Waldo Emerson once said, "Nothing can bring us peace but a triumph of principles." As we hope for success, we must have a good understanding of those great principles of eternal marriage and of eternal progression and the other great laws and doctrines of Christ.

We hear till we are weary about the temptations of our day. Some say that it is too difficult for one to live his religion and that we cannot be expected to practice the principles of the gospel. However, no temptation is a temptation at all unless we are entertaining it. God never forces us to do right, and Satan has no power to force us to do wrong. Someone has said that God always votes for us, and Satan always votes against us, and then they ask us to vote to break the tie. It is how we vote that gives our lives their significance. And if we always vote according to the principles of the gospel, our lives will have great power behind them.

If one desires to be a great teacher, or a great doctor, or a great citizen, or a great child of God, he ought to get out the great success books. He ought to know the great scriptures and study the principles of power, the principles of righteousness that are the principles of success. The Prophet Joseph Smith was once asked how he so successfully governed the large group of Latter-day Saints who had come from so many widely different backgrounds and cultures. They had different temperaments, different loyalties, and spoke different languages. The Prophet said, "I teach them correct principles and they govern themselves." And he has been the instrument in reestablishing the Church upon this earth, and the Church is the proponent of the fullness of the gospel. It is the chief fosterer of those great principles of eternal marriage, the literal bodily resurrection, eternal progression, salvation for the dead, and the atonement of Christ.

There are some who claim that it is difficult to understand the principles of the gospel, but it is also difficult to understand how the grass grows, or what sunshine is. We do not understand all of the principles of science, but we can understand how to get their benefits. We can run electrical currents for thousands of miles along copper wires and transform the energy into light, heat, or power, and we can learn to push the switch and pull the lever to give ourselves the benefits. We can make ourselves successful and happy and qualify ourselves for eternal life by understanding and obeying these great principles of the gospel which are adapted to the understanding of the "weak and the weakest of all saints, who are or who can be called saints." But certainly its importance makes it worthy of our best thought and finest attention.

The gospel is the good news, it is God's story; it is the plan of life and salvation. It contains the greatest success principles, and it is founded on the wisdom and mercy of God. It is our only safe guide in the universe.
