Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Law and the Prophets

THE SCRIPTURES are frequently called by various names, some of which may make a stronger appeal to us than others. They are sometimes referred to as "the law and the prophets." Since time began, God has given us many fundamental laws on which our success depends for both here and hereafter. He has also made available the stimulating words of his prophets. Jesus judged the philosophy of people and the people themselves by how they harmonized with these principles of truth.

After giving the great laws of love, he said, "On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matthew 22:40.) He admonished teachers to stay within the general limits by saying: "To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them." (Isaiah 8:20.)

The scriptures are called by such other names as the law and the testimony, or the God story, or the good news, or the commandments, or the principles of the gospel. Each of these has some peculiar significance to us. But whatever they may be called, each one of these commandments or truths represents a saving principle designed for our eternal benefit. None of these were intended to restrict our growth or happiness; in fact, the very opposite is true.

The Golden Rule is a basic fundamental principle of success. The Lord has given us the Word of Wisdom, the ordinance of baptism, and the principle of faith. He instituted the family relationship, the literal bodily resurrection, the immortality of the personality, the eternal glory of the human soul, and the principle of eternal progression. None of these, or any of the dozens of others, are superfluous or unnecessary, and we ought to be thoroughly familiar with them.

The Lord has said that in order to reach the perfection that he has projected, we should live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God. In every age the cry of the prophets has always been, "Keep the commandments," "Live by the law," "Be obedient to the great principles of truth."

Recently at a family home evening the father was discussing with his children the importance of keeping all of the commandments of the Lord, for even one exception might be disastrous. One of his young daughters held up her hand and asked her father a very comprehensive question when she said, "Daddy, how many commandments are there?"

The father was a little taken offguard, and he had to confess to his daughter that he did not know. And so, they took as the project for their next week's family home evening to count the commandments and to make up a list as large as they could think of. They reasoned that it might be a little bit difficult to keep a commandment that they had forgotten or didn't even know about or could not fully understand. And each one of us might also ask ourselves, How many principles of the gospel are there? We might find out that this question would prove to be somewhat comparable to asking how many laws we have on the statute books, or how many principles of success there are, or how many principles of truth, or how many principles of science, or how many laws of health, or how many good ideas there are, or how many promises of blessings God has made to us.

If we were going to be completely informed on the laws of successful farming or horticulture or animal husbandry, how many facts would we need to know and understand? Or how many laws of medicine are there and which one is so unimportant that we can afford to neglect it? If a good law firm is going to completely protect the best interests of all of its clients in court, it might be necessary for it to have a library of several thousand law books.

There are some people who may go through their entire lives without consulting a doctor or a lawyer more than a few times. But almost never does a day go by when we don't have some very important use for the constructive principles of truth and righteousness. We need to know all of the doctrines of salvation and all of the principles of righteousness. And we need to remember all of the commandments of God. If we forget any of his laws, we will be a different kind of people than if we remember them.

When I was ten years old, I had a brother who was nine years old. One afternoon while with a group of children his own age, something happened that involved a principle of morality. My brother came home and reported the occurrence to my mother, and my mother sat down with my brother and me and discussed this idea in its many ramifications and the great importance it had in our lives. I had a great love for my mother and a great confidence in her wisdom, ability, and righteousness. I made a firm determination that my mother's teaching on this subject would always be one of those fundamental principles that would guide me in my future life. Even when we are young, we can make some firm decisions that will hold us true against the ugly pressure of evil.

To help us to make good decisions is also the reason that our eternal Heavenly Father has given us the holy scriptures. Then, so that we would not get too many conflicts, he came down onto the top of Mount Sinai and said to us, "Thou shalt have no other gods before me." (Exodus 20:3.) That is, he was saying the same thing that my mother said, that there is no other acceptable conduct but righteousness. And if we disobey these principles, we can be certain that unpleasant and unprofitable consequences will follow.

There is a law of agriculture that says that if a farmer prepares a good seed bed with the proper fertility and if he follows all of the other laws of successful farming, he may have real hopes for an abundant harvest. But if he plants his corn in the chill of the December blizzard, he will surely find that the laws of successful farming have turned against him.

But more important than the laws of farming are the laws of life, and the Lord has indicated that we should study those important principles that determine our eternal salvation and happiness. He has had them written down for our benefit in the holy scriptures, and only when we understand and follow them are we on safe ground.

Abraham Lincoln was an unschooled, backwoods boy. He was isolated from most of the sources of culture and learning. His mother died when he was nine. Even books were very scarce and hard to get. But Abe said, "My best friend is the one who will get me a book I haven't read." In the evenings after the work of the day had been finished, he used to lie before the open fire and read the Bible and the one or two other good books that he had access to. He said, "I will prepare now and take my chances when the opportunity arrives." And when his chance came, Abe was ready.

There are many other great men who owe their success in life to the habit of regularly reading the scriptures and being familiar with other important ideas. It is also necessary that a good scientist study every day if he hopes to learn the secrets of science.

Jascha Heifetz, the great violinist, once said: "When I fail to practice for one day, I can tell the difference in my playing. When I fail to practice for two days, my family can tell the difference. When I fail to practice for three days, the whole world can tell the difference."

Practice is one of the fundamental principles of every other success. When even for an hour we forget God and these great laws that he has established for our benefit, we also immediately begin suffering some losses. The Lord has given us several other learning opportunities. One is that if we properly train our conscience, it will always prompt us as to what is right and what is wrong.

For another, we have the privilege of building great character power within ourselves so that we may always do what is right. We also have the prompting of the Spirit of the Lord speaking to us. On one occasion, Jesus said, "My sheep hear my voice. . . ." (John 10:27.) In our antemortal state, we were taught the principles of the gospel, and while the specific memory of the details has been temporarily taken from us, yet when we try to do right and listen to the Spirit's prompting, we receive directions from God and from our subconscious understanding. Good things have a familiar spirit in the ears of good people. And we bring with us from the past an important heritage that we may call instinct or character, natural intelligence, or inspiration. And all of these are for our individual protection and profit.

William Wordsworth put part of this idea into verse when he said:

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting:

The soul that rises with us, our life's star,

Hath had elsewhere its setting,

And cometh from afar:

Not in entire forgetfulness,

And not in utter nakedness,

But trailing clouds of glory do we come

From God, who is our home.

If we listen to those echoes from the spirit and the past, we may know that immorality, dishonesty, unkindness, unfairness, and all other kinds of unrighteousness are wrong. And certainly the best way to be a good teacher or a good salesman or a good doctor or a good lawyer is to be a good man. Just think what our world would be like if every one of us knew and loved and obeyed every principle of the gospel. Then the prayer of the Master would soon be realized when he said, "Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven." (Matthew 6:10.)

If we disobey God's laws half of the time and keep them the other half, we are doing just as much to tear down our eternal success as we are to build it up. We ought to have a great catalog of those important truths that we believe in so that we would not overlook any of them; then we ought to develop the skills, the attitudes, the aptitudes, and the courage involved in the power to follow through with them. Certainly we cannot hope for success while thinking negative thoughts or unrighteous thoughts or thoughts of failure. We can destroy our success by pouring fear into our bloodstream and filling our muscles with lethargy, disobedience, and sloth. But more than about anything else in our lives, we need to learn the principles of success and stamp into our brain cells those powers designed for greater accomplishments.

Religion is much more than theology. Religion is how to live successfully, not only for now but for eternity. There is nothing so profitable as to follow the principles of truth. There is nothing so Godly as righteousness. If the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ are lived, we will become as God is.
