Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Promise Books

RECENTLY A story appeared in the newspaper about a newly married young woman who gave an overworked mother next door a small notebook containing forty perforated slips of paper. On each slip this young woman had written: "I promise to give to Mrs. John Jones any time during the next year one evening of free baby sitting—date to be arranged." She then signed her name.

This interesting example of helpfulness inspired a Girl Scout to make up her own version of what she called her "Promise Book." It contained a great number of slips that she had made out to her mother and on which she had promised her mother to give certain services, such as washing the dishes, making the beds, and doing a lot of other helpful things. This would not only greatly please her mother but it would be of even greater benefit to the daughter herself. To this young Girl Scout these promise slips were all sacred pledges and they were backed up by the character and integrity of a very responsible maker. They were guaranteed by her firm determination that in no case would they ever fail to be honored in full. I do not know what anyone else may think about this situation, but if I know a great idea when I see it, this is it.

However, in the world around us, there are a great many promise books containing important promises to pay. For services received, the government has accumulated a vast debt of approximately five hundred billion dollars for which it has an obligation to pay. The government currency is made up of slips of green paper on which has been written a promise to pay the bearer a certain sum of money. On the bills themselves are shown the pictures of some great men, most of whom are American presidents. On the other sides of these slips of paper are emblems and significant insignia. A one-dollar bill has the picture of George Washington; two dollars—Thomas Jefferson; five dollars—Abraham Lincoln; ten dollars—Alexander Hamilton; twenty dollars—Andrew Jackson; fifty dollars—Ulysses S. Grant; one hundred dollars—Benjamin Franklin; five hundred dollars—William McKinley; thousand dollars—Grover Cleveland; five thousand dollars—James Madison, ten thousand dollars—Salmon P. Chase; and one hundred thousand dollars—Woodrow Wilson. A great amount of our energy and a large portion of our time are spent in earning the right to possess these slips of green paper. And of all of those mentioned above, we seem to prefer the ones having the likeness of Woodrow Wilson.

The greatest promises that have ever been made are not on the faces of $100,000 government bills nor even the promise book of a wonderful Girl Scout, but the greatest promises have been made by the God of Creation himself. And our holy scriptures are the most magnificent of our great promise books. In fact, someone has compared the sacred scriptures to a great collection of promissory notes. God has never given a commandment to which he did not attach the promise of a blessing. The value of this blessing always far exceeds the amount of the service given. For example, through Malachi he said that we ought to pay our tithing. He said: "Bring ye all of the tithes into the storehouse." That is the command. Then the blessing was attached when he said, ". . . and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it." (Malachi 3:10.) That is, if we keep his commandments, the blessings will be so great that we will be unable to contain them.

From the top of Mount Sinai, God said, "Honour thy father and thy mother." That is the command. Then the blessing is attached which says, "that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee." (Exodus 20:12.) He has said that if we obey the Word of Wisdom, we will receive the invaluable blessings of health. He referred to the Word of Wisdom as "a principle with promise," but all of his principles have promises attached. And if we live the celestial law, we will receive all of the blessings of the celestial kingdom, including the privilege of resurrecting celestial bodies and having celestial minds and celestial personalities.

Isn't it interesting that we can't even keep the Sabbath day holy without receiving a reward. We can't even think a good thought without being paid. And we can't think an evil thought without suffering a penalty. That just is not possible.

In one of his greatest promises, he has indicated that the success and welfare of our eternal lives are based on what we do in these few years of mortality. That is, the basic law of the universe is this immutable, inexorable, irrevocable, unchangeable law of the harvest that says, ". . . whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap" (Galatians 6:7), multiplied. It is one of the fundamental laws of our existence that everyone will be judged according to his works.

It is very interesting to try to place a figure on the number of God's commandments. It is even more exciting to try to place a value or a number on his promised blessings. And so far as I know, these numbers will be about the same. What an inspiring thought to know that we can build up the most tremendous eternal estate and bind the great God of heaven, the Creator of the universe, to the most magnificent promises possible. He himself has said: "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise." (D&C 82:10.)

One of the great characteristics of God is his desire to be bound in our service. In every age and with every people he has desired to make contracts or covenants of behavior through which it is possible for us to bind him to the most fantastic agreements in our interests. As a natural corollary to this idea, just think how profitable it can be for us to make out some promise books to God.

Robert Frost once wrote a striking poem entitled "Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening." He described the life's promises of a man who lived in the days before the automobile. One winter evening very late at night he was traveling through the woods in his horse-drawn sleigh. He stopped for a few minutes on a lonely road to enjoy the beauty of the snow falling so softly among the silent trees. He said that he was watching the woods fill up with snow. However, he could not linger for very long, as he had some important duties to perform. Whether he was a doctor out making late calls or doing some other important human service, I do not know, but he might have been representing any one of us when in concluding his poem he said:

The woods are lovely, dark and deep,

But I have promises to keep,

And miles to go before I sleep,

And miles to go before I sleep.

Abraham Lincoln said: "I am not bound to win, but I am bound to be true. I am not bound to succeed, but I am bound to live by the best light that I have. I will stand with anyone who stands right, and I will part with anybody when he goes wrong." There are many wonderful promises that we may make and keep. We make some sacred promises to God at the waters of baptism. We make others when we are ordained to the priesthood or called in any important divine service. We go into the holy temples and make God a party to our sacred marriage promises. We promise God that we will be righteous. We give some promise books to our wives that we will make them happy. We give some promise books to our children that they will be loved and educated.

Governments were instituted by God for the benefit of man, and he holds each of us personally responsible for our acts in relation thereto. We reaffirm those promises when we sing our national anthem and take our pledge of allegiance to the flag. Each of us who lives under the stars and stripes has inherited a responsibility for our country's safety, and one of our greatest opportunities is to make our nation greater and better than it would have been. Nathan Hale gave a promise book to his country and just before he was hanged by his government's enemies, he made the last entry in which he said, "I only regret that I have but one life to lose for my country."

Martin Treptow was also a great soldier and was killed in the battle of Chateau Thierry in 1918 in World War I. In the diary found on his body were written these words, "I will work, I will save, I will sacrifice, I will endure, I will fight cheerfully and do my utmost as though the entire conflict depended upon me alone." Such patriotism should inspire us as the young wife did the Girl Scout.

In 1852, John Ruskin wrote in his diary, "Today I promise God that I will live as though every doctrine contained in the holy scriptures was true." And if each one of us were inspired to emulate his example and with great integrity and character back up our promise that we would live by his every word, this earth would soon be God's paradise, and we would be the greatest generation that has ever lived upon it. And why not?

To begin with, God created us. He has granted unto us our lives, for which we will be forever indebted to him. But when we do any righteous thing, he does immediately bless us with manifold blessings, and our debt is increased. He has told us the sure way to eternal exaltation and eternal happiness, and if we make our covenants and keep our promises, no blessing will be withheld from us. In one of the greatest of all his promises the Lord said, "For he that receiveth my servants receiveth me; And he that receiveth me receiveth my Father; And he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him. And this is according to the oath and covenant which belongeth to the priesthood. Therefore, all those who receive the priesthood, receive this oath and covenant of my Father, which he cannot break, neither can it be moved." (D&C 84:36-40.)

Try to think of something more exciting or worthwhile than to be a part of that great enterprise in which God himself spends his entire time. How much better it is for us to be great human beings, to obey the law, to keep the commandments, to build up our balance with God, and to qualify for his promises. Before we can keep his commandments, we need to know what they are and have strong convictions about them. The kind of promises we make to God will not only determine the kind of people we will become, but they will also determine his promises that will be fulfilled in our behalf. And so we say again with Robert Frost:

The woods are lovely, dark and deep,

But I have promises to keep,

And miles to go before I sleep,

And miles to go before I sleep.
