Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Age of Power

THE PARTICULAR period in which we live has been called by many names, both good and bad. Our day is noted for its delinquencies, its crimes, and its sins. Jesus looked down to our time and made some rather uncomplimentary comparisons for us when he said, "But as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be." (Matthew 24:37.)

He also pointed out that our age should be characterized by its destructive wars and the serious disturbances that would be taking place in nature. The apostle Paul also saw our day even better than some of us do and he said, "... in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away." (2 Timothy 3:1-5.)

Other prophets have seen our day and have held up for view a great long list of our problems. It may be true that we constitute the most wicked age; if that is so, it may be that life is trying to keep the balance even because our age also has the longest list of positives.

The world's greatest knowledge explosion has taken place in our day. We are also the beneficiaries of the most fantastic inventions. We enjoy the greatest comforts, the finest luxuries, and the biggest food supply. It is also one of the most important religious ages. While looking forward to our day, the apostle Paul called it "the dispensation of the fulness of times," when God would "gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him." (Ephesians 1:10.) It was in our day and for earth's present people that the gospel was restored in its greatest fullness. It is the people of our present age who have split the atom. And certainly one of the most apt descriptions of our day would be to call it the Age of Power.

It is interesting to remember that our forefathers lived on a flat, stationary earth and plowed their ground with a wooden stick, whereas we live on an earth of power steering and jet propulsion. It was not many years ago that most of the work of the world was done by the puny muscle power of men and animals, but now our giant power equipment can literally move mountains. Almost every inch of our earth is loaded with potential power both on its surface and in its depths. God buried in the ground for our benefit billions of tons of coal, oil, and uranium.

The earth itself is a giant magnet with its great lines of force producing tremendous power. Both the water and the air are filled with electrical power. There is power in the rays of the sun, and the sixteen miles of atmosphere over our heads are also loaded with power. The air furnishes us power for our lungs and our combustion engines, and it keeps our airplanes aloft. God also gave another great gift of power to our earth when he covered it with sixteen inches of topsoil. Our topsoil has enough production power that over a few years it can produce a pile of potatoes twenty feet high and still have its sixteen inches of topsoil left. Scientists have now discovered how to produce vast amounts of heat and power by burning water. The great powers of our earth have produced some fantastic miracles.

We fly through the stratosphere faster than sound. We can live in the depths of the sea or sail under the polar ice cap. With our tremendous farm machinery, our fertilizers, and our know-how, one man can produce more food than thousands of those men represented by the parable of the Sower. Jesus told of the man who went forth to sow and some of the few seeds thrown out by his hand fell among the rocks, some got mixed up with the thorns and the thistles, and some lay upon the hard ground until they were eaten up by the birds. Any good farmer can imagine the starvation return that would result from this back-breaking, lackluster toil.

However, God did not put his greatest power into machinery or even into the atoms. He put his greatest power into the man who makes the machinery and splits the atoms. But above all of these, by far the greatest power in the universe is the power of God. By his power he created and controls the universe. The night before his crucifixion Jesus said that he could command the services of twelve legions of angels to fight in his behalf. However, during his antemortal existence he did many unimaginable things. God said: "And worlds without number have I created;... and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten." (Moses 1:33.) John mentions this same idea when he said of the antemortal Christ, "All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made that was made." (John 1:3.)

Jesus himself said: "All power is given me in heaven and in earth." (Matthew 28:18.) And we might try to imagine the extent of his present power. Through his power worlds come into existence and others pass away. At his decree nations rise or fall. The time is very near when he will come to the earth again with great power and glory, accompanied by his mighty angels in flaming fire. Jesus has power over life and death and every detail of our existence. He is the light of the sun and the power by which it was made. One of the primary purposes of his life is to give us power. And more than almost any other thing, that is what we are in greatest need of both here and hereafter. We have the power of repentance, the power of excellence, the power to be like God. Emerson said, "Do the thing and you shall have the power." That is, we learn to do by doing. Certainly our age of power is no place for incompetents, cowards, and weaklings. But the apostle John gives us a profitable direction for attaining power when he says of us and of Christ: "But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God...." (John 1:12.) We need the power to build character, the power to overcome temptation, the power to destroy the weaknesses and sins in ourselves.

The two angels who were sent to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah had the power to call down fire and brimstone upon those two ancient, wicked cities, and God has given us the power to destroy every vestige of wickedness and trouble from our own lives. Paul said to Timothy, "For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power and of love, and of a sound mind." (2 Timothy 1:7.) And with these three we can work almost any miracle.

The Lord gave the sealing power to Peter when he said, "And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven that whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: ... and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (Matthew 16:19.) And the dictionary says that power is the physical, mental, or moral ability to act. It is that capacity for extraordinary performance that we ourselves may develop. This great power has to do with such mental and bodily functions as thinking, believing, judging, willing, and progressing. Because of the increased evil of our day, we need a much greater power to overcome our more difficult problems. We need more thinking power and more character power, and more doing power.

We see some people who have political power, some who have financial power, and some who have physical power. There are many ways that we may develop greater personal power. Each of us has within himself fantastic abilities and potential powers that may presently be unknown to him. These may be aroused by a little study and exercise. We can wield a much greater power of example. There is a great power in love. There is a great power in godliness.

Tennyson's hero called Sir Galahad said, "My strength is as the strength of ten, Because my heart is pure." A roadside billboard for an oil company says, "A clean engine produces power." And so does a clean mind, a great ambition, and a righteous heart. We have a great power in our ability to plan. No one generates more power than the planner, the thinker, the organizer, the doer. He is the one who draws the blueprint for success. He is the one who builds the roadway on which every accomplishment will travel.

It takes power to overcome any evil and bring about every righteous accomplishment. Jesus said of his own mortal life, "I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again." (John 10:18.) And if we live by his principles, God will also give us the power over death. We may also have all of the power necessary to bring about God's promises of an eternal life, an eternal success, an eternal happiness, and our own eternal progression.

It should be of utmost interest to us that all powers are based on obedience to the laws of righteousness. It is the natural law of weakness that when one becomes drunken, disobedient, dishonest, he is enslaved by his evil habits and therefore loses his power. Satan is evil and the full consequences of his deeds will sometime catch up with him. Then he will lose his power and will be confined forever in hell, chained to the evil that he has developed. But in various degrees, this same situation will also prevail with those of us in this life who let weakness and sin rule our lives. Then if we are to be saved, even in the lowest kingdom, it must be through the cleansing fires of hell. But those who follow God will develop the strength and power of righteousness with the natural consequences of those blessings of happiness, everlasting life, and eternal progression. And of us it may then be said, as it was of God himself, "For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever." (Matthew 6:13.)
