Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Will to Do

IN PLANNING for any successful accomplishment, we should include in our research some studies having to do with those great potential powers that God has made available to us in our own minds and personalities. One of the most exciting of all of our human opportunities is our tremendous God-given gift of free agency. In one of his most significant declarations, God said to man: "... thou mayest choose for thyself." (Moses 3:17.) But in addition to giving us the right to choose, he has also given us the ability to bring any of our projected accomplishments about. We sometimes refer to this giant human power as "will power."

The dictionary says that will power is that energy or force of will that we express in our purpose, our resolution, our determination, and our strength of mind. Tennyson referred to someone with an "iron will." And we think of one who is strong-willed as one who has some definite goals that are supported by strong convictions and real enthusiasms. It is the will that moves the intellect to action. It is by our wills and our intelligence that we are able to overcome evil. It has been said that appetite is the will's solicitor and the will is appetite's controller.

Any worthwhile accomplishment involves a strong desire or a powerful intention or a resolute determination strong enough to control our activities. By the power of one's will he may also control his emotions, his thoughts, and the outcome of what he does. We sometimes speak of the will to win, the will to live, the will to endure, the will to grow, the will to excellence, and the will to make our lives successful.

Ernest Hendly was a helpless cripple when he wrote "Invictus." He said:

Out of the night that covers me,

Black as the Pit from pole to pole,

I thank whatever gods may be

For my unconquerable soul.

In the fell clutch of circumstance,

I have not winced nor cried aloud;

Under the bludgeonings of chance

My head is bloody, but unbowed,

Beyond this veil of wrath and tears

Looms but the horror of the shade

And yet the menace of the years

Finds and shall find me unafraid.

It matters not how strait the gate,

How charged with punishments the scroll,

I am the master of my fate:

I am the captain of my soul.

It is by this power of the will that we overcome all indecision and uncertainty. We settle all internal conflicts by the act or the experience of willing.

Great character values are always lost when our wills lose their tone or become flabby and weak. With a weak will we become like the weathercock that is blown about by every passing wind or the chameleon that changes its color in every environment, where it has no goal and no destiny.

The will becomes inoperative in the case of those who are feebleminded or intoxicated or who lack a sense of responsibility. Sometimes people can be hypnotized and placed under the control or the will of somebody else. It is easy to become enslaved by evil and weakness. On the other hand, a firm continuous exercise of a stable will builds up power that makes us stronger than anything that can happen to us. Will power eliminates danger.

Someone has expressed the philosophy of his will by saying:

Night swoops on me with blackest wings,

But I'll succeed.

I see the stars that darkness brings

And I'll succeed.

No force on earth can make me cower

Because each moment and each hour

I still affirm with strength and power

I shall succeed.

That is a marvelous philosophy of success. It is by the will that we establish goals and build habits around them. As it has been said, the strongest power in the world is the power of habit. It is stronger than education or discipline.

Someone has said that what the rails are to the streamliner, habit is to our success. As the rails support and guide the streamliner, so habit supports and guides our success. One of the chief exercises of the will is to bring about our own success by establishing in ourselves those habits of thinking, planning, working, and believing.

God is all-wise and all-powerful, and we can learn what his will is concerning us and then build strong habits around our obedience to it. What an exciting idea to try to understand the will power of God or how it would improve us and our world to join with Jesus, who is our example in following God's will concerning us. To do the will of his Father was probably the most important principle involved in the Master's success. On all occasions he said to his Father, "... not my will, but thine, be done." (Luke 22:42.) If we can develop great convictions and a great appetite to do the will of the Lord in every detail, then the greatest success is fully assured to us.

Sometimes we make this serious mistake of being spasmodic and uncertain in the control of our will. When we allow too many exceptions to success, we are doing as much toward tearing it down as we are toward building it up. One secret of the Master's excellence was that he allowed no deviations or exceptions to righteousness. There were no leaks in his enthusiasm and no chinks in his armor where weakness or evil could get a foothold.

Will power is made up of many things, such as appetite, ambition, desire, love, and industry, but it should not be confused with those elements of conflict and struggle. For many persons, will power has come to signify strain, tension, repression, misery, and compulsion. We sometimes think of will power as the unpleasant way to get ourselves to do something that we do not want to do. Jesus said. "... he that endureth to the end shall be saved." (Matthew 10:22.) And endurance has come to mean a time of suffering and unpleasant hanging on to our ideals by sheer force. There are some people who do not like to get up on time in the morning, and so when their conscience or necessity tells them to get up and their flesh and lethargy tells them to stay in bed, they lie there and carry on an unpleasant battle that almost always ends in failure and a kind of nervous instability. A much better way would be for one to point out to himself all of the advantages of wanting to get up on time and make it pleasant for himself to get up on time. If we were going to get a thousand dollars each time we got up on time, that would make us really want to get up, and our accomplishment would then be certain.

An effective assertion of the will makes all things not only easy but pleasant. Because we don't understand this principle of willing, we very frequently defeat ourselves by saying it is hard to live our religion, and to live a good life is so difficult and unpleasant that we cannot be expected to do it. This may be true if we have already given evil activities and unholy ambitions such a great power over our lives that we are enslaved, intoxicated, or hypnotized by them. But it is not true that evil is more pleasant than good or that the state of failure is happier than success.

It is just as easy for an honest man to be honest as it is for a dishonest man to be dishonest. It is much easier for a good man to do good than for a good man to do evil. However, it is much easier for an evil man to do evil than for an evil man to do good. A life of sin and unrighteousness would have been the most difficult path for Jesus to have followed. On the other hand, goodness and righteousness would be impossibly difficult for Satan. We are not paying ourselves compliments when we confess a greater desire to be traitors than patriots, or to be criminals than good citizens, or to be lazy than industrious. We are selling ourselves short when we make such false and evil generalities as to say, "Everybody's doing it" or "I suppose it would be more pleasant for me to go to hell because most of my friends will be there." The original meaning of will was desire, wish, to prefer; and to build up a great will power would mean that we cultivate a strong love of righteousness and success and a firm determination to avoid every evil and every failure.

If one allowed himself to get very sick with lung cancer by smoking cigarettes, then he might truthfully say it is very difficult to get well, but if he would prevent or dispose of the evil before it causes the disease, health would be the natural result even without effort. And so it is that by breaking the commandments of the Lord we produce stronger appetites for evil in ourselves. Then we might properly say that it is difficult to live our religion, or we cannot be expected to keep all of God's commandments. No success is easy if we first build up a lot of alibis, rationalizations, and antagonism to fight against it. If one wants to be successful, he must make success easy to attain. We always have great power to do those things that we love to do and that we do well, and the secret of will power is in building up a great love for accomplishment and righteousness.

There is also a great opportunity to strengthen the will by increasing our knowledge, our understanding, and our good judgment. Will power is that process by which the mind makes the right choices and is prepared for any effort to overcome the obstacles that would bar the way or the contrary desires that would neutralize effort. We ought to set the machinery of our life toward developing will power instead of won't power. We ought to love God instead of Satan. We should gear our life to success instead of failure, mediocrity, or neutrality.

A psychiatrist once asked a mental patient if he ever had any trouble in making up his mind. The mental patient said, "Well, yes and no." This is probably our own biggest problem. There are too many yes-and-no people who have not made up their minds between good and evil, right and wrong, failure and success.

Recently a man with a serious moral transgression was discussing his problem. It was said to him: "What do you think is going to happen when the next temptation presents itself?" He said, "How can I tell what I will do until I know what the temptation is?" It is easy to predict the future result of such irresolution. That is, because he hasn't made up his mind to begin with, if the temptation has a strong attraction to him, he will fall. If the temptation has only weak appeal, he will be able to resist.

We should thoroughly understand what is good and what is bad in life and then make some firm determination to accept the one and reject the other. The greatest example of success is God. He does not vacillate nor does he fall down before every temptation, because his mind is made up. He "cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance." (D&C 1:31.) God has will power. He loves righteousness, and by learning his will we can make its power our own. In yes-and-no people the will and the judgment are in continual conflict, and they are consigned thereby to the lower levels of success unnecessarily.

If we desire to develop this miraculous ability called will power, then we need to develop good judgment and fine convictions and the ability to eliminate conflicts. Then every success is placed within our easy reach.
