Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Action and Reaction

ONE OF the greatest ideas in our world is represented by the little three letter word act. Nothing has very much significance until something has moved. The battle cry of success is action. The power to act is the power to accomplish. To act is to work, to function, to operate, and to become. An act is the mainspring of existence. It contains the seeds of motivation and the fruits of achievement. We generate fears and failures while we sit, whereas courage and success are born out of activity.

One of the greatest compliments that can be paid to anyone is to say that he is a man of action. Where there is no activity, there is nothing. The chief characteristic of life as well as the greatest of all of our possessions is the power to do things. A stone may lie unmoving and unthinking on the mountainside for a billion years, and it accomplishes nothing. But God created man in his own image and gave him these miraculous gifts of movement, thought, love, and joy, which altogether we call life.

Life is that mysterious primal element in which God himself has his being. It was said of God: "In him was life; and the life was the light of men." (John 1:4.) The Creator has also placed that godly intelligence and the ability to take limitless action in his greatest creation—man. Through our great gift of free agency we have an unlimited ability to make any desired movement in any direction at any speed. However, action has a kind of opposite motion that is called reaction. Instead of our responses coming from our minds and wills, they sometimes come from our prejudices or emotions. Our responses frequently come as rebounds from some other things. Then instead of acting, we are being acted upon.

The dictionary says that reaction is to exert a reciprocal or counteracting force or influence. In one of his excellent articles entitled "Do You Act or React?" Sydney J. Harris says:

The other night I walked with my Quaker friend to the newsstand. He bought a paper, and politely thanked the newsie. However, the newsie didn't even acknowledge it.

"A sullen fellow, isn't he?" I commented.

"Oh, he's that way every night," shrugged my friend.

"Then why do you continue to be so polite to him?" I asked.

"Why not?" inquired my friend. "Why should I let him decide how I am going to act?"

As I later thought about this incident, it occurred to me that the important word was act. My friend acts toward people whereas most of us react. My friend has a fine sense of inner balance which is lacking in so many of us. He knows who he himself is, what he stands for, and how he should behave, and he refuses to let anyone get him off the track. If he should return incivility for incivility he would lose command of his own conduct.

Nobody is more unhappy than the perpetual reactor, because he is always at the mercy of everyone else's whims. His center of emotional gravity is not rooted within himself where it belongs, but it is in the world outside him. His temperature is always being raised or lowered by every social climate in which he finds himself, and he becomes a mere creature at the mercy of these elements.

False praise gives a reactor a feeling of groundless elation. Criticism depresses him. Real or imaginary snubs hurt him, and the merest suspicion of unpopularity generates bitterness in him. Serenity cannot be achieved in us until we become the masters of our own actions and determine our own attitudes. To let another person decide for us whether we shall be rude or gracious, elated or depressed, successful or unsuccessful is to relinquish control over ourselves, and control is ultimately about all that any of us possess. The only true possession is self-possession. One of the profitable projects of our lives is to learn to conduct our activities according to that God-given intelligence within us instead of throwing away our self-control and allowing ourselves to react according to what goes on around us.

A few years ago I had an ordinary cold. Because it seemed to hang on a little longer than it should have done, I went to a doctor who gave me a shot of penicillin. Instead of the medicine taking the curative action of killing the disease, as the doctor had intended, my whole system set up a violent reaction to the penicillin itself and induced in me a far more serious sickness than the one brought on by the disease. The reaction caused a rash to break out that completely covered my body and put me out of commission for several days.

But our problems become even worse when we get into the habit of substituting reaction for intelligent action. We bring many of our most serious diseases upon ourselves when we spend our energy reacting to the faults and failings of others. About this subject in our own day the Lord has said:

My disciples, in days of old, sought occasion against one another and forgave not one another in their hearts; and for this evil they were afflicted and sorely chastened.

Wherefore, I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin. (D&C 64:8-9.)

Someone has posed this question: "Suppose that you were bitten by a rattlesnake and had your choice between the following two courses, which would you take? First, you could chase and kill the rattlesnake, or second, you could get the poison out of your own system." Suppose that there was plenty of time to do either one but not enough time to do both. You can sit down quickly, open the wound, suck out the poison, and save your life, in which case the rattlesnake would get away. However, if you chased and killed the rattlesnake, by that time the poison would have gone all through your system and you would swell up and die. The right solution to that question may not be as simple as it sounds. Many people have such a strong sense of reaction that they even lose their eternal lives while killing rattlesnakes.

Some people react to their problems by getting drunk or becoming bitter or cursing God. There are people so burdened down with inferiority complexes that instead of curing the disease, they chase the rattlesnakes. Those people who want to tear down the establishment, overthrow the government, turn to crime, and join the hippies are reactionaries.

Recently a young woman came to talk about her problems. She was nice-looking and seemed like a very intelligent young woman, but she was a reactor. She had been immoral with three men, and each of her evils was a reaction to a disagreement with her boyfriend with whom she had never been immoral. She had always thought of herself as one with high principles and a good church member. However, because she now finds her actions in conflict with her beliefs, she has decided to try to solve her problem by withdrawing from church activity. If she took proper action, she would relieve the conflict by repenting of her sins. She merely reacts against her sins by committing more sins. She seems to think that by striking at her boyfriend and the Church, she might solve her problem, but each time that she kills a few more rattlesnakes, she herself will bloat up a little more.

In early days some Indians and some white men used to react to the death of one of their number by killing the next one of the opposite group that came within range. This reaction or rebounding, or this attempt to get even or to punish someone, causes many of our most serious difficulties. A reactor lives by rumors, impulses, senseless marches, and name calling when even the source of his problem is often in doubt.

Shakespeare was speaking of a thoughtful, righteous man of action when he said: "This above all: to thine own self be true, and it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man." (Hamlet, Act I, scene iii.)

When a person intelligently decides what is right and what is wrong, he is then able to use his mind and his will to take effective action. When anyone does anything right, he always has a feeling of peace and that his life itself is worthwhile. However, when one abandons his principles and becomes a reactionary, he gets into all kinds of troubles. When one can't tell whether he is responding to something because it is right or because he is a reactionary, then he gets all mixed up and doesn't know how to handle his problems.

A man was recently killed in an automobile accident, which naturally was a terrible shock to his wife. But instead of trying to solve her problems in the best possible way, she began a chain reaction. She somehow seems to have felt that her husband's death was God's fault. Therefore, she quit going to church. She began spending her tithing money for liquor and tobacco. She didn't like liquor or tobacco, but this seemed to her to be the best way to get even with God for letting her husband die. We can never solve our problems by offending God and making sinners out of ourselves.

One of the most important services that we might perform for ourselves is to build up our ability to take appropriate action in all things instead of turning ourselves into reactionaries. Such great words as ask, seek, knock, pray, love, work, and believe are action words, whereas hate, anger, revenge, lust, fear, and doubt indicate reaction.

There is a story to the effect that the President of the United States once asked Robert E. Lee to give him his opinion about the capability of a certain man who was being considered for a public office. Robert E. Lee gave the man a good report. Someone said to General Lee, "I can't understand why you have said so many nice things about that man when you know that he is saying many uncomplimentary things about you." General Lee said, "I understood that the President wanted my opinion of him, not his opinion of me."

So many of our sins are not because we want to do wrong, but because we are not using our best judgment. We are merely reacting to someone or something. There is a very constructive philosophy that we should remember that says, "I will not let mine enemy make me sin." Rather, we should make good out of every situation. Edgar A. Guest identified both of these situations in his poem "The Trick." He said:

I noticed as soon as I opened the door

that the fellow was surly, and so

with a frown just as black as the one that he wore

I angrily told him to go.

Now I hadn't the slightest intention to be

as surly, uncivil and hateful as he,

but that was the trick that he played upon me.

Another chap came to my doorstep that day,

and a twinkle he had in his eye.

With a smile on his face he began in a way

that prompted a gentle reply.

Though a stranger he was, I was eager to be

as gracious, good-natured, and kindly as he,

and that was the trick that he played upon me.

Since those visits I've thought in this life that we live

and the lesson seems simple to learn:

We get back a smile for the smile that we give

and a frown brings a frown in return.

If I chuckle, with chuckles I'll surely be met.

Just as I set my lips, so all lips will be set.

And that is a trick that I mustn't forget.

There is another wonderful action story told about a little slave girl on the auction block during the Civil War. A prospective buyer approached her and said, "If I buy you and give you a good home and feed you well and treat you kindly, will you promise me that you will be honest?" This wonderful little slave girl said: "I will promise to be honest whether you buy me and treat me kindly or not."

We have a great concern about protecting our material treasures and possessions, but our greatest treasures are the possessions of our own person. It is with our judgments and the kinds of decisions that we make that all good things are determined. All of us will be judged according to our works. This makes taking proper action the greatest of all of our opportunities. It is by our power to act that we may become even as God is.
