Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Agenda

ONE OF the most effective means by which any leadership accomplishment can be brought about is the habitual use of a good, well-planned agenda. An agenda is usually thought of as a list of items arranged in logical order with necessary information attached so that certain subjects may be taken up and discussed at a meeting called for that purpose.

The dictionary describes an agenda as a memorandum of responsibilities to be performed. It is a list of important duties that should be taken care of. Of course, before the agenda can be prepared, the matters to be decided have to be fully planned so that the agenda can be put down in writing. When the agenda has been thoughtfully prepared, the problems will have been partly solved. The dictionary points out an interesting relationship between the word agenda and the word credenda. An agenda is a list of duties that should be taken care of, and a credenda is a list of doctrines that should be believed in. In these two words we see something of the traditional conflict that has always been going on between our deeds and our creeds. Usually a good business practice dictates that when a meeting is called so that important matters may be discussed, a letter should be sent out with the call outlining the matters that are to be considered.

A written explanation of what will be on the agenda will encourage those planning the meeting to more carefully think through the matters that will be considered, and those involved may have all supplementary material available and on hand. It will also enable those attending to make all necessary preparations to protect their own interests and those of the company.

However, if those conducting an important meeting do not have a well worked-out agenda in writing, the meeting may not be nearly as productive. Those present may then have to guess at the pertinent facts and depend upon their memories, which may not be very dependable. A good agenda also has several other uses. I know a very successful salesman who makes up a written agenda for himself before he undertakes any important sale. He usually has a fact-finding interview with the prospect, and then in a kind of sales rehearsal he makes a written outline of the specific points that he feels should be made. Every good salesman needs an agenda of facts, thoughts, and reasons as to why and how the sale can best be made.

In addition to making an agenda for every sale, a good salesman may also make an agenda for each of those days, weeks, months, and years that are soon to become a part of his career. A good agenda, prepared and written down well in advance of its date of use, will help to mature his thinking and keep him on course so that his program will not be disrupted by unscheduled attractions.

I know a man who does a great deal of personal interviewing. He has an agenda of questions to use that have been well worked out in advance. This way he is certain that he will get all of the necessary information, and when he fills in the prospect's answers to these well-considered questions, he also gets written minutes of the interview. And in addition to the answers, he also gets the prospect's attitudes and ambitions.

However, there is at large a conflicting philosophy to the agenda that allows many people to hold their meetings, conduct their business, and make their sales on a kind of hit-and-miss basis. Because these people do things only as they occur to them, they never put very much planning or thought into their work. Rather, they just act on their impulses with whatever may come into their hands or minds. This lesser philosophy, featuring a lack of planning, is expressed in the recurring theme of the song which says, "Doing What Comes Naturally." Such people allow themselves to be governed largely by conditions or by whichever wind may be blowing at the moment.

Dr. Leon Tucker, a great teacher of the Bible, used to tell a story of a lady who had poor health. As her friends would ask her how she was, she would usually reply, "I am feeling as well as could be expected under the circumstances." Then in making a comparison to another kind of poor health, Dr. Tucker said that "far too many people, including a lot of Christians, allow themselves to live most of their lives 'under the circumstances.'" Everyone is far more successful when he lives above and ahead of and beyond the circumstances. Someone once said to Napoleon, "How are conditions?" The great emperor replied, "I make conditions." When we live at our best, so do we make our conditions.

As Julius Caesar was in the process of conquering the world, he was once crossing a rough sea during a severe storm. The captain of the boat was expressing his serious concern for the safety of those for whom he had responsibility. Then his famous guest said to him, "Fear not, thy boat carries Caesar." In the beginning God created man in his own image and gave him dominion over everything upon the earth, including himself. When we fail to control our conditions, our conditions will control us. When we succumb to our temptations or allow ourselves to be overpowered by our weaknesses, we are living under the circumstances.

In excusing his mediocrity, a salesman once said to his sales manager, "I think I did pretty well under the circumstances." His manager said, "What in the world were you doing way down there?"

That is a good question for many of us to ask ourselves. However, if we had a good agenda, planned well in advance, thoughtfully considered and completely followed, we would always be the master of our circumstances. But when we have no recognized official agenda, we then let all kinds of unauthorized activities get into our programs.

Frequently we wait to see what our circumstances are going to be before we make up our minds about what kind of people we are going to be. We wait on luck, chance, conditions, and the devil.

Often when one associates with those who drink or smoke or take dope or tell lies, he feels that under the circumstances it might be well for him to do these things also, no matter how unprofitable they may be. We excuse our lack of judgment by saying, "When in Rome, do as the Romans do." As a result, when someone breathes the air of dishonesty, atheism, or immorality, we frequently have a strong inclination to take up the habit. We reason that if others are doing it, it must be all right. However, the philosophy of "everybody's doing it" is a doctrine of weakness and evil.

Someone once said to his friend, "But for a jerk, don't you think that I have come quite a long way?" Jerks and sinners don't have a strong, well-planned agenda to which they have made a whole-hearted commitment. A good agenda greatly reduces the chances for errors and the necessity for making snap judgments. Our agenda tells us what should be on the program and what should be left off. It is sometimes illegal, unconstitutional, and unfair to take action on any matter that is not listed on the agenda in advance. It is also unprofitable and unwise.

Somebody has figured out that there are at least two ways to pack a trunk. One way is to have a place prepared for everything and then see that everything goes into its place. One compartment may be prepared for your shoes, one for your shirts, and all of the other items are exactly fitted in those places where they belong. Then all available space will be utilized to the best possible advantage. The other way to pack a trunk is to dump all of the contents into the trunk helter-shelter, with no order and no priorities. That is, the trunk has no agenda.

I know of a doctor who packs his office by loading it helter-skelter with patients who are required to wait for hours before their turn comes. I don't know how successful he may be in his efforts to save their health, but he is certainly very successful in wasting their time. This doctor would do well if he were to learn a little more about how to organize his day. A lot of us would do well if we were to learn how to better organize our lives.

Therefore, what are we going to do about organizing an agenda for ourselves? Certainly there isn't time for us to make all of the possible mistakes personally. This is also a luxury that we can't afford. And when we say "Everybody's doing it," we are just kidding ourselves. Some people are doing some wrong things and some are doing other wrong things, but no one ever does all of them. Because it is impossible to take advantage of all of the good experiences, we therefore need some kind of a system of priorities. We ought to sit down and work out what we want on our own life's agenda.

Somebody has said that the four most important dates in anyone's life are these: (1) the day he is born, when a new life comes into being; (2) the date that he is married—that is, when a new family is organized; (3) the day he selects his life's work, which will determine the amount and kind of his service and his own self-development, and (4) the date on which he dies—that is, the day he graduates from life with either honors or dishonors.

Henry Thoreau once said that we should thank God every day of our lives for the privilege of having been born. Then he went on to speculate on the rather unique supposition of what it might have been like if we had never been born, and he pointed out some of the excitement and accomplishments that we would have missed as a consequence. However, what Mr. Thoreau may not have known was that one-third of all of the children of God never were born and never can be born because they didn't comply with God's agenda prepared for their first estate. When Lucifer rebelled against God, someone in the propaganda field said, "Everybody's doing it," and as a consequence all of them failed to graduate into their second estate.

Every spirit child of God hungers for a body. Those unembodied spirits who appeared to Jesus in his day preferred the bodies of swine rather than to have no bodies at all. However, with our present battery of birth control pills and our high abortion rate, we are making it pretty tough even for those who passed the requirements of their first estate to be born.

Among many other success devices, we ought to have a good education placed high on our life's agenda. We should follow the instruction of Jesus and be born again so that we could become devoted members of his kingdom. We should put a godly character and a temple marriage on the agenda. We ought to make sure that the quality of our faith and our works will entitle us, upon graduation from this life, to enter into the celestial kingdom. It is important that we understand that every principle and every ordinance of the gospel has to do with the celestial kingdom. That is, if we are only interested in the lower kingdoms, it is not necessary to keep our minds healthy and our bodies clean. However, if we plan to qualify for the presence of God in celestial glory, we should put all of the Ten Commandments on the agenda to be lived under the strictest discipline, and we had better leave off the agenda all of those things about which God has given us those stern warnings, saying, "Thou shalt not."

If the enticement of liquor and atheism and immorality were forbidden by God when he stood on the top of Mount Sinai, then we had better not include them in any program for our lives. We should never make a decision in anger or fear or undue haste. A great businessman once said that one of the best aids to success was for everyone, before undertaking any accomplishment, to make up a list of those things which he just must not do under any circumstances. The Lord thundered one such list from the top of Mount Sinai some 3400 years ago. If we definitely make up our minds about those things that we must not do, then we will have all of our time free for those things that we should do.

Every one of God's great commands comes to us with a blessing of righteousness, prosperity, and happiness attached. The scriptures are just a great collection of promissory notes. We ought to make sure we have the ability to plan, organize, and follow the great agenda that God has prepared in the holy scriptures.
