Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Alienation of Affections

IT IS likely that the most important influences in our lives are determined by what we like the most. Life's quality depends on what we are attracted to, and whom we fall in love with, and what we have an appetite for. When we have some definite desires propelled by strong motivations, we can reach almost any planned objective. An unwavering desire for good things produces a power that God himself recognizes. A great prophet once said: "God grants unto every man according to his desires."

The primary principle of any success is to believe in it effectively and to want it vigorously. On the other hand, the chances for any accomplishments being reached are seriously reduced when our attractions and loves and appetites and desires are reduced in size or when we are working with a confused focus.

Of course all contrary influences tend to destroy our interests and turn our ambitions in some other direction. There is an interesting phrase found in the dictionary called "the alienation of affections." This refers to a destructive estrangement that makes one indifferent, unfriendly, or hostile to that which he had previously loved. This phrase describes a condition in which some previously profitable attachment is broken.

Then an existing love may be withdrawn or a faith may be liquidated or one's affections are transferred to another by being diverted from their natural channels. Many years ago this phrase, "alienation of affections" used to be a common court pleading in divorce lawsuits. Some third party was named as having broken up the happy relationship between a man and his wife. It was often claimed that an accused person had caused a transfer of a spouse's affections to himself from the plaintiff, who had a better right to them. Many have claimed that their spouse's love for them has been destroyed because she was improperly or unfairly persuaded that she had married beneath her station, or that her husband was too stingy or too selfish. Some women have been accused of taking advantage of some other woman's husband by flattering him about virtues that he did not possess or offering him charms with which the wife was not able to compete. All kinds of insidious alienation of affection campaigns have been carried on to pervert the minds of people with lies and enticements and every other kind of consideration.

One of literature's classic examples of alienation of affection is found in Shakespeare's tragedy of Othello. Othello was very much in love with his beautiful and virtuous wife, Desdemona. Othello was a famous general in the wars conducted by the Venetians against the Turks. However, Othello had one serious weakness in that he had a very jealous nature.

Capitalizing on this fault, his crafty and traitorous friend, Iago, poisoned Othello's mind against his own wife. In philosophizing about jealousy, Shakespeare says, "Trifles light as air are to the jealous confirmations strong as proofs of holy writ. . . . Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons, which act upon the blood and burn like mines of sulphur."

Finally, blind with rage and certain that his most virtuous wife had been untrue to him, Othello strangled her. His jealous, unreasonable mind told him that he must destroy her before she betrayed someone else. Almost immediately after her death, Othello learned the truth, and he stabbed himself and died by the side of his wife.

Othello's affections for his wife were alienated by jealousy incited by misinformation. But, alienation of affections, while not frequently mentioned in our own day of easy divorce, still leads the list as the reason for broken homes. The causes of divorce are not only jealousy; mental cruelty, immorality, dishonesty, nonsupport, boredom, and incompatability have all been added to the list.

Nowdays we don't need to wait for some third party to alienate our wife's affections, as there are so many interesting ways to make ourselves financially, religiously, and personally offensive to each other. Suppose that we had some way of registering what the affections of a wife may be on a thermometer ten feet high that we could read. We would find that everything that happened between the marriage partners would change the readings in proportion either up or down.

Suppose that when we had been at our best the reading was at its maximum of 100. But then suppose that we gave the wife a good punch on the nose. In all probability we would discover that the mercury would drop off a few points. All of our inconsiderations, unfairness, untruthfulness, temper, unkindness, scorn, unrighteousness, negative attitudes, personality faults, and irresponsibilities would cause the mercury to continue to retreat until it reached the bottom.

Alienation of affections takes many other forms. A great proportion of the success that the Communists have had in building up their power has come to them as they have alienated the affections of other people from their own government. Satan is the father of lies and misrepresentation, which are the chief tools of alienation, and in this field the Communists are probably his most capable students. They have been called masters of deceit. Over and over again they have proven their superiority in stirring up trouble for other governments and sowing discord among other peoples. They know how to cause divisions among those they are trying to dominate. They are masters in causing rebellions and strikes against constituted authority. As soon as their victim's strength has been exhausted by internal alienation, they walk in and take over because their prey is now too weak to resist.

The Communists may be far behind us in agricultural production, in manufacturing, in individual enterprise, in religion, in freedom, and in self-government, but they lead all peoples in their various programs of subversion and misrepresentation. They have made great progress in their announced goal to make slaves of as many people as they can, and they are able to collect enough vassal tribute to make their evil enterprises profitable. It seems incredible that many intelligent groups of people are not able to figure out that a free enterprise among a free people is much better than force, slavery, and oppression. The long suit of the Communists is alienation of affections, the inspiration for which comes from Satan, the father of all evil.

In the grand council of heaven before this earth was, Lucifer rebelled against God and led one-third of all of the hosts of heaven after him. Satan was the originator of this idea of ruling people by force and is still its chief exponent. In several ways, we who live in America are very vulnerable to having our affections alienated because of the great amount of freedom that has been granted to both friend and foe alike.

Everyone is permitted full liberty to promote his own doctrine, whether it is good or bad. But we should remember that it is by this process of alienating the affections of good people from good things that the Communists hope to destroy both our freedom and our country. Above most other things, Satan and the Communists want to alienate us from our ideals. They want to destroy our love of liberty. They want to kill our respect for law and order and our love of beauty and harmony. They would like to turn us so strongly against war that we would rather serve as slaves than protect our rights as free men.

The dictionary says that an alien is a person of another family or another race or another place. An alien is a stranger who pays his allegiance to some other country or some other ideology. And many of these aliens, who owe their allegiance to other countries and other ideologies, are now trying to pervert our minds with falsehoods and misinformation from within our own ranks. They would like nothing better than to make us dislike ourselves. By the things that we are doing in our crime waves and our sins, we are not only destroying our own self-respect, but we are also doing things that will estrange us from God.

With our help, the Communists have already gone a long way in this endeavor. The scriptures foretell the fact that the people of our present world will so seriously offend God that he will finally be impelled to personally come to cleanse the earth of its sin. The alienation causing all of these problems is actually our own fault because of our own gullibility. Anyone who deliberately permits himself to be led into a wrong must also bear the responsibility and suffer the evil consequences.

There is an interesting companion word for alien in the dictionary called alienability. It refers to those who are easily fooled. It doesn't take much to persuade some people to transfer their allegiance to the alien powers of Satan and the Communists, even though slavery and death are plainly marked as the final result. Shakespeare says of one person: "He would not serve God if the devil bid him." Cain was one of those who wanted to play on the devil's team. The alienability of Cain is indicated by the scripture that says: ". . . Cain loved Satan more than God." (Moses 5:18.) Many people in our day also want to get into the devil's act and serve as a sponsor for evil, ugliness, and crime. The increase in crime indicates the acceleration with which we are transferring our allegiance away from God.

There are many to whom it may seem a small thing to throw away their love of God and their prospects of eternal glory. The number one success law of the world says: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matthew 22:37-40.) This doesn't allow much space for any double loyalties. By our disobedience to God's law and the increase in our participation in crime, sin, disorder, and the ugliness that stems from Satan, we surrender our allegiance to the Creator and submit to an alien.

It is interesting how clearly this period of alienation of affections was foreseen over nineteen hundred years ago. Jesus said, ". . . as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be." (Matthew 24:37.) And the apostle Paul says:

This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come.

For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy.

Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good.

Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God;

Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away.

For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts,

Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.

Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. (2 Timothy 3:1-8.)

But if we go over to Satan and continue beyond the point of no return, we will then be required to live with him. Now is the time for us to make some decisions about what kind of ideologies we want to be in love with. We might make our citizenship more secure by taking a good, solid, permanent, unyielding pledge of allegiance to that nation which God himself established for our benefit.

We should also take a pledge of allegiance to our wives and our families and to all those principles of righteousness on which our success and happiness are based. We might also make our own personal covenant to serve God and keep every one of his commandments. If our commitment is firm enough, and we are dedicated enough, then no matter how much we are courted by evil, we will remain true to righteousness.

We can't very well ride two horses in the same race. We can't look up and down simultaneously. We can't serve both God and Satan. When we break any of the laws of God, to that extent we go over to the enemy. With every sin we transfer some of our loyalties and break some of our natural attachments. With every sin a part of us is defecting to the enemy and causing an estrangement from God. But we are also transferring our blessings away from ourselves. How disappointed we may sometime be if we have to look to Satan for our blessings and our happiness.

Satan is an alien. The Communists are aliens; sin is an alien; crime is an alien; and slavery is an alien. Our own errors and weaknesses are aliens, and they are robbing us of our blessings. However, God is our friend. He is our eternal Heavenly Father. If we love him with all our hearts and serve him with all our strength, then we are safe. Our wives and families are to be with us throughout eternity. We must be loyal to them in the best meaning of that word. Righteousness is our only means for eternal happiness. Therefore we must avoid the alienation of our own affections and learn to be loyal citizens of God's kingdom.
