Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

All Mixed Up

RECENTLY I had the interesting though frustrating experience of losing my sense of direction. I started out to find an address in an area with a number of winding roads and some "afterthought" streets placed in the middle of the blocks. I thought I knew where I was going and how I was going to get there, but after following a street with a lot of turns in it, the direction-finder in my brain seemed to get stuck, somehow, so that it no longer registered my directional changes. I have had a similar experience on an airplane. As soon as I get on the plane, I usually get out a book that I have been anticipating reading, and because I pay very little attention, the airplane can make many turns while I continue facing in the direction that I was when I lost myself in my book.

I suppose that subconsciously I had been turning off my direction-finder too much, and when I had to be my own navigator I began having trouble. Then my mixed-up sense of direction told me that I was going north when I knew I was actually going east. Before I was aware of what was happening, I had gotten several blocks off course. In trying to get myself back on the right track, I stopped my car and tried to correctly orient myself. However, when one is badly mixed up, this is not an easy thing to do. My mental compass could be compared to a compass giving wrong directions because of the influence of some magnetized ore body close by. The occasional street markers were hard for me to understand. They were saying one thing, and my mixed-up brain was saying something else. The things that seemed true to my brain were denied by other evidences, and vice versa.

Finally I took the easy way out and asked a passerby if he would direct me to my address. He said, "If you will follow me, I will take you there." Then as I drove along behind him, I thought how many other important goals are placed within our reach if we have a dependable guide to follow.

In my life I have had some other confusing experiences. Once in a while I have a dream in which I can't remember where I parked my automobile. I don't seem to have the slightest recollection whether I left it in New York or London or Mexico City. In my dream it is tremendously important that I find my car, and my agitation over my loss fights with my confusion until I am almost exhausted mentally. At other times I have dreamed that I am an actor about to go on the stage, but for the life of me I can't remember my lines. Or I may be a student about to take a final examination for which I am completely unprepared. After one of these frustrating experiences, I wake up in a very disturbed mental state.

Then I feel a great sympathy for some of those troubled people to whom I listen occasionally who, in trying to solve life's important problems, say, "I am all mixed up." I can solve my frustrations merely by waking up, but some people are unable to arouse themselves and so must live with these frustrations and confusions twenty-four hours a day. My mind can be swung back to normal in a few minutes, but some people must live with this imbalance and frustration for the rest of their lives. I am sure that it seemed a very simple thing for my friend to lead me to my destination. Likewise, the moral, mental, social, and occupational mixups of others often seem very simple to me. But they just can't seem to get rid of that conflicting body of magnetized ore that is drawing them off their course and making it impossible to distinguish between north and east, right and wrong, or the causes of happiness and misery.

I suppose that I would not have become mixed up in the first place if I had paid more attention to where I was going. Or I probably could have saved myself from being confused if I had been a little better prepared with a street map, a compass, or just a better set of mental directions. Perhaps I could have solved my problems merely by centering my attention on what I was doing. The Bible speaks of double-minded men. I suppose that these are men who think double. Sometimes we set our minds on the wrong things; sometimes we think by a crooked process, and sometimes we don't think at all.

There are several things that I might do to help me remember where I parked my automobile. I could pay more attention or I could write myself a note and put it in my pocket. It has been said that a good file and a poor memory are a lot better than a good memory and a poor file. It may be that my mind punishes me occasionally in my dreams because I needlessly confuse and agitate it by asking it to remember too much.

Sometimes I make office appointments over the telephone while I am at home or verbally when I am on the street. If I try to carry them all in my mind, I am likely to forget some of them. This gives my mind a feeling of agitation and unrest for fear that it may fall down on its job. I am sure that my brain would appreciate it if I were a little more businesslike and wrote myself a memorandum so that it would be relieved of some of these unnecessary responsibilities. I might also decrease the possibility of confusion and frustration by more thoroughly making up my mind about standards and preparation. Then my brain would have no occasion to worry over either a bad performance or my lack of being prepared.

Anyway, after I had found my address and had attended to my business, I got back into the territory with which I was more familiar. Then my brain made a correction in its compass setting, and immediately everything was all right again, and I knew with perfect assurance which was north, which was east, where I was going, and how I was going to get there. Then my brain was in perfect agreement with the markings on the street corners. If there had been no markings, I still would have known where I was and what the street markings should have been. Then I felt that very satisfying feeling of peace and harmony that comes from the assurance of knowing the score. This feeling of peace and self-confidence furnishes a striking contrast to the frustration and frenzy that comes from feeling half lost.

Again I thought of the troubled people who complain of being mixed up. Some of them have a moral or social or spiritual compass that won't work. They sometimes get lost in their purposes. They are unable to trust themselves in any responsibility involving right and wrong. They don't always pay attention to the signboards that life and success have erected for their guidance, or they erect street markers to suit their own desires, without reference to where they will be taken. They frequently can't trust themselves or their abilities. Then they sometimes go in the wrong direction or do the wrong things when they actually don't mean to do so.

When I got back to my office, I got out my dictionary and looked up the meaning of this important word confusion. It said that for one to be confused was to be thrown into a condition of disorder. It said that confusion meant to be mixed up or to have things jumbled together so that one couldn't be distinguished from another. It is bad enough for one to be mixed up in his physical directions, but it is far more serious to be confused about one's cultural or moral values. It can be pretty serious when one gets mixed up in the objectives by which his life's successes are determined.

There are many kinds of confusion, making it difficult to discriminate between right and wrong, and we actually make many false identifications and false judgments because we haven't properly set up our standards or made up our minds about our own programs. One does a lot of things when he is intoxicated that he would not do while he is sober, and he is a lot more likely to do wrong things while he is angry or has a hateful attitude. Cain killed his brother Abel only after he had made an unacceptable offering to the Lord. As a result, his countenance had fallen and he was jealous and envious. Cain was confused, and under these circumstances, killing his brother probably seemed to him to be the best thing to do. Then he tried to avoid punishment by lying. Cain's circumstances were wrong, which only helped him to get the wrong result. The unprofitable servant who made the mistake of hiding his talent in the ground gave his reason by saying, "I was afraid." Fear often confuses us so that we don't know whether to listen to our conscience or to our fears.

Sin and lust and disease can also throw us off our course. A little prejudice or a little hate or a little sin will throw our minds out of balance and make them almost completely undependable.

I got mixed up because I was unprepared and insufficiently thoughtful. But there are many kinds of ignorance, indecision, indifference, sin, and conflict that cause confusion. There are people who take part of the direction for their moral lives from the instructions in the scriptures and part from their own appetites. Frequently these two do not agree, and they get about as badly mixed up as when the rays of force of some magnetized ore are in conflict with the normal lines of the earth's magnetism. When these conflicting forces begin contending in human lives, the mixup frequently causes confusions that are serious enough to bring on nervous breakdowns or several kinds of mental disease. Someone has said that you never get stomach ulcers from what you eat—you get stomach ulcers from what is eating you.

The experience of getting lost reminds me of the experience of those people who were working on the tower of Babel. What a mix-up it must have caused when their languages were confounded so that no one could get his ideas over to anyone else. But confusion causes even more problems in our individual lives when we are willing to believe our own ideas instead of the holy scriptures. We frequently move to the other side of the road, ignoring that yellow line which is supposed to run between good and evil. Or sometimes we erase it altogether, which causes the error factor in our judgment, our fairness, and our morality to be greatly increased.

When we say that God is dead, or that we are not responsible for what we do, or that our behavior doesn't matter very much one way or another, a little self-induced confusion makes us unable to distinguish between God's morality and the so-called new morality (or immorality). We are also likely to believe that happiness can come from sin and evil indulgence. Without a dependable moral compass, we may think that strikes, racial strife, and wars are the best ways to settle our disputes. It is because we are all mixed up on so many questions in our own day that our world is teetering on the very edge of chaos. Chaos suggests the ultimate limit of confusion, in which things become hopelessly mixed up. We can actually go so far that no hope remains for ever getting ourselves untangled.

There are a number of situations wherein the physical body can get confused. Sometimes one loses his sense of physical balance, and he becomes unable to stand upright without support. Sometimes one's eyes get out of focus, and things are so blurred that he can't distinguish them clearly. One may also get some false standards in his mind that will prevent him from reasoning clearly. It can be a very simple matter for a person to get all mixed up in his attitudes, his personality, his faith, and his spirit.

Sometime ago I talked with a man who was mixed up in his morals. Instead of being capable of logically solving some of the little problems arising in his marriage, he began invoking sanctions against his wife. In trying to justify himself, he invented a new brand of morality all his own, which was in direct conflict with his teachings and his sense of right and wrong. As a result of the conflicts within himself and with other people, a sore began to grow. As he began picking at the wound, it began to fester. It became infected, inflamed, and finally became malignant, so to speak. In trying to justify his evil, he not only lost his mental balance and his sense of spiritual direction; he now believes that north is east. He has made enemies of his family, many of his friends, and his employer. He has largely lost contact with God and with his own better self, and he has these terribly dismal feelings of being all mixed up. His confusion causes him to be depressed and despondent, and it is pretty difficult to reach any successful destination while following two conflicting sets of directions.

Our conflicting nations can't get along because they go by different sets of standards and interests. Husbands and wives have conflicts for the same reason. It is pretty hard to support any standard merely because it seems right to one of the contestants. But one of our greatest benefits came into the world when the Son of God came here and organized his church, set us an example in righteousness, and then said to us, "Follow me." How simple it would be to find our eternal address if we would follow him.

In following the standards set by Jesus, we have an unchanging, unfailing, unerring standard that is fair for all and in which everyone can have confidence. If we could only learn to follow him, we could get rid of all of our confusion, our failure, and our unhappiness. We would then be successful in preventing ourselves from being mixed up and in keeping all sin and confusion out of our lives.
