Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Among My Souvenirs

ONE OF the interesting customs of our day is the use that we make of symbols. Someone has said that a thing is important not only for itself alone, but sometimes it is even more important for what it stands for or what it is a sign of or what it makes us think about.

An American flag may be just an ordinary piece of cotton bunting with a particular pattern of stars and stripes, and yet to many people it represents freedom, opportunity, and a new start in life, free from the tyrannies of a despotic old world. To millions, the American flag represents the best that has ever been known, not only of freedom but of many other things.

An ordinary light in the window may have no particular significance by itself, and yet where a loved one is far away from home, that light in the window may symbolize all of the hopes, dreams, and longings of an eternity to the one who waits for the loved one's return. We have many other things that serve us as signs, symbols, and emblems to represent the most important things. The lion is the symbol of courage; the cross is the emblem of Christianity. The American eagle stands for the power and majesty of a great nation. Witches, broomsticks, cats, and pumpkins give us the feeling of Halloween. Christmas trees, Christmas carols, colored lights, wise men, and presents in Christmas colors add to our festive Christmas spirit. The blind goddess with her scales stands for justice, blind-fairness, and righteousness.

Then we have some special personal kinds of emblems or symbols that we refer to as souvenirs. We collect mementoes, pictures, letters, books, and other reminders that represent some special experience, person, occasion, memory, or place.

For a very good reason, everyone was given a collector's instinct by the Creator to begin with, and it lives and grows in the recipient from the time he is born. To test this natural endowment, suppose you take any small boy by the ankles and turn him upside down. Then if you will shake him a little, you will probably discover that out of his pockets there will drop a great assortment of accumulated treasures, including chalk, string, colored glass, and probably a chicken's foot, each of which has some special value to him. As the collector gets older, the items in his collection are upgraded first to fishing rods, skis, and guns, and then to stocks and bonds, real estate, and insurance policies. If the collector is a female, she will have a hope chest loaded with the treasures of handkerchiefs, pillow cases, negligees, and other pretty and useful things. There are some people who collect stamps, some collect butterflies, some collect art pieces, stationery, and beautiful tapestries.

Because of this God-given instinct, we fill hope chests and safety deposit boxes, as well as our minds, our emotions, and our hearts. What would anyone do without his memories and the tokens that remind him of them! We sing a song in which we say, "Memories, memories, dreams of long ago. O'er the seas of memories, I come sailing back to you. Childhood days, wildwood days, among the birds and bees. You left me alone but still you're my own, in my beautiful memories."

I recently heard a man and his wife tell of their honeymoon in a foreign land where they had many interesting experiences that they wanted to remember. Since that time, they have frequently rerun these events through their minds as they relive those special experiences of love and happiness that are so sacred to each of them. Each of us does something similar every day. All of our lives are spent on an accumulative basis. We don't just live from day to day, because as each day comes along, it finds us one day richer or poorer because of the experiences that we have had in the meantime. The attitudes and pleasures of today are at least partly made up by carrying over those things that we did yesterday. We should get more out of our senior year at school than we did out of our sophomore year because we have a larger accumulation of experiences to work with and to enjoy it with. A workman with greater experience is usually a more valuable man because he now has more to think with, which gives him a choice of a greater combination of successes. In our school years we fill our rooms with pennants and other special reminders of important things. We take innumerable pictures of people, places, and events. We save programs and reminders. We gather mementoes of the interesting places we visit and the interesting things that we do. And we fill our memories with philosophies made up of symbols, parables, and emblems.

We store up all kinds of joys and sorrows for a rerun in the future. Souvenirs not only help us to remember, but they help us live with more pleasure, and they endow life itself with greater meaning. It is for this purpose that we keep journals, memorize poems, and write down our own biographies. A good accumulation of souvenirs gives an upward swing to life and makes the end better than the beginning. The poet Robert Browning said: "Grow old along with me! The best is yet to be, the last of life, for which the first was made."

Each year we set apart the 30th day in May as Memorial Day. This began as a special time set apart on which to remember our soldier dead. However, it has come to have a much broader significance. It actually works out that every day is Memorial Day.

The first part of life is set apart to accumulate as many great experiences as possible, and "the last of life" is the time when we get the most from remembering. Of course, the greatest adventure that anyone ever has in the journey of life is life itself. Just to live is our greatest accomplishment, and to live well keeps us interested, ambitious, and successful as we go along. It also gives us something pleasant to look back upon as we contemplate the end of the journey. How fortunate we are that we have our agency enabling us to choose the greatest experiences, generate the most stimulating successes, and store up the greatest love of life. By way of contrast we might think of those who in the end of their lives have only mistakes, weaknesses, and sins to remember life by. Think what a depression might come to one who had only the unhappiness, failure, and degradation that he has caused to look back upon. A song apparently written by a disappointed lover says:

Among My Souvenirs

There's nothing left for me of days that used to be,

I live in memory among my souvenirs.

Some letters tied with blue, a photograph or two,

I see a rose from you among my souvenirs.

A few more tokens rest within my treasure chest

And though they do their best to give me consolation,

I count them all apart and as the teardrops start,

I find a broken heart among my souvenirs.

Others have found an even more disappointing collection in a distorted mind, a ruined reputation, a lung cancer, a damaged soul, and a hopeless prospect for a happy eternal life. Even in eternity it may be pretty hard to forget those we have led astray with our bad example or those whom we have seduced by our immorality. Sometimes souvenirs lose their value because those whom they call to mind have proven unworthy. William Shakespeare said: "To the noble mind rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind."

Our present friendly partners who participate in our sins may someday feel very resentful toward us when they are asked to pay a heavy price because of our evil influence. I know of a man who shot himself because he induced a friend to put a lot of money in a worthless investment that he believed to be good. He intended to do his friend a favor, but he could not overlook the fact that his friend went bankrupt as a result of his recommendation.

How much worse it would be to knowingly or unknowingly influence one to make a worthless investment in life that would leave him bankrupt. That everyone will be held accountable for his influence and his leadership is an awful responsibility. Down the broad way of life, no one walks alone. Each one stands at the head of some kind of caravan. One of the best ways to get a good collection of souvenirs in life is through our service in helping to lift people up and make them better.

The poet has said:

Success when you sum it all up isn't gold

Nor is it in doing some deed that is bold,

For the money we make and the houses we build

Mean nothing the moment the voice has been stilled,

But he has succeeded who when he is gone

In the heart of another is still living on.

A squirrel stores up acorns to his heart's content. To about the same end Whistler once painted a tiny picture of a spray of roses. The artistry involved was magnificent. Never before, it seemed, had the art of man been able to execute quite so deftly a reproduction of the art of nature. The picture was the envy of the artists who saw it, the despair of the collectors who yearned to buy it for their collections. But Whistler steadfastly refused to sell it for, said he, "Whenever I feel that my hand has lost its cunning, whenever I doubt my ability, I look at the little picture of the spray of roses and say to myself, 'Whistler, you painted that. Your hand drew it, your imagination conceived the colors, your skill put the roses on the canvas.'" Then said he, "I know that what I have done I can do again." Then he gave us a thrilling philosophy of success. He said: "Hang on the walls of your mind the memory of your successes. Take counsel of your strengths, not your weaknesses. Think of the good jobs you have done, think of the times when you rose above your average level of performance and carried out an idea or a dream or a desire for which you had deeply longed. Hang these pictures on the walls of your mind and think of them as you travel the roadway of life."

The number and quality of our mementoes will be greatly increased by keeping our lives in closer touch with the source of all good. The scripture says: "But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you." (John 14:26.)

The word of the Lord tells us a lot of things that we should store up in our minds so that we can clearly remember them. When Jesus instituted the holy sacrament, he said, ". . . this do in remembrance of me." (Luke 22:19.) He said, "Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy." (Exodus 20:8.) Paul said, "Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on of my hands." (2 Timothy 1:6.)

If we remember our covenants, if we remember to do good works, and if we remember the kind of destiny that we would like to have, we will sometime have a lot of wonderful souvenirs in our memories.

Without the holy scriptures to keep us reminded of great ideals, and without our great literature to stimulate our activity, we would have long ago plunged ourselves into a period of dark ages. But the word of the Lord and the records of the great experiences of others has accumulated for us the necessary ideals and ambitions to fill our treasure chest. We should get some benefit and some memento from every great experience that we can make our own either by birth or adoption. The greatest ideas are all prepared to give us something. We have a song that says, "Please give me something to remember you by when you are far away from me." That is a good philosophy to apply to the world's great literature as well as the holy scriptures.

Someone once asked a little girl if she knew what was in the Bible. She said that she did. She said, "There are some pressed violets in it. There is a lock of baby's hair in it, and some of sister's love letters are in it." But there are a lot of other things in the Bible. There is a divine plan for our eternal salvation in it. There are some great biographies in it. There are some stimulating ideals in it. There are some stern commands from God in it as well as some love letters from him to help us to remember our duties. There are some other wonderful ideas available out of which we may build greater ambitions, higher ideals, and a happier, eternal life for ourselves. In exercising our collector's instinct, we may gather the greatest experiences to motivate us. We may fill our pockets with money and our minds with the mementoes of our trip through life. And someday, we will also find that the evidences of our own righteous obedience will be among our finest souvenirs.
