Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Anti-Art

ONE OF the important facts of life is its constant change. Since the world began we have been asked to choose between the extremes of good and evil, right and wrong, success and failure. With some resemblance to the moon, our lives themselves sometimes have a dark side and a light side. And, like the moon, our attitudes, ambitions, and accomplishments often wax and wane. Sometimes we find our success riding the crest of a full tide, and sometimes we discover that the tide has gone out and left us stuck in the mud.

I know of a very fine woman who married a man when all of his indicators pointed toward a successful career. But he made a change for the worse that left her unhappily floundering in the shallows of the low tide that his life had caused. Another woman might marry a man without much promise while the marriage computer is flashing nothing but danger signals. But later this man's ships may come in loaded with many of the good things of life.

From time to time over the years we hear of certain people thinking about some kind of trial marriage or other experimental device by the help of which prospective marriage partners hope to discover an ideal spouse. And while anyone contemplating marriage should know a great deal about his prospective mate, yet no amount of experimentation can guarantee any permanent success. I know of one couple who were very happy during the first ten years of their union but who have been very miserable with each other since. Trying out marriage is like trying out the practice of medicine. Success in medicine or in life or in marriage is not achieved just in finding the right person; it is also in being the right person. Life doesn't give enough time for very many kinds of experiments. King David was called a man after God's own heart in his youth. Then he tried out adultery and murder. Instead of helping him, his new experience made his life much more difficult. Solomon was king of Israel when he was a teenager. He was blessed with greater wisdom than anyone who had ever lived up to that time, and he saw God twice, but he tried out some disobedience to God, and he died an idolator, very much out of God's favor.

In the present day some people have done away with the moral restrictions between the sexes and have provided for a much wider field of sexual experience. But we are now finding out that instead of making marriage adjustments easier, they are being made much more difficult, and instead of learning we are piling up such a large number of stumbling blocks that success and happiness sometimes become impossible.

It is not very wise to attempt to get happiness from those experiences that God has forbidden. Our experience in doing as we please is now loudly proclaiming that man is still not a very good judge of right and wrong or of what is in his own best interests. Recently an evolutionist who had grown up with the idea that man has climbed upward from some simple form of life expressed the opinion that something must have gone wrong, as the growth process seems to have been thrown into reverse, and a condition of worsening now seems to be carrying us back in the other direction.

It is certain that our respect for law has recently been diminished whereas our crimes are increasing by leaps and bounds. We appear to be less capable of getting along with each other now than we were even in the Dark Ages. The divine objective of peace on earth, goodwill toward men is also running in reverse. There are many people who feel that the idea of righteousness itself is not realistic in our day. A moral recession has threatened the very existence of the home, the family, the country, and the church. When such depressing movements as the hippies and the yippies can flourish in our soil without any logical reason or intelligent effort, something must be seriously wrong. Our increased appetite for dope, alcoholism, and nicotine addiction shows that we are losing a lot of ground.

It is no wonder that a voice is heard from the bowels of the earth saying, "Wo, wo is me, the mother of men; I am pained, I am weary, because of the wickedness of my children. When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the filthiness which is gone out of me? When will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a season abide upon my face?" (Moses 7:48.)

However, among all of our many recently developed problems, it seems that one of the most unfortunate is the tendency of so many to rebel against beauty as well as to fight against goodness. In large measure many people have become anti-art. God intended to stimulate our finest appreciation when he made the earth such a beautiful place. Think of the tremendous artistic fascination of earth's oceans, its skies, its sunsets, its landscapes, and its flowers. God put all kinds of magnificent colors, fragrance, beauty, and riches into the earth. However, he reserved his greatest beauty for his own children. When God created us in his own image, he included a love of truth, a godly character, a miraculous personality, and a tremendous artistic sense.

The dictionary says that art is the systematic application of knowledge, skill, and taste. Our artistic sense was intended to produce such objects as beautiful painting, inspiring music, and harmonious sculpture. The fine arts are primarily concerned with the objects of our imagination. They include those subjects that we appreciate for their beauty, taste, and inspiration rather than for their actual utility. We refer to such things as painting, drawing, architecture, and sculpture as the fine arts of design. Other artistic studies include poetry, music, dancing, and the dramatic arts. The liberal arts include grammar, logic, rhetoric, astronomy, philosophy, and history. We might compare the fine arts to fine gold or fine people.

Fine gold might be described as gold that has been fully refined. It has been finished and brought to its perfection by being freed from its impurities. A fine man is also one who is refined, who is complete. He was formed in God's image. He is well fashioned and has a noble appearance. If he follows God's program, his impurities are removed, and fine personality and godly character traits develop within him. This gives him a fine tone, makes him fine spirited, and great beauty forms in his soul.

Art forms an important part of every great life. In fact, the most important art is the art of living successfully. One may be an artist as a musician, or as a painter, or as a sculptor, but the finest art is that which is displayed when one puts good taste, good judgment, and righteousness into his life and makes it beautiful and happy. Then it is harmonious with all that is beautiful, true, and good.

The dictionary represents some of the antonyms of art by such words as inferior, gross, heavy, coarse, blunt, dull, and awkward. What a great tragedy for our world when large groups of people rebel against beauty, order, righteousness, cleanliness, fineness, and good taste. Our present-day rebellion against art has taken many forms. We have the plotless movie, the painting that does not inspire, the music that carries us back to the jungle, the philosophy that makes us more coarse, the drama that debases our characters, and the speech that depresses our souls.

All art should have a happy ending, and drama is more inspiring if the hero has a haircut and does noble things. The purpose of art is to inspire, to refine, to instruct, to uplift, and to make us better and more complete than we were. The values are lost when our drama fills us with violence, when our philosophy teaches us sedition, when our literature motivates failure and glamorizes immorality. In many cases we have taken away from our art and literature that which is spiritual, patriotic, and moral. We sometimes say that the good is something that is theoretical and unrealistic, and to promote the religious may be against the public interest. Even realism has a positive and a negative side, but the realism of our modern rebellion seeks to center our attention primarily in the negative.

In some periods when people have gone to college, they have dressed themselves in their best clothes and worn their finest mental attitudes. They have been anxious to put their best foot forward, and it is considered a great honor to get good grades. However, there are now some who feel that anyone trying to appear at his best is not telling it as it is, and therefore many people prefer to display themselves at their worst.

Formerly in educational institutions we used to house scholarly students in inexpensive buildings. But now this situation is also changing. We levy high taxes and erect elegant buildings as a base for many who don't take a bath or get a haircut to launch a rebellion against the administration. A great general once said that he would rather have iron men in wooden boats than to have wooden men in iron boats. And a scholar who says his prayers, has his hair cut, takes a bath, and does some studying may reach higher goals housed in makeshift buildings than makeshift, drugaddicted students who use marble halls as a place in which to argue about repealing the Ten Commandments in favor of their own version of the new morality. The beauty of the coeds of yesteryear furnishes a striking contrast to some of their modern sisters who now patronize institutions of higher learning with uncombed hair, and faces, attitudes, and morals to match.

Some university students of a few years ago were an inspiration to behold, and there is still a great art in appropriate dress, good grades, high morality, immaculate cleanliness, and willingness to pay the price demanded for real character. Both on and off the campus, many women now wear a strange kind of apparel that could belong to either sex, and the general tolerance of a sloppy, uncared-for appearance has been greatly increased among us. A member of a hippie group recently referred to the outlandish garb of his own clan members as "casual dress." Proper attire and interested care for one's own person are more than ordinarily important, as there is a very close relationship existing between beauty on the outside and beauty on the inside. Schlegel says, "There is no more potent antidote for a low sensuality than the adoration of beauty." Aristotle said, "Beauty purifies the thoughts as suffering purifies the passions." Through a proper appreciation of the beauty of nature, we may put ourselves in tune with the infinite. On the other hand, when we surround ourselves with the sordid, the unclean, and the rebellious, they tend to get into our minds, our hearts, and our personalities.

Beauty in our landscapes, or in our homes, or in our music, or in our literature has an uplifting effect upon us. However, there is an ebb and flow in nature. We have a high tide and a low tide. The moon waxes and wanes. There is also an ebb and flow in life. We are not always faithful. All of our trends are not forward. Sometimes it is too easy for our minds to slip into a reverse gear and allow rebellion, negative thinking, and evil to take over. Our situation is made more serious when we tolerate this awful perversion of always wanting to appear at our worst.

This trend manifesting itself in our modern art was recently illustrated by a calendar showing twelve prize-winning drawings. As subjects the artists had chosen to paint such things as abandoned shacks that were surrounded by disorder and weeds. These were places where no self-respecting person would think of actually living. And yet we allow this spirit to live in our minds. Other pictures displayed other situations shown at their worst. It seemed that in these so-called art pieces, the artist's primary concern was to show dilapidation, deterioration, confusion, and decay, and call it realism.

We do something similar in our writing. We distribute millions of books each day picturing the base things of life. We take interest in actual horror movies and those that deal in hate and violence, and we glamorize crime and sin.

By the perversion of our anti-art, we are committing the great sin of degrading ourselves, whereas the greatest art is that which is the most uplifting. The greatest music is that which most stirs our souls and lifts us up to a higher level in life. All reading and all art and all philosophy should be constructive and elevating. Daniel Webster was speaking as an artist when he said, "The greatest thought that has ever entered my mind is the consciousness of my individual responsibility to God."

This is not an art that is written or drawn or acted out on the stage. It is that which we live. It is that which is used to inspire our minds and fill our lives with good works. Emerson once said that "beauty is the mark that God sets on virtue." The greatest virtue is finally the most beautiful. And the highest inspiration is to know that God lives, that righteousness is good, and that death is not the end of life. One has a great artistic sense when he understands that order is the first law of heaven and that cleanliness is next to godliness. How very helpful it also is to know that as a man thinketh in his heart so is he. May we so develop our artistic powers that we will love beauty, truth, and righteousness.
