Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Bewitched

AN INTERESTING story is told of a captain sailing his ship through the south seas. At one of his stops he picked up an unusual-looking stone, which he took on board and placed in the captain's cabin. A few days later when he again set sail, he discovered that, for some reason, the ship's compass was acting very strangely, and he decided that the ship was bewitched. The unusual stone was a piece of magnetized iron ore, and only after it had been thrown overboard was the compass again able to accurately guide the ship.

This is an interesting story, but it is much more than that. People also sometimes get bewitched when they take contrary influences on board in their lives. The apostle Paul cites one manifestation of this kind of confusion that took place among the members of the church. He said to them: "O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth...." (Galatians 3:1.) Luke describes a similar situation when he says: "There was a certain man, called Simon, which beforetime in the same city used sorcery, and bewitched the people of Samaria, giving out that himself was some great one:...And to him they had regard, because that of long time he had bewitched them with sorceries." (Acts 8:9, 11.)

The dictionary says that a witch is one who practices the black art of magic. A witch is regarded as possessing supernatural or magic powers gotten from evil spirits. The dictionary points out that witches and sorcerers are people who deny God and renounce both God and his grace. Witches are people who have made a league with the devil and have given themselves over to him body and soul, and by his influence they injure and destroy other people.

In our literature we have many accounts in both fact and fiction where someone has been bewitched. Saul, king of ancient Israel, was dismissed as king for this reason. The prophet Samuel said to him: "For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the Lord, he hath also rejected thee from being king." (1 Samuel 15:23.)

The scripture also tells about Cain, who was influenced by evil spirits. The record says that he loved Satan more than God, and he made a covenant to serve Satan. Others have done and are still doing very similar things, and as a consequence many people are still being bewitched by bewitching people. Certainly in our day we see a lot of those who are bewitched with rebellion, immorality, and irresponsibility.

Twenty-nine centuries ago the blind Greek poet Homer wrote the great travel story called the Odyssey. This is an account of Odysseus, sometimes called Ulysses, who was king of the little Greek state of Ithaca. He and his soldiers had fought in the battle of Troy. The chief interest of the Odyssey is centered in the adventures of their ten-year journey homeward across three hundred miles of island-dotted sea. Once a raging wind blew them off their course, and they landed on the island of the lotus-eaters. It was said that when men ate the magic fruit of the lotus tree they were bewitched into forgetting about their families and their responsibilities, and they lived in a dreamy forgetfulness and indolent enjoyment. Only when Odysseus dragged his sailors back aboard their ships were they able to recover enough of their ambition to continue their journey homeward. There are many people who have these same kinds of problems who never do recover their senses.

One of the greatest adventures came to Odysseus and his men when they landed on the island domain of the bewitching enchantress Circe. While there, some of the men fell into her hands, and she turned them into swine. It was only with great difficulty that Odysseus was able to break her spell and force her to set his men free. This experience delayed Odysseus and his men for a full year on Circe's enchanted island. In one way or another many men are still being turned into swine by the enchantments of evil.

In the course of the journey of these Grecian soldiers, they were required to pass an island where other bewitching sirens lived. It was already known to Odysseus that in times past the song of these sirens had lured many sailors to their deaths. He had been warned in advance about the hazards of listening to the music of these fascinating, dangerous creatures. When he came near to their islands, fearing that his men would not be able to withstand the temptation, he had all of the members of his crew fill their ears with wax so that they would not be able to hear the sirens' song.

Odysseus himself was overcome by curiosity and did not put wax in his own ears. But not quite trusting his own strength, he protected himself against his own weakness by having his men bind him to the mast. He gave them strict orders that no matter what might happen, they must not release him until they were past the island and out of range of the temptation. When they came within the hypnotic sound of the sirens' song, Odysseus weakened and ordered his men to pull their ship up to the shore. But the ears of his men were full of wax, and they could not hear his orders. The caution of Odysseus saved the day, and they rowed on past the temptation without succumbing to it.

In writing the Odyssey, Homer was making some comparisons with that more important journey which we sometimes refer to as the odyssey of our own lives. He certainly anticipated our day of rebellion with its seductive enchantments of evil. In an effort to seduce others and turn men and women into swine, one of the most prominent, Jerry Rubin, the revolutionaries' yippie spokesman says in his pornographic book Do It, "We have combined youth, music, sex, drugs, and rebellion with treason, and that is a combination that is hard to beat." Many of our day are being more badly bewitched by this evil combination than those who lived in the days of King Saul or Homer. Like Cain, there are many who have made covenants to love evil instead of righteousness, and only the devil could inspire such absolute satanism as that exhibited by some of the evil men of our day.

The power of music, both for good and evil, was recognized long before Homer. Aldous Huxley's book Brave New World, in attempting to appraise the evils of our day, says: "New and previously undreamed of devices for exciting mobs have recently been invented. The radio has enormously extended the range of the demagogue's raucous yelling. The loudspeaker amplifies the heady music of class hatred and the destructiveness of militant [minorities]." This book points out that an assembled mob of men and women who have previously been conditioned by reading the daily accounts of evil can be reduced in almost no time at all by loud, wild band music, bright lights, and the oratory of an evil person to a state of almost mindless subhumanity. Never before have so few been able to make fools, maniacs, or criminals out of so many in so short a time.

According to the Midszenty Report, Dr. William Sargent, a leading scientific authority on the human nervous system, reports that under stress of loud percussion music and bright lights, people can be brainwashed to believe almost anything.

Dr. Sargent says that "electrical recordings of the human brain show that it is particularly sensitive, among other things, to the rhythmic stimulation by percussion, bright lights, and drugs. And certain rates of rhythm can build up recordable abnormalities of brain function and explosive states of tension sufficient even to produce convulsive fits in predisposed subjects. In such a situation," he adds, "belief can be effectively implanted in people after brain function has been sufficiently disturbed by accidentally or deliberately induced fear, anger, or excitement...."

In an address to the Royal Society of Medicine in 1965, Dr. Sargent elaborated by saying, "Adolf Hitler, the Beatles, and the African witch doctors all practiced a similar type of brainwashing...."People can be brainwashed and bewitched to believe almost anything. The tragic thing about being bewitched is that evil, sin, and nonsense may all become palatable. The loud rhythmic music, dope, and emotional dancing are all effective ways of getting at the nervous system. When Adolf Hitler got people into a high state of excitement by yelling and loud noises, his evil schemes seemed all right to them. Hitler used this system of bewitchment to kill twenty million people, including himself. In his book The Riot Makers, Eugene H. Methvin provides facts on the scientific aspects of certain kinds of music as a weapon for psychological warfare.

Vice President Spiro Agnew has charged that America's youth are being brainwashed into drug use, largely promoted and spread by rock music via the communications media.

And Art Linkletter, the TV personality, whose daughter died as a result of a drug "trip," agrees.

Bob Dylan, one of the undisputed forefathers of today's socalled acid-rock music, is quoted by an underground New York newspaper as saying: "If parents knew what I was saying in my songs, they would break the records." One of Bob Dylan's earliest recordings, "Mr. Tambourine Man," is about a trip away from the worries of the world. Trip is slang for the effects one experiences on LSD and other hallucinatory drugs. This first song to combine drugs with music was a tremendous success.

Hundreds of other drug-rock compositions, with the added ingredient of sex, have followed. And many millions of copies have been sold to young people.

Jesse Kornbluth, a devotee of acid-rock, explained in his music review column in the New York Times: "Rock, drugs and sex—the foundations of the so-called New Culture—have been around long enough so that they are subliminal in our lives...."

The word subliminal is used by psychologists to describe something that exists or occurs in one's subconsciousness. When something evil has been sublimated in our subconscious mind, it can sometimes bewitch our lives without our knowledge.

Many evil men get out on the stage, dressed in ludicrous clothing, where they writhe, reel, stagger, and frequently look like someone on a bad trip who has been driven insane by nightmares that possess them but that they cannot understand. Thousands of young people have been lured by acid-rock bands, the promise of cheap pot and dreams of free love and sex to many so-called rock festivals around the country. Most publicized was the Woodstock Festival. It was Communist-inspired, and it was the place where our enemies served the first free dope in America. They said that this festival was "three days of music and peace."

The Altamount Festival, held at Altamount Speedway in Alameda County, California, attracted approximately 300,000 young people who watched as four of their number were brutally murdered, one of them stabbed to death by a member of the Hell's Angels motorcycle gang directly in front of the stage where Mick Jagger and the Rolling Stones were screaming their particular brand of music.

The rock festival phenomenon, as many youthful participants will quickly point out, represents the new generation "doing its own thing." Their explanation goes something like this: "We are tired of war, poverty, discrimination, and capitalist exploitation. We are turning to love, music, communal living, and sharing. We totally reject the rules and regulations of the establishment and are creating a new life style."

The truth of the matter is that many young people today are unaware that they are being victimized by exploiters. The Powder Ridge Pop Festival, held July 31 to August 2, 1970, near Middlefield, Connecticut, serves as a good example:

Although covered by television and the press, no mention was made that:(1) the co-owner of Powder Ridge is closely linked with numerous radical leftist movements and, in 1962, initiated a legal suit against Secretary of State Dean Rusk over the denial of a passport allowing him to visit Communist Cuba, and (2) Powder Ridge has, in the past, been used as a meeting place for pro-Communist organizations and personalities.

It comes as no surprise to discover links between gangsters, pro-Communists, and the booming acid-rock business. They are aware that the youth market is wide open for exploitation with unlimited possibilities.

And so we might ask ourselves, "O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth...?" And when we understand the close relationship between rock music, promiscuous sex, drug abuse, rebellion, and all evil things, then we may be able to throw them overboard in order to unbewitch ourselves. Then we will be able to sail a straight course in righteousness.
