Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Blind Obedience

A NUMBER OF years ago we had a family living in our neighborhood in which the father seemed to take great pride in his oft-repeated declaration that he didn't want his children to blindly follow the Church. He said that he wanted them to do some thinking of their own, to break some new trails, and to follow their own ideas. He agreed that this might involve them in some mistakes, but he felt that they would come out of it stronger people if they always stood on their own feet and did their own thinking.

Certainly there is far too little real thinking being done in the world, but it is thought that our greatest single idea is to know where we are going. We must also know the most effective procedures for getting there. With some definiteness we need to know from the highest authority what the real purpose of life is. We also need a dependable star to steer by and a reliable compass to keep us on our course. It takes constant steering to keep an automobile going in a straight line, and everyone needs some divine help to keep him thinking straight.

When we have no higher intelligence than our own to direct us, we frequently get lost, and no one can afford to make very many of the great mistakes personally. There are some serious disadvantages in breaking too many new trails on our own. When we put ourselves on a trial and error basis, we frequently find ourselves hopelessly bogged down in the quagmire of our own mistakes. The Lord expressed an opinion on this point when he said: ". . . cursed is he that putteth his trust in the arm of flesh." (2 Nephi 4:34.) Among other disadvantages, it is very expensive to live endlessly by our own untested opinions. This is especially true when, as is usually the case, our own opinions are so highly mixed with prejudices, false information, and unholy desires. Entire cultures and civilizations frequently go astray when living after their own opinions. In a very large number of cases self-directed individuals are almost always wrong.

For a counter plan there is a great scripture that says, "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths." (Proverbs 3:5-6.) And that proposal embodies a wonderful way of life. God is the source of all good. He has all knowledge, he has all power, and he is all-wise. He knows the end from the beginning. He has told us that crime, sin, ignorance, ugliness, and sloth are wrong. We can know without a question of a doubt that he is right and that it would give us a great advantage if we would take him at his word and strictly follow him. And yet for some mysterious reason we don't seem to like any of those terms that indicate any measure of blind obedience.

Recently I rode through a storm with an aviator in a little one-engine airplane. I was very anxious for him to be blindly obedient to his radar beam and to the instructions that came from the man in the radio control tower. With our lives in his hands, we would not want the pilot to be breaking any new trails through a black thundercloud. It would be a lot safer for him to forget about thinking for himself and to obey the man in the control tower, who knew more about the boundaries and intensities of the storm, the location of the mountain peaks, and where the runway was. How strange, then, that we are so willing to trust our eternal lives to those unknown combinations of ignorance, fear, lust, hate, and prejudice that cause so many crackups among us.

We sometimes become so obsessed with the idea of doing our own thing that we swing away from a safe, blind obedience to a disastrous blind disobedience. Recently, after a young man had his hair cut, the barber said to him, "Your mother will like that haircut." The young man said, "Well, if she does, I won't." This contrary streak of blind disobedience decreases the ability of parents to help their children because they become afraid to counsel them frankly.

A father recently had some very important information that he dared not give his son because he was afraid the son would do the exact opposite. The father thought that there would be less danger in the son's ignorance than in his perverseness.

Much of the rebellion of our day comes from our tendency toward blind disobedience. We see the wholesale phenomenon of children rebelling against their parents. This rebellion is not just against bad parents or poor parents or unwise parents. It is probable that there is about as much rebellion going on against good parents and rich parents and wise parents. Many ministers' children go astray by turning against the instruction of their fathers. The children of educators are sometimes dead-set against education. And the children of hard-working, self-supporting parents often turn themselves into human derelicts and idlers. Some people who have taken great pride in doing more than they get paid for have children who enjoy living from the labor of someone else.

However, the greatest rebellions and the most serious cases of blind disobedience are those that we direct against God. God has said, "Thou shalt not commit adultery" (Exodus 20:14), and so evil people rig up all kinds of schemes to foster the new morality on a wholesale basis. Some great industries are growing up for the purpose of manufacturing birth control gadgets, practicing abortion, treating venereal disease, and dealing with the awful problems of divorce, broken homes, unhappy parents, and unstable children. We could relieve ourselves of the need for all of these if we would merely obey God.

God said, "Thou shalt not steal" (Exodus 20:15), and so we turn ourselves into kleptomaniacs. We steal money, automobiles, and merchandise. We rob the government, our employers, each other, and God. Think what a paradise our earth could become if all of us practiced a blind obedience to those great laws of God known as the Ten Commandments. Blind obedience in its best meaning is a great success idea.

On one occasion an angel came to Adam and asked him why he offered sacrifice. He said, "I know not, save the Lord commanded me." (Moses 5:6.) What better reason could anyone ever have? How could one better reach the highest goals than by two or three kinds of blind obedience? For too many people even the suggestion of this idea would be very offensive. However, if we objected to obedience on this basis, we could still effectively solve our problems by so studying the program of the Lord that we would know the importance of all of his laws for ourselves.

One man said that he didn't just obey God—he agreed with him. But just suppose that we didn't always agree with God; then what? There are many people who actually make themselves think that they believe in adultery and in stealing and in sloth. There are many people who believe that murder, arson, and treason can promote some kind of a benefit for them. And yet think of the chaos that would exist in the world and in our lives if everyone followed the policy of endlessly doing what seemed good to him. Even now it is not our own convictions about righteousness but our police and military forces that are largely maintaining our civilization.

What a great idea it would be if, instead of depending on the police to hold our society together, we were fully obedient to God and to law and to righteousness because we wanted to be. No matter whether it was blind obedience or an obedience that was fully understanding, any kind of righteous, whole-souled obedience would transform our lives for good. In the midst of his afflictions, the great old prophet Job demonstrated the value of blind obedience when he said, "Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him." (Job 13:15.) There is no other program that will bring such outstanding success in life as obedience—obedience to the laws of God, obedience to the laws of nature, and obedience to our powers of reason. Nothing else can take the place of obedience. Obedience is the first law of heaven.

The most educated people sometimes get about as far off the track of success as those who are less learned. Science can't solve our problems, because action must usually be taken before there is time to make a full and complete investigation of the facts. The prophet Samuel said to King Saul, ". . . to obey is better than sacrifice." (1 Samuel 15:22.) And to obey is also better than to rationalize or to alibi or to philosophize or to rebel.

The Lord himself has said that "as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways. . . ." (Isaiah 55:9.) We show our greatest intelligence when we follow God. We may follow him blindly or otherwise, but we should follow him. When the Lord said to Peter, "Will ye also go away?" Peter said, "Lord, to whom shall we go?" (John 6:67-68.) And that is still our most important question. Whom can we trust? We can't trust the Communists, and we can't trust the arm of flesh. We can't always trust ourselves. We might make a list of those times when we have seriously disappointed ourselves by following our own opinions.

Mostly we can't even understand ourselves, let alone trust ourselves. Certainly we can't afford to leave the welfare of our immortal souls exclusively in our own hands. There is a great line in scripture that says: "Yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward." (Job 5:7.)

When we break our own trails, we make a percentage of mistakes that is much too high for us to tolerate. This is unnecessary when we can easily figure out for ourselves that God is always right. We know with an absolute certainty that God is always right. We know with an absolute certainty that those who keep the Sabbath day holy will be a different people from those who do not. We have seen enough broken, twisted, distorted lives to know that "Thou shalt not commit adultery" is a good law and should be followed. Absolute obedience is good because morality is much harder to understand when we are the ones being driven by lust than it is when the adulterer has one of our daughters in his sights.

Everyone except the violators knows that we would be much better off if we strictly obeyed the Word of Wisdom and every other commandment.

Recently over the radio I heard a very prominent minister teaching people that it was not necessary for anyone to be baptized. Where did he get the authority to contradict the word of the Lord? As Jesus stood on the mount about ready to ascend into heaven, he said: "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." (Matthew 28:19.)

"He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." (Mark 16:16.)

This minister is going to get into a lot of trouble putting his puny logic up against the word of the Lord. The Lord has been pretty harsh with ministers of religion who teach their own doctrines in his name, for this has caused almost all of our world's problems. Isaiah said: "The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant." (Isaiah 24:5.)

In our own day the Lord has said that those churches teaching man-made doctrines are an abomination in his sight and that their professors are all corrupt. He said: ". . . they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof." (Joseph Smith 2:19.)

This statement used to bother me some, since I have known many ministers who were intelligent, gentle men who desired to be as helpful as possible. But Jesus himself said: "Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. . . ." (Matthew 5:19.)

Suppose we tried to imagine what the worst sin could be. If I committed the unpardonable sin and became a son of perdition, only one person might be hurt as a consequence. If I became a murderer or stole an automobile, as heinous as those sins are, yet the damage might be confined to a very narrow area. But when, like this great minister, I teach a million people to disobey the word of the Lord, the area covered by the sin is greatly extended and the sin is intensified.

The wise man Solomon concluded his book of Ecclesiastes by saying: "Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man." (Ecclesiastes 12:13.)

This is not only the whole duty of man; it is also the wisest course. Whether it is blind obedience or some other kind is far less important than whether it is obedience or disobedience. There are some people who seem not a bit ashamed to put their own untried wisdom up against the wisdom of the holy scriptures, and there are some who do not hesitate to disobey or even ignore the great God who created heaven and earth and placed us here, fashioned in his own image. It is certain that the greatest good in our lives would be a full-determined obedience.
