Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Book of Instructions

WE HAVE developed a number of interesting procedures to assist us in solving some of the complexities of our present-day affairs. To help us with some of the problems incident to our knowledge explosion, the people who manufacture our appliances now send along with their product a book of instructions for their use.

For example, our family recently came into possession of a color television set. This miraculous instrument is one of the wonders of our day. It has taken our world nearly six thousand years to produce it, and it might take another six thousand years for some of us to learn to operate it if we first had to understand it. It performs miracles that, if I didn't actually see, I wouldn't believe. The sights and sounds of the world's scenery, music, gunfire, and tornadoes are all hurled through the air in every direction by a hundred telecasting stations. But they all find their way to quietly assemble in my living room. The book of instructions that came with the television set tells me which knobs to pull and which dials to turn to get any program onto my television screen in the right shade of color with sound effects to my heart's content.

Because of this modern-day wonder, our family has been able to watch astronauts land on the moon. I don't even try to understand how it is that these identical pictures and sounds are in ten billion other locations on every part of the earth's surface at the same time. Once when we tired of waiting for action on the moon, we turned the television knob and watched some elephants stampede in Africa. When that was over we paid a short visit to Queen Elizabeth in Buckingham Palace and then went back to finish our program on the moon.

The thing that impresses me most is the fact that in order to benefit from all of these miracles I don't even need to understand them. Neither do I need to pay for any part of the billions of dollars worth of scientific equipment necessary to produce them. All I need to do is to read my book of instructions. Then by pulling the right knobs and turning the proper dials, I can bring into my living room the finest symphonies, the greatest stage plays, the most constructive movies, the biggest tidal waves, the hottest wars, and all of the other wonders that make up our age.

But we are the beneficiaries of a lot of other miraculous events. I have a daily newspaper laid on my front porch that tells me what is going on in every part of the world during every hour of the day and night. I could not gather the news and print my single paper for a million dollars, and yet I get the news gathered, the paper printed, and the delivery made for less than the cost of the paper used. I don't need to become a reporter or a printer or a news analyst to get all of these facts with the most expert opinions about them. Nor do I need to understand the millions of other miracles in order to receive their blessings. I can attend school in my own home, or go sightseeing in Europe, or fly over the North Pole, or do a million other wonderful things merely by keeping on good terms with my book of instructions.

Our family recently transacted some business with General Motors and as a result we acquired an automobile. It will go fast or slow, uphill or downhill, backward or forward as I manipulate the gadgets. I can have almost any desired temperature inside the car no matter what the climate may be on the outside. If I pull the right buttons, even on the darkest night, two giant head-lamps throw great beams of light down the roadway ahead of me. This car has some little mechanical "hands" that keep the snow wiped off the windshield. Other devices will wash the front window, tell me the time of day, how warm the engine is, or how much gasoline remains in the gas tank. My automobile has puncture-proof tires, push-button windows, six directional seats, turn blinkers, tail lights, radio, and power-steering. With a little pressure from my right foot the 350-horses under the hood will fly across the earth at 70 miles an hour and keep up the pace day after day, without complaining about being tired. As long as I follow the book of instructions, everything performs miraculously whether I understand how or not.

However, the most complicated of all of our machines is the human machine. In great admiration David explained, ". . . I am fearfully and wonderfully made." (Psalm 139:14.) And certainly we can all say that again! For example, I have a personal fuel tank called a stomach. Into it I can put all sorts of herbs, grains, meats, sweets, and liquids, and the most fantastic of all manufacturing devices will turn them into energy, vision, heat, light, and understanding. This digestive system can take proteins, carbohydrates, and fats and turn them into flesh and blood, bones and tissues, brains and personality. I also have a wonderful pair of lungs. They automatically draw into themselves a mysterious substance called air that I can't see or understand. My lungs not only understand what they are doing, but they are fully automatic. They work while I am asleep or awake, sick or well, and while I am running or standing still. In the field of their activity my lungs are far more intelligent than I am. But every other organ of my body also has an intelligence that far surpasses mine with regard to its function.

My bloodstream contains trillions of microscopic red corpuscles that carry oxygen and nutrition to every part of my system. I have other trillions of white corpuscles that serve my body as its medical men. My white corpuscles fight disease, kill infection, and keep me in good health without my knowing what is happening. Billions of these wonderful little corpuscles are automatically manufactured in the marrow of my bones every day. Yet if I had all of the intelligence of the wisest combination of medical men, I would not know how to manufacture even one red corpuscle, and I wouldn't have the slightest guess about how to supply the oxygen to nourish even one brain cell. I know very little about estimating the needs of my liver, thyroid gland, or spirit. I don't even know where the self-starter is located that enables me to get myself going every morning. Every human being has some wonderful abilities to move and speak and laugh and think without knowing how it is done. There are millions of ideas filed away in my brain, any one of which can be flashed upon an invisible screen by pushing the right mental buttons. I also have an inaudible voice speaking to me that I have never heard, and yet it is telling me things every minute of every day in a language that is clearer than any audible voice. It lets me know when I am hungry or tired or cold or when I feel guilty or inferior or lazy.

The other day someone asked me to give them my opinion about two possible book covers. After I had looked at each one for a few seconds, something told me several reasons why I liked one very much and why I liked the other one not at all. In this interesting combination that I call myself, I have many aptitudes and abilities that are as mysterious to me and even more wonderful than those miracles on my television set. If I touch the right buttons I can laugh, love, think, repent, breath, sleep, eat, work, and worship. If I turn the dial to the right place, an unmistakable voice will tell me when I am doing wrong and when I am being unwise. I have some tremendous assets that even my television or automobile doesn't have. Somewhere within myself I have a wonderful thing called life, which is the most valuable of all commodities. I also have a brain, a personality, and a will. I have a marvelous physical body equipped with a lot of helpful emotions. I also have a spirit, and while no one, including me, knows very much about it, yet I wouldn't sell it for a trillion dollars. It is an interesting fact that I have never so much as even seen my own spirit, and yet it is very close to me. I live with it every day. I can feel its presence, and I can recognize some of its abilities and attitudes.

I also have a whole collection of miraculous instincts, abilities, character traits, and ambitions. I have a conscience, a voice, a will, a set of emotions, and access to the use of the still small voice. But probably my greatest good fortune is that the omnipotent Creator, who is the manufacturer and the inventor of all of these wonderful installations, has prepared some instructions as to how I should most effectively operate myself.

Some 3400 years ago God came down onto the top of Mount Sinai and to the accompaniment of the lightning and thunder of that holy mountain gave us some important rules to make us function more effectively. As a safeguard against ruining ourselves, he gave us some stern "thou shalt nots." The first step toward any success is to get clearly in mind and make some decisions about those things that we must not do. From the top of Mount Sinai God placed these flashing red lights of warning on such things as murder, adultery, dishonesty, profanity, Sabbath day violations, and the practice of identifying with false gods.

In 1832 the Lord placed some "thou shalt not" signs on alcohol, nicotine, and caffeine to emphatically warn us against them. Then in January 1964 the Surgeon General of the United States gave us a kind of progress report picturing the devastation that was taking place in our magnificent human machinery because we were not following instructions but were taking poisonous substances into our lungs, tissues, and bloodstream.

A prominent doctor recently attended the birth of a baby whose mother was a user of morphine. When the baby was born it looked more like a tiny Egyptian mummy than that proverbial bouncing baby described in the book of instructions. The baby's skin was an unhealthy blue-gray color, and within a few moments after birth he began to twitch and jerk with an increasing violence. The doctor knew that the baby was responding to his mother's craving for dope. He also knew that unless the baby received an immediate injection of morphine, he would have a convulsion from which he might never recover. The doctor injected the dope, which produced only a very short tranquillity. In less than an hour the baby was again twitching his way toward a convulsion. The nurse said, "The poor little guy is hooked just like his mom." She said, "What did he ever do to deserve a rotten deal like this?" When the mother was questioned about her habit she said, "Okay, okay, I am on the needle, so what? That is nobody's business but my own." The doctor said to her, "You don't believe that any more than I do." Then he went on to comment on the tragic life this poor little human being has to look forward to living with a mother who is out of control of herself and who is trying to make herself believe that what she does is nobody's business but her own. When she saw the pathetic-looking little son that she had produced, she closed her eyes and began to cry. What a tragedy that she didn't give her son the kind of start in life that he would have had if she had followed the Lord's book of instructions. From it we learn that our immoralities, our venereal diseases, our venereal attitudes, our atheisms, and our crimes can have devastating effects, and they are the business of a lot of other people, including God.

I might claim that my automobile belongs to me, but it is still the business of a lot of other people if I drive it down the wrong side of the street at a hundred miles per hour. But whom are we ourselves responsible to?

The apostle Paul says, ". . . ye are not your own. For ye are bought with a price." (1 Corinthians 7:19-20.) Christ redeemed us from death by sacrificing his own life. Even the earth on which we live belongs to him, and only by his grace are we permitted to live here and to work out our eternal salvation. The most important part of our success is to pay particular attention to the direction given in our book of instructions. It says that we should take maximum care of our bodies, our minds, our spirits, and our personalities. We start out our lives here with a father's blessing given under the power of the priesthood.

We are directed that at the age of accountability we should be baptized, receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and join the Church. At that time we are asked to make some covenants of faithfulness and not to take poisonous ideas into our minds. Then as we develop our abilities we may receive the priesthood, and by the quality of our service and obedience we may demonstrate our worthiness for increased blessings. We are instructed to be married in the temple, where the sacred family relationships are formed for eternity. The book of instructions says that these covenants must be kept. We are privileged to take upon ourselves the name of Christ and live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of an all-wise Heavenly Father. And one of his greatest commands has to do with having children and rearing them according to his rules. But the correct answer to every problem in our lives is found in these great books of instruction that God has caused to be written to teach us how to live. Our primary responsibility in life is to follow them.
