Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Colors of Life

ONE OF the very interesting facts about our world is its colors. I have often wondered how many billions of buckets of paint the Lord must have used to paint the oceans, the skies, the landscapes, and the sunsets in glorious color. It would be difficult for one to be in a beautiful flower garden with all its patterns and various shades of design without realizing that God is a great lover of color and beauty. This artistry carries over into every area of life. Someone with less imagination than the God of creation might have designed our food in one package, but God added great interest and color when he gave us red apples, black cherries, blue plums, purple grapes, with a dazzling array of blackberries, green gooseberries, oranges, and lemons.

Recently I reread the story of Solomon's temple. The building specifications were written by God and the building was one of the wonders of the ancient world. Many millions of dollars worth of fine gold was used in its construction. But besides the gold, the scripture also mentions the fine twined linens and other materials used in its furnishings. The striking colors of scarlet, gold, and purple added greatly to the beauty and attractiveness of this house of God. In fact, the color probably added as much to the temple's magnificence as did the gold. Since that time, we have increased the glory of our colors so that we now have paints, fabrics, enamels, and appliances in hundreds of stimulating shades and hues. We decorate our homes in Tahiti blue, delphinium, deep bronze, turquoise, rose, emerald, raspberry, old gold, and mace. Color is in the very air we breathe and in the sunlight that gives us life and strength.

The scripture says that Christ "is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made." It says that this "light which shineth, which giveth you light, is through him who enlighteneth your eyes, which is the same light that quickeneth your understandings; Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—The light which is in all things, . . . even the power of God who sitteth upon his throne, who is in the bosom of eternity, who is in the midst of all things." (D&C 88:7, 11-13.)

This wonderful sunshine that comes from God contains the many mysterious elements necessary for life. In addition to lighting up our lives, this wonder of sunshine is what gets into our watermelons to make them grow and gives them color. It vitalizes our vegetables and makes the fruits so delicious to our taste. It is interesting to remember that we do not live on an independent earth. If this colorful light of the sun's rays were turned off for just a few hours, no life would remain upon our earth.

The sun's rays themselves perform great miracles. They come through the frigid pitch-blackness of outer space without giving off their light or heat or color until they reach our atmosphere. Then the sunshine unloads its warmth and distributes its store of vitamins and health to sustain and energize our lives. This beautiful white light is occasionally broken up by the rain to show us God's great rainbow of color, but whether we see them or not, sunshine is always made up of many colors, and they serve many purposes.

We have also learned to make some rainbows of our own. When a scientist passes an ordinary beam of sunlight through a crystal prism, it comes out the other side separated into its various colors of red, blue, yellow, violet, orange, green, and purple with all of the other hues and tints that belong to God's brilliant color spectrum. And then we sometimes apply these rainbow colors to represent those particular traits, colors, and abilities in us.

Since 1893, American universities have used a rainbow color code to represent the different branches of higher learning. At commencement the white tassels on the caps of some graduates indicate that they have graduated from the school of arts and letters, blue stands for philosophy, scarlet is for theology, green is for medicine, purple is for law, golden yellow is for science, orange is for engineering, and pink is for music.

We also take these colors from God's spectrum and apply them to represent certain personality traits in us individually. When we are angry we say that we see red. We sometimes describe the character quality of a person as being true blue. When some people develop a yellow streak, it is an indication that they are suffering from a lack of courage. Under some circumstances, one may be green with envy or white with fear. We use color to describe either those who have a dark past or a rosy future. When we are at our best, we say we are in the pink of condition.

Life itself is a kind of prism through which we filter the sunshine to make the particular spectrum we desire for our own lives. In the spectrum of life, white stands for light, wisdom, purity, joy, and glory. Red stands for courage and valor. Blue, the color of the sky and the ocean, is the most common color. It is also the symbol of heaven. Blue stands for truth, piety, and sincerity. Gold stands for honor and loyalty. We have this quality of genuineness in mind when we frequently describe someone as pure gold. Silver stands for faith. Green is for youth and hope. The darkest and most somber of all of the colors is black. It stands for grief, sorrow, and death. Black is also a malicious, threatening, slanderous, deadly color. It stands for evil and malignancy. We represent blackmail, blackball, and a blackened reputation by this dark, evil color. Of course, our greatest concern should be to keep our souls off life's blacklist by a careful selection of the colors that we use in our own spectrum of living.

We need to include a lot of purple in the arrangement of our life's color scheme. Purple is the royal color and denotes high rank and great nobility. Orange is for continued strength and endurance. But this beautiful white light that comes from God is a composite of all of the colors in God's spectrum. Sometimes we refer to someone as a sunbeam or a ray of sunshine. That is a pretty good idea, and each of us should be filled with the warm sunshine of friendliness and goodwill. Enough of the right colors in our activity will also guarantee our eternal success.

It is, of course, very important that we give the best colors the most dominating positions. On one occasion someone said to an invalid, "My, how sickness does color life." The invalid replied, "It surely does, and so far as I am concerned, I intend to select my own colors." What a great privilege it is that we may take whatever colors we desire from God's spectrum and breed into ourselves individually those traits which they represent.

The other evening I was one of those invited to visit in the newly furnished home of a wealthy friend. No expense had been spared to make his house a model of utility and comfort. It was a showplace of beauty, and all the colors of the rainbow were attractively included. The building itself was of the finest quality, and the designing and decorating left nothing to be desired. It was a little bit difficult, even in imagination, to conceive of anything more attractive, harmonious, beautiful, pleasant, or comfortable. But what was even more important, the occupants themselves radiated an even more satisfying spectrum with those great human qualities which they had built into themselves. Included among the many desirable virtues that stood out in their lives was an aura of love, the warm feeling of friendliness, and the soul of honor.

They exemplified those great maxims that say, An honest man is the noblest work of God; order is the first law of heaven; cleanliness is next to godliness. How beautiful to see great convictions of truth shining like valuable gems in one's life. Their lives had an intelligent purpose. They were filled with joy and enthusiasm. Then, above all of these, is that great quality of godliness that so greatly brightens life. The house in which they lived was very valuable, the furnishings added color, harmony, and beauty, but it was the people who lived there who gave it its greatest importance and meaning.

While enjoying the good dinner, the fine company, the pleasant conversation, and the general beauty in our friend's home, I tried to imagine what the mansions in heaven would be like that were mentioned by Jesus. Someone has said:

If God hath made this world so fair

Where sin and death abound,

How beautiful beyond compare

Will paradise be found.

Jesus said: "In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also." (John 14:2-3.)

On one occasion the apostle Paul indicated that he had once been caught up into paradise, which he refers to as the third heaven, where he "heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter." (2 Corinthians 12:2-4.) And Paul must have known something about what was meant when he quoted the prophet Isaiah and said: "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him." (1 Corinthians 2:9.)

We can imagine beauty, luxury, and elegance that would cost billions of dollars, but Paul says that it has never even entered into man's heart the things that God has prepared for those who love him. And while we cannot imagine the glories of heaven, yet I think that we ought to try. We should also try to imagine what kind of people will live there. The scriptures speak of God's glory. We are told that the magnificence of his presence is so great that a man in his natural state cannot live in his presence. I am sure that the heaven where God dwells will not resemble a hippie camp, nor will that be the kind of people who dwell there. The people who inhabit God's mansions will be godly people. And by using God's own standards that we should judge a tree by its fruits, we can be perfectly sure that God loves beauty, cleanliness, morality, order, and righteousness. We also know that he has great ability as a designer, and that he loves harmony, color, and fragrance. We also know that God loves truth, honor, goodwill, and has in mind an eternal happiness for us; otherwise he would not have gone to such great lengths in recommending that we adopt these traits in our lives. In fact, God has included in us a natural, inborn quest for excellence on an instinctive basis, so that it gives us great joy when these qualities are made a part of our lives and activities.

Of course, we think that our earth, even in its present state, is a very beautiful, wonderful place, but this earth presently exists in its fallen condition. It is still under the curse placed upon it at the transgression of Adam. But some day the earth will be celestialized and become beautiful beyond our present imagination. In that inspired tenth Article of Faith we say, "We believe . . . that Zion will be built upon this [the American] continent; that Christ will reign personally upon the earth; and, that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory." But the glory of the earth will be exceeded by those children of God who dwell upon it.

The ultimate destiny of man is to become a celestial being and qualify for that eternal order to which God himself belongs. The earth will eventually become a celestial sphere and be made a fit place for the Creator's presence. Certainly the glory and majesty of God would not fit very well in a telestial environment. I don't think that he would like to live in a place filled with stifling tobacco smoke or the stale, nauseating smell of liquor. I do not think that he will people the celestial kingdom with those who are out of their minds with some kind of dope addiction or given to sex orgies. I am sure that he would not care to spend his time listening to degrading stories, profane oaths, and seeing acts of violence, or share the spiritual depression of drunken people reveling in crime. Certainly dishonesty, cheating, and selfishness are not a part of God's activity spectrum.

God himself has said that he "cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance" (D&C 1:31) and no evil will ever be permitted in his presence. And if we would sometime like to enjoy the beauty and luxury of his eternal mansions and their appropriate environment, then we must exclude all ugliness and blackness from our lives or it will cause us to be excluded from the celestial kingdom. We should also leave all inharmonies and untruths behind. What a thrill it ought to be that a genuine repentance can purge out those colors of sin and death and help us to develop to the full those colors that come from God's spectrum, made up as it is of that rainbow of virtues that come from him. The light from his presence will kill the germs of every evil and purify our lives that we might qualify for eternal life in that place which Paul describes as the "glory of the sun." (1 Corinthians 15:41.)
