Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Distortion in Definitions

ONE OF the biggest problems of our world is the trouble we have in communicating our ideas because of changed word meanings. When Dante, the Italian poet, wrote his great literary master-piece The Divine Comedy, a comedy was not something that was funny. It was something that had a happy ending. A more understandable title for our day would be A Divine Journey or A Divine Experience.

The Bible admonition to fear God may not give the exact shade of meaning today that was originally intended. Our dictionary sometimes gives as many as forty different meanings for the same word. For example, the word foot may refer to a member of one's body or to a twelve-inch measurement. It may indicate one's position at the foot of his class. The foot of the bed is not the same as the presser foot of a sewing machine. A foot may be a group of syllables constituting a metrical unit of verse, or a measure of music. There are also some figurative meanings, such as "he jumped in with both feet," or "he put his foot down," or "he put his foot into it."

However, we have probably made more changes in our language in the past few years than in many preceding centuries all put together. And as our sins have become worse, and our crime rates have increased, we have so degraded our words and corrupted our speech that we resemble those people who poison their own drinking water. With a more easy acceptance of the so-called new morality, extensive use is made of those slimy, dirty words to give expression to our ideas. Whereas some of our noble, inspiring, wonderful words of the past have been degraded, at the same time they have been robbed of much of their dignity and beauty.

For example, since time began we have had a magnificent word called freedom. To millions of people it has had a sacred tradition with a holy meaning. It has stood for a liberation from slavery and a release from those evil influences which previously held us bound. To some, freedom has also meant the absence of error, evil, weakness, sin, and disease.

On January 6, 1941, President Franklin D. Roosevelt gave a speech about such great American freedoms as the freedom from want and the freedom from fear. Other important traditional freedoms are the freedom of speech, the freedom of religion, and the freedom of assembly. But many evil people are now hiding behind this beautiful and exalted word as they claim a freedom to promote vulgar, disloyal, profane thoughts, causing increases in crime, the degradation of sex, and the multiplication of violence.

The Communists claim validity for such false freedoms as their claimed freedom to enslave such weaker nations as Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and East Germany. They want freedom to bury the United States and to subjugate all nations and bleed them of their material wealth and human resources. They have banished God so as to be free from any religious restraints that would be imposed by an allegiance to any power but their own. We have had a great uprising of people in our own land who claim such false freedoms as the freedom to break the Ten Commandments and the freedom to disbelieve in God.

Many want to be free to enslave themselves with drugs, immorality, and sin. There are many people with problems of immorality, drunkenness, and dope addiction who say: "What I do with my life is nobody's business, but my own." But when their sins result in unstable children and venereal attitudes in others, everyone knows that their sins must be the business of someone else. Some claim the counterfeit freedoms to riot, burn, kill, break the law, shout obscenities at the police, destroy the establishment, and cause anarchy in their own society. Some use this word freedom to cover up verbal filth, pornography, nudity, and the most mini-standards of morality.

Twenty-five hundred years ago Socrates went around ancient Athens saying to people, "Define your terms." Before he engaged in any discussions, he wanted to know what his friends were talking about. It would be a pretty good idea for our own day if we would honor our speech and not degrade our beautiful, honorable words by associating them with debasing, dishonorable practices. Because of our self-granted freedoms to practice the new morality and indulge our criminal tendencies, our entire society has been thrown for a serious moral less.

In the days of Noah the Lord sent a flood to destroy their version of the new morality and wipe out their crime wave. But soon after the flood, sin again began to raise its ugly head in the hearts and in the language of the people. And so from the Tower of Babel the Lord scattered the people abroad over the earth and he confounded their language to make it more difficult for them to contaminate each other. We could greatly upgrade our own society if we would abandon the use of those dirty, disloyal, faith-destroying, degrading words that are inseparably connected with evil activities.

A few years ago the Egyptian armies marched on Jerusalem with the publicly announced intention of subjugating the Israeli people. They distorted their own speech to make their project appear entirely proper to themselves. However, when the Israeli armies fought back and drove the invaders out to a safer distance, the Egyptians accused the Israelis of being the worst kind of aggressors. Nations are sometimes like criminals who attack a community and then cry police brutality when officers of the law try to prevent the destruction the criminals are attempting.

In the past we have had a fine word called reality or realism. It means that we should recognize all facts as they are. That is a fine idea. But the members of some rebellious, angry groups who are trying to overthrow the government, destroy the establishment, ridicule religion, and discredit our finest traditions have now picked up this word and have radically changed its meaning as well as its spirit.

They have invented a battle cry around it which says, "Tell it as it is." With their attitude of destruction, they insist that everything be told as it is at its worst without recognizing any good. They don't want things discussed as they could be or ought to be. Their idea is to talk only about the corruption in government, the hypocrites in society, the crooks in business, and the brutality used in trying to save lives. By distorting the meaning of good words, they try to show that slavery is better than freedom, that anarchy is better than law and order, that those dictators trying to enslave others are more to be desired than the self-government of free, God-fearing men. To them anyone who sees anything good in the establishment is being unrealistic.

The term the new morality in many cases actually means immorality. Jesus was certainly speaking of our new morality when he looked forward to our day and compared our wickedness to Noah's day.

When the great words love and peace are scrawled on the propaganda placards of a hippie camp, they do not have the same meaning that they had when Jesus used them. To these strange human beings, love frequently means the worst kind of a free and promiscuous association of the sexes, and peace may indicate their desire to be excused from any effort or responsibility. One of this new breed said: "We are tired of war, poverty, discrimination, and capitalistic exploitation. We are turning to love, music, communal living, and sharing. We totally reject the rules and regulations of the establishment and are creating a new life style."

When some of the nations objected to the German madman Hitler, who was enslaving the smaller nations, he shouted back in injured anger, "Let us alone. We want peace." He wanted peace so that he could enslave the world. Hippies also want peace; they don't want any of their evil plans regulated. They want to carry on their immorality, dope addiction, and sin in peace.

To describe drug addiction, some of its devotees use such terms as mind expansion rather than soul destruction.

That great Christian word tolerance is now being used as a direct tool of Satan. To some, tolerance means that everything goes, that nothing should be placed out of bounds. With enough tolerance we can make an easy adjustment to every sin. Many years ago Alexander Pope wrote about one kind of tolerance when he said:

Vice is a monster of so frightful mien

As to be hated needs but to be seen;

Yet seen too oft, familiar with her face,

We first endure, then pity, then embrace.

The word high once meant up or elevated or exalted. To many it now refers to one who is under the influence of drugs and living in an unnatural world of make-believe and unreality.

The word festival used to indicate a festive, joyous, happy occasion. It described a day of civil or religious feasting and celebration. Shakespeare once referred to a festival as "a blessed day." But now a festival might refer to a rock music festival, which may also include a drug festival, a sex festival, and a rebellion festival thrown in.

There is a practice of deliberately changing word meanings in order to produce evil, bring about antagonisms, and destroy good. By this process people may be confused and led away from God. The prophet Isaiah could have been speaking of our day when he said:

Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!

Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight!

Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink:

Which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him! (Isaiah 5:20-23.)

The scriptures announce several serious curses because of these deceptions. In the book of Deuteronomy it is said: "Cursed be he that removeth his neighbour's landmark. . . . Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger. . . . Cursed be he that confirmeth not all of the words of this law to do them." (Deuteronomy 27:17, 19, 26.)

Jeremiah said: ". . . for every man's word shall be his burden; for ye have perverted the words of the living God." (Jeremiah 23:36.)

We also distort the meanings of the commandments by our disobedience. The other day on the street I passed a group of young girls who were probably fifteen to seventeen years of age, and even in this age of degenerate sights, I was shocked to see them. They looked like a vicious pack of prowling wild animals. Conforming to a spirit so common in our day, they seemed to have made their inappropriate boys' clothing about as dirty and unattractive as possible. Their long hair was uncombed and their persons uncared for. Their attitudes and expressions were the outward indications of what I am certain was going on inside of them. It was evident that these young female human beings had long since abandoned their parents, their homes, and their interest in the Ten Commandments.

They were perverting the ways of the Lord by the sin that was corroding away their resemblance to that Divine Being in whose image they had been created. Certainly they were missing their high destiny of being the most beautiful part of God's great creation. Neither were they qualifying to be the holy inspiration for God's man-creation, nor were they producing the purity of life required to be the mothers of those spirits that God desires to send into the world through their instrumentality. Certainly they were missing the commandment which God had said to them: "Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord." (D&C 38:42.)

I shuddered as I thought about what the ultimate end might finally be for these young women. The outward signs indicated an overwhelming possibility of drug-addiction, immorality, and many other kinds of evil. The sex patterns of our day clearly point out what will happen as these females make their contacts with their male counterparts. And what chance will their children have for a good life when they are born and molded under such unfavorable circumstances?

How far some of us are missing the high mark set by the Lord when he said, "Verily I say unto you all: Arise and shine forth that thy light may be a standard for the nations." (D&C 115:5.) Again he said: "For Zion must increase in beauty, and in holiness, her borders must be enlarged; her stakes must be strengthened; yea, verily I say unto you, Zion must arise and put on her beautiful garments." (D&C 82:14.)

The most beautiful creations of God are his children, and in many ways the most favored of his children are those designated to bear and rear children. Certainly they should strive to be beautiful even as God is beautiful. There can be no question about the fact that God is a lover of beauty. The Bible says God made everything beautiful. (Ecclesiastes 3:11.) Order is the first law of heaven and cleanliness is next to godliness. God dresses in beautiful clothing. When Jesus took Peter, James, and John up onto a high mountain and was transfigured in the presence of Moses and Elias, the record says: ". . . and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light." (Matthew 17:2.)

May we use our greatest power in maintaining the meaning of our noble words and also in making our lives and actions beautiful.
