Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

A Dog's Life

RECENTLY FROM my hotel room very early in the morning I heard a dog barking down on the street, and as I was lying there in my bed listening to him bark, I had a number of interesting thoughts about him. I calculated that there was a rather large number of other people whom the dog had awakened, and like me, they were now listening to him. My first thought was to wonder why this dog's owner had given him so much freedom to break up the slumbers of so many people. However, I was mostly concerned with the dog himself, and I thought how interesting it would be to understand what his life would be like and how it would be to see the world from a dog's point of view. Ordinarily dogs are very intelligent animals, and many of them have been closely associated with human beings. They have some senses more highly developed than our own. That is, they have a better sense of direction, a keener sense of smell, and an ability to hear that is far superior to ours.

I wondered what kind of ideas dogs had about life and how they felt about people. I wondered if they were ever discouraged with their dog's life or if they ever envied us or if they ever made any comparisons with us as I was now doing with them. Although he had awakened me a little early, I didn't feel too bad about it, as I was very comfortable in my bed. I felt a little sorry that in all probability he never had a bed better than a cold doorstep. Because this dog seemed to enjoy his barking, I wondered just what he was getting out of it. As far as I know, barking and wagging his tail are about the only means of communication or expression that a dog has. If this dog was trying to say anything, he seemed to have only one phrase, for he kept repeating the same bark over and over again. It seemed to me quite unlikely that this dog believed that he was doing any essential service by his barking. He probably was not trying to extend a morning greeting or sound an alarm or do any entertaining. Apparently he was not trying to communicate with any other dog. I wondered if those dogs that were watch dogs or sheep dogs or human companions or pets felt that they were profitably employed. In any event, it never seemed to occur to them to go on a strike, incite a rebellion, or even object to being underfed or mistreated.

In my earlier years, I had some very pleasant relationships with some faithful, devoted dogs. I don't know how I could have felt a greater personal loss than I did when one of my faithful dogs was run over by an automobile after I had raised him from a pup. I will always remember the look of love and pain in his eyes as I nursed him through his dying hours. And even after many years have passed, he still seems to be an important part of my memories. Even now I felt a kind of friendly fellowship with this dog barking outside the hotel. However, I found myself being grateful that I didn't have to change places with him, as I greatly preferred the better comfort, wider range of activities, and more effective means of expression that the Creator had granted to me as a human being. it would seem to me to be a very serious limitation if I couldn't read, write, laugh, talk, work, and do the thousand other interesting things that people do while dogs just bark, lie on the doorstep, and wait for some opportunity to be with and serve their masters.

Then I thought of the restricted means of expression that is given to all of God's other nonhuman creatures. The primary means of vocal expression for the rooster is to crow, and he crows in the same key and hits the same notes that roosters have been hitting for thousands of years. And none of the others seem to be any better off. Hens cackle, frogs croak, cows bellow, horses neigh, birds sing, pigs grunt, sheep bleat, goats blat, snakes hiss and rattle, bears growl, and lions roar. A bee sets up a series of buzzes as he makes his rounds of thousands of miles gathering his honey and storing it in the same quality hexagon-shaped honeycomb cell in which bees have stored their honey for thousands of years. The cells of the present-day honeycomb are exactly the same dimensions as those found in Egypt manufactured by the bees of thousands of years ago. Apparently the honey then had the same quality, the same taste, and the same appearance as now. It seems that none of the animal creations are ever permitted to learn a single thing from any previous generation.

However, we are almost overwhelmed by this vast array of life. Many of God's animal creations have talents far surpassing our own. For example, on an average, a turtle lives longer, a rabbit runs faster, an eagle sees farther, a horse has a better sense of direction, a dog has a keener scent, and yet they have these severe limits placed upon them beyond which they cannot go, so that all animals must do their thing exactly as they have done it for thousands of years. As far as we can see, they have no future growth prospects in sight. Even with their keen senses and their alertness, all of their limitations seem definitely and unchangeably fixed.

It is interesting to read in the Bible the account of God's creation in which animals play such an important part. Sometime ago someone complained that the Bible contradicted itself with two accounts of the creation, but the Bible clearly tells of two different creations, not just one as is sometimes believed. The account of the creation given in the first chapter of Genesis is a spiritual creation. The one recorded in the second chapter is an earthly, physical creation. The Bible also makes clear that animals and plants, as well as people, were a part of the spiritual creation in heaven before they were made to grow physically upon the earth. Of the fifth day of creation the book of Genesis looks forward to an earthly creation and says:

"And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and the fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.

"And God created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

"And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth.

"And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.

"And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind: and it was so.

"And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind: and God saw that it was good.

"And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

"So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.

And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth." (Genesis 1:20-28.)

Then in the second chapter of Genesis everything is in readiness for an earthly creation, and the record says:

"These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens,

"And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground.

"But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.

"And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.

"And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed.

"And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

"And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him an help meet for him.

"And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air. . . ." (Genesis 2:4-9, 18-19.)

The Lord said, ". . . nevertheless, all things were before created; but spiritually were they created and made according to my word." (Moses 3:7.) That is, plants, animals including my canine friend at the hotel, and people all lived in heaven before they were physically placed upon the earth. Certainly animals have spirits the same as humans do. They will also have a resurrection and an immortality. I am confident that if we understood the entire program of God we would be more than ever delighted with the benefits of our own lives. I am so grateful that God has lavished so many blessings upon his own children. First he gave us the most noble identity when he created us in his own image. He gave us the form of angels. The beast was put down on all fours and thus his vision was cast upon the ground, but man was created upright in the image of his Maker that he might look up to God and to righteousness and to progress and to his destiny, which is to become like his eternal heavenly parents. We have a Father in heaven. We also have a mother in heaven, as certainly no one ever had a Father in heaven or on the earth without also having a mother. And we were given our godly powers of expression so that we could laugh and sing and love and think and feel happiness and be thrilled with joy.

It is very interesting to me to try to imagine what a dog's life is like, but the most exciting idea that I can think of in the world is to think about what it may someday be like to know firsthand what God's life is like.

It seems quite unlikely that a rather ugly caterpillar ever even imagines that he may someday be a beautiful butterfly. But one of the great blessings of our lives is that we may know in advance that it is our destiny to become like God. Among our other great endowments, God has given us the most wonderful language possibility, enabling us to enjoy a happy and meaningful communication with God and with others of our kind. The animals are unable to read or write even the most simple speech, and it has been pointed out that anyone is unable to think effectively until he has a language to think with. Beautiful poetry, eloquent prose, and stimulating experiences can all be used in forming beautiful words, pleasant emotions, and the most noble, exciting thoughts.

The psalmist said: "How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth! Through thy precepts I get understanding: . . . Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path." (Psalm 119:103-105.) And the writer of Proverbs says, "Pleasant words are as an honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and health to the bones." (Proverbs 16:24.)

How grateful we should be that God did not limit us to barks, growls, bleats, and hisses. As our means of expression, he gave us words, and we may sing, pray, laugh, and worship. Contemplating our marvelous human creation, the psalmist said:

"When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained;

"What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?

"For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour.

"Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under his feet." (Psalm 8:3-6.)

One translation of this scripture says: "Thou hast made him for a little while lower than the angels." When we have made the most of our situation, then God will exalt us on high. Then we will know something about life in its most pleasant form, and we may understand the scripture which says, "O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! . . ." (Psalm 8:1.) What an exciting idea to contemplate that God, angels, spirits, and men are all of the same species in various degrees of righteousness and in different stages of development. The only restrictions that are placed on us now or in eternity are those that we place upon ourselves.

It should be our primary objective in life to do all of those important things necessary to qualify.
