Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

An Epitaph

THE MOST valuable commodity in the universe is life, and two of the most important events in life are birth and death. Everything depends upon being born, but death is equally important as it is our entrance into immortality. The two important events of birth and death have an interesting relationship to each other, as we live to die and then we die to live. Most of life is preparation. We prepare for school; we prepare for marriage; we prepare for our life's work; we prepare for death. In the antemortal existence we prepared for this life; in this life we prepare for eternal life. The event that gives life most of its importance and urgency is death; and the more effectively we have lived, the more satisfactorily we may die.

Everything depends on what we do in between these two dates.

The thing that everybody wants to know about a basketball game is the score. At a horse race, people congregate at the tape to see how the horses finish. That is also the most interesting thing about the race of life. Jesus was anticipating our final score when he said, ". . . he that endureth to the end shall be saved." (Matthew 10:22.)

A lot of people have made wonderful starts but poor finishes. Others start poorly and finish like champions. Some with championship possibilities become dropouts and never reach the finish line. The greatest preparation for death is to make the most of our life, and the billing slip of every birth points to that time when we will be laid away in the cemetery. As usual farewell procedures, our friends get together and conduct a memorial service in our honor where eulogies are said and someone writes a final epitaph to go on our tombstone. These last words serve as a kind of summary of our life. The word epitaph comes from the Greek words epi, which means "upon," and taphos, which means "tomb." Therefore an epitaph is an inscription on one's tomb, which is usually made as full of praise as possible to represent all of our final score, including all of our hopes and eulogies.

Sir Chiristopher Wren was the builder of St. Paul's Cathedral and many other famous buildings in and around London. When he died they buried him in the cathedral that he had built. On the wall above his grave were inscribed these words; "Here is laid to rest the builder of the Church and the City. If you seek his monument look around you."

The science of criminology says that no one can pass through a room without leaving some evidence of his having been there. It may be only a footprint or a fallen hair or a scent, and yet to some extent everyone modifies his environment. Our epitaph will sum up the evidence that we leave of how successfully we have lived our lives. Christopher Wren left behind him a great cathedral in which thousands could worship God. Others leave dens of vice, where thousands bring eternal damnation upon themselves as well as lead other people to ruin. Some have taught false doctrines and destroyed people's faith in God.

Some have walked at the head of a caravan going down that broad road toward eternal death and have left their epitaphs written in the immorality that they have left blossoming along the way. The apostle Paul left thousands of devoted Christians who had obtained their faith through his personal teachings. He also left many uplifting letters that for nineteen centuries have been inspiring people toward righteousness. Paul wrote his own epitaph, saying, "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith." (2 Timothy 4:7.)

Thomas Jefferson also wrote a summary of his own mortal existence. In it he called attention to the fact that he was the author of the Declaration of Independence and the president of the University of Virginia. He did not mention that he had also been the President of the United States for two terms, bought Florida from Spain, made the Louisiana Territory a part of the United States, and had been a member of Congress, Vice President of the United States, and Governor of Virginia.

On the tomb of Robert Burns a friend inscribed the following:

An honest man here lies at rest,

As e'er God with His image blest;

A friend of man, a friend of truth,

A friend of age, and a guide of youth.

Few hearts like this with virtue warm'd,

Few heads with knowledge so inform'd.

If there's another world, he lives in bliss;

If there's none, he made the best of this.

On a tombstone in Aberdeen Churchyard is written:

Here lie I, Martin Elginbrodde;

Have mercy on my soul, Lord God,

As I would have were I Lord God,

And ye were Martin Elginbrodde.

David Gray wrote:

Below lies one whose name was traced in sand;

He died not knowing what it was to live.

Robert Burns wrote the epitaph for his father as follows:

O ye, whose cheek the tear of pity stains,

Draw near with pious rev'rence and attend!

Here lie the loving husband's dear remains,

The tender father, and the gen'rous friend.

The pitying heart that felt for human woe,

The dauntless mind that fear'd no human pride,

The friend of man—to vice alone a foe,

For even his failings lean'd to virtue's side.

And Mark Twain wrote on his daughter's tomb:

Warm summer sun,

Shine kindly here.

Warm southern wind,

Blow softly here.

Green sod above,

Lie light, Lie light,

Good night, dear heart,

Good night, good night.

Edwin Markham wrote an interesting epitaph for himself. He said:

Let us not think of our departed dead

As caught and cumbered in these graves of earth,

But think of death as of another birth—

As a new freedom for the wings outspread,

A new adventure waiting on ahead,

As a new joy of more ethereal mirth,

As a new world with friends of nobler worth,

Where all may taste a more immortal bread.

So comrades if you pass my grave sometime,

Pause long enough to breathe this little rhyme;

Here now the dust of Edwin Markham lies,

But lo, he is not here, he is afar

On life's great errands under brighter skies,

And pressing on toward some more melodious star.

It might be a very worthwhile project to undertake to write an epitaph that would fit our own lives. Or as an alternative, suppose that we were going to invite God to give the eulogy at our funeral. It would be stimulating to plan what we would hope that he would say of us on that occasion. Actually, we are the ones that will determine what is said and written, and we have a lifetime to furnish the evidence from which the inscriptions on our monuments will be taken. Our funeral service is the last and one of the most important sessions that we will ever attend. It will be the only one where our final life's score will be calculated.

At our funeral many important things may be said. That will be the time when God and our friends will be standing at the finish line. That will also be the time when they will sum up our lives and write our score in the Lord's book of life and carve our epitaphs on our tombstone and in their hearts. They will also send us on our way by giving some loving eulogies and singing a few sacred hopeful songs of farewell at our departure. There is a sacred song sung at many funerals called "The Christian's Good Night," in which we sing:

Good night, beloved,

Sleep and take thy rest.

Oh, lay thy head

Upon my weary breast.

We love thee well,

But Jesus loves thee best,

Good night, Good night, Good night.

There is another hopeful, comforting hymn that might make up a part of the spirit of our final epitaph, and by which we may be encouraged to look forward to our destiny. It is called "Beyond the Sunset."

Beyond the sunset, oh blissful morning,

When with our Savior, heaven is begun.

Earth's toiling ended—oh glorious dawning,

Beyond the sunset when day is done.

Beyond the sunset, no clouds will gather,

No storms will threaten, no fears annoy.

Oh day of gladness, oh day unending,

Beyond the sunset, eternal joy.

Beyond the sunset, oh glad reunion

With our dear loved ones, who've gone before.

In that fair homeland, we'll know no parting,

Beyond the sunset, for ever more.

We can't all make our entrance upon the stage of life at the same time. We were sent ahead of our children to prepare the way, to get an education, to learn to make a living, and to provide a home for them. Some must also leave this life ahead of others for similar reasons. The following lines may help us during this time of separation.

Should you go first and I remain

To walk the road alone,

I'll live in memory's garden, dear,

With happy days we've known.

In spring I'll wait for roses red

When fades the lilac blue,

In early fall when brown leaves call

I'll catch a glimpse of you.

Should you go first and I remain

For battles to be fought,

Each thing you've touched along the way

Will be a hallowed spot.

I'll hear your voice,

I'll see your smile,

Though blindly I may grope.

The memory of your helping hand

Will buoy me up with hope.

Should you go first and I remain

To finish with the scroll,

No lengthening shadows shall creep in

To make this life seem droll.

We've known so much of happiness;

We've had our cup of joy.

And memory is the gift of God

That death cannot destroy.

Should you go first and I remain,

One thing I'd have you do:

Walk slowly down that long lone path,

For soon I'll follow you.

I'll want to know each step you take

That I may walk the same,

For someday down the lonely road,

You'll hear me call your name.

And so we return again to the idea that all of life is a preparation, and what a tremendous experience we expect to have when we cross the borders of this life! Then we will have that happiness and glory promised by the Lord, discussed at our funerals, and written in our hearts. Then we will know love, beauty, happiness, and a feeling of worthwhileness that we have never yet imagined. Therefore, with these important dates of our birth behind us and our death ahead of us, we might muster our greatest efforts to make the most of what is immediately before us.
