Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Ergophobia

SOMEONE RECENTLY wrote to the question and answer section of a newspaper and asked the writer of the column to explain to her the nature of a disease called ergophobia. The inquirer had a relative who had been diagnosed as suffering from this particular malady, and she wanted to know the symptoms and what the percentages of fatalities were. The newspaper representative explained that ergophobia was an aversion to work or a fear of work. He went on to say that while an intense dislike for work was not necessarily fatal, yet it could be and in a great many cases it actually has been.

We do not always understand the widespread devastation caused by this plague that makes it one of the most dreadful of all human diseases. Of course, a less imposing name for ergophobia is just plain laziness. On many occasions Jesus referred to this destructive malady as sloth, and so far as is known, the most stinging rebuke ever heaped upon the head of anyone by him was upon the unprofitable servant whose fear made him bury his talent in the ground. Jesus was kind to the repentant adulteress. He had a sympathetic interest in the thief on the cross who wanted to do better, but he said to the lazy man: "Thou wicked and slothful servant." (Matthew 25:26.) Then he said to those who were with him: "Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which hath ten talents. . . . And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." (Matthew 25:28, 30.) Jesus came into the world calling for workers. He was pleased with people who were willing to do their share. He spoke of that eternal law that even faith without works is dead. It is always true that when we take away the works, the faith dies. You can't keep faith in cold storage. There is no such thing as preserved faith, and there is no excellence without labor.

The dictionary says that a sloth is a sluggish, slow-moving, tree-dwelling mammal with long front legs and curved claws that enable him to hang from tree limbs while he eats its leaves. However, the dictionary also explains that sloth is an inclination to inaction and indolence in people. It is a disinclination to labor, an allergy to service with an attendant lack of growth. How our society would be improved if in one of our knowledge explosions we could find a cure for sloth with its kindred ailments of lethargy, indifference, and apathy. The idler is a sloth, the ignoramus is a sloth. The one who steals to avoid work is a sloth. Some drug addicts will steal or kill to get dope, but few of them will do constructive work. Disloyal draft dodgers have ergophobia. Hippies have ergophobia. Some of the so-called Jesus people, participating in the new craze, will sing, march, and shout slogans, if someone else will support them. As a result of our scientific medical research, some of our most deadly physical diseases have been practically eliminated. The once dread diseases of tuberculosis, diphtheria, polio, and spinal meningitis have now almost disappeared. In 1886 smallpox killed over 120,000 people in the United States, but so far as is known, in recent years smallpox has not killed a single person. But ergophobia is now with us in its most exaggerated form. An idle mind is the devil's workshop. An idle body causes all kinds of weakness, degeneration, nervous breakdowns, and death. When the real business of this planet began, God first closed down the Garden of Eden paradise, and his very first law had to do with the development of our industry. He said: "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread. . . ." (Genesis 3:19.)

This is not a command of punishment; it is a command of opportunity. This is not just the way that we get our bread; it is also the way that we develop our characters, build our bodies, and improve our personalities. This is also the way that we provide for ourselves and our families and do almost every other worthwhile thing in the world. Later this law was supplemented out of the fires and smoke from the top of Mount Sinai when God said: "Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work." (Exodus 20:9.) Mostly we don't work six days anymore. We have greatly reduced not only the days and the hours, but also the work. We declare many extra holidays. We have many long and frequent vacations. We fill our shortening days with rest periods and coffee breaks. Unemployment insurance has induced many people to spend a large part of their lives in paid idleness.

We have had some government programs that have paid people for not growing crops. With our government subsidies and relief, we pay a large part of our population for their sloth. The government gets its money for handouts by raising the taxes and increasing the national debt rather than the old-fashioned way that says that the idler "shall not eat the bread nor wear the garments of the laborer." (D&C 42:42.) Instead of commemorating Labor Day with a good demonstration of labor, we even spend our Labor Days in idleness, and many people are now looking forward to a four-day week with a three-hour day.

We have disregarded the instruction of Jesus about being doers of the word and not hearers only. Christianity itself is not just a collection of ideas; it is a set of activities. Scientists can now repair damaged hearts and successfully remove parts of diseased stomachs, but when one gets this crippling disease of ergophobia, he is beyond the reach of doctors and is in serious trouble all over. His income is reduced; his enthusiasm for life goes down; his education deteriorates. His nervous system suffers, and he tends to lose his moral, mental, and spiritual, as well as his financial, health.

Dr. Alexus Carrol once wrote a great book entitled Man, the Unknown. He says that men and women were built for struggle. It was intended that they should subdue the elements, suffer fatigue and hunger, and fight with wild beasts. Now we sleep in heated bedrooms, ride to work in heated automobiles, eat soft food, and get our tissues shot through with ergophobia. In the beginning God said: ". . . cursed is the ground for thy sake; . . . Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee." (Genesis 3:17-18.) This extra work is good for us. But now most of our mental, as well as our physical, work is done for us by machines. The result is that we weaken ourselves. It seems that every power that we summon to our aid makes us weaker. When we walk with crutches, our leg muscles deteriorate. Not only does faith die without works, but almost every other thing dies as well. When the mole quit using his eyes, nature took away his eyesight. When we stop using the muscles in our arms or our brains or our personality, they first get flabby and then disappear.

Recently I reread the story of Mark Anthony, the friend and successor of Julius Caesar. He made himself the master of the world and then died of ergophobia. After Caesar's assassination, the world was divided into two great war camps. One was led by the conspirators under Brutus, the other by Octavius Caesar and Mark Anthony. During the long hard war that followed, Mark Anthony distinguished himself as the greatest general in the world. How did he do it? The primary part of his success was industry, and his awful fate came because of his idleness.

Someone has described his rise and fall as follows:

"Armed with his tireless industry, his convincing speech, the power of his logic, the courage of his leadership, and his own self-discipline, he swept everything before him. He took upon himself the hardest tasks with the most wondrous good cheer. He lived for weeks on a diet of insects and the bark of trees. This dedication and ability soon won the unquestioned loyalty of his men, the acclaim of the people, the support of Octavius and his own self-confidence.

"Opposed by such power, the enemy generals began dropping out of the fight one by one and finally when the war was won Mark Anthony stood where the great Julius Caesar had once stood, as the unquestioned master of the world."

But when the need for struggle was past, Mark Anthony became idle. Probably the greatest error that anyone ever makes is to quit, to become inactive, to give up, to surrender himself to indolence.

Mark Anthony fell in love with the bewitching Queen Cleopatra of Egypt. He became victim of the soft luxury, perfumed elegance, and immorality of the Egyptian court. His great mind became clouded by the fumes of wine, and as he abandoned his better self, his magnificent personality began to disintegrate. Then he soon lost the loyalty of his men, the acclaim of the people, the support of Octavius, and his own self-respect. Finally a guard of soldiers was sent from headquarters to take Anthony into custody and bring him back to Rome in chains. It did not now require an army to take Mark Anthony. A mere handful of the most ordinary soldiers was now all that was needed.

Anthony avoided arrest by thrusting a dagger into his own heart. As he lay dying, he recounted to Cleopatra that there had been no power in the world sufficient to overthrow him except his own power. He said, "Only Anthony could conquer Anthony." Then contemplating the arrival of the soldiers and the great disgrace that he had brought upon his nation, his associates, his family, and his friends, he made his last speech, which William Haynes Little has translated into verse:

Let not Caesar's servile minions

Mock the lion thus laid low.

'Twas no foeman's arm that felled him.

'Twas his own hand struck the blow.

He who pillowed on thy bosom

Turned aside from glory's way;

When made drunk with thy caresses,

Madly threw the world away.

Mark Anthony had held securely in his hands the control of the entire world, and there had been no power on the earth sufficient to take it away from him except his own power. "Only Anthony could conquer Anthony." Then because of his own idleness and evil he threw away an entire world. But each of us holds in his hands a world that is far more valuable than that which belonged to Mark Anthony. There is no power in the world that can stand between us and the celestial kingdom of God except our own power, but by a little idleness, a little sin, a little thoughtlessness, and a little sloth each of us may throw away every blessing.

George S. Benson, nationally known educator, author, lecturer, columnist, and fighter for private enterprise, tells the story of the seagulls of Conch Island, Florida, just off the waterfront of St. Augustine. Some years back, their pitiful plight made news all over the nation. The Conch Island gulls were the pride of the Atlantic; powerful of wing and keen of eye, they were flashing, slashing, diving fishermen. For years they would fly each morning far out to sea, search out their small fish prey schools, and dive among them to eat their fill.

Then the shrimp fleet moved into St. Augustine. In the late evening of each day, the fleet would come in from the shrimp grounds, and at dockside, clean thousands of pounds of shrimp. The water was littered with bits of culled shrimp. The Conch Island gulls quickly recognized their bonanza. Naturally there was no longer any need for them to fly for hundreds of miles out over the ocean looking for food. The tide brought the shrimp right up on their Conch Island beaches. To the seagulls it was like having their supper served in bed.

For three years the shrimp fleet stayed at St. Augustine. Then it moved far around the coast. The Conch Island gulls waited in vain for their food to be served to them. After a few days they began starving. Their shrimp handout had ended. The St. Augustine residents heard the gulls' mounting screams. When they investigated, they found that the older gulls had lost their ability to hunt and fish for themselves, and the new generation of gulls had never learned at all. Whether we are talking about the animal kingdom or the members of our human society, the handout program is the most dangerous, the most self-defeating, and, in the end, the cruelest policy that anyone can adopt.

A great welfare program where handouts are given to citizens and nations soon makes them become like the Conch Island gulls, unable and uninterested in taking care of themselves. When people need help, our natural tendency is to rush to their aid. Our love for someone, or our money, or our abundance can easily get in the way of wisdom and destroy the receiver.

Recently I talked with a young man who for a few years had been a partial practitioner of the philosophy of one variety of hippie-ism. Now he wanted to do better, but it was difficult for him as he was just plain lazy. His skin was a kind of death color. He had little to show for muscles, where his chest should have been he had a depression, and it seemed as though he didn't have enough strength to work up a sweat. He was another victim of this world plague of ergophobia.

If God answered all of our prayers for peace and plenty, we would all soon destroy ourselves. Emerson says that mostly we are parlor soldiers. We like to dine nicely and sleep warm, but we shun the vigorous battle of life where strength is born. A far better prayer is for us to help God, and as it has been said, "The hands that help are holier than the lips that merely pray." Someone prayed a great prayer, saying:

I ask no heaven till earth be thine,

No glorious crown till all thy work be done;

When earth shall shine among the stars,

Her sins wiped out, her captives free,

When all men live gloriously unto thee,

Then for my crown, more work give thou unto me.
