Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Fool's Gold

ONE OF the most important substances in our world is its gold. It has been widely sought after since time began. Many prospectors have given their lives in finding it, and numerous wars have been fought for its possession. The discovery of gold at Sutter's Fort in 1848 initiated a kind of human stampede when people from every part of the country headed for California.

Gold is prominently mentioned in the history books and in the Bible itself. It has been used to erect temples and idols. A tradition suggests that even the streets of heaven may be paved with gold. The ancient Greek deity Dionysus granted King Midas his fondest wish so that everything he touched would be turned into gold. But in one way or another, there are many people who are still trying to make this golden dream come true. Some people have married for gold, some have labored for it, and others have stolen it. Stories have been written about the goose that laid golden eggs and the Garden of Hesperides, where grew the golden apples that were guarded by nymphs and a sleepless dragon. We also remember Jason and the golden fleece and Edgar Allen Poe's story of the "Gold Bug." But we are all still on the alert for buried treasures, and we are constantly being bitten by various gold bugs or hit with gold bricks.

Gold is also one of our most important commercial articles. We use gold for ornaments, for jewelry, and for filling our teeth. Before it was against the law we also carried golden coins in our pockets. But because gold is so important to our national trade and credit, the government has now taken over primary possession of it. Instead of having it guarded by sleepless dragons, we have now buried it at Fort Knox and have it guarded by some sleepless machine guns. But even though it is buried it is still very important. Gold has a specific gravity of 19-3/10, which means that it is nineteen times heavier than water. Because pure gold is too soft for ordinary use, it is hardened by alloying it with some other metals. Then its purity is measured in carats. A carat is 1/24th; hence an alloy containing 14/24th gold is said to be a 14 carats fine; 18/24ths would be 18 carats fine; and pure gold is 24 carats. The price of pure gold was set by legislation on January 31, 1934, at $35.00 per ounce. We use this as a measuring stick for other values. We sometimes try to compliment someone by saying that he is worth his weight in gold. If you have a 120-pound wife worth her weight in gold, her value would be $50,000. If she were turned into 120 pounds of gold, she would be about 1/19 of her present size, whereas if she were turned into gold and her size kept constant, her weight would increase to a total of 2,280 pounds.

For a hundred years prior to 1934, gold was the primary support of our monetary system. We referred to this system as the gold standard. Under it, creditors could expect that all debts would be paid in gold. This gave everyone the confidence of a secure foundation and a value that could be depended upon. However, after the first World War, some of the nations were unable to pay their debts in gold, and one by one they abandoned the gold standard and adopted in its place a kind of managed currency. Under this new arrangement, certain government officials are supposed to use their personal opinions to determine what our money should be worth. But at about this same time, we also began to abandon some of our symbolic gold standards. We began substituting our own personal opinions for what had previously been unchangeable. For centuries, the Ten Commandments and the Sermon on the Mount had served as a kind of gold standard of conduct. These fundamental codes were built on the word of God, who is "the same yesterday, to day, and for ever." (Hebrews 13:8.) In our day, he has the same standards of honesty, reverence, faith, and morality that he has had since time began.

However, in some way, we his children have largely abandoned many of the time-honored standards of truth, and in their place we have come to depend on personal opinions, frequently based on satisfying our own individual convenience. In place of our time-honored gold standard, a kind of new morality has arisen among us by which we measure our conduct by a new yardstick. In this new code, there are no harsh authoritative "thou shalt not's" such as are found in the Ten Commandments. This new standard places very little if any conduct out of bounds. Our new code sometimes says that God is dead and that what one believes doesn't matter very much. It proclaims that we are the products of our environments so that no one is to blame for what he does. With this process of reasoning, we can use a lot of cheap substitutes instead of insisting on the genuine article.

According to the kind of alloy that is used, one may have yellow gold, white gold, or green gold. We can have 10-carat gold, 14-carat gold, 18-carat gold, or 24-carat gold. But it is an interesting fact that nature has also fashioned some cheap gold counterfeits in the form of iron pyrites that are called fool's gold, and although they are only worthless counterfeits, many people have thought of them as genuine.

I suppose that one of the hardest of life's lessons is to learn that all is not gold that glitters. Even in the ten-cent stores, we may buy the most wonderful collection of gold rings and bracelets, set with giant diamonds. We also have some gold rushes of our own in which we strike out for some of those symbolic forms of fool's gold. And although these imitations sometimes seem very impressive, they are only counterfeits of the genuine article. For just as diamonds can be made out of glass, and worthless twenty-dollar bills can be made to look real, so we can develop counterfeit character traits, imitation religions, and moral standards made of fool's gold. Emerson once said that our greatest sin is pretense. He said that most of us were like pennies trying to pass ourselves off for half dollars. Many of us live in a kind of fool's paradise and indulge in fool's reasoning and enjoy a fool's happiness. But when these imitations are tested in the fire or examined in the light of God's truths, they are often found to be worse than worthless.

The dictionary says that a fool is one who is deficient in judgment or who so lacks discretion that he acts absurdly or stupidly. It is interesting that very few people fail in life because they lack intelligence or can't develop sufficient ability. Too frequently we are simply fooled or misinformed or careless or disinterested. Because our judgment can never be any better than our information, we frequently fail to reach our goals primarily because of our foolishness. Even the scriptures make more references to fools than to sinners. Penitentiaries, reform schools, and mental hospitals also contain more victims of error and weakness than of intentional sin. Almost everyone wants to do right and to be successful and happy. But sometimes we never quite reach our goals merely because we do the wrong things. We allow ourselves to be influenced by the wrong people and develop the wrong objectives and attitudes.

So far as we are informed, the rich man mentioned in the scriptures who died while his barns were bulging with goods that he couldn't use was not an evil man. Jesus didn't say that he was dishonest, immoral, or lazy. Certainly, he appears to have been very successful in his occupation. He must have been an intelligent and industrious worker to have accumulated such a great amount of wealth. The Lord didn't call him a sinner; he merely said he was a fool. Apparently, this man had misunderstood the real objectives of life and was therefore unprepared for death. With his wealth stacked around him he heard the Lord say, "Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee." (Luke 12:20.) Certainly anyone is foolish who exhausts his energy on those things that can never bring him any benefit, and yet this is exactly what so many people do. Our testing is being given in a world of opposites where we see the contrasts of good and evil, success and failure, right and wrong side by side. The wheat and the tares are frequently allowed to grow together until harvest time. These contrasts can help us to develop our judgment and our righteousness. However, we should be aware that every genuine article has a counterfeit that we must learn to recognize. It has been pointed out that even God has no temple where Satan does not soon locate some den of vice close by.

Jesus established the gospel of Jesus Christ upon the earth and taught those divine principles which, if practiced, would enable us to qualify for God's highest kingdom. But immediately a flood of counterfeits were introduced. As the scripture says, the people had "transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, and broken the everlasting covenant" (Isaiah 24:5) that Christ himself had established. In our own day of enlightenment, a dozen counterfeit doctrines are being proclaimed for every one that is genuine. In his own image God created male and female and gave them a miraculous power called procreation. This was part of the divine program wherein all of God's spirit children may receive a mortal body under the most favorable circumstances. It was ordained that this power of procreation should be exercised only within the sacred confines of the marriage relationship, where children could be loved, educated, and provided for. But this great power was soon being abused, and presently a vast group of moral counterfeiters are contending for premarital and extramarital sex relationships.

There is a kind of free love promiscuity that is painted with the glamour of fool's gold. However, because it ruins the lives of many people, it is far worse than counterfeit. There are other counterfeiters who prostitute the beauty and appeal of the human body in their attempts to sell booze or get people to buy cigarettes or do those other things that have a soul-destroying effect. All of the virtues, the character traits, and even the abilities are the targets of counterfeiters. To live on counterfeit money would be undesirable and unpleasant, but how much worse to live a counterfeit life and know that we ourselves are phonies instead of genuine human beings. Frequently, even one's ideas, ambitions, and ideals are counterfeit, and then his whole accomplishment usually turns out to be nothing more than fool's gold. Fool's gold may have a lot of glitter but it gives no real satisfaction. It would be disappointing to find that your valuable diamond ring was a worthless imitation from the ten-cent store. But how much worse to discover that your loves, friendships, or virtues had no real substance and were actually worse than worthless.

Recently the newspapers told of a group of young hoodlums who get their greatest happiness from glue sniffing and dope addiction. Dishonesty and sloth are the counterfeits of honor and industry, and they can easily set in motion those influences that can make one's life itself worthless. Instead of building quality and genuineness in oneself, there always seems to be a temptation to try to counterfeit happiness and to get our feelings of worthwhileness by merely taking off and getting drunk. But this false sense of elation soon wears off, and the resulting depression of spirit proclaims the harmfulness of such cheap counterfeits. The glittering fool's gold called alcohol always leaves one far worse off than he was before. Anyone is a fool who lives by fool's logic in a fool's world.

God himself has set up genuine happiness as the chief objective of life. Righteousness and doing good to others are always elevating to our minds and spirits. It is interesting that God has made some genuine happiness pills that are easily available to us. Even in small doses, good deeds and uplifting thoughts make us happy. Any real success always produces joy. To be genuinely worthwhile gives us genuine satisfaction, and there are no substitutes for happiness. But all imitations are useless, and every counterfeit is harmful. A depraved mind can never think anything but depraved, unhappy thoughts. Satan is miserable because he is evil. One who seeks happiness in wickedness is a fool, and every time one does any evil deed, large or small, he is lowering himself just that much and is putting a little more worthless fool's gold into his life's treasury. The teenage hoodlums who commit their vandalism for kicks should listen to the voice of the prophet who said: "Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Galatians 6:7.) When it makes any human being feel good to destroy the property of someone else, or when a group of hoodlums can get a thrill out of beating an old man to death, they may be sure that their lives are being seriously perverted. Satan's program for spreading bloodshed, famine, ignorance, and misery over the earth is the counterfeit of God's plan for our eternal salvation, and it is up to us to be able to tell the difference. If we go about it right, God will help us to make our lives of pure gold.
