Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Force

ONE OF the most devastating influences in our world is the evil philosophy of force. Force is one of the major sins of nations, societies, and individuals. One of the most common manifestations of this destructive power is seen when national dictatorships flourish. Our world has been set back a long way by the evil domination of the Napoleons, the Hitlers, and the Communists. While Joseph Stalin ruled Russia he also bathed his own country in the blood of millions of his countrymen. Those who have followed him have imposed their will upon the souls of other millions of human beings. We remember the malicious propaganda of Khrushchev with his bluffing, his vicious threat making, and his shoe rapping. His threat of "We'll bury you!" represents the longing of Communist ambition to dominate. And if they thought they could, the Communists would enslave the entire world without a second's hesitation. They devise systems of brainwashing and related pressures as a science to satisfy their satanical desire to control people's minds and emotions. It is a sickening thought that any human being would attempt to banish God and say he is dead and then seek to replace him by establishing himself as the supreme power in the world.

Our minds go back to another generation when in leading up to the first World War, the Kaiser of Germany commonly used the phrase "Me and Gott." This indicates how power-mad dictators frequently come to think. However, with the world's increase of ungodliness, present-day dictators leave off the "Gott" and use only the "Me." We have one of the most pitiful examples of this doctrine of force operating just a few miles off our southern shores.

Cuba is a small country of great beauty and rich natural resources. It came into the possession of the United States as a result of the Spanish-American War. It was given its independence in 1909 and for a number of years had a democratic government. In recent years dictators have held the people down and have wasted the national strength in their struggle for control. That unhappy country is now ruled by an immoral, bigoted, be-whiskered, villainous dictator by the name of Fidel Castro, who dominates, demoralizes, and improverishes his own countrymen as he tries to please his own vanity. He also uses this island as a training center of evil as he threatens the peace and safety of a large group of human beings outside his own country.

God has always disapproved of force and of some men trying to dominate the minds, affairs, or property of other men. Dictators insist upon having their own way, and those who disagree with them are usually assassinated, and unhappiness and failure come to many people as a consequence. Dictators usually set themselves up to decide right and wrong, and frequently they use half-truths and misrepresentations to make their course seem right, whether it is or not.

In our own day God has said that it is wrong to exercise force or dominion or compulsion upon the lives and minds of men in any degree of unrighteousness. Human freedom is the cause to which God has given one of his most firm personal commitments. But in this connection it is very interesting to remember that national dictators are not the only ones who are guilty of using force unrighteously.

In a recent political meeting, called to discuss an important issue, a group of paid hireling agitators arose from their seats as the speaker was announced and stomped out of the meeting in an attempt to discredit the speaker and what he stood for. A more civilized group might have been expected to try to enlighten those whom they believed were in error. There are many nonlogical ways of creating social and individual pressures. Many large groups stage marches or carry signs or burn draft cards or try to cause someone embarrassment in order to secure some notoriety or benefit for themselves. Besides promoting crime and delinquency among ourselves, we have frequently abandoned reason and persuasion and substituted a kind of trial by frenzy or a trial by hysteria, to create social pressure. As in the case of Russia, the winner is sometimes the one who can make the most noise or cause the most trouble for someone else. In the old days, men frequently used to determine right and wrong in a trial by combat. Now we frequently try to see who can create the most pressures or be the most unfair. There are many groups who want recognition and benefits whether they are entitled to them or not. They threaten elected officers and embarrass, frighten, or humiliate others into compliance.

The great Christian message through the ages has been one of "peace on earth, good will toward men." The Communists completely reverse this program with many paid agitators specifically assigned to foment trouble and set one group of people against another. They seek to build up their own strength by tearing others down. Many people in our great, free, democratic America are following the dictator techniques by resorting to subreasonable methods to create unrighteous pressures. It was a related technique that sent the rabble-rousing mob to the palace of Pilate in the middle of the night crying, "Crucify him, crucify him!" The power that can be developed by this evil force is seen in the fact that even Pilate, the Roman governor, was persuaded against his will. In his personal examination of Jesus, he found no fault in him, yet he yielded to the mob's evil influence and permitted the death of the best man who ever lived.

Mobs of vandals and hoodlums are presently going about both by day and by night stealing and destroying and beating for what they call kicks. Recently such a gang of sub-moral gangsters, saturated with the philosophy of force, beat an old man to death. When questioned, they said they bore the old man no ill will; they merely wanted the thrill of killing someone. The human mind can be a deadly power when perverted by this awful philosophy of force. Almost unknown to us, this attitude is infiltrating many departments of our lives. William James once said, "Our minds are made up by what they feed upon." The mind, like the dyer's hand, is colored by what it holds. If I hold in my hand a sponge full of purple dye, my hand becomes purple, and if I hold in my mind ideas of hate, lust, strife, and force, my whole personality is changed accordingly. When we feed our minds upon the kind of passion, violence, greed, filth, and irresponsibility that fills our newspapers, movies, and magazines, it is natural that that is what our lives will become.

Recently for several days a woman paraded back and forth in front of a certain office building with a sign that didn't make the slightest sense to anyone; but she seemed to imagine that she was taking the part of some kind of a heroine. She had heard of others carrying signs, and she wanted to be in the act and to attract a little attention to herself. She had had some moral and personality problems, but now she was the center of attention. Sometimes logic or reason or right don't seem of great importance to people. Anyway, it is sometimes a little difficult to attract attention by doing good deeds, but anyone can easily and quickly get attention by starting a fight or doing something spectacular or harmful or evil.

Recently one of the long-haired, unshaven, unbathed kind of young men went around town trying to get someone to buy him a bicycle and then finance him on a transcontinental journey. He wanted to develop as much notoriety as he could and then ride on Washington, D. C., to induce the Congress to adopt a particular law that he had figured out. He was asked why he didn't write a letter to his congressman or to the President. But he figured that first he had to do something a little more shocking in order to get attention. This young man was a dropout from school, a dropout from church, certainly a dropout from cleanliness. He had no money, no job, and no interest in finding one. He was only interested in seeing that Congress did not overlook any of its responsibilities.

It was suggested to him that he might do a little better job with Congress if he would find out a little more about his proposition and then get a job and learn something about financing himself. It was thought that he might have a little more influence with Congress if his own mental, social, and financial affairs were put in a little better condition. But a kind of high pressure, exhibitionism, was the only way he seemed aware of to get things done. And while we are thinking about it, we might examine ourselves occasionally to discover how many subreasonable things we are trying to force upon other people. Many people are able to get their good friends to indulge in a few friendly drinks of liquor, a little immorality, or a little dishonesty, and whether we kill someone with a hammer or destroy him by a bad example, the end result may be about the same.

It is a startling thought to remember that God will hold each of us responsible for his influence. The improper use of his influence is probably the most serious sin of Satan himself. It was bad enough that he rebelled against God in the council of heaven, but it was a much greater sin when, by his influence as the light bearer, he led away one-third of all of the hosts of heaven after him. He not only fell himself, but he also destroyed the chances for eternal exaltation of a great multitude of his friends. By our influence or example or sometimes by actual physical force, we sometimes accomplish about the same thing.

A few evenings ago as a certain family was preparing to retire, they heard the screams of a young girl coming from their front lawn. They turned on the lights and ran to her assistance to find five boys holding her so that she could be raped by the sixth. Five other girls were looking on from three cars parked near by. Apparently this girl had not been as quick to succumb to this male immorality as her friends had been, and by a kind of general agreement it had been decided to forcefully initiate her into their club. If sexual sin stands next to murder in the catalog of crime, what must God's opinion be of the enormity of a crime where one's life and memory are soiled and violated by force? God has said that he "cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance." (D&C 1:31.) He has firmly condemned immorality as one of the greatest crimes, and he has vigorously forbidden the use of force or compulsion in any of its physical, moral, or social forms. This is one of our most serious world disorders, as so many people prefer merely surrender to pressure rather than to have any trouble or suffer any embarrassment.

Each of us is born into God's world holding a share of the responsibility for its welfare. It is our duty to teach righteousness and to set everyone else a good example. god himself has said, "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:34), but as God's children, it also becomes our work and our glory to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. Jesus said, "Follow me." And we are supposed to follow him in every particular. We are supposed to follow him in his good example and in his righteous influence and in promoting the freedom of other people. Every life will finally be judged by how well it carries out that single direction.

The apostle Paul says we are not our own but that we have been "bought with a price," and we are charged with an important responsibility. We all know the kind of life that God would like us to live. He has said to us that we may choose for ourselves, but he doesn't want us to be forcing our will upon others. The poet was speaking for Deity when he said:

Know this, that every soul is free,

To choose his life and what he'll be,

For this eternal truth is given

That God will force no man to heaven.

He'll call, persuade, direct aright,

Bless him with wisdom, love and light,

In many ways be good and kind,

But never force the human mind.

Freedom and reason make us men;

Take these away, what are we then—

Mere animals and just as well

The beasts may think of heaven or hell.

God is the greatest advocate of freedom, free agency, and righteousness. He is not a sign carrier nor a marcher seeking notoriety, nor does he try to dominate us nor influence us for evil, whereas Satan is the chief exemplar of force; and every time we think of using undue influence upon the minds and wills of other human beings, we may know that that one impulse is being dictated by evil, as there can be no other source. America is the world's greatest nation, and as a group we are the world's most privileged people, and we have a divine mission to keep freedom and righteousness alive in the world. What a tremendous influence we would have for good if we stopped the pressure we use in satanizing each other so that we could properly honor freedom and always keep righteousness alive in our hearts and help it take root in the lives of others.
