Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

God Bless the Establishment

AMONG THE most characteristic activities of our age are the large number of changes presently taking place in our society. In so many ways our world is making radical departures from that way of life that our fathers knew and cherished. In the past we have thought of our most constructive citizens as those who always put back into the community more than they took out, whereas now so many people want to get out more than they put in. In addition, we want to kill the goose that lays the golden eggs. By our propaganda, rebellion, race riots, and evil we tear down the source of our benefits. We want to belong to the club without paying our dues. We want to pick the fruit without planting the trees. We want to vote ourselves benefits that were produced by someone else, and we don't know how to exercise the privileges of dissent within the framework of law and order.

Many people are now in the process of abandoning their own personal standards of integrity and culture. Many have abandoned their loyalty to the flag, their allegiance to the means of production, and their belief in the Ten Commandments. Many are now discrediting the religion of Christ and the other great traditions on which so much of our civilization of the past has rested.

There has been a serious breakdown in our respect for authority. A sweeping socialism is making serious changes without much thought being given to analyzing the problems or producing satisfactory solutions. Sound principles have little importance in the face of some of our modern movements to abandon religion, our individual enterprise, and our good sense.

Many of our modern people do not understand the relationship of work to success and happiness. Because many now insist on seeing everything at its worst, there is a tendency to destroy religious faith, kill patriotism, belittle hero-worship, and even make self-confidence of small effect.

Many have converted their lives over to patterns of ugliness and idleness where they behave at their worst. They expect to live by the sweat of other men's faces. We adopt a philosophy of trial by marches or make our point by carrying propaganda slogans.

The large increase in stealing, killing, and intimidation indicates that the fundamental concepts of freedom, basic human rights, the sacredness of human life and property are no longer in good standing with many people. By congregating in large groups, these rebellious people can give themselves a feeling of authority by supporting each other in their evil. And because of the propaganda of their own large groups, the opposing opinions of righteous people and even of God become relatively unimportant to them. To some people the value of law and government also shrink in importance, as do our time-honored social customs.

One person obsessed with a major interest in drugs said, "Why worry about having friends when you can get pot?" Some of this large group that is fostering our raging epidemic of rebellion, crime, sin, destruction, and the rejection of standards are young and inexperienced; some are misguided; some want attention, and some are frustrated by their own failures. The evil of our time has given birth to a brand new breed of human beings with a philosophy of selfishness, hate, and force, which is sweeping across our world with its primary focus in the general objective to weaken, punish, and destroy the existing order that they refer to as the establishment.

One of their spokesmen said: "We totally reject the rules and regulations of the establishment and are creating a new life style."

The dictionary says that to establish is to make stable or firm. It means to confirm or to settle, to enact a decree, or to ordain a principle. Much of the establishment being opposed has been ordained by God himself. The scriptures point out that governments were instituted by God for the benefit of man. The primary purposes of the government are to promote peace, success, security, law, and order. As we pledge allegiance to the flag, we say, "One nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all." Abraham Lincoln referred to our national authority as a "government of the people, by the people, and for the people."

But there are other important parts of our God-given establishment that are also under attack. In the meridian of time the Son of God established his church upon our earth, one purpose of which was to establish in each individual life those important virtues of righteousness, integrity, industry, and responsibility on an eternal basis. The great primary laws of free agency, honesty, morality, goodwill, and honor among men were originally ordained in heaven, and they have been transferred to us upon the earth. God himself made the Ten Commandments a part of the establishment.

In addition to governments and the church, God also established our occupations. The beginning of our great agriculture and horticulture industries began when he covered the earth with sixteen inches of topsoil. At a time long antedating our mortality, God himself planted a garden eastward in Eden. Then for the benefit of our agricultural establishment, he invented seeds, irrigation water, and the processes of cultivation. He started our livestock industry by creating the animals even before he created the men who would take care of them.

As God stored up in the earth the great treasures of coal, iron, gold, silver, oil, and uranium, he laid the foundations for our important mining and manufacturing industries. As he made coats of skins for Adam and Eve, he started our tailoring enterprises. Our great businesses embody the best ways that we have ever been able to discover of providing for ourselves. Business, law, agriculture, and medicine all administer to important human needs and each therefore must be considered as a divine calling. We might continue on indefinitely through the entire list of manufacturing, mining, transportation, merchandising, communication, and the professions. Naturally some of the involved people, organizations, and programs have weaknesses, but our mortality is supposed to involve us in many learning situations; some great improvements have been made, and many people, companies, and regulatory bodies are trying as hard as they can to educate and train us to serve each other more effectively.

I, for one, never cease to be grateful that I am permitted to live in this marvelous age of wonders, miracles, and enlightenment, which the apostle Paul looked forward to and described as the "dispensation of the fulness of times" when all things should be brought together in one. (Ephesians 1:10.) When I think of the miracles being performed by our great manufacturing industries, our wonderful transportation systems, our great organizations for banking and merchandising, the professions and the trades, I again thank God for the establishment. The establishment makes occupational specialization possible. It helps us to produce and refine the things that we need as human beings, and our institutions challenge us to produce more effectively and make ourselves stronger by our own toil and our constant striving for improvement. Most of the important branches of the establishment also maintain important research organizations in an attempt to uncover those other great natural laws that God has ordained for our use and that are as yet undiscovered by us.

What a great and sustained thrill we should get from the effects that this wonderful system of freedom and individual enterprise has in developing our imaginations, our initiative, our ambitions, and our capabilities! Improvement requires that we learn to cooperate together in our own interests. We must also learn to get along with each other. I am very grateful for the fact that God made all men and women gregarious by nature in order to encourage us to unite together as nations and as businesses and as families and as human beings in order to more effectively carry forward that part of the work of the world that we have chosen to do. What confusion and suffering would result if each ignored all others by going his own individual way and endlessly doing his own thing. Friendly and organized cooperation is the best way to supply our own physical, mental, spiritual, and social needs.

The establishment also includes our libraries, hospitals, reform schools, and penitentiaries, which are jointly provided for the good of those in need. We should be so grateful for our wonderful laws and social conventions. Someone has said that the greatest invention of all time took place 2500 years ago at Platea when an obscure Greek perfected the process of marching men in step. When it was discovered that a great group of people could be organized with their attention focused on a single objective and their minds motivated by a single command, that day civilization began.

Then how unfortunate it is when any group of people become unthankful, destructive, angry, and unreasonable as they dedicate themselves to tearing down that which is not theirs and that which others have worked so hard to build up. Instead of getting on the team and doing their best to improve, educate, and build, they insist on breaking the harmony, rocking the boat, threatening the safety, and reducing the standards of others.

One wrecking crew can destroy more than a hundred groups of builders can create. One criminal can do more harm than a hundred citizens can do good. One sailor can scuttle the ship by scoffing at ideals and ridiculing standards without the slightest idea of what will take their place. So many people develop within themselves the devilish and unholy desire to destroy. They spit on the government and call our qualified officers of the law by unsavory names.

Those who have themselves been most unsuccessful seem to feel perfectly qualified to pass judgment on those who have succeeded. One may get an evil distortion in his own vision so that to him everyone else looks like monsters. To such a one the most beautiful flowers may look like poisonous weeds, opportunities may appear to be obstacles, and great men resemble criminals.

Many of those men who operate the establishment are hardworking men of foresight who have organized and built up important businesses that have furnished jobs to thousands of other people and greatly expanded our general prosperity. They have also established great financial foundations in order to help others. They have paid vast sums in state and federal income taxes, and then at death the balance of what they have earned has gone to the government and to other people. It is impossible to lift oneself up by pulling someone else down.

In becoming a millionaire, Andrew Carnegie made thirty-eight other people millionaires. On one occasion he was visited by a socialist who ranted and raved over the idea that Mr. Carnegie should share his great wealth with others. Mr. Carnegie asked his secretary for a statement of the Carnegie holdings and the population figures. When the statistics were ready, Mr. Carnegie figured for a moment and then said to his secretary, "Give this gentleman sixteen cents. That would be his proper share if all of my wealth were equally distributed among everyone." But if the establishment were actually liquidated, no one would be benefited very much even temporarily, and our means of producing goods and services would be destroyed; the workers would be unemployed, and chaos would reign.

Our capitalistic free enterprise system is the most successful way of living that has ever been devised and it gives us the opportunity to learn from the philosophy and industry of our greatest men. We can also be stimulated by their skill, courage, and ambition. We should not be too impatient to write the rules before we know the facts or have had some actual successful experience. A young man was once asked whether or not he could play the saxophone. He said he didn't know because he had never tried. Dwayne Laws expresses this thought under the title of "Band Leaders." He says:

Each man, at times, has dreams of power,

And hopes that someday, when

His ship comes in, he will assume

The leadership of men.

But, any man who has such dreams,

One fact must understand—

One must learn to face the music

Before he can lead the band!

If we become better people, the establishment will be better automatically.
