Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Half-Believers

ONE OF the first steps toward any accomplishment is to believe in it. Faith is the foundation on which every success is built. Fortunate is the man who has some good, solid, righteous convictions concerning the important issues of life. It is one of our greatest of all good fortunes to be able to believe in great things with a whole heart. We are inspired by such great patriots as Nathan Hale, whose love of his native land made it possible for him to say, "I regret that I have but one life to give for my country." And it was another inspiring belief that made Job say of his Creator, "Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him." (Job 13:15.)

There are many advantages in being a full believer. Ernie Pyle, the late war correspondent, pointed out that nine-tenths of morale comes from pride in your outfit and confidence in your leaders. What great joy and success is ours when we feel completely proud of our families, love our neighbors as ourselves, and have a vigorous, wholehearted, honest, well-earned belief in ourselves. The poet has said:

Trust in thine own untried capacity

As thou wouldst trust in God Himself.

Thy soul is but an emanation from the whole;

Thou dost not dream what forces be in thee,

Vast and unfathomed as the grandest sea.

No man can place a limit in thy strength.

Such triumphs as no mortal ever dreamed may yet be thine

If thou canst but believe in thy Creator and thyself.

At length, some feet shall stand on heights now unattained,

Why not thine own? Press on, achieve, achieve.

It was the Master himself who said, "If thou canst believe, all things are possible. . . ." ((Mark 9:23.) And the apostle Paul was trying to build faith, encouragement, and a good example into the life of Timothy, a young man whom he called his son in the gospel, when he said:

"Let no man despise thy youth; but be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, and in purity.

"Till I come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine.

"Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery.

"Meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them; that thy profiting may appear to all.

"Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them: for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear thee." (1 Timothy 4:12-16.)

Following this doctrine of a wholehearted belief and a full dedication puts us securely among the believers. It also greatly increases our strength and happiness. But unfortunately, everyone does not always earn the right to believe even in very important things. A famous Canadian athletic coach once said that most people in and out of athletics were holdouts. What he meant was that we usually don't invest ourselves fully in what we are doing. We are afflicted with too many doubts, and we have too many reservations about things. There are too many issues about which we lack the necessary information on which to make solid, intelligent, proper decisions. Consequently we go into life with our fingers crossed, so to speak.

One of our most unfortunate situations comes about when we become holdouts on life, for when we hold out on life, life holds out on us. And by holding back in our faith, we become holdouts on God and members of the unfortunate group that someone called "life's half-believers." They are those who believe just a part of the time, or they believe in just some of the issues. This makes us guilty of those great sins of fractional devotion and marginal morals, which produces a minimal performance.

Jesus said that he came that we might have life and have it more abundantly. But it is impossible to live at one's best when he is only a half-believer. The agnostic says, "I don't believe, and I don't disbelieve." With enough lethargy and indifference, one gets to where he just doesn't care. There are some who are impartial about right and wrong. There was a group of fractional believers living at Laodicea to whom the resurrected Jesus instructed John the Revelator to write as follows:

"I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot.

"So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth.

"Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked." (Revelation 3:15-17.)

This reminds us of the psychiatrist who once said to a mental patient, "Do you ever have any trouble making up your mind?" The mental patient said, "Well, yes and no." There are many people whose convictions are caught on dead center. What miserable lives we lead when we can't make up our minds between right and wrong, good and bad, obedience and disobedience, success and failure. Then much of the time we remain as if we were wallowing in the slime of the low tide. We are left straddling the fence, and our dim understanding leaves us uncertain as to which way we should go.

The other day I looked up in the dictionary a term that was unknown to me. I had heard this word a number of times, but its meaning had never been definitely registered in my mind. Before I opened the dictionary this word probably did not have more than a five percent meaning. But even after I had read the dictionary's definition over several times, its meaning was still very hazy. To me the dictionary explanation was almost as cloudy as the word that it was trying to throw its light upon. Then I asked a friend of mine to study the dictionary with me and give me several concrete examples as to how this word might be used. Finally the light began to break through the fog to where I probably had a 40 percent understanding, but I am still not at home with this word. That is frequently the way it is with life's concepts. We may understand some perfectly, some not at all. We may fully believe some things and believe in even more important things not at all. Therefore our belief averages out somewhere in the twilight zone of those gray areas of life. We are life's half-believers.

In this connection, I thought of what the apostle Paul said in his stimulating discussion on faith, hope, and love. He pointed the fact out that presently we see as "through a glass darkly." He said, "For we know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away." He tries to make his own meaning more clear by saying: "When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things." (1 Corinthians 13:9-13.) Sometimes a parent or a teacher says to a child, "Now are you sure you fully understand that idea?"

All good ideas can be gone over again and again until they are fully understood. That is a pretty good procedure for developing our convictions. We should go over them again and again until we fully believe all good righteous ideas. Jesus said, "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (John 7:17.) When we live on a 100 percent basis, then we will be able to get out of that misty, shadowy, half-light in which so many of us live so much of our lives.

Many of life's problems are caused because too frequently our belief is regulated by our moods instead of the facts. Sometimes when we get a little discouraged or lonesome, we may do things that we would not do if we were living at our best. There is an ebb and flow in our lives. We go up and down on the scale of excellence. We sin at night and hate ourselves in the morning. We frequently react to things not according to whether they are right or wrong but according to how we feel at the moment.

Many people have a kind of fair weather faith that disappears in the storm. The following expression is found in the book of Genesis:

"And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on,

"So that I come again to my father's house in peace; then shall the Lord be my God:

"And this stone, which I have set for a pillar, shall be God's house: and of all that thou shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto thee." (Genesis 28:20-22.)

So many people are inclined to say, "If everything goes well, then I will believe and behave." Job's faith seems to be more effectively integrated with good as he said: "Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him." (John 13:15.)

Ralph Waldo Emerson once pointed out a typical problem of a half-believer when he said that his moods had difficulty in believing in each other. He said it was about as difficult for him to manage his attitudes as to manage thunderbolts. At times his brain would become a blank and leave his mind in a state of barrenness. Life often seemed to him like a flash of light followed by long periods of darkness. To give continuity to his work, he began keeping a journal. In his journal he wrote down every thought with every suggestion that he believed would be helpful. Each day he collected in his journal all of his disjointed dreams, his mental reveries, and the fragments of all of those ideas that his mind was capable of conceiving. He discovered that the act of writing an idea down improved the quality of both the idea and his mind. His journal became the hive in which he stored the honey of his mind as the bees of his brain distilled it. When once his ideas were written down, he could then review them again and again with the thought of making any needed improvements.

As he had daily visits with great ideas, he grew accustomed to their faces, and he was able to improve their dress, brighten their eyes, increase their muscle power, and join them together in a more effective marching order. When once Mr. Emerson had snared an idea, he never allowed it to get away. He immediately wrote it down and put it into his mental incubator. He knew that ideas have a natural tendency to propagate and that each of his thoughts had the possibilities for a large posterity.

Emerson worked incessantly. He said, "Of all the tonics, work is the most effective." There was a great inspiration for Mr. Emerson in every assertion of his will, and like every other person, he needed a mental generator to set industry in motion. He knew that faith without works is dead. You can't keep faith alive in isolation; there is no such thing as preserved faith. Therefore, memorizing, writing the right things down, and taking action can strengthen belief. A song or a phrase or a poem with a strong emotion attached has the power to keep our faith impulses strong and in motion. But when left in an indefinite condition or in some hit-and-miss kind of position, they soon fade and become dim, indistinct, and unusable.

Someone was once asked what he thought about a certain thing and he said, "I don't know, I haven't spoken on it yet." Before we speak on ideas or write them down, we must think them through and make decisions about them, and then if we get them definitely fixed in our minds and memorized, our power is increased. Like everything else, our faith grows by exercise. As we recount our blessings, we increase them; as we practice our loyalty, it grows. When we express our love, it becomes stronger. We must not only believe in God, our country, and our families, but we must earn the right for them to believe in us. There are many women who desperately want to have confidence in their husbands and to believe in their integrity, but they feel insecure and are afraid because of some weakness in them that lies too near the surface. For the same reason there are many people who don't dare trust themselves. To only half-believe in ourselves has made the inferiority complex the most widespread disease in the world. But with a sure knowledge of the facts, a strong conviction of right supported by some whole-souled decisions and some unwavering industry, we can make ourselves stronger than anything that can happen to us. The most important part of that faith that we should build into ourselves centers in the Creator. He is all-wise, all-powerful, and all-good. He is the only fixed center of truth in the universe.

What a thrill when we can really say, "We believe in God." That doesn't just mean that we believe that he exists and that we know the kind of being that he is; it also means that we believe in him. We trust him. We believe that he knows his business and that his teachings are all in our interests. Then we can get rid of the doubts, the hesitations, the reservations, the vacillations, and the half-light in which we sometimes live. We might pray for deliverance from half-belief by singing with the poet:

I ask no dream, no prophet's ecstasy,

No sudden rending of this veil of clay,

No angel visitant, no opening skies,

But take the dimness of my soul away.
