Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Hard Life

IN OUR day we hear many complaints about how difficult life is. So many people feel burdened down with unpleasant problems and bothersome temptations. Our taxes are high, and we have the threat of the atom constantly hanging over us. Our difficulties are further increased by the crime, vandalism, and delinquency with which we have to contend. There is also a lot of sin in the wrong places and enough political malfeasance to give us serious concern.

However, it was never intended that life should be a downhill roller coaster ride. Actually it is one of our greatest good fortunes that life is difficult. Charles Kingsley once said that we should "thank God every morning when we get up that we have something to do that day that must be done whether we like it or not. For," said he, "being forced to work and forced to do our best will breed in us faith, virtue, temperance, self-control, and a thousand different virtues that the idle never know." Solving a lot of good hard problems can also keep us from feeling too sorry for ourselves.

One of the things that bothers me more than almost any other thing as I go about a little bit is the large number of people, particularly young people, who get discouraged. A discouraged person is always a weak person. I think it doesn't matter very much whether or not there is just cause for the discouragement. Whenever we start getting discouraged we start losing our strength, and weak people do all kinds of unprofitable things. Discouragement destroys our faith, our enthusiasm, and our enjoyment. It causes us to lose interest in life. When we lose interest in life, we lose many of the blessings that go with it. Most of our difficulties are actually blessings in disguise. Someone has put this philosophy in verse under the title of "Adversity." He says:

The tree that never had to fight

For the sun and sky and air and light,

That stood out in an open plain

And always got its share of rain,

Never became a forest king

But lived and died a scrubby thing.

The man who never had to toil to live,

Who never had to win his share

Of sun and sky and light and air,

Never became a manly man,

But lived and died as he began.

Good timber does not grow in ease,

The stronger wind, the stronger trees,

The further sky, the greater length,

The more the storm, the more the strength.

The sun and cold, by rain and snow,

In tree and man good timbers grow;

Where thickest is the forest growth

We find the patriarchs of both.

And they hold council with the stars,

Whose broken branches show the scars

Of many winds and much of strife.

That is the common law of life.

These laws relating to adversity make up a very important part of our success. The reason that we sometimes lose confidence in prayer is that so often we cannot identify the answers that we receive.

We ask for strength, and God sends us the difficulties which make us strong.

We pray for wisdom, and God sends us problems, the solutions of which develop wisdom.

We plead for prosperity, and God gives us brain and brawn to work.

We plead for courage, and God gives us dangers to overcome.

We ask for favors, and God gives us opportunities.

Oscar Wilde once said that if God wished to punish us, all he would need to do would be to answer our prayers. If all of our prayers were answered, then no one would ever die, no one would ever get sick. We would never make a mistake. We would always get our own way. Then no wisdom would be generated and no strength would be developed.

Frequently we want God to do our work, prepare our speeches, select our occupation, tell us whom to marry and where to invest our money, without our becoming very heavily involved. We all like to be inspired and noted for our wisdom without having to develop it. We want to always say and do exactly the right things. In a way that we don't always understand, God has already provided a very effective means by which we may do exactly that. That is, that we should throw in a lot of study and hard work with which our prayers can be supported. Even if we made a mistake once in a while, it is still true that self-effort, the courage of our convictions, and a lot of thoughtful activity are still the finest instruments of growth. We generate fears while we sit; we overcome them while we work. If we always had someone to do our thinking for us, solve our problems for us, and pay for our mistakes for us, then we would resemble hothouse plants, and we would actually become weaklings.

Emerson says that mostly we are parlor soldiers. We like to dine nicely and sleep warm but we shun the vigorous battle of life where strength is born. We sleep in heated bedrooms, ride to work in heated automobiles, eat soft food, live soft lives, and consequently become soft. However, man was built for vigorous activity. It was intended that he should struggle with the elements, control the thorns and thistles, produce his own food, fight the wild beasts, and suffer hunger and fatigue. These are those blessings in disguise that give us strength, endurance, and resourcefulness. They keep us lean, hungry, and ambitious. We need to get more industry into ourselves, and we need more outside difficulties to overcome.

It was a great prayer when someone said, "Lord, send me something hard to do today." We can only learn to handle difficult challenges effectively by first handling a lot of smaller challenges effectively. In ancient Greece, Pericles said, "No one should be appointed to a big office until he has first filled several smaller offices well." One of the purposes of life itself is to be tested and proved and tried and strengthened. We do not always remember that it takes a lot of hard pounding to make good steel. The dross and impurities of life can be more readily burned out of us when the furnace is made seven times hot. Most great people owe their greatness to the problems they have solved.

The early Sandwich Islander believed that the strength of every enemy that he overcame became a part of his own strength. That is still exactly what happens. With this great law in mind, someone prayed a great prayer, saying, "If trouble comes, let it be in my day." If there is something hard to do, let me do it. Don't send it to Bill or Henry or Jim; it might upset them or cause them to be over-discouraged. Frequently, in contrast to this attitude of strength, we like to think about the good old days when we had everything to our liking. This may have been in our youth when we had strong parents to do most of the work as well as to carry most of the responsibility. But parents are usually not doing us a favor when they are making it too soft for us.

At one time Adam and Eve lived in a paradise where everything necessary for their welfare had been provided. Then they had no temptations and no worries about good and evil. They had no government problems, no taxes, no education, no children, and no parents. They had no problems with clothing, food, housing, transportation, sickness, or death. Then mortality came into the world, but it did not come by accident. This was provided for from before the foundations of the world. It was God himself who provided that all men and women should have these wonderful earthly experiences. We needed some actual problems to cope with on our own.

Therefore, God closed down the Garden of Eden and put Adam and Eve out into a lone and dreary world that produced weeds more readily than good plants. This was a place where, even without any cultivation, thorns and thistles grew luxuriously. Then they had to contend with deserts, crop failures, and wild animals. Sickness, death, and evil were introduced into the world. On top of all of this it was said to man, "By the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread." (Moses 4:25.) But that is not a command of punishment; that is a command of opportunity. That is not just the way we get our bread; it is also the way we build our characters, develop our personalities, overcome our evil, and do almost every other worthwhile thing in life. One good way to judge anyone's ability might be to measure the size of the problems with which he is able to cope successfully.

Someone has said that a man can be judged by the size of the thing that gets his goat. Isn't it interesting that even the devil himself is put among us in our own interests? That is, God could destroy Satan at any instant he desired, and we might ask, "Then why doesn't he?" And he himself has given us the answer. He has said, "And it must needs be that the devil should tempt the children of men, or they could not be agents unto themselves; for if they never should have bitter they could not know the sweet." (D&C 29:39.) In one of the greatest lines in all sacred literature, Paul gave us this same kind of advice when he said, ". . . all things work together for good to them that love God." (Romans 8:28.) That is, if we love God, if we think right, if we have the right attitude, if we do the right things, then everything works out in our interests.

Many years ago I had a friend who had a drunken ne'er-dowell father. But this young man loved God. He always did the right thing, and nothing could have been a more potent teacher of righteousness for this young man than his drunken, unrighteous father.

Charles Dickens, in his great book A Tale of Two Cities, tries to describe the period of the French Revolution of a couple of hundred years ago by saying: "It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us, we were going direct to Heaven, we were going direct the other way."

These opposites with an increase of intensity are still with us. This is the greatest age of miracles, wonders, scientific marvels, and opportunities ever known. But the balance is maintained by the fact that this is also the worst age of evil that has ever been known. As a good banker goes up the financial scale, he always keeps his assets and liabilities equal, and so it is with us: the greater the prize, the more the risk so that the balance may be maintained.

In Tokyo Bay, General Douglas MacArthur said, "It is of the spirit if we are to save the flesh." All good military leaders understand that every victory must first take place in the mind of the conqueror. The greatest of all conquests is that conquest over ourselves. David said, "He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city." (Proverbs 16:32.)

Recently a man was telling about an experience that had taken place in his early youth. He was aware of a moral transgression committed by one of his friends. He talked this matter over with his mother. She pointed out to him several reasons why such activities were wrong. This young man not only loved his mother, but he also had great confidence in what she said. And because he loved God and his attitude was one of complete obedience to right, he made up his mind that immorality would be forever excluded from his activities. His mind was made up so solidly that no temptation has ever had a chance since. The strength of his mother became a part of his own character. Definite decisions about righteousness can give enough strength to make any hard life easy. We may have all of the advantages that we elect and none of the disadvantages that we reject.

A seminary class was once having a debate about whether it was hard or easy to get into the celestial kingdom. They finally decided that it was hard to get into the celestial kingdom if you worked at it easy, and it is easy if you worked at it hard. It's awfully hard to do the things you don't want to do. It's awfully difficult for a chain smoker not to smoke. It's almost impossible for an alcoholic not to drink. It's very difficult for a dishonest man to tell the truth, but it is just as easy for an honest man to be honest as it is for a dishonest man to be dishonest.

If you want to have an easy life, then you should learn how to work hard at good things. We should learn how to make up a water-tight mind so that our decisions never leak any evil. Recently I saw a long list of the chief battles of World War II. Some of those long to be remembered engagements were: the Battle of Bataan, the Battle of the Coral Sea, the Battle of Guadalcanal, the Battle of Iwo Jima, and the Battle of Okinawa. Then I wondered what it would like if we made up a list of life's battles. We can win the battle of faith, the battle of morality, and every other battle of life if we just learn to keep a water-tight mind and then fight as hard as we can, having a great appreciation of our opportunities. Then God will continue to answer all our prayers for strength.
