Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Honor

SOMEONE HAS said that before anyone can think effectively he must have a language to think with. We endow our words, phrases, and symbols with power, and they change our lives either for better or for worse. Without words, life would largely lose its meaning. Through our language we train ourselves to love art, enjoy music, and appreciate great literature.

I have just finished reading the biography of the man who, so far as I know, is the greatest salesman in the world. Some meaningful success stories placed in contrast to the hardships of his youth had put a great hunger in his heart that became the basis for a fantastic personal accomplishment. It is pretty difficult to separate words from emotions and ambitions. The right words can give people an understanding of religion, an appreciation of beauty, the feelings of happiness, and the attitudes of success.

Dale Carnegie once wrote a book entitled How to Win Friends and Influence People. If we effectively run these ideas through our minds enough times, a change soon takes place in our conduct. But we can also make friends with the greatest accomplishments by getting intimately acquainted with the words that represent them. One of the words that can produce the finest motivations and ambitions is a majestic word called honor. This word not only stands for some of the finest things in life, but it also helps to produce them. In our own interests we need to set this word up on a pedestal where we can pay it our constant homage and receive from it its strength.

The great Boy Scout program is centered in the noble word honor. The entire movement revolves around an oath taken by each boy as he qualifies for membership; and frequently thereafter, he raises his right arm to the square, extends his three middle fingers to make the Scout sign, and then makes a solemn covenant in which he says, "On my honor I will do my best to do my duty to God and my country and to obey the Scout Law; to help other people at all times, to keep myself physically strong, mentally awake and morally straight." That oath represents one of our world's greatest concepts, and this is a commitment to life that everyone should take.

One's honor is his greatest possession, and to enshrine this word in his heart will help to hold him firm against the pressures of dishonor. What tremendous wealth is developed in oneself when honor is the chief ingredient of his ambition.

Some thirty-four centuries ago, the God of the universe came down onto the top of Mount Sinai and said: "Honour thy father and thy mother." (Exodus 20:12.) Obedience to this one idea alone would soon transform our world. The quality of our religion is determined by how well we honor God, and we could transform this earth into God's paradise if we properly honored ourselves. Shakespeare gave us a thrilling line when he said: "...to thine own self be true, and it must follow, as the night the day, thou canst not then be false to any man."

To speak of a woman's honor may mean her chastity, her purity, and her righteous dependability. As a sign of respect and admiration, we refer to certain high office-holders, such as the mayor and the judge, by their chief characteristic when we say, "Your Honor." President Dwight D. Eisenhower said that in America our national administration should have such honor at home as to always insure the highest respect for our nation abroad. Honor represents the highest standards of justice and responsibility. Josiah Gilbert Holland wrote an inspiring prayer in which he said:

God give us men! A time like this demands

Strong minds, great hearts, true faith, and ready hands;

Men whom the lust of office does not kill;

Men whom the spoils of office cannot buy;

Men who possess opinions and a will;

Men who have honor—men who will not lie.

And Annette Wynn's poem entitled "Memorial Day" indicates that each of us should cultivate his own honor and not depend on that which belongs to someone else. She says:

Is it enough to think today

Of all our brave, then put away

The thought until a year has sped?

Is this full honor for our dead?

Is it enough to sing a song

And deck a grave; then all year long

Forget the brave who died that we

Might keep our great land proud and free?

Full service needs a greater toll—

That we who live give heart and soul

To keep the land they died to save,

And be ourselves, in turn, the brave!

We honor great men most highly when we ourselves are honorable. Honor is something that each of us can and must develop for himself. A boy underwrites his Scout oath by obeying all of the Scout laws. If any Scout or any king or any apostle can learn to keep those great laws of honor concerned with being trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous, kind, obedient, cheerful, thrifty, brave, clean, and reverent, then his honor is safe.

In the days of Jesus a ceremony was instituted involving the washing of feet. In addition to the religious significance of this ordinance, it must have also been very pleasant after a long hot day's journey to be refreshed by having one's feet washed. But Jesus instituted an even greater and more pleasant law of refreshing when he gave us the fundamental laws of repentance and complete baptism as the primary means for cleansing our lives. As a part of the honor code, the Lord has said to everyone: "...be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord." (Isaiah 52:11.)

One of the most uplifting of the philosophies of Jesus was built around the concept of that straight and narrow way leading to eternal life. This idea requires that we rule as out of bounds all inharmonious things. Certainly the path of honor is also a straight and narrow road and all dishonor should be forbidden.

Everyone understands that no airplane can keep losing its altitude for a very long period without having a crackup. And just so, no one can for long tamper with his honor without destroying it. When one loses his honor, most of his happiness also goes down the drain. Just as there are not many people who ever die without first getting sick, so there are not many people who get off that straight and narrow way at right angles. We lose our blessings a little bit at a time. People do not usually become dropouts from education, or excellence, or morality all in one drop. Big drops begin with little slips. Just as death follows a deterioration of one's health, so also one's honor usually starts developing some leaks before the major tragedy takes place.

When a believer develops a leak in his faith or when his airplane runs out of gas, he still doesn't usually fall in a vertical line. With a 5,000-foot altitude and a 200-mile-an-hour velocity, an airplane can soar for fourteen miles before the crackup. Those who become involved in sin or failure usually do not hit the ground at the first offense. very generously life usually gives us some intermediary time for repentance. With a quick reformation we may restore our honor and avoid a crackup, but we must not ignore a descending altimeter for very long.

I know a man who, during the past few years, has held and lost several jobs, and one of the reasons is that he doesn't see the danger in losing altitude until he is confronted with the crackup. This man is a very capable, fine-looking, intelligent person. However, this defect of permitting weakness in himself has made him a quitter. He starts out on each job with the assurance that his ability, aptitude, and I.Q. are capable of producing a fine success. But he lets too much failure get into his work.

Because he is not as strict as he should be in following the laws of success, he usually flies at treetop level. He does what he feels like instead of doing what is right. He is much too friendly with sloth and entertains some serious touches of irresponsibility. All success is like the old Model T Ford—when you turn off the engine the lights go out. This man doesn't seem to understand that in order to maintain a proper altitude the engines must be kept running.

To become a success, one must think and work like a success. One of the characteristics of failure is that those involved always dislike what they are doing. Because this man works like a failure, he soon begins developing dislikes for what he is doing and disharmony with the people with whom he is associated. It is perfectly natural, therefore, that the thermometer of his enthusiasm as well as his altimeter soon begin to fall, and of course his income always follows.

Some people don't seem able to tell that they are getting off the straight and narrow way until they find themselves completely out of bounds, and some people don't know that they are failing until they actually find themselves in the crash. There are some who never find out that crime and sin are unprofitable until they are asked to start paying the penalties. And so it was that in the early stages of each of this man's employments, when people tried to tell him that he was on his way out of the business, he thought that they were being ridiculous. Then finally, when the inevitable came, he couldn't understand how it had happened. He usually tried to explain his failure by rationalizing. He felt that he was the victim of circumstances. Either business was poor, the national economy was unsound, or he made a mistake when he selected this particular job in the first place. He could never realize that his failure was completely of his own making.

Many people try to explain the success of others on the basis of some natural ability. They rationalize their own poor showing by saying: "I wasn't cut out for this kind of work." However, if you ask them what kind of work they were cut out for, they won't know. Shakespeare came closer to the truth when he said, "The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, but in ourselves, that we are underlings."

In accounting for any success, we should remember that everyone has two personalities. He has the one that he was born with and the one that he acquires after he is born. It is our acquired personality that we make a living with and live an honorable and successful life with. Such great instruments of success as industry, courage, positive mental attitude, enthusiasm, faith, and honor are not free gifts, but they can all be limitlessly developed. Abraham Lincoln once said that we are about as happy as we make up our minds to be. And we are about as successful and as honorable and as faithful as we make up our minds to be.

One of the tricky things about success and failure is that we are not always aware of which we are cultivating. Frequently we are actually making our own success impossible by tolerating too many defects among our virtues. Then we are unable to identify the reasons for our disinterest, our dishonor, or why our dislike for what we are doing. Primarily it is not the kind of work that makes us unhappy and unsuccessful; far more frequently it is the way we do it and our attitude about it. Poor quality in our work always causes us unhappiness and tends to make us quitters. In the same way, it is the poor way that we carry out our marital responsibilities that causes our family problems and eventually sends us to the divorce court.

In fact, many people start getting a divorce even before they apply for their marriage license. Every single wrong thing that we do sends the marriage thermometer down by exactly that much. Unless we do a lot of those things that lift us up, we soon have a crackup. And so it is with life. We fail or succeed by each individual act. Success isn't in New York or in London or in jobs or in conditions or in circumstances; it is in us.

When we start doing the wrong things, a feeling is set up in our conscience that tells us to stop. If we don't obey, then instead of doing what is right, we try to rationalize and justify ourselves in our sins. Then we stop going to church and we stop saying our prayers. When we allow unresolved problems to fester in our lives, a mechanism is usually set in motion, and we start lashing out at our wives or becoming bitter toward the church or antagonistic toward God. The people did not crucify Jesus because of any evil he had done to them; they crucified him because of what they had done to him.

It is so easy to get some of these problems lodged in ourselves, and then almost before we know it, we are in serious trouble. The greatest safety and the finest success is brought about when we always maintain the finest standards of honor in everything that we do. We need to fly high in all of our duties, and then we will be highly honorable.
