Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

"Honour Thy Father and Thy Mother"

ONE OF the greatest ideas ever given in our world came down from Mount Sinai 3400 years ago when God said: "Honour thy father and thy mother." (Exodus 20:12.) This direction is closely related to that first and most important commandment that came out of the fires of Sinai wherein the Creator said: "Thou shalt have no other gods before me." (Exodus 20:3.) God is our eternal Heavenly Father. He is our greatest benefactor. He is our wisest teacher. By doing as he directs we may reach any state of accomplishment. But then standing next to God in our lineup of benefactors are our parents.

It has been said that because God could not be everywhere present, he made mothers. Mothers and fathers do much of the work of human upbringing and betterment that otherwise could only be effectively done by God. Napoleon was once asked what was the greatest need of France and he gave his one-word answer: "Mothers." And what a tremendous good fortune it is to have a godly set of parents. Good parents are the greatest need of nations and of individuals. No matter how capable or how loving or how thoughtful one parent may be, a single parent cannot do the job alone.

What a fortunate situation exists when a wonderful mother is supported, protected, provided for, and loved by a faithful, devoted, honest, God-fearing, hard-working husband who is the father of her children. And how favored is any man who has a devoted, inspiring, pleasant, spiritual wife who is the mother.

These two very special people were appointed by God to create our physical bodies, to mold our attitudes, and to care for our needs, particularly during our early, formative, dependent years. From our parents we learned to walk, talk, and think. They help to build our attitudes and form our habits. They teach us the fundamentals of religion and assist us in laying a solid foundation for our characters. What we will ultimately be will very largely depend upon God, our parents, and ourselves.

To honor our fathers and our mothers means to believe in them, to trust them, to obey them, and to live the kind of righteous, exemplary life that will make them proud of us. Of course the parents must be assisted by the children. It has been said that as every inspired book needs an inspired reader, so inspired parents need inspired children.

I once heard a famous sales manager give some very good counsel to a picky, hard-to-please, rebellious person who was trying to learn to be a good salesman. When the sales manager tried to correct the salesman, the salesman would frequently get angry if what was said didn't strike him just right. The salesman did not hesitate to put his own opinion up against that of his sales manager. Everyone had to put on his kid gloves when dealing with this salesman. Finally, the sales manager laid it on the line and told the salesman that he must either get down off his high horse or find himself a job elsewhere.

This sales manager knew that it was useless for anyone to try to help someone that he was afraid of. If every time the salesman was corrected his feelings would be hurt, or if he took a nose-dive into some kind of emotional depression, most of the good would be lost. The sales manager said, "I have more important things to do than to waste my time begging and coaxing and trying to pamper and to bribe you into being successful." This sales manager was one of the best men in the business. He knew his job backward and forward and upside down and standing on his head. It would have been very profitable for any intelligent salesman who wanted to be somebody to pay this man thousands of dollars to handle his training. But instead of listening, some salesmen insist on telling an experienced, highly successful sales manager how they want to be trained.

Everyone has blind spots and needs someone on the sidelines to give him directions, and if this sales manager had a friendly, obedient, appreciative salesman and if the sales manager felt perfectly free with the salesman, he could, with absolute certainty, quadruple the salesman's income, prestige, and job satisfaction. But if the sales manager is always running the risk of arguments, sulkiness, and unpleasantness, it doesn't matter much how capable he may be. And if the salesman does not have great confidence and love for the sales manager, the salesman will always be the loser.

When Job was having some trouble he said about God, who might represent his sales manager, "Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him." (Job 13:15.) And we might say hurrah for Job! With that kind of an attitude he just about had it made.

If one wanted to be a great soldier, what a privilege it would be to have a great general to teach him. Or how fortunate a young singer would be to be able to work under the direction of a master. It is possible to get a great coach or a great businessman or a great doctor who could almost guarantee the success of a friendly, devoted, obedient student who studies hard and works diligently and knows how to take direction.

There are some unwise children who depreciate, criticize, accuse, and dislike their parents. Some children think it smart to have their parents afraid of the unpleasantness that they can cause if any parental restrictions are imposed, whether they are right or wrong. One who wants to be a good salesman had better love, honor, and obey the sales manager and like it. Anyone pays an awful price when his sales manager or his parents are afraid of him.

One of the greatest of all success laws is that we should believe in God. But next to God we should believe in and obey and honor our parents, who, because of their special interest and love, have an extra ability to help us that no one else has.

When Aaron was appointed to be the mouthpiece for his brother Moses, God said to Moses:

"[Aaron] shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall...be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of God.

"And thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do." (Exodus 4:16, 15.)

And God made a similar arrangement when he commissioned our parents. In several very real ways they should be as God to us. Lincoln said: "All that I am or ever hope to be I owe to my angel mother." Because Abe honored, trusted, loved, and obeyed his mother, he received a tremendous benefit from her influence.

God gives every parent some godly powers that reach far beyond their natural human endowments. Someone reminisces about his mother as follows:

Your hair has faded, mother dear,

From gold to silvery gray,

Yet, in your eyes, that little spark

Of love, I see today.

It means that you are proud of me;

You're glad for what you've done,

And in your heart I never see

A shame for me, your son.

Oh, I remember very well

When first I learned to pray,

Each night beside my little bed

You taught me how to say—

God bless my mother that she may

Protect and care for me,

And guide me right with truth each day

An honest man to be.

The days flew by; the years came on.

You led me all the while and

Through the trials that break with dawn

You held me with your smile.

The waves are strong that tempted me

To plunder wrongfully,

But with your love I could not go

Adrift far out to sea.

The darker ways that beckoned me

To lie, to steal, to cheat,

I might have gone, could you not see

My life lay at your feet.

And all through life you toiled away

And struggled just for me

To make me what I am today,

And what I'm proud to be.

Then God, it seems, has answered them,

Those prayers we used to say,

And in my heart that mighty theme

An honest man will stay.

And when alone at times, dear heart,

You ponder o'er the past

And wonder will I think of you

As long as life shall last—

Remember that I love you still.

You linger ever near,

And in my heart and soul I pray

God bless you, mother dear.

The power and intensity of a mother's love is one of the wonders of the world. And even though parents may sometimes make some mistakes or even do some wrong things themselves, yet they do not want their children to do wrong things. This great invention of mother love reaches all the way down through the animal kingdom. Many animal, as well as human, mothers have willingly given up their lives for their offspring.

The story is told of a farmer whose barn caught on fire. The farmer led the cow out of the burning building and tied her to a tree out of the reach of the fire. He believed that all of the other animals had been rescued, but the cow knew that her calf was still in the barn. She tried to communicate that idea by bellowing and making as much noise as possible, but when she was unable to get her message over, she mustered all of her strength, broke the rope, and, completely disregarding her own welfare, rushed into the blazing inferno in a desperate attempt to save her offspring. The result was that both perished in the flames.

Human parents have been endowed on a much higher plane. They were created in God's own image, and they have been endowed with a set of his attributes and potentialities, and thrice blessed is he who receives the full benefits of keeping that great command saying "Honour thy father and thy mother." Because the beast was put down on all fours, his vision is cast upon the ground. But man was created upright in the image of his Maker that he might look up to God and to his parents and to truth and to honor and to progress.

In an attempt to make the most of the fifth commandment, we have set apart the second Sunday in May as Mother's Day and the third Sunday in June as Father's Day. On these occasions we give special attention to this divine law of the fifth commandment. When we exalt our parents in our minds and love them in our hearts and honor them by living a godly life, we lift ourselves up, for we always develop those qualities that we magnify in our hearts.

The apostle John indicated some of the great joys that come from honor when he wrote to a young man whom he thought of as his son in the gospel. He said:

"Beloved, I wish above all things that thou mayest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospereth.

"For I rejoiced greatly, when the brethren came and testified of the truth that is in thee, even as thou walkest in the truth.

"I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth." (3 John 2-4.)

We remember that as our Eternal Heavenly Father has introduced his Only Begotten Son he has said: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." May we so live that both our heavenly parents and our earthly parents will also say that of us.

To enable us to please God, one day out of every week was set apart as the Sabbath. This is the Lord's day. This is a kind of Heavenly Father's Day. This is a special time for pleasing God and honoring our parents. From the cross Jesus looked down upon John the beloved apostle and said: "Behold thy mother!" (John 19:27.) I suppose that that meant to pay attention to her and think about her and care for her. And on Mother's Day we might say to ourselves, "Behold thy mother!"

My own mother has long since departed this life, and yet I know what would make her most happy on the special Sabbath that has been set aside as Mother's Day, and that would be for her to know that her children were faithful to those noble ideals and high principles which she tried to instill into them. She wanted us to be happy, and she knew that that could only be brought about by righteousness. On this important subject the Prophet Joseph Smith has said: "Happiness is the object and design of our existence and will be the end thereof if we pursue the path that leads to it." And this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all of the commandments of God. But we cannot keep all of the commandments of God without knowing them, and we cannot expect to know all or more than we now know unless we comply with and keep those that we have already received.

So on Mother's Day we might honor our mothers best by making some Mother's Day resolutions to know the truth, to love God, and to obey that great command in which he said: "Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee." To our mothers we might repeat the prayer in which some of the ancients extended their appreciation and conferred their blessings upon their loved ones. They said: "The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace." (Numbers 6:24-26.)
