Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

How Great Thou Art

WE HAVE a very interesting word called great that we frequently apply to persons or things whose real importance we may not fully understand. We sometimes speak of our great country, or a great business, or our great inventions. However, this word has one of its finest applications in describing people. It designates a human dimension of importance or quality or excellence or ability. We sometimes feel great, and frequently we are able to get a little greatness into our activities. Certainly if a person is not great in what he does, he is not great. Greatness is also one of our objectives for eternity, and if one plans to be a great soul in heaven, he ought to practice being a great soul here.

But whether our concern is for here or hereafter, we should be aware of those traits in human life that are great in magnitude, power, intensity, eminence, or elevation. The opposites of great are seen in those conditions where either things or people are described as little, brief, scant, slight, unworthy, undistinguished, and unimportant. Most of our personality traits, mental abilities, and character qualities fit some place in between the extremes of great and small.

The most exalted use of this great word great is when it is used to describe the function or the person of God himself. God represents the greatest good in the universe. He is all powerful. He is all wise. He is all knowing. He is all good. If we will follow him, his influence and rule can make us as he is. God is the Creator of the earth and all things that are therein. All of its laws were organized and ordained by him. He is the giver of all good things, and all of our hopes for future happiness depend upon him and how effectively we obey his laws. When we keep his greatness in our minds, we can bring important benefits upon ourselves. John Drinkwater has said,

When the high heart we magnify,

And the sure vision celebrate,

And worship greatness passing by,

Ourselves are great.

Sometimes ago, Stuart K. Hine wrote an inspiring sacred song entitled "How Great Thou Art." [^1] He said:

O Lord my God! When I in awesome wonder-

Consider all the worlds Thy hands have made,

I see the stars, I hear the rolling thunder,

Thy pow'r throughout the universe displayed.

Then sings my soul, my Savior God to thee-

How great Thou art, how great Thou art! . . .

And when I think that God, His Son not sparing,

Sent Him to die, I scarce can take it in,

That on the cross, my burden gladly bearing,

He bled and died to take away my sin:

Then sings my soul, my Savior God to Thee-

How great Thou art, how great Thou art!

When Christ shall come with shout of acclamation

And take me home, what joy shall fill my heart!

Then I shall bow in humble adoration

And there proclaim, my God, how Great Thou Art!

Then sings my soul, my Savior God to Thee-

How great Thou art, how great Thou art!

Then sings my soul, my Savior God to Thee-

How great Thou art, how great Thou art!

It is thought that probably the most important idea with which we ever occupy our minds is to try to comprehend the greatness, the power, the wisdom, and the goodness of God. This idea is even more important inasmuch as the human mind has some of the qualities of the tendrils of a climbing vine that attach themselves and draw themselves upward by what they are put in contact with. When we put our minds in contact with God, our lives are drawn upward. Jesus said, "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.)

Because we are gregarious by nature and have these climbing-vine tendencies, we are always attaching ourselves to or identifying with someone. We attach ourselves to the Democrats or the Republicans or the hippies, or hold on to the atheists or the Communists, and then we go up or down accordingly. We tend to absorb the essential parts of what we cling close enough to and hold on to long enough. We take into our mental bloodstream the ideals, ideas, and mannerisms of those with whom we identify. But the climbing vine has little chance to remain standing after the wall to which it is attached has crumbled away.

To satisfy our human need for someone to cling to and something to grow on, Jesus was sent into the world to be our example and give us our pattern. When he said, "Follow me," he was providing us the safest wall to cling to and the finest ladder on which to climb upward.

We are taking serious chances when we place our confidence in any of the arms of flesh. Some have attached themselves to dictators or to wealth or to power or to evil, and they have always eventually fallen. Many men have built their houses upon the sand and placed their trust in human wisdom, and when the storms have beat upon them, great has been the fall thereof. Certainly one of the most serious mistakes that has ever been made in our world has been the tendency of men to downgrade God in their own minds. We sometimes say that God has lost the power to reveal himself, that we don't need him anymore, or that he is old-fashioned and out of date. Sometimes we allow some mixedup, self-styled intellectual to get above the great God of Creation in importance in our minds. Then we let go of God and cling to the crumbling wall of man.

In preaching their false man-made doctrines, some so-called religious leaders insist upon depriving God of his body, his personality, his faculties, and his senses and make him a mere nothing. Then we say that God is dead, and we discontinue our prayers and cut off all of our other communications with him. Because of our sins and disobedience, we alienate his spirit and lose his blessings. In the foul sacrilege of our oaths, we profane the divine supremacy of him whose names we desecrate. The scripture says that "ere he is aware, he is left unto himself, to kick against the pricks, to persecute the saints, and to fight against God." (D&C 121:38.)

If we would sing with full appreciation, "How great thou art," we would not disobey his commands and commit every possible crime against each other. Some whole nations have banished God. Others have forbidden that prayers be said to him in the public schools. One of the evidences of his greatness is that he treats us as well as he does when we are such unprofitable servants.

In the antemortal estate Lucifer was the light-bearer, the brilliant son of the morning, but he rebelled against God and drew away after him one-third of all of the hosts of heaven. I suppose that it would be impossible to imagine a more gigantic waste. Even in mortality many of God's spirits are carrying on the evil activities of disobeying, disbelieving, seducing, deceiving, lying, and destroying. But at the glorious second coming of Christ the activities of Lucifer and all of those who follow him will largely be destroyed. Then that thousand years of a millennium of peace will be inaugurated upon the earth, and Satan's reign and his power to do evil will be greatly reduced.

We might wonder why God doesn't put an end to all of Satan's evil and force us to do right whether we want to or not, but in the council in heaven a two-thirds majority of God's children voted for the freedom of the human spirit, and God himself made a firm commitment to support man's free agency. God gave us a promise saying, ". . . thou mayest choose for thyself." (Moses 3:17.) This applies to the entire 6,000-year period that has been allotted as the time for man's mortality. This is the period when the earth will be in its telestial state. When this 6,000-year period has been completed, Christ will come to cleanse the earth of its sin and establish his own government upon the earth. Then after the thousand years are finished, the influence of Satan will be finally destroyed, and the earth will again be raised in status, this time to the rank of a celestial earth. It is very difficult to understand why Satan should continue to do evil in the face of many serious disadvantages. It is even more difficult to understand why so many mortals who followed God in the preexistence should jeopardize their eternal welfare by having such an estranged attitude toward him in this life.

From some points of view we got off to a bad start when Adam and Eve disobeyed God and brought the curse upon the earth with its telestial conditions. Cain started an extended crime wave when he murdered his brother, and since that time we have suffered through all kinds of wars, sins, floods, confusions, the crucifixion, and the dark ages because of our evil deeds. Even now in these last days of our world's telestial history, with the second coming just around the corner, we seem to be in a kind of suicidal race to see who can pile up the most serious evils, including the threat of blowing up our world, destroying our bodies, and condemning our souls.

It is interesting to inquire of ourselves why it is that we do as we do when we believe as we believe. Or why do we act as we act when we are who we are? We were created in the image of God, and we can be like him. He is the greatest being that our minds are capable of conceiving. He lives without committing any wrong. We cannot imagine him doing any evil thing. He is so opposed to the destructive nature of evil that no sin is permitted in his presence. God himself "cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance." (D&C 1:31.) While he gives us our free agency, however, he also grants us the full and unrestricted privilege of full repentance. Under some circumstances he grants us the promise of a full pardon. God is not only the greatest being in the universe; he is our eternal Heavenly Father and is by long odds our greatest benefactor. He has given us this beautiful, wonderful earth with all of its delightful interests, its abundant food supply, its great natural laws, and its wonderful opportunities. What is probably even more important, he has given us ourselves on a kind of lend-lease basis. We have these magnificent minds, these wonderful personalities, and these bodies capable of a glorious resurrection and an eternal life. God's objective for us is complete success and happiness. We are not our own while we are in this life. We were sent here to be tested and to prove ourselves worthy of those great blessings of eternal progression and everlasting happiness that he has held up before us.

After we have satisfactorily finished our second estate and passed our final examinations, then we may have glory added upon our heads forever and ever. Then we will be turned over to ourselves to live in our exalted state forever with God.

Under these circumstances, when we sing "How great thou art," we ought to respond in kind. We ought to show our Heavenly Father that we can be trusted to be faithful and devoted and righteous forever. Just think what our earth would be like if all of God's children conducted themselves as his children and as he desires us to conduct ourselves.

It is an interesting thought that we come next to God in the catalog of greatness for a very good reason. God hates our sins, but he loves us. We are his children, and that family relationship will last forever. We have inherited his great traits, and if we are faithful, the offspring of God may eventually be like their eternal parents and live with them in eternal glory. So we sing again,

And when I think that God, His Son not sparing,

Sent Him to die, I scarce can take it in,

That on the cross, my burden gladly bearing,

He bled and died to take away my sin.

Then sings my soul, my Savior God to Thee,

How great Thou art, how great Thou art!

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Copyright 1955 by Manna Music, Inc., Burbank, California. International copyright secured. All rights reserved. Used by permission.
