Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

How Much Should We Lose?

SOMETIME AGO an article was written by Myron Roberts with its interest centered in Las Vegas, Nevada. Mr. Roberts refers to what takes place there as an American phenomenon. He says that "nothing like it does or could exist any place else in the world." It is his opinion that Las Vegas expresses a trait of an affluent twentieth century America in about the same way that the Olympic games stood for ancient Greece, or the Circus Maximus expressed ancient Rome, or the pubs and coffee houses stood for eighteenth century London.

It seems to Mr. Roberts that to have lived in Rome during the days of the empire and not visited the Coliseum would have reflected a certain poverty of the imagination. By the same logic, he argues that someone who lives in America in the last third of the twentieth century and does not visit Las Vegas is not experiencing his own culture and doesn't know his own time. Of course, the primary business of Las Vegas is gambling. It is around this that all else revolves. Unfortunately gambling is evil, and it becomes the mother of many other human problems. It also calls our attention to the fascination that so many people have for it. This fascination might be compared to the story of the rabbit being hypnotized by the snake as a preliminary to its destruction. Will Durant once pointed out that there has never been a civilization in the history of the world without the two universal vices of drinking and gambling. Why this should be so, no one can adequately explain, but the fact seems to be that man is a betting animal, and he finds betting in its greatest abundance in Las Vegas. There is another interesting fact: the great majority of people don't go to Las Vegas with the idea of making any money by gambling. Rather, they usually start out with some kind of an idea in mind as to about how much they feel that they can afford to lose. The only real question involved during their stay is whether or not they can manage to keep within their selfimposed limit. They know that the slot machines and the gaming tables mean a sure loss to everyone who plays.

They know that all of the gambling devices operate with a mathematical precision that precludes any possibility of winning over a long period. This law of averages for the machines is so adjusted that the house eventually ends up with the money. As in most other things, those who play are usually those who cannot afford to lose. Inasmuch as the lure is not the anticipation of something for nothing, we must look for the attraction in some element of the gambling itself.

There may be some things about our human nature that are not quite clear even to us. Just as the members of our society usually do not go fishing because they want to eat the fish, so people do not gamble because they expect to win. There is something about the risk involved or the struggle engaged in that seems to supply its own inducement to play. It may be man's inexhaustible fascination with luck that causes his endless flirtation with this serious evil even if he loses money that he cannot afford. There are many people who would be more enthusiastic about finding a hundred dollars, or winning a hundred dollars, or even in stealing a hundred dollars, than in earning a hundred dollars.

Someone once asked Napoleon what sort of generals he chose for his armies. He replied, "Lucky generals." Many people feel that while it's nice to be smart or brave or reverent or true, yet it is even better to be lucky. Mr. Roberts feels that much of the lure of Las Vegas lies in the opportunity given for one to test his standing with Lady Luck.

An astonishing thing about Las Vegas is that based on this undesirable human weakness, men have created a city of a quarter of a million people in the midst of a barren and inhospitable desert and have almost exclusively given over the city's importance to gambling. There are other world famous resorts, spas, and places of amusement. There are also other places where one can gamble, but nothing remotely comparable in scope or scale to Las Vegas has ever been known in the world before. Alongside Las Vegas, Monte Carlo is merely a quaint little village. Only a couple of decades ago, Las Vegas itself was a curiosity. It was a rather disreputable remnant of an old frontier saloon town. But it has now become a major city financed by some of the world's richest and most celebrated capitalists.

The only part of Las Vegas that most visitors ever see or care about are the few miles of Las Vegas Boulevard called the Strip. The huge urban resort that has been created there is really a series of cities within a city, where the principal pleasures are to be found indoors. But even the outdoor sports, including golf, swimming, and other activities, are conducted with a certain high gloss not usually found elsewhere. Most of the great hotels of Las Vegas are new, and they are like completely self-contained luxury liners floating on the desert instead of on the sea; they offer to the visitor almost every imaginable form of recreation. There is a variety of restaurants from coffee shops to intimate cafes to elegant gourmet dining rooms. One gets the works in elegance as he visits the shops, golf courses, pools, and gymnasiums.

The hotel executives, the restaurant chefs, the entertainers, and the musicians who manage these vast enterprises have all been brought to Las Vegas from virtually every city in the world. Most of them were highly successful someplace else. As a result there is a certain professionalism that characterizes the typical Las Vegas resort hotel. Certainly there is nothing rustic or intimate about it. No one is likely to accuse Las Vegas of being a warm, friendly little town. As Mr. Roberts says, Las Vegas is fast and efficient.

A certain kind of success is one of the other commodities that Las Vegas also has a lot of. Mr. Roberts says that in Las Vegas everything works. The rooms in the hotels are uniformly attractive, the beds are large and comfortable, the TV sets turn on and off when you flick the buttons. At the International Hotel, Mr. Roberts was continually surprised at how smoothly the management manages things:

"The International is thirty stories high (the tallest in Nevada), it has 1519 guest rooms. It contains three theaters seating thousands of people and the casino is the largest in the world. In the convention hall, 5,000 people can sit down for dinner; there are six restaurants, a gigantic swimming pool, a golf course, a complete children's hotel within the hotel, 211 chefs and cooks in eleven kitchens with an annual payroll of 25 million dollars. And there are plans to expand it to twice its present size. The task inherent in keeping so gargantuan an enterprise running well boggles the mind. And either on the Strip or downtown, it is easier to hit a dollar jackpot than to find a bad room, or a service that is not swift, efficient and pleasantly given. . . .

"Of course, there is a shrewd, practical reason for the time, trouble and expense the management is willing to put forth in order to keep the guests amused and contented. The reason is to be found in that portion of the lobby given over to what the billboards describe as 'Nevada Fun':-namely, the casino. . . .

"Closely associated with the games are the other forms of entertainment. In about two decades, Las Vegas has become synonymous with a certain kind of flashy showmanship, the form of which has been polished and refined to a point of high excellence. In a way Las Vegas has resisted the recent downgrading that has taken place in so many other areas. For example, the trend in the moving picture industry, in night clubs and to some extent on TV is toward anti-art: We now have the plotless film, the bitter comic and the hero who slouches around dressed in ugly clothing in need of a haircut and an elementary course in Basic English. He refuses the bath and does the most sordid kind of things. Even in the movies and on TV commercials, the producers are now using many ugly girls as models to satisfy the current passion for a distorted realism."

Mr. Roberts says that Las Vegas has not lowered itself by any cheapening in its standards. It still clings to the American tradition of excellence. In Las Vegas, show girls still have to be beautiful and elaborately costumed. The men must be tall and handsome, their voices clear, powerful, and masculine.

The Las Vegas show girls look magnificent prancing around in their fantastic costumes, and Mr. Roberts says that he found them much more interesting to look at than the coeds one sees in many college towns with uncombed hair and faces to match. These college girls are frequently dressed in disorderly, unattractive, and unladylike clothing. At the International Hotel, the settings and costumes cost the management almost one million dollars. Certainly Las Vegas is good at "doing its thing." It is a place where the American art of packaging has been carried to new heights. Whether the subject is a pop song, a clean, attractive room, or the sight of beautiful girls resplendently clothed, Las Vegas delivers an experience that is uniquely its own.

The civilizations of ancient Greece and Rome have long since destroyed themselves. Their many points of excellence were outweighed by their sins, and Las Vegas might serve as an American symbol cautioning us of our own decay. This human weakness of gambling that manifests itself in Las Vegas also shows up with even bigger losses in the greater activities of real life. As we contemplate our own life's journey, we might ask ourselves the Las Vegas question: "How much can we afford to lose?"

How much can we afford to lose playing at the new morality? How much can we afford to lose to atheism? How much can we afford to lose to disloyalty, lawlessness, rebellion, and weakness? Anyone who plays those games involving nicotine and alcoholism knows that certainly there will be serious losses. All of the machines of evil are set so as to preclude any possibility of a gain. That gambler is very fortunate who never loses anything more important than his money, as there are many who also lose their faith, honor, ambition, and hope. Many people lose the very attitude of righteousness. Our great nations of the past lost all of their virtues to their vices. Our serious modern rebellions and our attitudes of permissiveness have also turned many people to an attitude of anti-art in real life. More and more people are going through life without an objective, without standards, without a design, and without an ability to appraise values. More and more we are getting ugliness and hate into our philosophies, and many are using criminals and other evil doers as their models. As we invest our effort in sordidness and sin, we greatly increase the loss ratios on those machines that we operate in the casinos of our own lives.

Actually, there are better ways to live than by the alcoholism and gambling mentioned by Mr. Durant. It is interesting that the men who have built up this giant gambling industry in Las Vegas do not themselves gamble. They always bet on a sure thing. Their machines and playing tables are so set that those who own them will get many million dollars of profit annually. All of the risk has been taken out of gambling so far as they are personally concerned. Every thousand times the handles are pulled on these one-armed bandits, their victims will be poorer and the owners will be richer by an amount known in advance. The owners themselves determine the ratios in their own interests. The same procedure is followed with dice, roulette, and cards. That is also about what happens in life. When anyone sets his hand to do any evil, a loss is always sustained.

When we pull the handles on our various indulgences, we lose our health, our wealth, our ability, our morality, and our hope for the future. Satan is the overall operator of a far greater gambling kingdom than the one seen in Las Vegas. Whenever we can be induced to take a chance with evil, we pay our tribute to him in our life's values. The ratios are set against any possible win by those who play. Whether evil is dressed in the glamour of a painted, scantily clad show girl or the squalor of the degenerate, yet its machines are set to collect an awful toll.

It is a sin to cheat. But it is also sinful to be cheated, and two of our most unprofitable sins are the sins of drinking and gambling mentioned by Mr. Durant. From time immemorial, these evil devices have broken up homes, distorted morality, and destroyed faith in God. These are two ways in which we most frequently lose our money, our success, our treasures in heaven, and often even our lives themselves. They represent the exact opposite of that way of life recommended by the Savior of the world. If we live those great principles called the principles of the gospel, then our every effort will bring us a profit. There is a fundamental law in the universe that says that all effort must be paid for. We can no more do a good thing without in some way receiving a reward than we can do an evil thing without suffering a loss. The basic law of the universe is that immutable, unchanging, inexorable, irrevocable law of the harvest which says:

"Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he that soweth in his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting." (Galatians 6:7-8.)

If we properly conduct our personal affairs, we will reap an abundant and profitable harvest.
