Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

In the Garden

ON SEVERAL occasions over the years I have had the inspiring experience of visiting in some of the world's famous botanical gardens. It is amazing what wonders an expert gardener can perform with a few seeds, some fertile soil, a good climate, and plenty of water. Of course many families in every part of the world maintain their own supply of beauty and utility in beautiful gardens of their own. Also many parks, hotels, business establishments, and others maintain gardens for many purposes.

The dictionary describes a garden as a lot of cultivated ground devoted to growing herbs, fruits, flowers, or vegetables. A garden might be a natural forest. It has been pointed out that groves were used as God's first temples. Frequently a garden is a place where people go for inspiration and uplift.

A lot of people have an uplifting hobby of working in their garden for relaxation and as a means for building up themselves. Many of the prophets and even Jesus himself have gone to the mountains and other places of peace, quiet, and beauty for rest, prayer, worship, and inspiration. It was to a high mountain apart from the world that Jesus, with Moses and Elias, was transfigured before Peter, James, and John. The record says: "And [he] was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light. And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him." (Matthew 17:2-3.)

Jesus spent a part of the period of his final preparation for death in the Garden of Gethsemane. Here he prayed to his Father in heaven. This was also the place of much of his suffering. Luke says:

"And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground.

"Saying, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done.

"And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him." (Luke 22:44, 42-43.)

Jesus was buried in the garden tomb of Joseph of Arimathea, and he was also resurrected in a garden. When Jesus first spoke to Mary after his resurrection she mistook him for the gardener. (John 20:15.) All of us have been inspired by being in beautiful gardens; we have also been inspired by the evident fact that God himself loves gardens. For our own starting point, our life upon this earth began in a garden. The record says:

"And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed.

"And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

"And a river went out of Eden to water the garden. . . ." (Genesis 2:8-10.)

It is interesting to try to imagine what this beautiful, beneficial place must have been like. At that time our earth itself was a paradise. The curse that was put upon it at the fall had not yet taken place. There were then no deserts, no weeds, no pollution, no evil, and the fertility of the earth was then new.

We think that this earth is a pretty nice place as it now is, but this earth is now in its telestial or fallen state. Then it was a terrestrial earth described as a paradise. The scripture says that the Lord had made to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food. Even on our telestial earth we have some trees and flowers that are very pleasant to the sight, and we also have many whose fruit is very good for food.

The fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil made people wise. How helpful it might be to eat a little more from the fruit of this tree. What will it be like sometime when we are permitted to eat from the tree of life and the other wonderful trees that God had planted in the Garden of Eden for our benefit? Then, the record says, God made us gardeners: "And the Lord God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it." (Genesis 2:15.)

Adam was instructed that with two exceptions he might eat from all of the trees and enjoy their beauty. Even God himself must have greatly enjoyed this beautiful garden. The scripture says that God spoke to Adam and Eve as he walked in the garden in the cool of the day. (Genesis 3:8.) A place of natural beauty and peace is also a good place for us to go when we want to think and meditate and prepare ourselves for important things. It was with this kind of inspiration in mind that C. Austin Miles wrote his beautiful poem "In the Garden" in which he says:

I come to the garden alone

While the dew is still on the roses

And the voice I hear falling on my ear

The Son of God discloses.

And he walks with me and he talks with me

And tells me I am his own

And the joy we share as we tarry there

None other has ever known.

He speaks and the sound of his voice

Is so sweet the birds hush their singing.

And the melody that he gave to me

Within my heart is ringing.

And he walks with me and he talks with me

And tells me I am his own

And the joy we share as we tarry there

None other has ever known.

Of course there are other kinds of gardens. Many people have talked about their own heart as a garden-and so it is. Our minds can also be beautiful, fertile places where lovely flowers grow with wonderful fragrance, quiet order, and happy harmony. Or our minds can be places that produce noxious weeds that are harmful to human beings.

In God's garden he had every tree that was pleasant to the sight and good for food. The fruit of one tree brought mortality into the world. The fruit from the tree of knowledge of good and evil could make men wise in judging right from wrong. Luther Burbank spent his lifetime in cross-breeding trees and flowers. We can do something similar to that in our minds.

Jesus was not talking about plants; he was talking about people when he said that a tree should be judged by its fruits. We might imagine our lives as a great garden with its trees producing all kinds of good things. In the garden that I plant in my own mind I would like to have one tree, the fruit of which would make me dependable. Few things are more inspiring than those people who produce the fruit showing that they are trustworthy and predictable. I would like to have one tree the fruit of which would make me appreciative.

The old Roman statesman Cicero once pointed out that gratitude is the mother of virtues. Almost every good thing comes from a grateful heart. I would like to have a tree in my garden that would produce loyalty. So far as I know, the greatest sins that have ever been known in the world have been the sins of disloyalty. Lucifer was disloyal to God, and in his rebellion he induced one-third of all of the children of God to turn away from their Creator and lose their blessings. Judas sold Jesus for thirty pieces of silver. Benedict Arnold was disloyal. The reason for many divorces and spiritually bankrupt lives is disloyalty. How wonderful it would be if we could produce in ourselves the kind of devotion to God seen in the great old prophet Job. When his affairs were not going as they should, one of his advisers said to him, "Curse God and die." But Job's faith could not be shaken, and he said: "Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him." (Job 13:15.)

The sunflower has been called the symbol of loyalty, and because of its beauty and significance it has been chosen as the state flower of Kansas. As one of its distinguishing traits, the sunflower always follows the sun, not only in the early hours when the day is young, but also during the long afternoon when the heat is great. Even at the end of the day as the sun disappears into the ocean, it still looks directly into the face of the ever loyal sunflower.

Some years ago a movie showed a ship that had been torpedoed at sea. The captain, who had been blinded in the explosion, had made known his intention to be true to the tradition of the sea and go down with his ship. The mate had helped to launch the lifeboats and had seen to it that everyone had safely gotten away from the ship, and then he came back to the captain's cabin to go down with his chief. The captain was dressed in his smartest uniform and was ready to meet the end of his career in the best possible tradition. When the captain learned of the mate's intention to accompany him in death, he urged his faithful friend and aide to save his own life.

But the mate could not be dissuaded, and as the end approached, the mate was telling the captain the story of the sunflower with its symbolism of loyalty. As the water in the cabin of the sinking ship rose from the men's ankles to their knees, to their waists, and just before the great ship reared up on its end to plunge with its cargo to the bottom of the sea, the mate said, "The sunflower follows the sun; you go down with your ship; I go down with you." That's loyalty.

I usually keep around some sunflower seeds, and occasionally, when I need a little special tonic, I eat a few for the strength and motivation I may get from this loyalty symbolism.

As I work in my spiritual garden, I pay special attention to the fruit on my tree of faith. One of the greatest emotions is the ability to say, "I believe." It is difficult to believe in something that you do poorly, and it is a fine compliment to be able to say, "I believe in God. I believe in my country. I believe in my family. I believe in my life's work. I want to make that great Article of Faith grow stronger in me, which says: 'We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men; indeed, we may say that we follow the admonition of Paul-We believe all things, we hope all things, we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things.'" (Article of Faith 13.)

We can make all of these virtues grow in the garden of our lives.

When I was young and lived out on the farm, we had a fruit orchard in which grew several varieties of apples, cherries, peaches, apricots, and plums. In addition, my father allowed me the use of some land of my own where I cultivated some smaller fruits and berries for my own pleasure. What a delight it was for me then to go into the orchard in the spring and see the beauty of the blossoms, smell their fragrance, and watch the bees go about their business of pollination. I could see the fruit of my youthful ambition as I went among the tomatoes, the cucumbers, the strawberries, the watermelons, the cantaloupes, and other fruits and vegetables.

In the long ago day I had something of the feeling of a creator because I had planted the seeds and helped to bring about so many wonderful things that were good for people. A half century later, I still like to go into a great supermarket and see the tremendous array of colors, flavors, vitamins, and tastes that have all come from this great miracle of creation that God has put into our human hands.

But we can also create a lot of other things, such as courage, industry, a knowledge of truth, morality, spirituality, and eternal life. Gardening was the occupation in which the Master himself was engaged. Jesus referred to himself as a gardener, a vinedresser, a horticulturist, the true vine, a good husbandman, a sower of seeds, and a pruner of trees. He always had a great concern about his plants.

As I think about him, it is easy for me to remember that each of us has been given some gardening responsibilities. When he said, "Follow me," one of his meanings may have been that he wanted us to plant and cultivate our own gardens-our gardens of virtues, our gardens of good deeds, our gardens of character values. He said, ". . . man shall not live by bread alone. . . ." (Luke 4:4.) I must decide the kind of trees and plants that will characterize my life, and all of these must be cared for, cultivated, fertilized, and vitalized.

Elbert Hubbard once said, "I am looking out through the library window into the apple orchard and I see millions of blossoms that will never materialize or become fruit for lack of vitalization." The destiny of an apple blossom is that it should someday become an apple. The destiny of a human soul is that it may eventually become as God is. Neither of those things happen without that vitalizing pollen that brings about accomplishment, so one of our greatest objectives in life should be that of being good husbandmen.
