Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

It Is Good to Give Thanks

ONE OF our greatest American holidays is Thanksgiving Day. This very special day is set apart each year by a proclamation of the president of the United States. Thanksgiving is a legal holiday. It is a day when we recount our blessings, and it is also a feast day. However, Thanksgiving was designed primarily as a day of religious devotion.

By presidential proclamation, Thanksgiving has been set apart as a day of prayer, and everyone is exhorted to go to church. We should certainly do all of those things that a good follower of the Master should do. Thanksgiving is also a day of national dedication. Two of the most important considerations of our lives are those of paying our allegiance to God and to our country.

Governments were divinely instituted for the benefit of men. The Church, officered by inspired men and instructed by the holy scriptures, was established to direct our lives toward the greatest success not only here but hereafter. Some other great institutions have been established for our benefit, such as the family and our occupational organizations, and certainly we should all unite in asking God's blessings upon all of those who have the responsibility for conducting the affairs of church, state, family, and providing our livelihood.

As we recount our blessings, we increase them; and as we ask God's blessings upon our leaders, we are motivated to help them.

In one of the very wise statements of the Old Testament, it is said: "It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy name, O most High." (Psalm 92:1.) There are a great many reasons why that is a good idea. By being grateful we develop within ourselves those qualities of greatness. The best way to give life to such virtues as courage, love, happiness, prayer, faith, righteousness, health, and prosperity is to have a grateful heart out of which they may be born.

Those who are bitter toward God, disloyal to their country, unfaithful to their families, hateful toward life, and get satisfactions in ugliness are suffering from insufficient gratitude. It is easy to visualize the kind of man who said in his prayer:

Oh God, I thank thee for each sight

Of beauty that thy world doth give.

For sunny skies and air and light,

Oh God, I thank thee that I live.

That life I consecrate to thee

And ever as the day is born,

On wings of joy my soul doth flee

And thank thee for another morn.

Another day in which to cast

Some silent deed of love abroad

That hastening as it journeys past,

May do some earnest work for God.

At one Thanksgiving time a wise teacher asked her students to compose their Thanksgiving Day prayers and tell what they wanted to express appreciation for. Then the teacher wrote the following composite prayer. She said:

We bow our heads and thank Thee, God—

—for the sounds of laughter,

—for the colored leaves that swirl and fall in the autumn,

—for the smell of chocolate cake in the oven,

—for big, red garden tomatoes,

—for my playful kitten that gets tangled up in pink yarn,

—for erasers that make mistakes disappear,

—for the feel of wet grass on my bare feet,

—for the good taste of hot cherry pie,

—for my warm, soft bed,

—for my sister's smile on Christmas morning,

—for the boats and seagulls on the wallpaper that carry me across the sea when I look at them,

—for the shade of the maple trees in our yard,

—for the windows that let me watch the world go by, and

—for God's care.

But this blessing of gratitude is taken away from us when we fail to use it. When one ties up his arm in a sling, the arm loses its strength. That is also the way we lose our virtues. When the mole didn't use his eyes, nature took away his eyesight. Some nineteen hundred years ago when the people didn't respond to Christ's message, their ranks were soon devastated by apostasy. When one fails to be grateful, he soon loses his gratitude.

One of those unpleasant traits opposing gratitude is rebellion. This disease has broken out in epidemic proportions in our day. Under a recent newspaper title of "Runaways Find Tragedy," UPI women's editor Gay Pauley said that each year an estimated one million teenagers run away from their homes. Of this group more than one-half are girls and there are more thirteen-year-old female runaways than those in any other age group. Imagine this large group of little girls hating their parents and leaving their homes without supervision or any proper means of providing for themselves. Each year this delicate segment of our population is plunging into every conceivable kind of tragedy.

Real gratitude could prevent the disasters of rebellion. However, children are not the only ones afflicted with this plague. Thousands of adults are joining mobs to conduct rebellions against the government. Many are rebelling against decency, law, and order. Some young people have turned against cleanliness, beauty, and fairness. With a terrible vengeance some have dedicated their lives to fighting the establishment. They seem to feel that they have some kind of divine right to burn down property and destroy what has taken others a lifetime to build up.

But there are no vacuums in human personality. When people lose their gratitude there is always a supply of bitterness, sin, and rebellion that rushes in to fill up the vacated space. Some people have gone so far into evil that it soon becomes impossible for them to save themselves. Then they become victims of that truth stated by the scripture that says: "He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still. . . ." (Revelation 22:11.)

In Paris there is a famous gallery of art called the Louvre where many treasures of uncalculated value are kept. In the centuries since it was converted from the royal palace of France into their national museum, the Louvre has acquired a great collection of masterpieces that unfailingly speak the poetry and drama of man's existence and inspire the full spectrum of emotion in some three million people every year from all over the world. They come away enthralled and uplifted by the majestic beauty of what they see. One of these paintings, which was exhibited for a short period in New York and Washington, has an insurance value of $100,000,000. However, its real value may be much greater than that.

Once a group of tourists was being taken through this great gallery. There was considerable agitation among them in anticipation of seeing this famous painting. Further interest was added by the fact that it was protected twenty-four hours a day by an armed guard. As the tourists approached the picture, one of them said, "I don't see anything so hot about that." The guard said, "But don't you wish you could?"

What a tragedy it is when our hearts become incapable of appreciating beauty and righteousness. How fortunate they are who can fully serve God, love truth, and help to build up the establishment. Don't we wish that we could feel a genuine patriotism for our great country and be loyal to it under all circumstances?

How the quality of our lives would be improved if we had some of those traits possessed by Major Martin Treptow who, before the battle of Chateau-Thierry, wrote in his diary, "I will work, I will save, I will sacrifice, I will endure, I will fight cheerfully and do my utmost as though the entire conflict depended upon me alone." Don't we wish that we could feel that way? Don't we wish that we could get all of the bitterness, hate, and irreverence out of our hearts? What a tragedy it is for those poor unfortunates who betray their country, conduct senseless marches, foster race riots, hate law and order, and call law enforcement officers, who are only trying to do their duty, unsavory names.

It would help us to develop this profitable quality of gratitude if we knew more about God, truth, and our own possible destinies. It would also be helpful to know more about the religious origin of the United States and those who have built up our establishment. Our Pilgrim fathers were not rich or powerful; they were not highly educated, but they were real people. It took them 128 days to cross the Atlantic in their little ship of ninety tons. In that year they had one of the wildest winters that ever swept the North Atlantic.

The Mayflower landed in December, and it is cold in New England in December. Columbus landed in October, and his crew mutinied. Columbus had recruited a poorer grade of human beings and they were merely "summer sailors." But there was not a single Pilgrim who even thought of mutiny. During the first terrible New England winter, ninety people were sick at one time, and only seven were well enough to care for them. One by one they died—wives, husbands, and children. Fifty-one out of 102 were laid in the frozen earth by the survivors. The Pilgrims had a lot of other problems that their faith and sturdy gratitude helped them handle. May God help us to build on their foundation that we also might have the strength and righteousness of real people.

How different our history might have been if our country's foundations had been laid by draft card burners, trouble makers, and idlers who spend their time in protest marches, causing trouble, and holding angry demonstrations. The lives of our Pilgrim forefathers were God-oriented. When they landed in America, the first public building erected was not a store, or a town hall, or a library, or a courthouse. It was a church. In their philosophy, the Pilgrims related everything to God.

It is interesting to take a close look at our own dollar bill. On one side of this paper money is a picture of George Washington, the father of his country. On the reverse side we see the front and back surfaces of the great seal of the United States. In the middle are the words "In God We Trust." There are certain super liberals who now want to have these words removed because they might offend the weak sensibilities of someone.

In one of the circles of the great seal is the picture of a pyramid that was left uncompleted at the top. Above the pyramid is the Latin phrase Annuit Coeptis, meaning "He has smiled on our undertaking," and below it says, Novus Ordo Seclorum, meaning "A new order of the ages," the idea being that with the blessings of God we can build the finest order of society, including a magnificent way of life. A successful way of life must always be a righteous way of life. It is God's way of life.

The pyramid is left incomplete to indicate that we are always building and always trying to improve. Above the pyramid is an eye that represents the eye of God. The fathers of our country resolved that under God they would build a greater order than had ever been known before. May we carry the torch they have lighted. It is a good thing to give thanks that we can make our good nation better.

There is only one thing that could go wrong either with our country or with the church or with our marriage or with our lives, and that is us. The only way for our country to fail, or for the church to fail, or for our marriage to fail is for us to fail. Our country is not made up primarily of buildings and real estate—it is made up of people. We have this nation because human beings were inspired by God to establish it on Christian principles. We cannot make a great nation out of criminals, atheists, hippies, or those possessed by an unholy mania for tearing down, burning up, and destroying. When we sing "God Bless America," we do not mean a drunken America, nor an ignorant America, nor a weak America, nor an atheistic America, nor an ungrateful America. And so at Thanksgiving time, we pray that we may help God to build up an industrious, successful, righteous America filled with happy, prosperous, God-fearing Americans.
