Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Looking Backward

THE OTHER day I read an interesting article telling of the conversation of two men who were discussing the advantages and disadvantages of looking backward. One man said, "If I had my life to live over again, I would not change a thing." The other man thought this was a very unproductive and unprofitable attitude. He felt that anyone should be able to learn a great many things from a lifetime of experience and that every adult who couldn't see things in his own past that he could have done better must be very unperceptive and insensitive.

This man went on to say that when he was a young boy his mother had started him out taking piano lessons. But like many other young boys, he developed a serious dislike for piano lessons. Consequently he kicked up so much fuss about them over such a long period that his mother finally gave up in disgust and sold the piano. Now he thinks about what a thrilling experience it would be if he could occasionally sit down at the piano and effectively run through some great musical selections. With these he could not only please his many friends, but he could also inspire himself. He recounted a large number of other abilities and emotions that he could have had at a small sacrifice, and the effort required now seems to him very trivial.

This man had another interesting idea. He had been born and reared in Los Angeles when Southern California real estate was selling for a song, whereas it now brings a price of thousands of dollars per square inch. With a little ability to see ahead, every person living in North America then could now be wealthy. And it is probable that many people have neglected a great many other personal opportunities that they now wish they had taken advantage of. We fall down in our opportunities because, at the time, they are so easily available that we see them only in the dim misty view of our foresight. Because we don't have a trained hindsight to teach us how to look ahead, we frequently pass up all kinds of privileges that, if we could only turn the calendar back, we would most certainly do something about.

Therefore, just for the fun of it, this man sat down and made up a list of all of the things that he would do differently if he could live his life over again. Now just suppose that as a special favor to us, the clock of the universe could be turned back so that we could actually live our lives over again. What would we do differently? It may be that we would work a little harder in school and be a little more dependable in our social relationships. Or it may be that we would have left out of our life's mixture some of those bad attitudes and unfavorable experiences that have since caused us too many embarrassments. Of course, the cold facts are that we can't turn back the clock, and we can't postpone even the smallest crisis while we prepare for it. But we ought to learn to look back frequently as we go along.

Recently I talked with a man who had been fired from his job at the age of sixty-four who had never learned to do this. With a real fear for the future, which prompted a genuine regret for his past, he said, "I wish I could live my life over again." But trying to relive life is like trying to rehearse birth or death or success. One can't leave age sixty-four while he starts over again at age twenty-four. However, even regrets can be very profitable if we have them early enough.

Recently a friend was telling me about one of his greatest experiences. Because of financial problems, he had had to drop out of school for four years while he was young. Most of his friends went on to finish, and he was made to feel that the possibilities for success had already all passed him by. On one occasion after visiting with his former best friend, he sat down and cried about the uselessness and disappointment that in his opinion had already destined his life to permanent failure. But from his viewpoint at age twenty-five he couldn't see all of the picture. Actually he had received many benefits from these out-of-school years. Certainly they had taught him how to work hard, and they had given him a helpful humility. He learned something of that old proverb which says, "He who arises quickly and continues the journey is as though he has never fallen." Therefore he picked himself up and got started.

It is also helpful to understand the temporary failures of other men. One might review the letter that George Washington once wrote to his kinsman during the discouraging years of the Revolutionary War. He said:

"Such is my situation that if I were to put the bitterest curse on an enemy this side of the grave I would put him in my place. I see the impossibility of doing any essential service to the cause by continuing in command, and yet I am told that if I quit the command inevitable ruin will follow from the distractions that will ensue. In confidence I tell you that I never was in such a divided, unhappy state since I was born."

But because Washington kept going, he became the father of his country. Success is not in causes or in classes or in teachers or in locations or in situations, but in people.

A great corporation recently announced that all of its executive officers were college graduates except two, one of whom was president of the company and the other was chairman of the board. It is very interesting that neither Abraham Lincoln nor Brigham Young nor Jesus of Nazareth had very much formal education. Abraham Lincoln even lost more elections than he won, but he learned from his defeats how to become the President of the United States. Lincoln did a lot of looking backward, not only into his own life but also into the lives of others, and with the desperate ambition generated by his failure, he had soon passed up all of those about him.

Looking back is about the only way to develop hindsight, which is usually much clearer than foresight. If we develop the right combination of introspection, retrospection, and contemplation, our forward vision can be greatly strengthened by our rear views of life. From old Roman mythology we get the helpful story of Janus, the Roman god of January. One of the unusual things about Janus was that he had two faces. With one he was constantly looking back into the past, which made him continually aware of his previous mistakes and what had caused them, and with his other face he looked up into the future as he planned how he could avoid repeating his past errors. An effective hindsight is not limited to an examination of one's own errors. It is very helpful to learn from one's own mistakes, but it is much more profitable to learn from the mistakes of others. One may also be encouraged and enthused by his own as well as other people's successes. Both the successes and failures of every other person, past and present, can help him effectively plan his own future.

It has been said that planning is the place where man shows himself most like God. He is the one who borrows from the success of every other person to help him draw the blueprint for his own accomplishment. He is the one who builds the roadway on which his future success is to travel. He is the one who studies causes and consequences so that he understands why things happened as they did in the past and how he can use his knowledge to produce a more rosy picture for the future. We can build up our own success every day.

By looking backward into the past, we may be impressed with the idea that we have been stamping our minds with too many bad habits, too many sins, too much failure, and too many negative attitudes. Our futures will soon be our pasts. Because hindsight is very inexpensive and easy to profit from, the rest of our future may have all of the fumbles and mistakes removed from it. In a very substantial way we can read the future by looking backward.

A Detroit executive was once shopping for a new home and when he found the one that fit his liking, he was told by the realtor that it would cost him $70,000. The executive said, "I could have bought this house last year for $60,000." "That's right," said the realtor, "and next year it will cost you $80,000." Because the executive could see into the future by way of the past, he bought the house.

Values change and times change, but by looking back into the past we can discover the fact that music lessons and hard work now will always have a still greater value for the future. We may also discover that in the future we will still want to love more and to hate less. It will still be profitable to be more kind, more considerate, and more tolerant toward others. And no matter how important our past may have been, the next five years will undoubtedly be more important years than any up to this date.

In the financial markets, special importance is attached to what are called growth stocks. Whether our life's values are growing or diminishing will determine whether we are becoming wealthy or going out of business. If we can read the past and identify the causes of failure, we can change every recession into a boom. The records of the past show us clearly that crime does not pay and that disobedience to God is unprofitable. We can easily learn that industry and righteousness are vastly superior to sloth and sin as a way of life.

As we review the past records of Cain, Jezebel, Judas Iscariot, and Benedict Arnold, we can eliminate any of the seeds of their failures that may be getting a start in us. We can determine also the most profitable courses by comparing their failures with the successes of the great prophets, the great saints, the great patriots, and the faithful doers of good deeds. Righteousness is always profitable, and we can always sluff off failure by repentance.

In 1932 Walter Pitkin wrote an interesting book entitled Life Begins at Forty, but life begins every morning. Life begins when we begin. It is never too early to stamp personalities with righteousness, and some of the world's greatest successes have taken place after age sixty-five. Our real lives begin when we start enthusiastically doing those things that God's laws of righteousness say that we ought to be doing.

The great God of creation also looks in both directions. He has said: "I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last." (Revelation 22:13.) God can see the end from the beginning and he can see the beginning from the end. He has offered us his objectives to go by and he has charted our course in such a way that if we follow we can't miss. What an unpleasant sensation it will be if, when we arrive at that great day of judgment, we can only say, "I wish I could live my life over again."

One of the greatest blessings is to live in this world of contrasts where we can learn by opposites. It is one of our greatest opportunities to look back that we may see what is ahead. We may look back into our antemortal existence. We can also look back to our mistakes of last month and last year. Then, with a look forward to the most magnificent successes, we can understand what someone has said: "Life can only be understood backwards, but it can only be lived forward." Our primary job is to live it well.
