Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Love of Truth

DURING THE ministry of Jesus he gave many great laws and profitable philosophies for people to live by. His two greatest commandments were centered in love. He said that we should love God with all of our hearts and our neighbors as ourselves. This great emotion of love is fundamental to any outstanding success. When one has a substantial love for something, he sets up a strong natural attraction that draws him toward it. This procedure might be compared to a piece of metal setting up a powerful magnet to draw it toward its goal.

An airplane can fly faster and much more easily when it is assisted by a strong tail wind. Every accomplishment can be multiplied when we fall in love with what we are doing. I knew a man many years ago who wanted to get married, and he needed to have a job that would allow him more freedom, help him to develop himself more rapidly, and pay him a larger income in order to do so. He was offered a job as a salesman that included all of these possibilities. The problem was that he was not a salesman and that he didn't like selling. But he had set up a worthy objective and he was willing to sweep the street in order to bring it about. Therefore, he changed his job from one that he liked to one that would give him what he wanted. With strong selfcontrol, he forced himself to do what all good salesmen are required to do, and because he followed the laws of successful selling, he was an immediate success. The only problem was that he didn't like what he was doing.

But after a period of fighting the strong headwinds of dislike by forcing himself to do the things that he didn't like to do, he thought how ridiculous it was to hate something that offered the only way of getting him to his objective. Then he made a great decision to love his new job. He made a list of the good things about it and began building them up in his own mind. He believed in his product. His job had the advantage of forcing him to develop initiative, courage, and love for people. When he reasoned it out, every single thing about it was good. He also remembered what Jesus had said about the advantages of loving one's enemies, and everyone should understand that when we love our enemies, we more or less automatically make them our friends.

When we do a good job well, we always learn to love and enjoy it. The reason that he hadn't liked selling was because he was not big enough to do it like a champion, and he would now either be forced to grow or to acknowledge himself a weakling. Therefore, because he forced himself to work harder than anyone else, he began to exceed everyone else in results. And it wasn't very long before he sincerely loved what he was doing.

Many years have passed since then, and this man has won many honors and received many recognitions in his field. But he still maintains his high standards of effort, because he knows that when one relaxes his excellence, his abilities soon dwindle and his love disappears.

Now, if we thoroughly understand how this principle of love works, we can get great pleasure from keeping the two greatest commandments. But we might ask ourselves, why should we love God? We should love God because our love will draw us toward him. We should love him because he is our eternal Heavenly Father. He is our best friend. He is the giver of all good things. He is the author of happiness, success, fairness, and the source of everything else that is worthwhile. When we love God, we find our lives in the very center of all good things. The Master said that we should love our neighbors and ourselves. These are both great ideas and both are fundamental to our success.

Someone once asked his friend which commandment came next to love in importance. His friend said that he didn't know there was one. Actually we fall in line with most of the other laws automatically when we obey these first two. Think what it would mean to us and to everyone else if we really loved fairness, righteousness, our country, our families, our work, our opportunities, and ourselves. It is important to remember that none of these loves come automatically; we must even earn the right to love ourselves.

The ancient Chinese had an interesting custom. If you became a visitor in one of their homes and were attracted to some particular object, you might find that your host would wrap the object up and send it to you as a present. That is, you loved it and that made it yours. Such a custom might seem a little strange to us, and yet life has a program that is just exactly like that, for it is a natural law of life that everything that you truly love and admire you get.

If you love courage, you get courage. If you love the great character traits, life wraps them up and sends them to you free of charge. Abraham Lincoln loved honesty and frankness, and because life gave them to him, they distinguished his life as long as he lived. One of the great privileges of our existence is that we may love the most important things to our heart's content. Someone once said, "I own the landscape." But you can also own the sunrise merely by loving it. Some people reap far more value from the beauty of a wonderful landscape than the one who actually possesses the legal title to it. You can own the most fabulous treasures of beauty, wisdom, righteousness, and happiness by loving them. When anyone really loves great wealth and power, he is already well on his way toward their actual possession. On the other hand, the failures in life are known by the numbers and degrees of their hates.

When you hate your job, you soon lose it. When you dislike people, you lose your friends. When we stop using those great character qualities that we already have, nature soon repossesses them. Everything that we have in life, whether it is good or bad, is only ours on a kind of a lend-lease basis. As long as we love it and use it, it is ours. When our love diminishes, our possession is lost. An interesting thing about this law of love is that it is unable to discriminate between good and bad. Therefore when we love liquor, we get liquor. When we love the new morality, life wraps the awful package up and writes our names on it. When we become disloyal, that trait is also registered in our name. How unfortunate are those people who hate the government, and hate the establishment, and hate their work, and hate their mothers-in-law, and hate their wives, and hate themselves. One of the most pathetic circumstances in our world is that people can learn to hate God, righteousness, beauty, and truth by contrary action.

When people sin against life, they become bitter and hateful. When we are lazy, we hate industry. When we are disloyal to the government, we soon dislike the government. When we lose the spirit of law and order, we may soon start calling law enforcement officers "pigs" and other unsavory names. It is interesting that every vice that we entertain is always extremely unprofitable, and sin is always very expensive to the one committing it. This is particularly true when one hates the church or hates the government or hates his wife. If one doesn't like where he lives, he ought to repent because he is doing something wrong. If he can't correct this situation, he ought to move immediately to a place where he can fall deeply in love with some new homeland. Then his hates will not have an opportunity to fester and destroy his soul.

One man recently told me that he had worked for a great national company for twenty-two years, and he said, "I have hated every minute of it." I said, "You can't be serious." He said, "I am telling the absolute truth." I said, "Why didn't you quit this hateful job twenty-two years ago and get one that you could fall head over heels in love with?" He said, "Where could I find a job like that?" He didn't even know that such a job existed. This man didn't just dislike one job, he disliked all jobs. Hate is always located in the hater instead of in the hated. This man would be miserable in any job. Some people dislike the tenth job even more than the ninth, and they dislike the fifth wife even more than the fourth.

The scripture tells about a group of the ancients who loved Satan more than God. This seems strange in view of the fact that Satan stands for everything evil. He is everyone's worst enemy. Satan is not even friendly to the hardest criminals or the worst sinners. He is the father of lies. He delights in ugliness and sin and poverty. He practices deceit. It pleases him to cause as much misery and failure as possible. Those whom he injures most are his own followers. He will destroy even them if he can, and yet they continue in their evil, unprofitable, unpleasant course.

It is hard to understand why people in our enlightened age continue to cater to unrighteousness and sin. We probably wouldn't even believe that we were guilty if we didn't see it happening every day with our own eyes. Arsonists seem to delight in setting fires and destroying the property of others, even though they themselves have nothing to gain and everything to lose. That is, if they are discovered, it may cost them their freedom, their reputation, their job, their family, their friends, and their own self-respect, and yet they just hunger to destroy something that they have no right to. Kleptomaniacs steal merely for the sake of stealing. Many adulterers carry on their own ruinous evil for the mere glory of the conquest.

Some people, formed in the image of God, do everything that they can to destroy God's likeness in themselves. They dress themselves in dirty, ludicrous clothing, refuse to bathe, shave, or comb their hair. They destroy their minds with dope, their bodies with venereal disease, and their spirits with venereal attitudes. What a shocking sight to see God's glorious image distorted by human beings living at their worst. On the other hand, what a great joy when God's greatest creation effectively honors his Creator. What an accomplishment when one magnifies his office as a great human being and intensely loves to live life at its best.

Now of all of the things that we might like to love, which one thing would we put first? Jesus said that we should love God. God comes up at the top of the list, but God is also great for what he stands for. God stands for love, for righteousness, for beauty, and for truth. What could more effectively distinguish us as that greatest creation fashioned in God's own image than to develop a whole-souled love of truth? That would not merely mean to know the truth or even to be truthful—but to love the truth. That means to have a strong attraction for truth and to love it with a passion that would never allow us to deviate from it and would continuously draw us toward it.

One of God's highest and most noble titles is that he is "a God of truth. . . ." (Deuteronomy 32:4.) Jesus said, "I am the way, the truth, and the light. . . ." (John 14:6.) The dictionary says that truth is that quality or state of being true and faithful. It includes fidelity, constancy, and veracity. It is made up of a sincerity of character both in action and in speech. It implies a genuineness in expression, in feeling, and in belief. The scripture says: "And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth." (John 1:14.)

The thing that distinguished Abraham Lincoln and set him above others was his love of absolute honesty. This has also been the glory of many other people. We would not discount the importance of love, and yet someone has said that to be trusted is more important than to be loved. What trait would you rather have in a child or a parent or in a spouse or in an employer than that he could always be absolutely trusted under any circumstances? That is, one who is always true blue and always faithful.

On the other hand, what could be worse than to have to live with or work for or be associated with one who was a liar, a deceiver, a betrayer, and one who was undependable and irresponsible? If we were going to try to guess what trait God would like best in us, what could be more important than a strong love of truth? This would mean that we should understand the truth and that we should live the truth.

Jesus said: "And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:32.) But the truth will also make us prosperous, happy, and successful. Therefore, we ought to love it nobly and continually.
