Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Magic Beans

THERE IS a famous old nursery tale entitled "Jack and the Beanstalk." It is based on an ancient and widespread myth about some magic beans. Jack and his mother were very poor. In their desperation Jack's mother sent him to sell their primary asset, the family cow. Jack traded the cow to the butcher and in payment accepted a handful of magic beans. When he handed his mother the beans, she became very angry and threw them out the window, and I suppose that Jack went to bed without any supper. However, one of these magic beans immediately began to grow in the good soil of the garden, and by the time Jack and his mother awoke the next morning, the top of the beanstalk had already reached to heaven. Because it was a magic bean, it was also a magic beanstalk, and so Jack decided to climb it. When he reached its top, he was met by a fairy. The fairy directed him to the house of the giant from whom Jack obtained a bagful of gold without the giant's consent. With his new-found wealth, Jack hurriedly descended the beanstalk with the giant in hot pursuit. Then just in the nick of time, Jack chopped down the beanstalk, causing the giant to fall and be killed. With the giant's gold, Jack and his mother lived happily ever after.

This story itself has a little bit of magic in it as over the centuries it has reminded people to be on the lookout for ways of improving their own good fortunes. The writers of the fairy tales sometimes have the knack of transmitting their ability to think big. This in itself is a kind of magic, for it has always been true that as a man "thinketh in his heart, so is he. . . ." (Proverbs 23:7.) It has been said that science and magic are similar inasmuch as they both deal in cause and effect. However, the scientist rejects those things that lie beyond his science, whereas those are the things on which magic thrives. My own opinion is that we should not too quickly throw away those ambitions which appear larger than life. Nothing can be brought about without believing in it, but there is a very reasonable philosophy that says that anything that the mind can conceive can be realized by the ambition.

In our day there is much greater magic than that of climbing a beanstalk for a bag of gold that doesn't belong to us. Our world has always been filled with magic. We remember how Aladdin built a palace by rubbing a magic lantern, but magic has become much more powerful since then. We now have mechanical genies that can build far more impressive palaces than Aladdin's. We have also surpassed the wildest dreams of the ancients who traveled on magic carpets or used seven-league boots or wore magic wishing caps. Even the most ambitious imagination of those early days never even thought of putting a windshield or a steering wheel or a heater on a flying carpet. Sometime ago when out in my automobile in sub-zero weather, I thought how much more comfortable I was than if the trip had been made on a flying carpet.

A hundred years ago Horatio Alger wrote 235 books of the rags-to-riches kind of success stories. These tales had enough magic in them to uplift the accomplishment of many people. But probably the greatest magic is found in present-day industry, courage, ambition, and faith. Nowdays unheard-of things always seem to happen when someone goes to work or gets enthusiastic or becomes ambitious.

The dictionary says that magic is something exhibiting more than ordinary power. It is something that produces results beyond those that might have been expected. According to that definition, I know a lot of people who have magic in them. Many years ago, I knew a young boy who had a very serious inferiority complex that caused him great mental suffering. He played a role similar to the one described by Hans Christian Andersen in his story of the "Ugly Duckling" that became a beautiful swan. From this boy's point of view and from the point of view of many who knew him, he had a very bleak future to look forward to. But somewhere along the way he got hold of some magic beans, and now he brings home more gold every month than Jack got from his magic beans in a lifetime. Jack had to risk his life, kill a giant, and employ methods that would never have been approved by the Better Business Bureaus of our day, whereas the improved varieties of magic beans now available require none of these hazards or questionable practices.

Even those things that seem to us to be disadvantages almost have magic in them. There is an old proverb that says "Foxes are wise because they are not strong." Some used to think that only sickly boys unable to do hard work should be educated. Because of my young friend's early ugly duckling status, he didn't have the usual social demands made upon his time or attention. Therefore, he channeled his saved energy into the work on the farm. Naturally he was more effective than if he had been more popular socially. To cover up his hurts and loneliness, he lost himself in his work. He developed a great love for the soil and was delighted in making it produce all kinds of valuable crops. In this substitute interest he soon learned a better acceptance of himself. He stopped worrying about his ugly duckling image and became a very competent young farmer. His successes with the soil seemed to come about as easily to him as the social graces had been difficult. These abilities soon began attracting other responsibilities, and when people began taking a little more notice of him, he wasn't an ugly duckling at all. Following Mr. Andersen's example, he had transformed himself into a very acceptable person. Jack had given his mother's cow for a handful of magic beans—but my young friend gave himself to his work and in return received a whole pocketful of magic beans.

If some success expert were to put a scientific name on these magic beans, they might be called planning, initiative, industry, and a healthy outlook on life. Certainly my young friend's magic beans were more worthwhile than those that Jack's mother threw out the window. This young man saved the money that he earned and went on a mission for the Church. Soon he was acquiring such other magic beans as devotion, faith, conviction, and courage. It is the basic law of the universe that all effort must be paid for, that one can no more do a good thing without at some time, in some way, receiving a reward that he can do an evil thing without suffering a penalty. This is just not possible. The basic law of the universe is this immutable, inexorable, irrevocable law of the harvest that says, "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap" (Galatians 6:7), and this young man was taking his pay in the magic beans of thoughtfulness and righteousness. The one of Jack's beans that fell in fertile soil provided the ladder on which he could climb to heaven, and our beans of virtue and ability will do the same for us. On them we may climb to heaven and make intermediate stops at every worthwhile accomplishment.

The dictionary says that a bean is an edible seed that grows in the long pods of the leguminous herb, scientifically called ficia faba. All beanstalks grow erect, and many of them are climbers. We call them by such names as kidney beans, lima beans, sieva beans, soy beans, and string beans. The dictionary points out that these edible seeds are very rich in protein and highly nutritious. They come in a great variety of colors. We have black beans, white beans, red beans, and spotted beans. An interesting phrase has been developed in American slang in which we refer to a man's skull or brain as his "bean." As a boy, I remember that in playing baseball when someone was hit on the head with the ball, they said he had been "beaned" or he had been hit on the "bean." In addition to stopping baseballs, our heads may serve us as our chief magic bean. If we put into our mental beans a few good ideas, some solid convictions, and a few determined ambitions, the resulting beanstalk may easily provide us with a ladder that will reach to heaven.

I know of a salesman who gives credit for his success to his set of ten beans. For a long time he suffered from the awful salesman's disease called "call reluctance." This occupational disorder has destroyed the effectiveness of thousands of salesmen since time began. It has much in common with the physical malady known as muscular dystrophy. Muscular dystrophy breaks down the physical muscles and prevents its victim from moving about very effectively. But call reluctance gets into the mind and paralyzes certain important attitudes so that the ambition refuses to respond. This is often a fatal disease and causes failure in sales work, certain kinds of church work, and many other important related activities.

But in the case of this particular salesman, he was saved by his magic beans. Every morning he put ten colored beans in his inner left-hand coat pocket. Six were white, three were black, and one was red. During the day whenever he merely made a call, he transferred a white bean over to the inner right-hand coat pocket. When he made a call that developed into a good selling interview, he transferred a black bean over to the right-side pocket, and when he made a sale, he transferred the red bean over to his accomplishment pocket. He had a strict irrevocable agreement with himself that he would never quit calling until he had all of his beans in the right pocket. It was quickly proven that these beans all had a great deal of magic in them, for his income, his job satisfaction, and his prestige began a growth almost as rapid as the beanstalk on which Jack was able to climb to heaven.

The Boy Scouts have an excellent program that calls for doing at least one good turn every day. This program is designed to make people happy by doing some helpful thing for them. If this irrevocable schedule of good deeds were religiously carried out by everyone, it would soon change our world into a paradise. However, the reason it doesn't work out as well as planned is that we so frequently forget to follow through. Just suppose that we had the tailor make all of our future suits with a right- and left-hand pocket for our good-turn magic beans. Then suppose we really lived under a rigid commitment to ourselves that we wouldn't go to bed until we had all of our good-turn beans in the right pocket. Some people have fallen down in this program because they have made the mistake of using jelly beans. There isn't any magic in jelly beans, and besides, the jelly frequently gets into the convictions, the backbone, and the muscles. When we get a little jelly in the will, we are done for. It is much better to go to the other extreme and use jumping beans. The jumping bean is the one with the highest content of magic in it. There can be no doubt about anyone's success if each morning he takes two jumping beans out of his bean bag. He should put one in his left-hand pocket and swallow the other. If a good man keeps on the jump all day, he will always be on schedule in having his beans in the right pocket.

The beanstalk on which we climb upward will also grow a little faster if we use jumping beans. There are no problems climbing either to financial, social, or spiritual success if each morning our minds swallow a few jumping beans. The most important thing we ever need to learn about success is how to get the right amount of magic into our beans. A few years ago Claude M. Bristol wrote an inspiring book called The Magic of Believing. Mr. Bristol points out that whether you want an increased income or a new home or a better job or a happier marriage or simply a better night's sleep, you may have any of them merely by getting a little more magic into your believing. Jesus said it more effectively when he said, ". . . all things are possible to him that believeth." (Mark 9:23.) He didn't say that just a few things were possible. He said that all things were possible.

When we really believe, then our faith is always supported by strong ambitions and good works, and any accomplishment is placed within our easy reach. Anyone who wants to change his ugly duckling status or legally get possession of the bag of gold that may now be in the possession of the giant called industry can easily do so by using a few of his magic beans. Then our beanstalks will grow to God's highest kingdom. This is the place that Paul refers to as the "third heaven" (2 Corinthians 12:2) and the psalmist calls the "heavens of heavens" (Psalm 148:4).

The magic of understanding and faith and works will enable us to perform the greatest miracles. Miracles are only happenings that presently are beyond our understanding. But we all know numerous people who are miracle workers and turn in great wonders of performance. We may also accomplish more than is expected of us, and we can develop that magic in our lives which will enable us to climb upward to our own greatest happiness.
