Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Making the Most of Your Regrets

MANY YEARS ago, I read an interesting article about success that impressed me very much. It pointed out the very small differences that frequently exist between success and failure. I remember that it gave one example from the meat packing industry. It pointed out that no one could succeed in that business if he prepared for sale only the finest cuts of meat. To succeed, he must also make the most out of those lesser items which at first thought might seem relatively unimportant. In fact, it has been said that to stay in business and show a profit, the meat packers not only must use the less desirable cuts of meat, but they must utilize such byproducts as leather, glue, and fertilizers.

In the lumber industry, a firm may make enough money to run the business from selling fine hardwood lumber, but it will never realize a profit unless there is also a good market for the lesser grades of lumber, the telephone poles, the plywood, the paper pulp, and even the sawdust.

This situation has something in common with the way we succeed or fail in life. It is very helpful to utilize our great virtues, our untiring industry, our strong convictions, and our constructive abilities, but if we are to make the best and the most of ourselves, we must also make capital of our lesser talents. We must be able to use even our defeats and our faults to make a profit.

Reed Smoot once said that an ambition to excel is indispensable to success. Everyone has his own trade leaders that must be pushed to the limit. Each individual has some talent or some character quality or some personality trait that can be developed to the point where he may surpass everyone else in the world. But sometimes the margin by which we keep our lives in the profit column comes from the way we have handled some weakness. Jesus said: "I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; . . . if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." (Ether 12:27.) He also said: ". . . my strength is made perfect in weakness." (2 Corinthians 12:9.)

It has been said that Demosthenes did not become the greatest orator in the world in spite of his speech defect; he became the greatest orator in the world because of his speech defect. His inability to communicate so humiliated and embarrassed him that his extra effort to overcome it generated in his soul a giant power strong enough to turn all of his weaknesses into strengths. If properly used, handicaps, problems, and hardships can serve a useful end in our lives. For example, John Milton once said that no one can do his best until he has suffered much. Suffering purifies the soul. Even evil can serve a constructive purpose.

The villain serves our best interest quite as well as does the hero. One shows us the quicksands to be avoided, whereas the other shows us the best road to follow. Some of the greatest of all of life's lessons we learn from our own mistakes. In planning our lives, we should certainly spend a lot of effort in the development of our talents and abilities, but we should not neglect to turn all of our errors and even our weaknesses into a profit.

Among the unpleasant experiences of life are the mistakes we make and the regrets that we must live with. The word regret comes from some words meaning to weep and mourn. This is one of those experiences that most of us have in abundance, as many people spend much of their time in some kind of mourning. The dictionary says that to regret is to remember an experience with grief and sorrow. Regret is to feel distressed in one's mind and emotions because of some past failure or mistake. If we can find some way to make a profit from our regrets, we are in pretty good shape, since many of us have so many things about which to feel sorry. But these must be handled effectively, because even one unpleasant experience that is not taken care of may canker, fester, get infected, become inflamed, and turn malignant.

The human body is equipped with many organs to help it handle the various parts of its business. For example, the stomach receives all kinds of grains, herbs, fruits, vegetables, and meats. Then by a process of digestion, these raw materials are transformed into such usable products as tissues, sinew, blood, heat, vision, intelligence, personality, and power. However, if the digestive system gets out of order and stops functioning, in a very short time the food becomes rancid, sour, and poisonous.

We also have mental, spiritual, and emotional digestive systems, and the dangers involved with these are even greater if we are unable to eliminate the harmful elements. Some people allow their souls to become sour, bitter, ugly, profane, and ungodly. However, it is one of the most fortunate circumstances of our lives that we are equipped with these miraculous personality digestive systems which can transform our disappointments, regrets, and bad habits into positive mental attitudes, great spiritual powers, and productive emotional traits. And, in turn, these can produce the finest qualities of beauty, industry, success, happiness, and godliness.

It is interesting to remember that the bee gets honey out of the same flowers from which the spider extracts its poison. This selection device is also a human ability. The apostle Paul gave an example of the functioning of this great human endowment when he said to the Romans: ". . . all things work together for good to them that love God." (Romans 8:28.) If we love God, if we think right, if we have the right attitude, and if we do the right things, then everything can be made to work in our interests.

It is to our advantage that we live in a world of opposites. We can always see light things best on a dark background. Lemonade tastes better if it has some sour lemon juice mixed with the sweet sugar. The world is planned for our benefit. Uphill is as good as downhill, night is as necessary as day, sickness and death serve our eternal purposes quite as well as health and life.

If we love God, even Satan serves our best interests. That is, God could destroy Satan and evil at any instant that he desired, and we might ask, "Then why doesn't he?" God himself has given us the answer. He has said: "And it must needs be that the devil should tempt the children of men, or they could not be agents unto themselves; for if they never should have bitter they could not know the sweet." (D&C 29:39.) If all of our prayers were answered, then no one would ever get sick, no one would ever die, and there would be no opposition. Everyone would always get his own way, but there would be no strength. God has made up our world of contrasts and opposites. He has made it possible for us to receive poverty, struggle, doubt, defeat, sickness, error, and weakness, and to transform them into prosperity, power, faith, health, happiness, and godliness.

Think what Lincoln made out of the lack of advantages that came with his backwoods origin. Much of John Bunyan's success was born in the prison where he wrote his masterpiece The Pilgrim's Progress. About the many thorns in his flesh, the apostle Paul said: ". . . therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me." (2 Corinthians 12: 9.) There is one theory that says that in whatever aspect life expected us to excel, she gave us a weakness. Demosthenes was supposed to be a great orator, so life gave him a speech impediment to overcome. Beethoven's deafness led him to become a greater musical composer. His longing to hear the beauties of the finest music impelled him to create them. While Julius Caesar was conquering the world, he was an epileptic. Many people presently drawing total and permanent disability benefits are in better physical condition than Julius Caesar was while conquering the world. John Milton was blind for fifteen years before he wrote Paradise Lost; that is, he never saw paradise until he lost his eyes.

We ought to understand that those problems and difficulties which are a natural part of our lives can be used for our benefit. It was a part of the plan that our world should be filled with the opposites of good and evil, success and failure, uphill and downhill, struggle and ease. Even hell is a divine institution, and one of its functions is to serve as a place of purification for those who can't handle their own problems in this life.

How shall we get the most mileage out of our regrets and disappointments? One thing that we should not do is hide them from ourselves by our denials or our excuses or our alibis. If we say, "Everybody's doing it," we will probably so appease our minds that we will keep on making mistakes and our problems will get worse instead of better. Neither is it a good idea to let our regrets paralyze us so that we get so discouraged that we throw up our hands in despair and stop trying.

Our regrets can completely destroy us if we adopt the destructive attitude of unduly condemning and belittling ourselves. The best way to handle a regret is to let it arouse in us such a fighting spirit that we will overcome it. Then the more it hurts us, the more benefit we get from it, because we launch an attack against our offenses in a kind of a suit for damages.

The Bible gives an account of Jacob wrestling with an angel at Peniel. Jacob would not let the angel go until he gave Jacob a blessing. (Genesis 32:26.) We can get blessings out of our regrets, too, if we fight them hard enough. There is a law of regrets similar to the law of the pendulum. A swing in one direction gives a pendulum the power to swing an equal distance in the opposite direction. Life is also like that, except that the opposite swing can be made much longer and more powerful.

In his youth, one young man was arrested with some other young men for stealing a watermelon. He was very badly frightened, and he made a solid resolution that has lasted through the years that he would never again try to steal a watermelon or anything else under any circumstances. The recoil toward good caused by his regret was much stronger than the evil force that had set it in motion. Other people have used their regrets over little sins to build great virtues; their temporary weaknesses to build everlasting strength; their embarrassing blunders to cause satisfying thoughtfulness. Our regrets can be used to build over-compensations in other fields.

Vash Young once wrote a book on his regrets entitled I Got Tired of Being a Fool. He built a great fortune on a few miserable mistakes. His regrets built up some powerful extremes to carry him to success in the other direction. We can also powerize the swing of our own pendulums by harnessing the regrets of others. Mistakes in others can build virtues in us. There is also a natural compensation enabling us to get good out of weakness.

Many poor boys have become capitalists, and plowboys have become prophets. Napoleon rode his inferiority complex to become one of the most powerful of all our world military leaders. The apostle Paul fought the church in his early years and had a part in the stoning of Stephen. This caused him great regret, which lasted throughout his life and made his pendulum swing so far that he became one of the greatest of all Christian missionaries. Everyone should make a list of his weaknesses and then use his regrets to turn them into strengths. He should make a list of his mistakes and transform them into advantages.

The ancients spent much of their time in the ancient science of alchemy, trying to find ways to transmute the lesser metals, such as iron and tin, into silver and gold. Regardless of their success or lack of it, we can actually transmute habits of tardiness into punctuality. We can change ugliness into beauty. We can also change falsehoods into truthfulness, dishonor into honor, irresponsibility into dependability. One's insane angers can be changed into a quality of imperturbability; his doubts into faith; his disobedience into godliness; his sloth into industry, and his hate into a friendly consideration and love of others. One of our greatest possibilities is to learn to increase the motivating power of our regrets and then transmute them into pure gold.

Life is a most generous trader. She maintains a store stocked with every good gift in the most abundant supply, and she will give us peace for tension, happiness for misery, heaven for hell, and God for Satan. It is interesting that no one is ever sent to hell by somebody else. By the same token, no one is ever given a free ride to heaven, especially against his will or his industry. But if we build strong enough regrets around our bad habits, then our bad habits will disappear, and we will find virtues growing in their places. In trying to make the most and the best of his life, no one is compelled to remain as he is, even for one more minute, and no one ever remains down after he determines to rise. We can intensify our regrets, exchange them for virtues, and then let them take us to any desired destination.
