Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Our Human Plurality

EDWIN SANFORD MARTIN once wrote some interesting lines about human personality under the title "My Name Is Legion." He said:

Within my earthly temple there's a crowd;

There's one of us that's humble, one that's proud,

There's one that's broken hearted for his sins,

There's one that unrepentant sits and grins;

There's one that loves his neighbor as himself,

And one that cares for naught but fame and pelf.

From much corroding cares I should be free

If I could once determine which is me.

Among the most important facts of our lives that all of us must learn to reckon with are the problems and responsibilities that go with our multiple personalities. To make the most of ourselves, our many virtues, abilities, and problems should all be effectively integrated under one central, righteous authority and not be allowed to go their own individual, contrary ways unrestrained. However, our personality sometimes gets so seriously divided and antagonistic that control, as well as accomplishment, is lost. Conflicts and rebellions within ourselves can easily be our undoing. Our society itself sometimes develops such serious conflicting factions that it becomes an unwieldy, uncoordinated, unmanageable combination of the positive and the negative, the good and the bad, the successful and the unsuccessful.

Sometimes we actually so much lose ourselves that we have difficulty with our own identity. Frequently someone makes an accurate description of his situation when he says, "I am all mixed up." "I've got to find myself." Then he is unable to distinguish between the good guys and the bad guys within himself. Sometimes one part of us wants to go forward while an antagonistic part is dragging us backward. Frequently our high gears, our low gears, and our reverse gears are all trying to operate at the same time.

We have many cases of mistaken identity where we can't even recognize ourselves. We believe that we are one kind of person when we are actually some other kind. We may be a different person when with our families than when we are at the office. This inconsistent plurality may also seriously confuse others because they are unable to tell which of our various personalities will represent us on any given occasion.

Recently I heard three men being discussed for employment. Of one it was said, "He is a wonderful person; he is very friendly; he knows his business, but he is undependable." Of another it was said, "He is absolutely honest, he has a good character, but he can't get along with other people." Of another it was said, "He likes people; he is nice looking; he is a very hard worker, but he is immoral." I decided that no matter what may be said about us during the first part of the discussion, we had better pay close attention when the discussion gets around to the buts.

Martin Luther once said that one small vice could overcome ten great virtues. One may be excellent in many ways and have his whole personality made useless by his buts. A movie actress with several divorces to her credit once said that getting married was like buying a house: the first time you buy a house you look at the paint job on the outside, but thereafter you always look for the termites in the basement. This lady had previously made the mistake of disregarding the buts in her situation.

Often we try to keep our worst faults hidden from general observation, but with the closer personality views that are offered in marriage, in employment, and in friendship, we may find that we or our friends often turn out to be someone else. How frequently we hear someone say, "I have never known John before." "He is a completely different person than I always thought he was." "This is not the man I married."

In addition to our confusing plurality, our many selves are continually changing. Someone once reminded his unhappy wife that she had married him for better or for worse. She replied, "Yes, but you are so much worse than I thought you were going to be." Frequently we fertilize some of the elements in our personality so that they grow very rapidly whereas other parts are afflicted with a disease called arrested development, and they grow not at all. Sometimes while improving in one place, we are losing ground in another place, and we become completely unpredictable even to ourselves.

We remember Robert Louis Stevenson's story of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. Dr. Jekyll was a fine young physician who had within himself some of the usual conflicts of good and evil. However, instead of bringing all of his various inclinations into line by integration and self-discipline, he split off his bad traits and refused responsibility for them. Therefore, in a very real way, he became two people. When Dr. Jekyll's conscience was undisturbed by Mr. Hyde's misdeeds, Dr. Jekyll became better, and when Mr. Hyde's misdeeds were unrestrained by Dr. Jekyll's sense of right, Mr. Hyde became worse. Soon a kindly, helpful, completely good physician by day became a ruthless, immoral, unmanageable criminal by night. It was not long before this antagonistic duality destroyed itself.

This splitting-off or splitting-up of the personality is one of our most common and most serious problems. Goethe indicated the dangers of this possibility when he said, "I have in me the germ of every crime." One of the great abilities we need to develop is to keep the harmful germs from repeating in us the tragedy of the Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.

Sometimes a mother explains the delinquencies of her son by saying, "It's your father coming out in you." Some have also been accused of having the devil showing up in them. Our personality crowd may range all of the way from a group of angels of light to a company of evils resembling the devil himself. Everything in our lives depends upon how well we integrate and control and eliminate the factions of this plurality within ourselves. It has been said that everyone always carries a little child around inside of him. E. S. Jones, Jr., mentions this particular duality when he says:

Across the fields of yesterday

He sometimes comes to me,

A little lad just back from play,

The lad I used to be.

He looks at me so wistfully

Once he has crept within,

I wonder if he comes to see

The man I might have been.

I know a mature, intelligent, well-balanced woman who is so disturbed by the wind that she can't sleep at night when it blows. When she was five years old, there was an east wind in the community where she lived. She discovered that her mother was afraid of the wind, and this little girl developed such a severe childish fear that it stamped itself into her mind and personality so that she has been unable to get it out. Therefore, whenever the wind blows at night, the little girl in her returns, and this lady must not only carry her around with her but also be tormented by her childish fears.

Many people carry around with them even more serious kinds of childishness. I know of another woman who is allowing her childish selfishness to wreck many lives. When she was young, her parents were always engaged in quarreling and other forms of unpleasantness. In the parental contest for this little girl's affections, the child was rather seriously spoiled and became very selfish. Now the child in her has never ceased to believe that she should have everything to which she takes a fancy.

Her problem is increased because she thinks of herself as something of a glamour girl, and she has now taken a fancy to another woman's husband. She just knows that she can't live without him, and under her spell, he has agreed to give up his wife and five children, a very lucrative professional practice, as well as hundreds of friends, and to start over elsewhere with her where they are unknown.

To get what she wants and has no right to have, this selfish woman is willing to break up two homes, deprive two sets of children of their fathers, deprive the proper wife of the very things that she, "the other woman," is using her glamour to steal. Because of her unmanaged and unmanageable emotions, there will' be a serious loss for everyone in total honor, income, self-respect, stability, and love. This is all because an otherwise fine woman is still carrying around with her the terrible weight of her childish selfishness and a kind of Mr. Hyde's evil.

For good or for bad, many people also carry their parents around with them. From the top of Mount Sinai, God said that the sins of the fathers shall be visited upon the children (Exodus 20:5), and that is one of our greatest tragedies. However, it is also true that the virtues of the fathers may also be visited upon the children. As Nancy Hanks Lincoln lay on her death bed, she said to her nine-year-old son, "Abe, go out there and amount to something." Throughout the balance of Abraham Lincoln's life he always carried his mother around with him, and everything that he did was influenced by her love and desire for his success. Later on, Lincoln said, "All that I am or ever hope to be I owe to my angel mother."

It is even more important what kind of self we carry around with us. Each one of us has been endowed by creation with a set of magnificent equipment, including a brain, a heart, a conscience, and a will. These can be important influences for good if they are properly developed and used. If we are weak or sinful, we impose a heavy load upon ourselves and find ourselves stuck with our own evils. However, if we are the kind of people God intended, then every labor can be made a light and joyous experience. One of our greatest good fortunes is that we can carry the Spirit of the Lord around with us. We are all entitled to have the Holy Ghost as our constant companion. We can always have with us the Spirit of light, truth, righteousness, and intelligence. The apostle Paul said, "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?" (1 Corinthians 3:16.) If we heed the promptings of this Spirit, it will help us to purge ourselves of all selfishness, childishness, and evil.

The Bible says that if we draw nigh unto God, he will draw nigh unto us. (James 4:8.) However, when we follow Satan, in a very real way we must always carry his heavy satanic weight around with us.

Jesus went among people casting out devils. Before Mary Magdalene could solve her problems, the record says that seven devils had to be expelled. (Luke 8:2.) It is one of our primary responsibilities of life to learn to cast out devils in a very real way. The apostle James gave us one method when he said, "Resist the devil, and he will flee from you." (James 4:7.) However, if we do not resist him, we will soon have him on our backs. A little favorable entertainment, and Satan always tries to take us over.

On the other hand, Satan has no power over us except as we give in to him. His outside attractions are powerless unless they are connected with our own inside inclinations. We should never say, "How much the devil tempts," but only "How strongly I am inclined."

A little boy once said, "There ain't no Santa Claus. It's like the devil—it's your dad." But frequently other members of the family, including ourselves, insist on getting into the devil act. Certainly our generation needs to work a lot harder on this technique of casting out devils and getting rid of our own weaknesses. If everyone in the world would always keep all of the commandments of the Lord, Satan would be completely powerless, and this earth would be God's paradise. It might help us in this art if we got a little more practice in casting out those seven devils—selfishness, weakness, sloth, hate, alcohol, immorality, and atheism. Then if we would like to try casting out another seven devils, suppose we start with our indecision, our ignorance, and our indifference. We sometimes develop a devil of a temper that we allow to rule over us. We also develop a devilish habit of rebellion against right. We would be a lot better off if we would cast out the devil of falsehood and the devil of unfairness.

The greatest secret of success is to be able to coordinate all of our righteous powers into one cooperative effort involving a joint action of the heart, and the mind, and the might, and the physical strength. By this process of consolidation and joint action, one may concentrate all of the elements of personal power into one determined effort. He thereby achieves a centrality in his purpose. His effort becomes concentrated, highly focused, one directional, and all in one piece rather than being a bundle of many directioned impulses held loosely together by circumstance.

Our problem is that so many of us are neither one thing nor the other. We are made up of various fractions of good and bad going in all directions at once. Our weak convictions and minimum efforts tend to give us small accomplishments. Without a strong, central, righteous self-discipline governing all of ourselves, we degenerate into a mob of appetites. Then our lives become torn by evil, indecision, and conflicts. As we load ourselves down with guilt complexes and feelings of inferiority, we tend to reenact the age-old battle of good versus evil, which usually ends in some kind of stalemate.

It is interesting that when our food doesn't taste good, it is a sign that we are sick, and when we find ourselves unfriendly to the best things, then we can be certain that we need to repent and cast out a few devils. As James says, "Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; and purify your hearts, ye double minded." (James 4:8.)

The greatest opportunities of our existence are to fully integrate our lives under a righteous authority and then center all of our different abilities and powers into a divine focus.
