Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Paper Man

MANY YEARS ago, Mao Tse-tung, the Chairman of Red China, referred to the United States as a paper tiger. He was trying to convey the idea that the military power of the United States looked good only on paper. His thought was that the United States may be a great power in theory, but in an actual demonstration of strength he felt that it would not stand up very well. While he believed that his own country might not have done as well in some places of actual accomplishments, yet it would be a veritable tiger in any test of actual performance. Mao used this particular figure because in his part of the world a tiger is thought of as the strongest of animals, and a tiger is frequently used as the symbol of the greatest strength.

There are many individual people who feel about this same way as they compare themselves with others. They feel that while they may not have many tangible favorable facts that they could put down on paper, yet when the need arises they will be able to perform like a tiger. But if one wants to be a tiger in any actual accomplishment, it is a pretty good idea to be a tiger on the paper first.

Recently I met with a group of church leaders where some of the statistics of their church activities were being discussed. Some of them seemed to show a considerable amount of resentment toward the records of their own work. One of them said, "We are not interested in the statistics; it's the people that count." They were saying to themselves, "Our statistics are terrible, but we are wonderful."

This human attitude of resenting our own statistics is all too common. Because our statistics are the best way of representing what we are, it might be a pretty good idea for us to pay a little more attention to how we look on the paper, especially in the bright light of day. How we feel in our hopes and ambitions or what our wishes and dreams are is very important, but we should also give some consideration to the facts.

We usually have more power for the actual contest when we have a strong reflection coming from the paper. It would be pretty difficult to develop an athletic program if we left out the paperwork. In football, every kick, every pass, every run, every down, and every penalty is measured and timed and counted and recorded. It is also interesting that we always add up the score. It is the score that makes the game. If the score is 6 to 7, and we are on the one-yard line with a minute and a half to play, everyone is excited. If the score is 50 to 0, most of the crowd will have gone home.

Everyone wants to know who won the game and what the score was. The statistics are a kind of itemized statement of the accomplishments. It is from the statistics that we get the final score. A football team's morale and a football team's prestige go up and down with their statistics. The team that looks the best on paper is the one that stays up at the top of the league.

In baseball we keep an accurate record of the hits, runs, and errors of each individual player. Life is also a great game, and in life the statistics are much more important than they are in football. One of our human weaknesses in life is that when we are losing the game, we don't always like to keep track of the score. Certainly we are not very enthusiastic about putting the errors down on the paper, and most people don't even know what their individual batting average is. This makes our success much more difficult both to figure out and to attain.

If you bat .350 in the big leagues, you may receive a salary of a hundred thousand dollars a year. If you bat .250, you may get ten thousand per year. This is quite a difference in pay when the difference in effectiveness is only one additional hit in ten times at bat. That is, the .350 batter gets on first base three and a half times out of ten tries, whereas the .250 batter gets on first base two and a half times out of ten.

The greater success is not always because of how frequently or how hard you hit the ball. The .250 man may be held back because he can't run. There are enough photo finishes at first base to indicate that if you had been half a step faster in 90 feet you would have been safe, but because you were half a step too slow, you were called out. It would not even have been necessary for the unsuccessful man to have been faster every time. He was fast enough two and a half times out of ten; all he needed was a little more speed in one out of ten tries.

However, it is far more important that we know our batting average in life than it is in athletics. We cannot separate our success from our statistics. That is, a banker may not be very favorably impressed if we say, "Our financial statistics are terrible but we are wonderful." The banker might want to know about such prosaic things as our assets and liabilities, our income and our outgo, our bank balances and our overdrafts. Planning and record keeping are so closely related in our success that they cannot be discussed separately.

Someone has said, "You cannot effectively increase accomplishment without some accurate measurement of the progress made." That is, you can learn to be a high-jumper much more quickly by laying a bamboo pole across on two measured uprights and then jumping over it than you can by merely going out onto the field and jumping up in the air without any knowledge of your effectiveness. It has been said that when accomplishment is measured, accomplishment improves, and when accomplishment is recorded and reported back, the improvement is accelerated. But when accomplishment is also publicized, our motivation is given gigantic power. If you want to help your son, don't give him an assignment and then fail to check up; and while your own planning, goal-setting, and motivation are good to watch, never fail to keep an accurate score on yourself.

It is an interesting fact that God is the creator of, and the greatest believer in, statistics. He not only keeps records, but he also advises us to do the same. He said to John the Revelator: "What thou seest, write in a book. . . ." (Revelation 1:11.) He also might have said, "What thou doest write in a book." And that is exactly what he does. John the Revelator records his preview of the final judgment as follows:

"And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works.

"And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man according to their works." (Revelation 20:12-13.)

If each day we could see what God writes in his book about our works for that day, it would certainly motivate us to make better scores. We can most surely reach any goal by putting our results down on the paper every day. When our statistics are low, it is more important than ever that we keep them. How stimulating it would be to see our personal errors published every day on the front page of the newspaper. With this kind of situation, our errors would be much fewer. This would also help us prepare for that great day when all of our present secret acts shall be revealed. Of course, there are some things about ourselves that we can't get on the paper.

Many years ago Clarence E. McCartney compiled an important book entitled The Great Sermons of the World. After an exhaustive amount of research and selecting, Mr. McCartney collected in one book the greatest human utterances that had ever been made. He included two sermons by an old preacher named Whitefield who used to live in New England a couple of hundred years ago, and as kind of an apology, Mr. McCartney said, "No one can read the sermons of Whitefield and understand why thousands of people were always flocking out to hear him." Then by way of explanation, he added, "You can't get the man on the paper. You can get his words and his paragraphs and his questions, but you can't get the man." What he meant was that you can't get the light in his eye or the music of his voice or the love vibrations that come out of his heart. You can't get the fire of his personality or the warmth of his soul on the paper.

One famous minister was once approached by an admiring listener who had just heard what he thought was a magnificent sermon. The listener said, "I would like your permission to publish and distribute that sermon." The minister said, "You may print and distribute the sermon if you will also print and distribute the thunder and lightning that goes with it." It is pretty difficult to get human thunder and lightning on paper. It is very hard to get real love, personality, and faith on paper.

On the other hand, we can get on paper many of the things that cause love, personality, growth, and faith. And there are some things that must be put down on the paper. If a man's biography is not written down, the story of his life is soon lost, frequently even to himself. If one's plans are not put down on paper, they are soon forgotten. It has been properly said that "no plan is a plan until it is on paper." You wouldn't employ an architect who didn't know how to get the ideas out of his head onto the paper. If the bishop tries to keep the records of all of his ward members in his head, he is doomed to fail.

Suppose you take any group of even fifty people, no matter how well they may be known to you, and see how many of them you can remember without hesitation. You will be shocked at how ineffective are your powers of recall. But your brain was never intended to be a baggage room or a storehouse; it much more resembles a machine shop or a work bench. One of our greatest opportunities is that each of us may increase his total mental equipment by building a great paper memory. A good bookkeeper with an ordinary brain can have a fantastic paper memory. A lawyer sits in his library where he has on paper all of the legal experience of the greatest legal minds, and they are more readily available to him than if he had to depend on some kind of magic recall from his own mind.

We may make the greatest literature a part of our paper memories. You can't judge a man by watching him live or a baseball player by seeing him bat. I have personally watched Babe Ruth at bat three times, and he struck out every time. But at the very time that I was watching him strike out, the record said—and still says, even after he is dead—that he was the greatest home-run king who ever lived.

What a great thrill it would have been to have studied at the feet of the great thinkers and leaders of the past, and yet we have many of them down on the paper verbatim. Written expression can be much clearer as more care is taken in its preparation. We can hear the words and feel the ideas of Shakespeare, Washington, and Lincoln even better now than if we had lived in their own day. Abraham Lincoln once said, "What I want to know is in books." And the two most powerful books in Lincoln's life were the Holy Bible, which even in his youth he hungrily devoured before the open fire, and The Life of Washington, by W. R. Weems.

Weems put the life of George Washington on paper, and as a result Washington has favorably influenced Lincoln and millions of other people ever since. Through books we may know the greatest men and women with an intimacy and completeness that was never enjoyed by those who lived in their own time or even in their own household.

Recently a woman came to talk about some of her emotional and moral problems. She said that her boyfriend liked to go to X-rated, sex-oriented movies. She pointed out that when she went to any kind of a movie, she lived the events as they took place on the screen; and while she felt that she had high moral standards, when she came out of this particular kind of movie she felt like a different person than she had been when she went in. The people on the screen were actually getting over to her. The people in great books can, with real power, get over to us also because every contact that we ever make, either good or bad, modifies us. Some people make us feel like we are ten feet tall, and some can make us feel small, dirty, and sick.

Someone wrote a poem in which he said, "I love you for what you are but I love you even more for what you make me feel while I am with you." We have detailed editions of Shakespeare, Moses, and the apostle Paul all arranged on paper. We can be with them at our leisure and enjoy their inspiration to our heart's content, and, like the girl at the movies, we can absorb their spirits and breathe the atmosphere of those things that were in their minds and souls.

One of our greatest blessings is that even God has made himself available to us in a very real way on paper. We may spend a lifetime waiting for some sign or revelation from him, but on paper we may feel his inspiration immediately and listen to his words at will. At our pleasure we may witness the thunders and lightnings of Mount Sinai and be present in spirit while God gives again those fundamental laws. With Moses we may go and spend those memorable forty days and nights in God's presence. But that is not all. We may make ourselves a part of those other important conversations that God has had over the centuries with Adam, Enoch, Noah, and Abraham. We may read at our pleasure the revelations of his mind and will to all of the holy prophets and understand again his words that "whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection." (D&C 130:13.) One of the great opportunities of our lives is to learn to do the paper work on which a most happy and successful eternal life can be built.
