Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

A Piece of Paper

SOMETIME AGO I met with a group of Aaronic Priesthood bearers who had received certificates of achievement because of their religious excellence. A young man who had not thus achieved had tried to discredit to himself the importance of the award by saying that it was just a piece of paper. But actually it was much more than that. The merit identified on the paper was an outward representation of something much greater inside the lives of the boys themselves.

Very frequently a thing is not as important for itself alone as it is for what it stands for. Of course, a piece of paper may represent a great value in itself. A hundred dollar bill is just a piece of paper. A ten thousand dollar stock certificate or a deed to one's home or his baptismal certificate or his marriage license or his citizenship paper or his license to practice medicine is just a piece of paper.

The value of one particular piece of paper is indicated by a story of an explorer who many years ago was working in one of the world's primitive countries where writing was unknown. On one occasion it became necessary for this man to send a message to an associate working many miles away. It was arranged that a native who knew the country should be the messenger. The native watched as the explorer took pen and ink and made some written marks in a letter. Then the native was given an envelope enclosing the paper. After spending the necessary days traversing the jungle, he placed it in the hands of the one for whom it was intended. The native stood by as his host looked at the marks on the paper. Then, to the great astonishment of the native, without any word having been spoken, the man to whom this mysterious package had been delivered knew exactly where his friend was, what he was doing, how he felt, what his problems were, and what help he was asking for. The receiver knew all of these things merely by looking at signs on a piece of paper. Overcome by the powerful magic that was contained in the writing, the native fell down on his face and worshiped the paper.

Because we have a better understanding of this miracle of writing, it has lost much of its glamour and has become more or less commonplace to many people, and one who doesn't read is no better off so far as all practical purposes are concerned than one who can't read. In many cases, our apathy may be more of a deterrent to our progress than was the native's lack of learning.

In a little lighter vein, though not without some elements of truth, someone has said that out of our 200 million people, 30 million of them can neither read nor write. But then there is another 30 million who can read but don't, and another 30 million who can read and do read some but don't understand what they read. Then there is another 30 million who can read, and who do read and do understand, but they don't do anything about it.

Be that as it may, writing by any measurement is still one of the greatest wonders of our world. It is our most productive force. Its productive magic can still perform all kinds of miracles in our behalf. Writing is preserved speech. It is our greatest storehouse for helpful ideas, pleasant emotions, and profitable information. It has the ability to transfer to us the finest thoughts, the highest ideals, and the most powerful ambitions from the greatest men and make them negotiable in our own lives.

Writing is also our most effective way of communication as well as our most valuable avenue for receiving benefits. During the 1956 political campaign, a newspaper man pointed out that Dwight D. Eisenhower was ear-minded. That is, for most of his life he had served in the army where he had received his communications largely by means of the verbal commands that entered his mind through his ears. The same newspaper man said that Richard M. Nixon was eye-minded. He had been trained as a lawyer, and the main entrance to his brain was through his eyes. Mr. Nixon liked to get by himself among his books and look up the needed information as it had been written down by the best legal authorities.

Many of us are or ought to be productively eye-minded. Our eyes not only provide the chief entrance to our minds, but that is also the best way to our hearts as well. Most people can usually hear much faster through their eyes than they can through their ears. Sounds fade away, and even the ability for recollection is soon lost, but writing can make our ideas permanent. Its power defies time and continues on with undiminished effectiveness.

Writing gives value to our law books, our schoolbooks, our newspapers, our signboards, our great literature, and particularly our holy scriptures. Someone has said that without books God is silent, justice dormant, philosophy lame. Some of our most valuable possessions, our most powerful emotions, our most thrilling memories, our most motivating faith, and even our grandest experiences come from the written page. Even the word of the Lord himself spoken from the top of Mount Sinai thirty-four centuries ago can be re-run through our minds over and over again. God has specifically commanded that his greatest revelations should be put down on paper. In this way we can have the revelation renewed every day.

On one occasion, God said to John the Revelator, "Come up hither, and I will shew thee things which must be hereafter." (Revelation 4:1.) Then God uncovered to the gaze of the great apostle much of the future history of our world. He also showed him a clear vision of the resurrection of the dead and let him preview some scenes from the final judgment exactly as it would someday be. Important as this great communication from God was, it could not help us very much unless it could be preserved in some way, so the Lord said to John, "What thou seest, write in a book." (Revelation 1:11.) And God's command to write important things down has been repeated on many occasions.

As a consequence, a great volume of these important papers having a divine origin have been accumulated. Someone got the exciting idea of binding all of these life-giving documents together into books. Our great world literature is now headed by four great volumes of holy scripture that are God's own communications to us. For example, I hold in my hand a copy of the Holy Bible. On one of its pages have been written the Ten Commandments, and if we were to live by the writings of this one page alone, we could quickly transform our world for the better. On this one page, God has sent to us, across thirty-four centuries, many of the blessings of wisdom, law, righteousness, and religion. Also bound in the Holy Bible are the papers containing the beautiful poetry of the Psalms, the wisdom of the Proverbs, the hope of the Beatitudes, the wonder of the Golden Rule, and the great lifesaving doctrines of salvation providing for our own eternal exaltation. We not only have the important papers from God; we also have some wonderful communications from the greatest men who have ever lived in any land and in any age of time.

The greatest nonscriptural papers have also been made into books containing all of the wisdom, literature, beauty, enthusiasm, faith, experience, and even the enjoyment of some of our greatest men that they are able to transfer to us. All of this is as fresh and as exciting when it comes to us as it was when the events themselves originally took place. Someone put this idea into verse when he said:

Every day in books

Rip Van Winkle lies asleep,

Moby Dick patrols the deep,

Every day in books.

Tall windmills turn in Spain

Where across the empty plain

Rides the rusty knight in vain,

Every day in books.

Falstaff laughs and Hamlet dreams,

Camelot is all it seems,

Kublai Khan in Sahna Du

Hears the rivers running through.

Marco Polo sails away,

Mr. Pickwick has his say,

Troy is falling every day,

Every day in books.

However, we not only write our great messages on paper; we write them even more effectively on human minds and spirits as well as in their flesh and blood. Daniel Webster once said: "If we work upon marble, it will perish; if brass, time will efface it; if we rear temples, they will crumble into dust; but if we work upon immortal minds, imbue them with principles, with the just fear of God and love of our fellowmen, we engrave on those tablets something that will brighten through all eternity."

On many occasions our lives themselves have been compared to a piece of paper. One of the great educational processes is transferring the wonders from the paper into ourselves. We need to use our papers more effectively in this important process. Actually, our minds were never intended to serve by themselves as baggage rooms or warehouses. They are machines or spiritual work rooms, and many of the things that are written in our minds, if left by themselves, may sink below the level of consciousness or they may slip beyond our ability to recall them. But the things that are written on paper can be retained indefinitely. By the use of paper we may appropriate for our own pleasure and profit the finest ideas developed by all of the greatest men in the world.

Even the most vast paper memory has no forgetfulness, and we can transfer the substance of our greatest ideas from the paper into our own personalities. We can also appropriate the greatest ambitions of the greatest men from a written account and make them our own. We may also use the ideas from books written in other lands and in other ages to motivate our own souls and to bring about every desired success. We can preserve our physical food by freezing or canning, and we can preserve our most important mental and spiritual food by collecting the greatest ideas and getting them into their written form.

Through our four great volumes of the holy scriptures we may use for our own welfare the detailed directions from God himself. We can review the covenants and practice the training that he has given to other peoples in other lands. Through books we can rethink his thoughts and live in a way befitting his offspring and heirs.

James Russell Lowell puts this idea on paper and says to us:

Life is a leaf of paper white,

Whereon each one of us may write

His word or two and then comes night.

Greatly begin! Though thou hast time

But for a line, be that sublime.

Not failure, but low aim, is crime.

One of the greatest challenges of life is to try to understand what that paper of our lives will look like when we have finished with it.

Oliver Wendell Holmes once wrote an interesting poem entitled "To a Blank Piece of Paper." In his thoughts, Mr. Holmes speculated on the possibilities of this pale sheet of white paper before him. He wondered what his pen might write upon it that would be helpful for others to read. His brain might produce on this paper a poem of love or cast forward a projection of his own faith or picture an embodiment of his own courage, or he could give a forecast of the greatest accomplishment of which he was capable. Mr. Holmes said to his piece of blank paper:

Thou hast no tongue yet thou canst speak,

Till distant shores shall hear the sound;

Thou hast no life, yet thou canst breathe

Fresh life on all around.

No one except ourselves can read the unborn meaning of our lives, and yet many people will read as we write. And we can write such miraculous things as have never been known before. We can inscribe into our own hearts those great virtues which God himself possesses. We can transplant into our personalities the greatest enthusiasm that we can get from others, and they will radiate from our faces the love of beauty and the harmony of our lives as we develop the ambition to build up God's kingdom upon the earth. All of us are children of God, and each of us was sent from his presence with a message for general delivery.

As Joyce Kilmer has said:

And since the way was hard and long

And through a strange and weary land,

God placed upon my lips a song

And put a lantern in my hand.

We can shed that light and breathe that song of joy on all around us.
