Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Quitter

ON ONE occasion President Calvin Coolidge pointed out a great success idea that we might all do well to work at a little bit more effectively. He said: "Nothing in the world can take the place of persistence. Talent will not. Nothing is more common than unsuccessful men with talent. Genius will not. Unrewarded genius is almost a proverb. Education will not. The world is full of educated derelicts. Persistence and determination alone are omnipotent."

On the other hand we lose many of life's greatest blessings because we fail to make a continuous effort in the right direction. We form too many damaging bad habits that cause us to become quitters. All too frequently our success and righteousness lack persistence, and consequently the rewards are also lost.

The dictionary says that to quit is to abandon, to forsake, to terminate. It is common for otherwise fine people to just stop working, and because faith without works is dead, when we stop working we stop believing. A quitter gives up many things, including his employment, his faith, his family, his loyalty, his courage, his righteousness, and his rewards.

Our battalions of quitters include large numbers who are dropouts from education, dropouts from religion, and dropouts from the service of others. Many older people as well as younger people run away from home, and they also run away from duty and responsibility. They desert their families; their courage disintegrates; they betray their country; they allow their hope to wither, and they apostatize from God. The traits that characterize us as quitters are the exact opposites of those qualities that we need for all of our human success and happiness.

In one of his greatest statements, Jesus said, ". . . he that endureth to the end shall be saved." (Matthew 10:22.) Jim Sullivan, one-time heavyweight prizefight title holder, gave this idea a little different twist when he said, "The champion is the one who can stay on his feet and fight for one more round."

The other side of this proposition was demonstrated by Cato, the great Roman patriot who committed suicide on the very eve of his triumph. If he had only hung on to his courage and industry until morning, he would have been victorious. We have a natural human tendency to start a lot of good things that we never finish, and this unfortunate habit costs our world a lot of our success and happiness. An unknown author has commented on this trait under the title of "The Sticker." He says:

Oh, it's easy to be a starter, Lad.

But are you a sticker, too?

'Tis fun, sometimes, to begin a thing,

But harder to see it through.

If you failed sometimes when you did your best,

Don't take it too much to heart;

Just try it again in a different way,

For it depends upon how you start.

And sometimes a failure is best, my boy,

To keep you from being too sure;

Success that is built on defeat, you know,

Will ofttimes longest endure.

'Tis the sticker who wins in the battle of life,

When the quitter is laid on the shelf;

You are never defeated, remember this,

Until you lose faith in yourself.

Oh, it's easy to be a starter, my boy,

But are you a sticker too?

You may think it is fun to begin a task;

But are you game to see it through?

Under the title of "Perseverance" another unknown voice says to us:

Genius, that power which dazzles mortal eyes,

Is oft but perseverance in disguise.

Continuous effort, of itself, implies

In spite of countless falls, the power to rise,

'Twixt failure and success the point's so fine

Men sometimes know not when they touch the line.

Just when the pearl was waiting one more plunge,

How many a struggler has thrown up the sponge?

As the tide goes out, it comes clear in;

In business 'tis at turns the wisest win.

And, oh! how true, when shades of doubt dismay,

'Tis often the darkest just before the day.

There are many people who would have gone a long way in the race of life if they had kept going for just one more round. The most serious cause of quitting is almost always that destructive slowing-down process that precedes it.

These two faults of slowing down and quitting are like their physical counterparts of disability and death. People usually get sick before they die. The government attempts to measure the disability caused by disease as a percentage. The government might say that one person is 10 percent disabled or that he is 50 percent disabled or that he is 90 percent disabled. Actually disability is merely a part of death. Death also comes as a fraction.

Sometimes one's faith dies or his industry dies or his morality dies or his loyalty dies or his enthusiasm dies. Then he may be 10 percent dead or 50 percent dead or 90 percent dead. Jesus said, "I am come that they might have life, and have it more abundantly." (John 10:10.) But in most cases only some fraction of us presently remain alive. There are many dead people who have not yet been buried. On one man's tombstone were inscribed these words: "Died at 30 buried at 65."

It is unfortunate that without knowing it we lose large fractions of our lives because we are quitters. And even quitting is carried out a little bit at a time. We first slow down in our study, we slow down in our enthusiasm, and we direct our attention to some competing interest. We almost automatically slow down when we allow antagonisms to destroy our effort, or doubt to destroy our faith, or a guilty conscience to destroy our ability to concentrate. If our excellence is allowed too many leaks, the day finally comes when we are more dead than alive.

The actual dropout act is usually a mere formality that takes place long after it has actually happened. We mold ourselves and then we wait until some crisis shows us what we have become. The Lord said: ". . . once more I shake not the earth only but also heaven. . . . that those things which cannot be shaken may remain." (Hebrews 12:26-27.) The Lord provides the crisis that shows us to ourselves.

Many years ago, out on the farm, I discovered a kind of physical dropout process in operation. In our apple orchard I discovered that the sound apples were not the ones most likely to fall to the ground when the trees were shaken in the wind. It was the wormy apples or the apples with other serious defects that would fall at the least shaking of the tree. This is about what happens to us in life. A few defects and we become quitters.

Of course there are many things that we should quit as soon as possible, such as our bad habits, our negative attitudes, our lethargy, our evil, and our sloth. But there is an important difference in the reason for quitting these things. That is, we quit bad things by design, whereas we usually quit the good things by default.

Jesus gave us an idea about one way to prevent ourselves from becoming quitters when he said that we should be careful about what we begin and that we should make sure that we finish what we start. He said:

"For which of you, intending to build a tower, sitteth not down first and counteth the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it?

"Lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock him,

"Saying, This man began to build, and was not able to finish.

"Or what king, going to make war against another king, sitteth not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand?" (Luke 14:28-31.)

Just think how many things there are in life that we quit with serious consequences to ourselves. We frequently see disaster when we quit our marriage through a divorce, or we quit our business through bankruptcy, or we quit our employment through failure, or we give up our citizenship through treason, or we quit our church membership through apostasy, or we break off our relationship with God by our sins.

It is probable that no one ever does any of these things deliberately. We just let our personal situation deteriorate until it almost falls to pieces of its own weight. Someone has said, "I never had to put religion out of my mind; I was so open-minded that it fell out." Some people say they have fallen out of love as though they themselves had nothing to do with it. Or that they have lost interest in the church through no fault of their own. Or that their patriotism just happened to die for no reason at all. It is probable that none of these are ever true. Satan did not fall from heaven until after he had committed so many sins of rebellion and betrayal that his further residence in heaven was impossible.

Before Judas sold Jesus to the mob, he had sold himself to Satan. He first became Satan's serf, and then there was nothing left but to do his master's bidding. At one time Judas Iscariot was a member of the Quorum of the Twelve in good standing, but before he became a quitter, greed and selfishness had replaced those holy principles upon which a successful apostleship must be based. Benedict Arnold was a general of great ability in the American Colonial army, but when his greed and selfishness became stronger than his patriotism, he became a quitter and betrayed his country.

Recently a couple came in to talk about their projected divorce. Actually, the divorce began to develop even before the marriage took place. They had been drawn together by their natural instinctive urges, and for several years their forces of attraction fought with the evils that were tending to push them apart. Even before they were married, they had already started these forces of disintegration to work by committing some serious offenses against each other. By their immoralities and deceits, they had planted the seeds of failure and distrust in each other. After they were married, they made several arbitrary attempts to get their relationship on a better basis, but they never seemed to get around to obeying the fundamental laws of righteousness on which all real confidence and success rests.

If a student wants to avoid being a dropout, he should first quit doing those things that lead to it. If one wants to avoid causing a divorce, he should wipe out of his own life those personality and character defects that are the natural enemies of marriage. When the wife feels that her husband tries to dominate her unjustly, her resentments keep her in a state of continual rebellion. Some married couples are always bickering and quarreling and trying to outdo each other in imposing sanctions and penalties against each other.

In many cases both admit their share of the blame and because of the children both would like to see the marriage work. But each has an elephant's memory, and they can vividly recollect those sins which have now carried them beyond the point of no return. And like a school dropout, their future has been ruined by the wrong kind of a past that they are unwilling to let go of.

We should not try to rationalize that lover's quarrels are good, or that some little sins and offenses against God are all right. For like chickens, they will someday all come home to roost. The story is told of a man who jumped out of a window of a tall building. As he went by the third floor, he was heard to say, "Everything is all right so far." But the length of the fall will all be represented in the landing.

As our sins and personality problems are more securely established, they become more difficult to get rid of. Even a repentant mate can be almost unbearable to the other if the offense has gone far enough. Success in marriage is not so much in finding the right person as it is in being the right person, and we cannot have a happy marriage on our own terms unless those terms are also the terms of righteousness.

The trouble with most marriages is that we do not provide enough love, trust, congeniality, or pleasure for the marriage to run on. When too large a percentage of our energy is spent in generating unfairness, irresponsibility, and incompatibility, then our marriage is in real trouble.

We are told by the psychologists that everything that we hear, see, or think is registered in us. When our destructive emotions get set too deep, it is pretty difficult to get them out. When I make a mistake on the belt of my electronic dictating equipment, it is a very simple process to completely erase it and put on something that is more acceptable. Each belt can therefore be used over and over again whether the messages it carries are good or bad.

However, my previous dictating equipment had a plastic belt, and a recording needle cut the message into the belt itself so that after it had been used once it had to be thrown away. The Creator has given us some important procedures called repentance, reformation, restitution, forgiveness, and forgetfulness. Sometimes we are like an electronic belt and can completely erase those evils that cause our failures, but then again our sins sometimes cut themselves pretty deeply into our lives. And we also frequently cut our sins into the lives of other people. Then even the psychiatrists and the mental health people that we may hire have difficulty digging down deep enough into the dark regions of our lives to cut them out. We should avoid this great sin of quitting good things, and we should also avoid the deterioration in excellence that precedes it.
