Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Road Not Taken

ONE OF the greatest poets of our time was Robert Frost. He left us many helpful ideas dressed up in interesting language. He ornamented his thoughts and made them exciting and meaningful to us with constructive figures of speech. It has been said that the poets stand next to the prophets in their ability to influence and motivate our lives for good. We need the greatest truths presented in their most compelling form. Fortunately, we are the beneficiaries of a great array of literature that has been packed with the most helpful and significant meanings.

To make great thoughts usable to us, to light them up with greater meaning, and to make them more clearly understood, we have similes, poetic images, metaphors, symbols, and parables. They are used to uplift our feelings and improve our conduct. Symbols and figures of speech are not important for themselves alone. Frequently they are much more important for what they are a sign of, or for what they stand for, or for what they incite us to do and to feel.

The words that are used to form these pictures in our minds are the lifeblood of our language, and they vary in their constructive result according to the degree of identification that we make with them. Meanings are important not only for what their authors put into them; they are also important for what their readers can get out of them. More than anything else, every inspired author needs an inspired reader.

Many years ago Mr. Frost wrote a poem in which he pictures himself walking down a path through the woods. He came to a division in the pathway that required him to choose which way he would go. Both looked interesting and seemed filled with promise. Mr. Frost thought he would like to explore both roads, but obviously that was not possible, so he chose the lesser-traveled road.

One of the significant limitations placed on our experience is that we are required to make these choices every day. There may be a dozen roads, all of which have interesting sights to see and wonderful things to do along the way, but since we can't walk on many roads at the same time, we must reject all of the roads but one. Because this sometimes causes disappointment, Mr. Frost made a kind of compromise. He chose one road and then told himself that maybe he could come back later and explore the other. However, he knew that in all probability his hopes in this direction would never be realized.

Of course, Mr. Frost had something in mind that was far more important than merely choosing a path through the woods. There are also many interesting paths that run through life. Since time began, road or journey has always been used as the symbol for the course that we take in life. Our choices may make the difference between a life filled with serious regrets or one of eternal joys. No matter which road one takes, he will always remember his decision and will be compelled to live with whatever the results may be.

There are many decisions wherein the choices are not between good and evil. Frequently the alternatives may appear to be almost equally attractive, and yet, the road we take will determine what the volume and the quality of our experiences will be. Over the years, the particular road we travel can also make an important difference in the kind of people that we become. Actually, Mr. Frost's poem would have a different meaning for everyone to whom it was applied. In saying that he took the road that was less traveled, Mr. Frost may have been referring to his decision to become a poet instead of becoming a doctor, a lawyer, or a businessman, professions in which he would be on more heavily traveled roads.

To others who may read this poem, the fork referred to may have had reference to the need for deciding upon a hobby or an education or a wife. One might be selecting his own personality traits or selecting some of the minor trails that run through life. Actually, it is unimportant to us what choices the poet or some fellow traveler may have had in mind. However, it is very important that we clearly understand the truths that this poem holds up for our consideration.

The poem is a kind of expression of regret that the possibilities of our experiences in life are so limited that we can have but one native country or live with one wife or follow one profession. Some people regret that they did not live in some other age or in some other country. Many people have wished that they had lived in the golden age of Greece or in the days of Jesus of Nazareth. Sometimes we express ourselves as wanting to get back to the good old days of the past, and with the poet, we may feel a bit sad that we are unable to explore all of the interesting roads instead of just one.

A person who has a wholesome craving for life may be completely satisfied with the choices he has made, and yet, he may long for some of those additional realms of experience that he had to pass by. However, if he had lived in the good old days, he would have been required to forfeit the privilege of living amid the miracles and wonders of our own days. If he had been Abraham Lincoln, he could not have been who he is.

Solomon was born to great wealth and power, and he ascended one of the most desirable thrones in the world while he was yet a teenager. As a consequence, he was denied the thrill of working his way up to success. Many men who have been born in poverty and have known a life dedicated to struggle have said that this was one of the greatest benefits of their lives. The football spectator who sits safely in the bleachers, wrapped in warm clothing and enjoying his ease and comfort, may not get as many thrills as the quarterback playing to the very limit of his strength, fully exposed to accidents and exhaustion. In every place that we find ourselves, there are choices that must be made.

The symbolism of Frost's poem is very rich and may be given many meanings. It teaches us something about the important doctrine of choices, as well as the equally important doctrine of responsibilities. We should understand, of course, that our choices not only govern the present; they also limit the range of all possible future choices. Since our lives are made up as we go along, once we have traveled the road of being a poet, we cannot easily go back to the crossroads to travel the path of being a great physician. One must either decide to give up the wonder and delight of curing men's bodies or he must miss the music, fascination, and excitement of his poetry. And even though one chooses between paths that are as equal as possible, the choices still will have far-reaching consequences. In his poem, Mr. Frost centers his attention on "The Road Not Taken." He says:

Two roads diverged in a yellow wood,

And sorry I could not travel both

And be one traveler, long I stood

And looked down one as far as I could

To where it bent in the undergrowth;

Then took the other, as just as fair,

And having perhaps the better claim,

Because it was grassy and wanted wear;

Though as for that the passing there

Had worn them really about the same,

And both that morning equally lay

In leaves no step had trodden black.

Oh, I kept the first for another day!

Yet knowing how way leads on to way,

I doubted if I should ever come back.

I shall be telling this with a sigh

Somewhere ages and ages hence:

Two roads diverged in a wood, and I—

I took the one less traveled by,

And that has made all the difference.

Mr. Frost's poem tells of selecting one path that seemed just as desirable as its alternative. Whatever his specific decision was, it was made between two good choices. We can understand that even this kind of a choice is often very difficult to make. Frequently we have another kind of decision wherein the choice lies not between good and good but between good and evil. This latter decision should not be so difficult, and yet, mounting crime waves and increases in atheism and delinquency indicate that a lot of wrong choices are being made in preference to good ones that are available. This involves a different kind of thinking and a greater contrast in the rewards that await at the end of the trail.

Someone has written a poem about making a selection between a good path and a bad one. Although each of us must be personally responsible for which road is taken, some of the differences may lie in the kinds of counsel that we pick up along the way. This poem is entitled "The Crossroads."

He stood at the crossroads all alone,

The sunrise was in his face;

He had no thought for the world unknown,

He was set for a manly race.

But the road stretched east and the road stretched west,

And the boy knew not which road was best.

So he strolled on the road that led him down

And he lost the race and victor's crown.

He was caught at last in an angry snare,

Because no one stood at the crossroad there

To show him the better road.

Another day at the self-same place,

A boy with high hopes stood;

He, too, was set for a manly race,

He, too, was seeking the things that were good,

But one was there who the roads did know

And that one showed him which way to go

So he turned from the road that would lead him down,

And he won the race and the victor's crown.

He walks today the highway fair,

Because one stood at the crossroads there,

To show him the better road.

One of the significant characteristics of our lives is that we live in a world of contrasts. Always before us there are choices of good and evil, sickness and health, light and darkness, pleasure and pain, God and Satan, heaven and hell, and labor and ease. The road that seems the fairest and the easiest may not always be the best. Frequently our blessings come disguised in their work clothes. Struggle and adversity sometimes look upon us with an unpleasant countenance, and yet they often prove to be our best friends sent to challenge us and make us strong. We might try to understand what it would be like to find failure at the end of our lives because the road not taken was the road of industry and struggle.

One of the most prominent teachings of Jesus has to do with this two-road concept of life. One road was that straight and narrow way which leads to eternal life, and the other was the broad road which leads to death. In Mr. Frost's poem, he took the road that was the least traveled. That is also the one contended for by Jesus. The most heavily traveled road is that broad road which leads to the place that no one wants to go. The broad road is wide enough to accommodate atheism, dope, alcoholism, and lung cancer, but on the straight and narrow road, dishonesty, profanity, Sabbath day violations, and many other evil pleasures must be excluded. When we get to the end, how will we feel if the straight and narrow way is the road that was not taken?

The road we choose continues to be one of the most important parts of life, and the straight and narrow road that leads to life in God's eternal city is the one that will prove more profitable in the end.
