Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

A Salute to America

SOMETIME AGO I listened to an interesting radio program entitled A Salute to America. It was a provocative discussion about some of the unusual opportunities that are granted and the duties that are required of those who live in this great free nation. It was pointed out that America is made up of many things, including real estate, buildings, climates, minerals, rivers, and other resources. But primarily America is made up of Americans. Among its many assets is a Constitution that has a divine origin and background. America is based on noble ideals with some great traditions for freedom, fairness, and democracy. It is governed by laws and founded upon basic Christian principles.

Not the least of America's assets is the fact that our founding fathers were raised up by the God of heaven to stand in the forefront of our civilization and give our nation its start toward its destiny. As I listened to this tribute, I was very proud to be an American, and I was motivated by a wholehearted desire to make my own salute more meaningful by a greater personal contribution to my country's strength and greatness.

The dictionary says that to salute is to address with expressions of kind wishes, courtesy, and honor. Then it gives some interesting examples, such as the lark saluting the dawn by bursting into song with its wholehearted welcome of the new day. The crocus salutes the spring with its new life and color. In some of our military salutes we fire cannon, dip the colors, uncover our heads, and stand at attention. We also have several kinds of hand salutes to show our approval and express our goodwill. There is an old Anglo-Gallic gold coin that bears a representation of Mary of Nazareth receiving the salutation of the angel Gabriel, indicating her new position as the prospective mother of the Savior of the world.

We might ask what would be an appropriate salute for good citizens to make to America, particularly at this time when she has such an urgent need. We might begin our personal salute to America by trying to understand America and by believing in America. Governments have been instituted by God for the benefit of men, and he holds us responsible for our own acts in relation thereto. We have the word of the Lord himself that the American Constitution was established by wise men whom God himself had raised up for that very purpose. God caused that this land should be redeemed by the shedding of blood, and the government of this land was founded in honor and based upon Christian principles. Good government means order and righteousness. We are certain that many centuries ago God became sick and tired of dictators. What would a just God think of the kind of men who use Stalin blood purges, Hitler gas ovens, and Castro indignities as instruments of government?

God not only had a hand in the establishment of our government and in fostering the ideas of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, but he also established his divine church here in these latter days. America, with its freedom and democracy, was about the only logical place where the restoration could have been effectively made. Certainly the two greatest present responsibilities of our lives have to do with our allegiance to God and our loyalty to our country.

An ancient prophet said: "Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it." (Psalm 127:1.) Under his favor, the United States of America has become the greatest and most powerful nation ever known in the world, but it will continue to prosper only as we obey the God of this land, who is Jesus Christ. From the time of the great council in heaven, God has continually made the strongest kind of commitments to freedom and democracy. In our time America has been ordained by him to serve as the citadel of freedom, and America has been given the divine mission to keep freedom, righteousness, and human dignity alive in the world.

In the days of ancient Israel, God also tried to establish a great nation based on freedom and democracy, but the people turned away from God in favor of a king, and as a consequence, their hoped-for success fell into the evils of dictatorship, and the whole undertaking failed. But now again in the last days God has established upon the earth a great free nation with special powers. This is his final attempt, before the glorious second coming of Jesus Christ, to promote his primary objectives of producing righteousness upon his earth and establishing peace and goodwill among men.

What a great benefit was conferred upon the entire world when God inspired our Constitution and raised up God-fearing, freedom-loving, righteous men to give it implementation. And every individual in the world should continually pray for a strong, enduring United States of America, for if any Communist combination of nations should ever gain control in the world, then none of our other problems would ever again seem of much consequence. As Emerson, an earlier spokesman for America, has said: "Of what avail is plow or sail, Or land or life if freedom fail?"

If they thought they could, the Communists would enslave every person in the world without a moment's hesitation. Enslavement is not the spirit of the great God of the universe. The spirit of God is the spirit of liberty. The spirit of God is also the spirit of righteousness, and it must also be the spirit of America.

Goodness is the basic law of nations, and freedom and righteousness are the two primary safeguards of America. If we hold these traits sacred, we will not fail. The people failed in the days of Noah, Babel, ancient Israel, ancient America, and in the days of Jesus himself because they ignored these primary laws of righteousness and freedom.

We need to understand the God-given American purpose. We need to believe in its destiny and to serve the true interests of its people. Someone has said that he likes to think of an American citizen as a person who helps to put out the fires of disagreement between people, who picks up a bottle in the street so that someone else's tire won't be ruined. A good citizen is also one who loves God and serves his fellowmen. The greatest discovery that has ever been made is not fire nor the wheel nor the internal combustion engine nor atomic energy nor any other material thing. Man's greatest discovery is teamwork by agreement, which brings about the righteous objectives of God-fearing, patriotic men.

Patriotism is a love of country, and it is also a determination to safeguard those important benefits that God would not want to see lost in the world. Patriotism indicates a real faith in our country's future and a sincere, unselfish dedication to her best interests. Patriotism is a challenge based on the religious concept of the dignity of man. It rests on the thesis that righteousness and freedom are the greatest objectives that any age can foster.

One of the outstanding characteristics of an intelligent citizen is that he learns from the past. The past is the source of many of our greatest benefits, which were bought for us at an incredible cost. There are very few privileges or opportunities that we enjoy that are not the product of other men's labors. Every day we eat from vines that we haven't planted and drink from wells that we didn't dig. We warm ourselves by fires that we did not kindle; we are the beneficiaries of a government that we did not devise; and we are benefited by those great religious, social, and business institutions that we had no part in forming.

As we are made aware of the fact that no man lives unto himself alone, we might well resolve to pass on undiminished to our children those great blessings which we have received from our fathers. All of the past has been an investment in us, and because of it we are under obligation to accept our share of the responsibilities for the world's future. We have inherited duties as well as benefits and opportunities. It has been said that the Lord fits the back to the burden, and only as we assume a greater load do we get a stronger back.

A young soldier who had just returned from a faithful service overseas was asked where he hailed from. He said: "I was born in Philadelphia but I grew up in Viet Nam." And what a wonderful way to grow up—by carrying the responsibilities of that great nation under God that he has established to provide liberty and justice for all.

Jesus gave an important success formula when he said: ". . . by their fruits ye shall know them." (Matthew 7:20.) God has prospered our land until it has become without question the greatest nation that has ever existed upon this planet in any age. But we are not without problems. There are some very serious changes that have been taking place in the last few years. Some enemies have come among us and have sown tares among our wheat. As a consequence, some of our attitudes toward law and order have been corrupted. Many have deserted the high ideals of our fathers upon which our nation was originally established. Upon our shoulders now falls the responsibility of taking up the load, and unless we can root out the evils, we cannot avoid suffering the consequences that will fall upon many people.

We are presently mounting some devastating crime waves. We are allowing ourselves to be overrun by the influences of atheism and sin. Our enemies from without are infiltrating our ranks, and with subversion and evil they are destroying our morale and our righteousness. Satanic slogans, with the purpose of demoralizing our attitudes, are being sponsored by Communist troublemakers who are attempting to tear down the greatest establishment ever known in the world. They shout their traitorous battle cry of "Tell it as it is," meaning, tell it as their lies say it is and as their evil ambition would like it to be. They mean tell everything at its worst; tell it as the enemies of America would like to make it.

We know that God could not possibly condone Communism with its dictatorship, its anti-God, its slavery of other people, its blood purges, its deceit, its trickery, and all of the other evils that from the beginning have been so offensive to him. However, this is not fatal to us except as we are seduced by it. There is only one way that any ungodly dictators can cause our fall, and that is by our making ourselves unworthy of our promised blessings by our own ungodliness.

Our civilization is now balanced on the razor's edge of a possible destruction, just waiting to see which way we will go. But as grave as the dangers are that threaten us from without, they are minor compared to those that threaten us from within. It is not underestimating the dangers from without to say that our foreign enemies can never hurt us if all Americans remain solid in our convictions about our own righteous Americanism, as it is still true that no one can hurt us except ourselves.

We may well fear the Communists. They stand for evil and subversion. They have already demonstrated that they will not hesitate to enslave everyone over whom their evil power can be extended. If we allow ourselves to become the victims of apathy, indifference, and complacency, what hope can we have? Our greatest fear should be for those misguided Americans who have lost their patriotism and their devotion to God. Some have already put on the uniform of ugliness, rebellion, and evil. They have become strangely behaved, ludicrously dressed, irresponsible agitators, spending their time in every kind of subversion and protest demonstrations against everything that is good.

We should be afraid of those Americans who have become so hardened to all types of crime that the chief offense is no longer the criminal act itself but being found out. We should be afraid of those traitorous, so-called Americans who operate in and under the protection of our courts in helping to destroy law and order. Before it is too late we should do what we can to help all Americans to recognize and love those ancient landmarks of our heritage that in the past have been so tremendously important. We should make permanent in our lives such real American strengths as reverence for God, dignity in our work, honor among our fellowmen, and always promote and safeguard that priceless heritage of freedom. We have good reason to be afraid, for the time is growing very short. May we lose no time in making effective our own enthusiastic, whole-souled salute to America.
