Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Self-Management

ONE OF the most important skills that everyone should strive to develop is the ability to successfully manage himself. The dictionary says that to manage is to control and direct. It is to guide, administer, conduct, and handle successfully. The dictionary gives an example of management as that of a trainer of horses putting his charges through their paces. And what a delightful sight it is to see beautiful, graceful, powerful, well-trained horses perform. However, there is something much more exciting than a well-trained horse, and that is a well-trained human being.

The most valuable of all commodities is human life, and the greatest of all development is human development. Development comes from training. A well-trained man is always more effective than an untrained man. We think of a highly trained manager or teacher as among our greatest benefactors. And our greatest possible accomplishment is to become a great human being who is well-trained in the arts of manliness, effectiveness, nobleness, and godliness.

I have great authority over my finger. If I tell it to bend, it bends; if I tell it to unbend, it unbends. When I tell my eyes to close, they close; and when I give my feet an order, they obey. Now when I can get that kind of control over my brain and my objectives and my tongue and my emotions and my ambitions, then I am well on the way toward any accomplishment.

We have great possibilities in several fields of training. There is a physical training, a mental training, a social training, an emotional training, a moral training, and a training for our spirits. We sing a song in which we say: "School thy feelings, O my brother." And good social training is a high objective. Solomon points out the value of mental training when he says, "For as [a man] thinketh in his heart, so is he. . . ." (Proverbs 23:7.) A great human brain is undoubtedly the most wonderful creation ever known in the universe. Everyone born into the world is given free of charge a brain with the most fantastic possibilities for training.

A prominent British neurophysicist recently pointed out that no one could construct an electronic computer for three billion dollars that would be the equivalent of a human brain. Even so, who could endow an electronic computer with insight, foresight, kindness, understanding, and goodwill? But so many of us waste our potential because we either let our minds go undeveloped or we develop rebellious minds, negative minds, or closed minds.

Woodrow Wilson once gave an indication of this waste when he said, "The greatest ability of the American people is their ability to resist instruction." And many of us have our full share of that unfortunate talent. Thomas A. Edison gave his own appraisal of our human neglect when he said, "There is no limit to which a man will not go to avoid thinking." The most disagreeable, unpleasant thing that many of us ever do is to try to think constructively. Mostly we say "Everybody is doing it," and so we play follow the leader with such people as alcoholics, nicotine addicts, rebels and the followers of the new morality.

The human mind can either give us the greatest pleasure, produce the most outstanding success, and develop the greatest godliness, or it can be perverted, criminalized, and Satanized according to the evil of our own self-management. The mind, heart, spirit, and personality are all like rich, fertile, well-watered fields, and our husbandmanship can make them the most productive and profitable, or they can all be made to produce a poison fruit. Unless these human fields are planted with good seeds and the plants cultivated and cared for, the ground of our lives will always bring forth noxious weeds. Our minds are like horses, and unless they are well-managed, well-disciplined, and well-trained, they will run wild. What may at first be a small mental imperfection can soon become strong enough to take over the territory. John Richard Moreland once said in his poem "Growth":

It was such a little, little sin

And such a great big day,

And I thought the hours would swallow it,

Or the wind blow it away.

But the moments passed so swiftly,

And the wind died out somehow,

And the sin that was a weakling once

Is a hungry giant now.

But how tremendous is our potential ability to manage ourselves and make ourselves productive. It is probable that the greatest gift that God has ever given to man is the ability to think and dream and imagine. In one's mind he may go backward or forward across time or space with greater facility than he could get across the street. The mind can plan and meditate and construct and enjoy.

Mind is the master power

That builds and molds,

And mind is man,

And ever more he takes the tools of thought

And fashions what he wills,

Bringing forth a thousand joys, a thousand ills,

We think in secret, and it comes to pass

Environment is but our looking glass.

The mind can put together any kind of success. It can work out all of the necessary details and supply the discipline for bringing any accomplishment about. But unless we hold a tight rein on our thinking and our activities, our minds can get us into all kinds of trouble. Many minds are guilty of alibiing, rationalizing, crooked thinking, and mental agitation based on error and false reasoning. Sometime ago J. P. McEvoy wrote an article entitled "Want to Borrow a Jack?" He said:

"One day I went to a lawyer friend for advice. 'I'm in real trouble,' I said. 'My neighbors across the road are going on vacation for a month and instead of boarding out their two dogs they are going to keep them locked up and a woman is coming to feed them—if she doesn't forget—and meanwhile they'll be lonely and bark all day and howl all night and I won't be able to sleep and I'll either have to call the SPCA to haul them away or I'll go berserk and go over there and shoot them and then when my neighbors return they'll go berserk and come over and shoot me. . . .'

"My lawyer patted back a delicate yawn. 'Let me tell you a story,' he said. 'And don't stop me if you've heard it—because it will do you good to hear it again.

"'A fellow was speeding down a country road late at night and BANG! went a tire, he got out and looked and—drat it!—he had no jack. Then he said to himself, "Well, I'll just walk to the nearest farmhouse and borrow a jack!" He saw a light in the distance and said, "I'm in luck; the farmer's up. I'll just knock on the door and say, 'I'm in trouble, would you please lend me a jack?' And he'll say, 'Why sure, neighbor, help yourself—only bring it back.'

"'He walked on a little farther and the light went out so he said to himself, "Now he's going to bed and he'll be annoyed because I'm bothering him—so he'll probably want some money for his jack. And I'll say, all right, it isn't very neighborly—but I'll give you a quarter. And he'll say, do you think you can get me out of bed in the middle of the night and then offer me a quarter? Give me a dollar or get yourself a jack somewhere else.'

"'By this time the fellow had worked himself up into a lather. He turned into the gate and muttered, "A dollar! All right, I'll give you a dollar. But not a cent more! A poor devil has an accident and all he needs is a jack. But you probably won't let me have one no matter what I give you. That's the kind of guy you are."

"'Which brought him up to the door and he knocked—angrily, and loudly. The farmer stuck his head out the window above the door and hollered down, "Who's there? What do you want?" The fellow stopped pounding on the door and yelled up, "You and your damn old jack! I don't want to have anything to do with either of you."'

"When I stopped laughing, I started thinking, and I said, 'Is that what I've been doing?' 'Right,' he said, 'and you'd be surprised how many people come to a lawyer for advice, and instead of calmly stating the facts, they start building up a big imaginary fight—what he'll say to his partner, what she'll say to her husband, or how they'll tell the Old Man off about his will. So I tell them the story about the jack and they cool off.'

"I thought, How true! Most of us go through life bumping into obstacles we could easily bypass; spoiling for a fight and lashing out in blind rages at fancied wrongs and imaginary foes. And frequently we don't even realize what we are doing."

This wonderful creation of our minds can be so used that it will work against our own best interests in many ways. If it is not properly managed, it often turns against the right, it builds up our hates, it nurtures our glooms, enlarges our discouragements, alibis, and sins. It fights against the government, tears down the establishment, and rebels against God. The mind can easily bypass success and happiness because of our indecisions, our procrastinations, our indifferences, and our ignorance. Many people are perpetual hesitators with a slothful follow-through. Some are able to convince themselves that wrong is better than right, that idleness is superior to industry, and that ugliness is more desirable than beauty, health, and cleanliness.

Our earth is made up of contrasts and opposites. When we are without the proper training and discipline, our minds themselves may become addled, mixed up, and confused. Some people become tyrants and saddle their families with all kinds of unpleasantness and shame. Some people develop weaknesses and tell themselves that it is too difficult for them to live the religion of Christ. They can easily make themselves believe that crimes, sins, weaknesses, and negative thinking are in their own interests.

But minds can also be charged with righteousness. They can be trained to understand that there are no successful criminals. There are no happy sinners. And everyone may choose for himself what he will become. William James once said, "The greatest discovery of my generation is that we can change our circumstances by changing our attitudes of mind." No one need remain as he is for even one more day. Jesus said that we should be born again. Each of us may be reborn as many times as we like, and each time we can be reborn better.

This process may be what the apostle Paul had in mind when he said: ". . . be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind." (Romans 12:2.) In addition to the renewing of our minds, we can also renew our faith and our industry and our attitudes and our success and our happiness.

In 1926, Emile Cue announced his famous system of psychotherapy based upon auto-suggestion. He taught that we could have better health, increase our general well-being, and make improvement in every way by saying and thinking and living the ideas embodied in the phrase, "Every day in every way I am getting better and better." By our own effective self-management our foreheads can get broader, and our hearts can get bigger, and our emotions can become more intense, and our success can be increased, and our love of God and good can be given more power. And to develop one of the greatest advantages for our lives, we need to learn how to effectively manage ourselves.
