Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Social Services

ONE OF the important activities of our world is its social services. This is something in which all of us have a personal as well as a general interest. The dictionary describes social services as any activity designed to promote social welfare. It refers to specifically organized philanthropic programs for giving assistance to the sick, the destitute, the unfortunate, or any group of people who are below, or who are likely to get below, the community standards of well being.

These groups include the poor, the neglected, the maladjusted, and the abnormal. The field of social services covers the entire area of physical, financial, mental, spiritual, moral, and social problems. We think of prostitution as a social problem. We refer to the venereal diseases as social diseases. When we speak of social hygiene, we have in mind the prevention of those sicknesses that are socially communicated.

Our social problems are those human problems that affect the community. Many business problems, family problems, and personal problems may become social problems. There are a great many organizations and groups engaged in social service, including governments, churches, clubs, hospitals, penal institutions, and such groups as Alcoholics Anonymous, and all are social service organizations to some extent.

Every morning I walk by three large, home-type buildings filled with groups of men who are trying to get away from the afflictions of that traditional demon called alcohol. In an attempt to help, there are also large groups of people who are presently spending vast amounts of money and a great deal of their time trying to rehabilitate dope addicts, those who have nervous troubles and criminal inclinations, as well as those with mental, spiritual, and moral weaknesses.

We have a continuing problem with unwed mothers, irresponsible fathers, child neglect, and many other kinds of sins that leave people scarred for life with feelings of emotional imbalance and guilt. Like alcoholism, dope addiction, immorality, and feelings of deep-seated inferiority are diseases that we largely bring upon ourselves. However, in spite of the great number of people engaged in social services, we are still losing ground at a tremendous rate. There are many people who actually spend their lives dragging other people down, and they are helping to produce those problems that afflict our entire community. We have many new sources of problems, and some of them center in that vast modern breed of hippie-type individuals who foster sexual promiscuity and other kinds of moral and intellectual irresponsibility that are probably far more damaging to human lives than all of the moral problems of the past put together.

Individual sins, like individual apples that are spoiling by themselves, are bad enough, but a rotten apple in a barrel, or an immoral person in a group, has a much more destructive power. The new development of communal nests where human beings foster social disease, moral decay, and physical filth in bunches gives an effectiveness in spreading problems that probably surpass in trouble-making ability anything that our world has ever previously known.

It might be difficult for anyone to imagine what our world may soon be like if we continue to go downhill at our present rate. Certainly the most serious problems of our world are not its food supply or its populations explosions or any shortages in scientific progress or military power. Our biggest problem is our inability to solve our social, spiritual, and moral difficulties.

Sometime ago a great businessman gave his accomplishment formula, which applies particularly to social success. He said that when contemplating any achievement, one of the first steps to be taken was to definitely decide on those things that just must not be done under any circumstances. That is, if one is going into a business, there are certain dishonest policies and improper practices that must never be engaged in if the business is to succeed.

If one is planning a happy marriage, there are certain things that must be ruled out of bounds. The best example of this technique was demonstrated by the Lord himself when he began his project to make the ancient country of Israel into the greatest nation in the world. The Lord sent Moses into Egypt to liberate the people from their bondage and to bring them up to meet God at Mount Sinai to there decide on arrangements for their national greatness and to make the necessary mutual covenants.

Three months after their liberation they were encamped before the Mount and God came down onto the top of the Mount and gave them their law. In giving them the Ten Commandments, he enumerated some of those things that they just must not do under any circumstances, for even God couldn't make a great nation out of a group of atheists, murderers, thieves, liars, profanity users, and violaters of the Sabbath day. In getting into their minds the things that they must not do, the Lord said:

These sixty-seven words probably make up the greatest statement of social services ever made in the world. If all members of our society would definitely make up their minds not to do these things, then we would have all of our time and enthusiasm to devote to those things that we should do.

Joseph Malius once wrote some lines indicating two different kinds of social services. The one centered in prevention and the other in cure. He entitled this poem "A Fence—An Ambulance":

'Twas a dangerous cliff, as they freely confessed,

Though to walk near its crest was so pleasant.

But over its terrible edge there had slipped,

A duke and full many a peasant.

So the people said something would have to be done

But their projects did not all tally.

Some said, "Put a fence round the edge of the cliff,"

Some, "An ambulance down in the valley."

But the cry for the ambulance carried the day,

For it spread through the neighboring city.

A fence may be useful or not, it is true,

But each heart became brimful of pity,

For those who slipped over that dangerous cliff

And the dwellers in highway and alley

Gave pounds or gave pence, not to put up a fence

But an ambulance down in the valley.

"For the cliff is all right if you're careful," they said,

"And if folks even slip or are dropping,

It isn't the slipping that hurts them so much,

As the shock down below when they're stopping."

So day after day, as these mishaps occurred,

Quick forth would their rescuers sally,

To pick up the victims who fell off the cliff

With their ambulance down in the valley.

Then an old sage remarked, "It's a marvel to me.

That people give far more attention

To repairing results than to stopping the cause

When they'd much better aim at prevention.

"Let us stop at its source all the mischief," he cried.

"Come neighbors and friends let us rally.

If the cliff we will fence, we might almost dispense

With the ambulance down in the valley."

"Oh, he's a fanatic," the others rejoined,

"Dispense with the ambulance? Never.

He'd dispense with all charities too, if he could,

No, no we'll support them forever."

"Aren't we picking up folks just as fast as they fall

And shall this man dictate to us? Shall he?

Why should people of sense stop to put up a fence

While the ambulance works down in the valley?"

But a sensible few who are practical too,

Will not bear with such nonsense much longer.

They believe that prevention is better than cure,

And their party will still be the stronger.

Encourage them then with your purse, voice and pen,

And while other philanthropists dally

They will scorn all pretense and put up a fence

On the cliff that hangs over the valley.

Better guide well the young than reclaim them when old,

For the voice of true wisdom is calling.

To rescue the fallen is good but 'tis best

To prevent other people from falling.

Better close up the source of temptation and crime,

Than deliver from dungeon and galley.

Better put a strong fence round the top of the cliff

Than an ambulance down in the valley.

Even since this poem was written our situation has so drastically worsened that we are seriously overworking many ambulances. It has always been a fairly simple matter to put some criminal in jail in the public interest or to feed a few hoboes or close up an offending house of prostitution. But what do you do when a large crowd of hippies almost takes over a whole community? Or what can you do with those thousands of marchers whose loyalty and reason are seriously distorted?

It is interesting that the Lord looked forward to our day and made a rather uncomplimentary comparison for us when he said, ". . . as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be." (Matthew 24:37.) The social problems of Noah's day were so severe that they could only be solved by sending a universal flood. If our age gets much worse, some comparable methods may have to be used on us. Certainly prevention is far superior to any known cure either in handling our social or our individual problems.

There is an interesting old proverb that says that God always sends the remedy before the plague. The Savior of the world provided a cure even before the problems arose. In fact, the religion of Jesus constitutes a great social gospel. The teachings of the holy scriptures have the best possible answers to all of the problems of sin, crime, weakness, and delinquency. The scriptures are very clear on declaring the infinite worth of the human personality. Jesus said: ". . . what shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?" (Luke 8:36-37.) We might ask what indeed. This great social gospel teaches the Fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man. It holds love up before us as the greatest redemptive force in the world. Love is also the finest method of procedure.

When the Son of God established his church upon the earth, he intended that every single person should belong to it and should live by its principles. Even as Jesus stood above the Mount of Olives as he was about to ascend into heaven, he represented a great way of life when he said to members of the Twelve at his feet: "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world." (Matthew 28:19-20.)

Again he said: "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." (Mark 16:16.)

The church and its doctrines were not just for a few. They were for everyone and should be lived with an intensity that would permit no vacillation or exception.

As Charles Kingsley once said, "What I want is not to possess religion but to have a religion that shall possess me." The greatest need in the world is still and always for every individual to make a full and complete return to the religion of Christ. That would solve all of our social problems for the here and also for the hereafter.
