Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

So Little Time—So Much to Do

THE MOST important power that anyone ever acquires in this world is a righteous control over his own life. Solomon said: "He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city." (Proverbs 16:32.) And Socrates added: "He who would move the world must first move himself." How one uses his power over himself determines his every success, his every happiness, his physical comfort, his peace of mind, the future welfare of his family, and the riches that his own eternal life will include.

It has been pointed out that in order to make the best and the most of one's own life one needs to be: well bred, well fed, well read, well led, well wed.

It is also helpful if his ideas are well said. The final evidence of his success comes only when the final curtain has come down, and he is well dead. But in the meantime everyone needs a good supply of physical health, mental health, spiritual health, moral health, and social health.

We need to be able to visualize our opportunities, analyze our problems, supervise our efforts, energize our industry, and spiritualize our objectives. But more than almost any other thing, we need a greater sense of urgency about life. We need to be able to wind up our enthusiasm and raise the level of our righteous activity. It is important that we have some inspiring experiences reminding us of the shortness of life so that we will be impelled to make the most of it while it lasts.

I happen to be a member of that part of our national population who are politely called senior citizens. We are those members of the human race who are over age sixty-five, which is the generally accepted age for occupational retirement. Age sixty-five is an imaginary line that is drawn across the path of every individual, making the subtle suggestion that his working life may be about over. At least it is time for him to begin that tapering off period leading to complete inactivity. It also suggests that he should now surrender his occupational place so that his share of the world's load of work and responsibility may be carried on younger and safer shoulders.

This important transition presents many problems for many people on both sides of the retirement line. Sometimes senior citizens themselves find that they are not prepared for retirement. They may be unprepared financially, socially, and spiritually. They may also be lacking in that sense of fulfillment and satisfaction that should come at the end of every fully lived life. To indicate the shortness of these sixty-five years, someone has pointed out that six of them are spent in childhood; another twenty are spent in getting an education; then of the thirty-nine remaining, one-third are spent in bed.

Because we only work five days per week, eleven more full years are subtracted from our working lifetime for Saturdays and Sundays. A lot of additional life is lost because of sickness, vacations, and holidays. We use up more of our time in eating and going to and from work. Then if we add the time that is wasted and eaten up by our sins, we don't have very much left. Just as we begin finding out how to live, we find that it is time to die. If anyone will work out the arithmetic to find the shortness of his own life, he will probably be shocked into a sense of urgency, as this short allotment is all he has in which to learn to support himself, educate his family, and build a foundation capable of bearing the burden of eternity.

Liquor and tobacco may cut down the length of life; ignorance may reduce its breadth and interest; sin may diminish the depth and intensity of life; and lethargy and sloth may thwart its purpose. But even at best we haven't much time. Reading has always been very pleasant to me, and because I have spent a good deal of time in the last few years on airplanes, I have looked forward to my flying time as a period when I could settle back and lose myself for a few hours in the comfortable enjoyment of some good book that I had been longing to read without any interruption from telephones or personal callers.

But because of some of the incidents of my advancing years, my reading ability has recently been greatly restricted, and I have had a few problems trying to find other ways to profitably occupy myself while flying. Sleeping, or looking out the window, or talking to my neighbors, or even thinking, have not always proven to be very good substitutes. I have thought how wasteful we sometimes are of this precious, available combination of great literature, vision, and time. I have never discovered anyone who had eyes to rent so that I might still discover some of the many interesting, helpful things that are hidden within the covers of books.

Without eyes, some people get very lonesome for the great scriptures and other great pieces of literature or even the printed news of the world. Many people never think in advance of the other doors that will be closed in our faces as we get older or the other of life's privileges that will be withdrawn as time advances. Finally, all of us must eventually come up against that stop sign that is marked with the words The End.

One of our greatest regrets may sometime be the benefits of life that we have missed because our time has been cut off by advancing years. Recently I talked with a comparatively young woman who has been made almost totally incapacitated by muscular dystrophy. She has four children who are also completely helpless because they have inherited her disease. Her husband deserted her on the grounds that he did not want to be married to a cripple. She has been told that she cannot live more than one more year. At one time she had visions of being with her children as long as they needed her to lead them from a helpless babyhood to a strong, self-reliant adulthood. But now her own strength has vanished, and time itself will soon run out for her.

She has no money, no influence, no friends, and no hope. Her overwhelming desire to build the proper character qualities into her children and to see that they know how to earn a living will both be denied her. And although her children are hopeless cripples, they are rebelling against her, against life, and against God. Their bitterness against life provides for a further reduction in the possibilities for any feelings of fulfillment in them.

Every day some additional people are cut off from life and from accomplishment by such things as muscular dystrophy, cancer, accidents, and heart disease. But an even greater number are being cut off by negative attitudes, bad habits, and sins. It seems very unfortunate that many young people think that they can solve their problems by tearing down the establishment, destroying the government, and ignoring the finest conventions that our society has been capable of building up. But in the process, they also waste their own precious time. It does not seem to help anyone very much when they dress themselves in unconventional clothing and congregate for a joint venture in such wrong things as dope addiction, draft card burning, placard carrying, and senseless marches. It doesn't seem to help to solve our problems when people put on the ugly uniform of hippieism, and rebel against wholesome, necessary, self-supporting, useful work.

As I go about a little bit, I wish that I could do something for these thousands of misguided young folks by suggesting that whether or not they are successful in breaking down the establishment, and no matter how dirty they are or how immoral they become, they cannot stop their own calendars, which are always recording a daily advance of their own years. Sometime their eyes will begin to fail, and their hearts will get weak, and some of the lessons that life has been trying to teach them will have been missed because of their preoccupation with less important things. Life at best passes rapidly, but our vices bring us to our end much more quickly.

The other day a young mother was seeking a divorce from a husband who spent much of his time in such things as Sunday motorcycle races and doing other questionable and improper things on the other days. I thought how bitter may be the regret of those who, because of their sins, have broken up their homes and helped to wreck the lives of their own children. This particular father and husband has the physical body of a man, yet in some ways it seems that he has not matured beyond the spoiled child stage. He has a wonderful wife and three fine children, but he claims that he doesn't like his eleven-year-old son because he thinks that this son is not as alert mentally as the other children. Instead of giving this son the extra amount of love and help that is necessary, the father is actually doing more to agitate this condition than to cure it, as he is continually criticizing him and calling him unpleasant names.

When this fine little boy was seven years old his teacher found him quietly sobbing in school. She inquired as to the cause of his tears, and between his sobs and through his tears, he haltingly said, "My daddy doesn't love me." Under these circumstances there isn't much chance that this little child is going to do very well. Even if this man were living at his possible best, he would scarcely have time to develop sufficient love in his heart to solve the problems of his children and properly expand the soul of his wife by his love, devotion, and care. How pitiful that he uses the few brief years that are granted him to break down the life of this little boy by his cowardly inhuman treatment of his own flesh and blood. What punishment could be severe enough for a mature adult who would deliberately destroy the soul of his own child?

So many of us spend too much of our lives in unproductive things and not nearly enough in the serious business of living and helping our children to live and mature. Many of us are working at cross purposes to good and are staging some rebellions against our wives, children, and our own eternal futures. We are also rebelling against reason, religion, education, and useful work.

Sometimes by these processes we inflict upon ourselves the terrible consequences of some distorting personality diseases. How awful are the mental and moral afflictions that some poor, misguided young people may pass around among themselves by an actual contamination of each other. It is helpful to remember that sins are contagious, and the results of our sins manifest themselves in us. Recently I talked with a young man whose long idleness was showing itself in his emaciated, sunken-chested body. His immorality, caffeine addiction, alcoholism, and nicotine-ism had all left their awful marks upon him.

When one rebels against study, it is not long before it will show itself in his form and features. When Lucifer rebelled against God, he began looking and acting like the devil. But even for the rebellious, their time will also finally run out, and the end of all rebellion is hell. The end of all evil is also hell. Satan is the most expert in rebellion. He is also the most effective evil-doer, and hell is the place where Satan must forever be confined. Rebels are presently having a heyday, but what will they do when they run out of people to rebel against and when there is no more time left for them to vent their antagonism? People in America are allowed to rebel against their country, but those under Communist rule don't rebel against the Communists because the Communists would not permit it. It might not be as pleasant for a rebel to try to start a rebellion while locked up in hell with Satan. How would one go about rebelling against the father of lies and the father of force and the father of slavery?

The time may come when even under the program of the God of freedom, there will be no time left for rebellion and sin. A great prophet once said:

"But wo unto him that has the law given, yea, that has all the commandments of God, like unto us, and that transgresseth them, and that wasteth the days of his probation, for awful is his state!

"And, in fine, wo unto all those who die in their sins; for they shall return to God, and behold his face, and remain in their sins." (2 Nephi 9:27, 38.)

Then the great scripture will be fulfilled which says: "He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still." (Revelation 22:11.)

To develop a greater sense of urgency about life so that we may make the most of our opportunities is probably our finest challenge.
