Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Soul Power

THE MOST interesting as well as the most important thing in the world is a great human being, and the thing that we actually know less about than about any other thing is ourselves. If someone asks us questions about science, inventions, history, or politics, we may be able to answer them. But if they should ask us to sit down and write out an analysis of ourselves and describe our mind and soul qualities, we might not give them very good answers, or if someone asks us about where we came from or what the purpose of our life is, or if they ask us to describe our eternal destiny, we may stand silent and uncomprehending before them. Yet the two most necessary things to know about ourselves is where we are going and how we are going to get there.

We learn something about ourselves from the two scriptural accounts given of our own creation. The first chapter in Genesis tells of our spiritual creation, which took place in heaven and about which it is said, "So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them." (Genesis 1:27.) But no one had yet been placed upon the earth to carry on its work. Then in the second chapter of Genesis we are told about our important bodily creation, in which it is said, "And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul." (Genesis 2:7.)

We are all aware of that interesting quality that exists in ourselves. Certainly it is evident when we look upon the dead as we stand at the bier of a loved one that the one we loved is not in the casket and that we are merely looking upon the tenement in which the spirit lodged. The body and the spirit were temporarily joined together at birth, and they are temporarily separated at death. The process of death has been described by the writer of Ecclesiastes, who says: "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it." (Ecclesiastes 12:7.)

Following death there is a period of varying length during which time the body and the spirit are separated so that they can most effectively be prepared for that great event of their own resurrection. At the resurrection their bodies and spirits are inseparably joined together. A great modern scripture calls our attention to this important event when the Lord says, "And the spirit and the body are the soul of man. And the resurrection from the dead is the redemption of the soul." (D&C 88:15-16.) The prophet Alma also comments on this important fact when he says, "The soul shall be restored to the body, and the body to the soul; yea, and every limb and joint shall be restored to its body; yea, even a hair of the head shall not be lost; but all things shall be restored to their proper and perfect frame." (Alma 40:23.)

The scriptures frequently use these terms spirit and soul interchangeably, and yet in the interests of our own understanding we might make some distinctions between them. Before we were born, we existed as spirits. We had antemortal bodies made of a substance much finer than that making up our mortal bodies. The spirit has many abilities that our flesh does not have. It has much greater power than do our bodies alone. At birth we are added upon with these beautiful, wonderful bodies of flesh and bones without which we could never have a fulness of joy either here or hereafter. Then our cleansed spirits and refined bodies are inseparably joined together, and we begin that happy period of eternal progression and increase. If in this life we qualify for a celestial designation, we will then be able to resurrect a celestial body, and our immortal souls will belong to that exalted order of which God himself is a member. But whether we speak of spirit or the soul, we are speaking of that entity or substance or essence that is the animating, activating part of our lives. This is where our greatest powers are developed. The spirit is the vehicle of our individual existence which, until the time of the resurrection, may exist either in connection with or separate from the body, and it determines our welfare. The soul is that magnificent finished product of life which is life as God knows it. And it is by the power of our spirits that we are perfected.

The spirit is that rational thinking, reasoning, deciding, willing part of us. It is the source of our strength and success and the power by which our flesh is trained and perfected. In its resurrected, immortalized state, our soul will have far greater influence and power than our spirits did or than our spirit and body did during our mortality. Even that great creation called our brain cannot function in the absence of spirit. The soul also controls our moral and emotional natures. Soul is more than intellect; it is the seat of all real life, vitality, and action. The spirit can live and act without the body, but the body cannot live or act without the spirit. The fruits of the spirit are courage, fervor, and the power to accomplish.

On several occasions, the Lord has discussed the development and use of soul power. This is an ability to coordinate all of our strengths of mind, body, and spirit into one cooperative, unified effort. In the fourth section of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord said, "Therefore, O ye that embark in the service of God, see that ye serve him with all your heart, might, mind and strength, that ye may stand blameless before God at the last day." (D&C 4:2.) To carry out this command involves a joint action of the heart, the mind, the might, and the physical strength.

To serve God with all our hearts means that our love and our devotion should be genuine and whole-hearted. To serve him with all of our might is to employ to the utmost our determination and our will power. It does not mean to walk the irregular pathway of vacillation and procrastination. To serve God with all of our mind requires a clear understanding, a strong positive mental attitude. It means study, meditation, and the ability to make firm positive decisions on each of the questions of life. To serve him with all of our strength requires vigorous persistence and continuous physical activity.

By this process of consolidation and joint action, one may concentrate all of the elements of personal effectiveness into one united powerful effort. We thereby achieve a centrality in our purpose. Our effort becomes not only highly concentrated but accurately directed. Psychologically speaking, a person whose life is characterized by this united effort is all in one piece rather than resembling a bundle of many directioned and conflicting impulses held loosely together by circumstance. Such a consolidated personality is capable of the maximum of efficiency and accomplishment.

Someone has said that the soul is a synonym for God, but it is more than that. As the children of God we are all actually gods in the making, and we sometimes refer to the vital energy of this inner man by saying that he is the soul of honor, or the soul of righteousness. It is interesting that during this life, no one ever sees this magnificent creation which is his own spirit. In some ways our spirits are like the proverbial iceberg that for the most part keeps itself hidden and out of sight. Yet like the iceberg, the unseen part of us is the most important part. It is also the most valuable of all other things in the universe. The whole purpose of our preexistence as well as our mortality is to develop and save our souls.

Sometimes we lessen our chances for success by allowing ourselves to be afflicted with certain soul sicknesses. The worst enemies of the soul come upon us in the form of those moral poisons of atheism and weakness. All sin tends to kill the spirit of success and happiness and thereby to destroy our eternal prospects. To keep ourselves at our best, we need to occasionally work ourselves over with the scrubbing brush of repentance. Only in righteousness are we able to develop enough power to bring about those great eternal blessings which make up our natural destiny.

When Columbus arrived in America, the Indians told him about an herb that was supposed to be growing here that could take away fatigue, but this herb is one that grows in the soul. There are also other herbs that can be made to grow in us that can produce faith and energy and love and power. These are the herbs of our own enthusiasm for life and the effort we are willing to make in our own interests. That is, when we are ahead of our job, we love it. When our job gets ahead of us, we hate it. No one ever gets tired while he is winning. No one ever quits while he is ahead, and everyone likes to do that which he does superbly well. The spirit of success can make the body strong, and almost all strength is the strength of the spirit.

The poet was speaking of soul power when he wrote "The Champion." He said:

The average runner sprints

Until the breath in him is gone,

But the champion has the iron will

That makes him carry on.

For rest the average runner begs

When limp his muscles grow,

But the champion runs on leaden legs—

His spirit makes them go.

The average man's complacent

When he's done his best to score,

But the champion does his best

And then he does a little more.

In 1923, there sat in a prison cell in Germany a young man by the name of Adolf Hitler. He was writing in his book Mein Kampf his plan to make Germany the greatest nation on earth. The fact that starting out single-handed he almost upset the world indicates that he had something. How did he do it? The answer is in his book. He said: "The question of Germany regaining her power is not how to manufacture or distribute arms but how to produce in people that will to win, that spirit of determination which produces a thousand different methods, each of which ends with arms." That is, we don't win wars with tanks or guns or airplanes or oil; we win wars with that spirit of determination inside of people, and that is how we save our souls. That is also how we do every other worthwhile thing in the world. By the development of our soul power we can turn every evil into a good. We can build up our weaknesses until they become our strengths. We can build courage and righteousness into our lives in the greatest dimensions. We can build up the kingdom and please God. We can worship with Mary as we say: "My soul doth magnify the Lord. And my spirit has rejoiced in God my Saviour." (Luke 1:46-47.)

We may not only become living souls; we may also become faithful souls and happy souls and productive souls. The soul of the righteous produces godliness and righteousness and success. We need to feed our souls on some new success every day. We should have something to do that we can get excited about. The greatest objective of life is to develop the kind of soul power that will give it eternal life. Isaiah said: ". . . hear, and your soul shall live." (Isaiah 55:3.) God said: "For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads." (D&C 25:12.)

For many years Grantland Rice was the dean of American sports writers. Most of his life he followed the great champions of sport. He tried to identify those important traits that made athletic champions. Then during his life he wrote some seven hundred poems about those qualities that gave power to such great sports figures as Red Grange, George Gipp, Jim Thorpe, Babe Ruth, and Jack Dempsey. One of these poems is entitled "Courage," in which Mr. Rice says:

I'd like to think that I can look at death and smile and say

All I have left now is my final breath; take that away,

And you must either leave me dust or dreams or in far flight,

The soul that wanders where the stardust streams through endless night.

I'd rather think that I can look at life with this to say:

Send what you will of struggle or of strife, blue skies or gray,

I'll stand against the final charge of hate by peak and pit

And nothing in the steelclad fist of fate can make me quit.

It is our minds and spirits that make our bodies rich. We are moral beings, and the great driving forces of the world are not only intellectual but spiritual and emotional. When our minds are aroused and our souls are set on fire, we develop the kind of soul power that may bring about the greatest accomplishments of our eternal lives.
