Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Stored-up Gladness

ONE OF the great stories of the world is the Bible story of Joseph, the son of Jacob. When Joseph was seventeen years of age he was sold by his jealous brothers for twenty pieces of silver to a wandering band of Ishmaelites going down into Egypt. In Egypt, Joseph arose to great fame and power. One of the main events of his life was Pharaoh's dream in which Joseph learned that the next seven years would be years of plenty when the land of Egypt would yield abundant harvests. This seven years of plenty would be immediately followed by seven years of famine. In order to favorably meet this situation, Joseph built great granaries in which he stored away 20 percent of all of the corn grown in Egypt during the seven years of plenty.

When the famine began, Joseph opened the granaries. Thus, with one good idea, two nations were saved from starvation. However, this idea of storing up food for the future always has been and probably always will be one of our greatest ideas. To begin with, in one way or another these alternating periods of feast and famine continue to come with some regularity as an important part of life.

In the year 1800 the French Government offered a prize to anyone who could discover a way to preserve food so that it could be carried over beyond the season in which it was produced. Without sufficient variety, many sailors died from scurvy and other diseases caused by deficiencies in their diet. Malnutrition also took a heavy toll both in the military forces and among the civilians.

The prize was won by a Frenchman by the name of Nicholas Appert. Stimulated by the government's offered prize, he went to work on the problem. Finally he discovered a way to preserve fruits, vegetables, and other foods by putting them in glass bottles, heating them to the boiling point, and then hermetically sealing the containers.

The French press, in praising the winner, said: "M. Appert has discovered the art of fixing the seasons. With him spring, summer, and autumn exist in bottles like delicate plants that are protected by the gardener under a dome of glass against the intemperate seasons." From this small beginning has grown the great modern canning industry. American can manufacturers alone turn out in excess of twelve billion cans each year, to say nothing of the bottles and freezing used to preserve foods. For many years The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has advised its members to always have on hand a year's supply of food to enable us to tide ourselves over those emergencies that may arise unexpectedly.

This interesting and productive possibility of storing up food for the future is an idea of God himself. That is, it was the Creator who put a hoarding instinct into the squirrel so that each fall he is stimulated to hide away enough acorns to provide for his food needs for the winter. God also put some other kinds of storing abilities into some of his creatures. For example, the bear lays up an extra supply of his own fat in the summer to provide him with the necessary heat, energy, and life during the period of his long winter's hibernation. However, the most important example of this ability to store things for the future is found in man himself. Man is by far God's greatest creation, and this ability in man has been given many different facets.

We can store up energy in our bodies so that when our stomachs are empty, our physical and mental operations can continue to run for a long period out of our reserves or on a very limited supply. Provision was also made for a mental, emotional, and financial storage. One reason that human beings go to college is to store up enough learning in four years to enable them to provide for a lifetime of occupational needs.

We also have another ability in our society, which is, to store up wealth. Many centuries ago the Phoenicians invented money, which we use to represent wealth. Money serves us as a medium of exchange. This makes it unnecessary for us to live too close to our food supply. Money is preserved industry. It is labor made negotiable. It is our most effective barter system. Money is materialized ambition, and because we can carry our labor over from one period to another, we can benefit from our labor even when it is not available.

The great business organizations have made several uses out of this storing idea. On a very large scale they store up money for the future to serve many needs. They not only carry large business reserves, but they also put away a part of one's individual wages to help him bypass the non-income periods of vacations, unemployment, and disability. Inasmuch as a famine frequently comes every day in the year beyond age sixty-five, some employers store up wages during the earning years to enable employees to enjoy an adequate income when the famine of retirement sets in.

This is a kind of supplement to that natural instinct for self-preservation that God put in each of his children. That is, each of us has a natural fear of the proverbial rainy day, and therefore we have built up a strong hoarding instinct in order to provide for it. This vigorous inclination to save has built up the great insurance companies and other saving institutions that teach us to save while the good financial weather lasts.

Some of the most common commodities that we save are food, clothing, shelter, and fuel. But money also has a great value because it is the recognized medium of exchange. It is also very convenient, and it does not deteriorate. Frequently it actually increases because of its ability to earn interest while we are waiting for the famine to arrive. This common medium of exchange makes it possible for our labor, our planning, and our foresight to be given a kind of economic immortality. Therefore, we may enjoy the benefits from our labor even after the energy itself has been exhausted.

But we also have been endowed with other abilities for storing up things for the future. For example, God has provided us with some large mental, emotional, and spiritual storage reservoirs in which we may impound spiritual strength, faith, enthusiasm, success, and happiness for future use.

Sometime ago I read of a man and his wife who spent a wonderful vacation in Hawaii. They had a delightful time admiring the beautiful scenery, listening to the music, eating the food, enjoying the climate, and visiting with the friendly people. They went bathing in the ocean and spent many hours lying on the beach absorbing the warm, healing sunshine, and listening to the delightful sound of waves washing upon the shores. But when this couple came home, they brought the islands, the ocean, and the beauty back with them in their memories. Then whenever they wanted to rerun their vacation and refeel their pleasure, they could just lean back in their easy chairs, close their eyes, hold each other by the hand, and relive their memories.

James Russell Lowell describes this same technique as he tells the story of Sir Launfal's life-long search for the Holy Grail. This great knight was a very wealthy man, and one beautiful June day he left his castle and money to spend his life searching for the Holy Grail. This was the cup out of which the Savior was supposed to have drunk at the Last Supper. Years later, after a fruitless search and when he was old and poor with threadbare clothing, he returned in the middle of a hard, cold winter to the area of the palace that had once been his home. As he huddled alone trying to keep himself warm, he thought about his past. Mr. Lowell says:

Sir Launfal's raiment thin and spare

Was idle mail 'gainst the barbed air,

For it was just at the Christmas time,

So he mused, as he sat, of a summer clime,

And sought for some shelter from cold and snow

In the light and warmth of long ago. . . .

Sir Launfal had stored up in his heart many pleasant memories of long-ago comforts that had stayed with him all of these years and now could be utilized to help to keep him warm.

In some ways we have the same ability as a tree that grows in the forest. It stores up the warmth of the sun for a hundred summers before being cut down to provide a happy family with a yule log. Then, as it is burned in the Christmas fire, it releases to the yuletide worshipers the warmth and sunshine which required a hundred years to accumulate.

James M. Barrie once said God gave us memories that we might have roses in December. But we may also enjoy many other things that we have stored up in advance. Isn't it interesting that all habits, all happiness, and all character qualities are accumulative? Rome was not built in a day, and neither are we. But each day we may stamp our minds with the finest ideals, the greatest enthusiasms for life, the most patriotic loyalty to the government, and the most fervent devotion to God. Then when any problems arise, or when our spirits need extra power, or when icy winter winds tend to chill our faith, we may call upon our reserves of strength to carry us through the storm. The prophet Job had stored up so much faith in God that when he had the shock of losing everything he said of his Creator, "Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him." (Job 13:15.) Nathan Hale had laid away a large reserve of patriotism, and while he was waiting to be hanged as a spy by his country's enemies, he said, "I only regret that I have but one life to lose for my country."

Many powerful decisions and stimulating emotions can be stored up to be used when needed at some later date. We have also learned how to bottle and preserve gladness. Someone wrote a poem in which he said:

There was a dachshund, one so long

He hadn't any notion

How long it took to notify

His tail of his emotion.

And so it happened while his eyes

Were filled with woe and sadness,

His little tail went wagging on

Because of previous gladness.

This idea of storing up gladness is a great one. We can acquire an unlimited amount of previous gladness to be rerun, revitalized, and relived and to last us through a lifetime of problems and needs. Great righteousness can also be stored up and hermetically sealed in. Every day that we love God and do our duty, we put a little extra fat on our spiritual bones to increase that reserve of strength and power which gladdens our immortal souls. We sing a song about some accumulations in which we say:

There's sunshine in my soul today,

More glorious and bright

Than glows in any earthly sky,

For Jesus is my light.

There's music in my soul today,

A carol to my King,

And Jesus listening can hear

The songs I cannot sing.

There's springtime in my soul today,

For when the Lord is near,

The dove of peace sings in my heart,

The flowers of grace appear.

There's gladness in my soul today,

And hope and praise and love,

For blessings which he gives me now,

For joys "laid up" above.

Oh, there's sunshine, blessed sunshine

When the peaceful, happy moments roll,

When Jesus shows his smiling face,

There is sunshine in the soul.

It is very important for us to understand that love and all other good things are accumulative. Companions in marriage who have been faithful and true to each other usually have very few misunderstandings. But if a problem should arise, it is quickly absorbed by that great reserve of love that has been accumulated in earlier years. Those marriage companions who have had many happy experiences together have built up a substantial balance of love that goes on increasing. This kind of situation might be compared to a large bank account yielding an interest income large enough to pay all of the bills so that the principal goes on increasing every year.

However, if one neglects this principle of building up a reserve and begins to withdraw from his capital account, he may seriously reduce his capital balance. It is those who skate on thin ice who most frequently break through to bring about disaster. Those who run their lives on deficit financing keep their love, happiness, and goodwill in a continual state of bankruptcy. The superior way to live is to store up gladness and all other good things in advance.
