Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Success Scrolls

THE OTHER day as I was riding down the highway, I passed an old abandoned fruit orchard where most of the trees were totally dead. Their bare, ugly, dry limbs looked like skeletons standing up against the sky. But over on the fence-line where there was water, the trees were still alive and green. About 10 percent of the trees there were neither one thing nor the other. They were live trees that were largely dead. Out of a possible five main trunk branches, it might be that just one had a few green leaves. All of the others had long since passed away. And I imagined that that might be about the way that we sometimes appear to God as he rides down the highway of our lives.

Someone once wrote a provocative book for us on this subject entitled How to Stay Alive the Rest of Your Life. That is one of the greatest do-it-yourself projects in the world, and all of the programs of Deity are designed to help us in this accomplishment. Jesus announced the purpose of his own mission by saying, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly." (John 10:10.)

To help us attain this abundance for both here and hereafter is the purpose of the Church. It is the purpose of our lives. That is also one of the primary purposes of our occupations. In our own day, the Lord has said: "Wherefore, verily I say unto you that all things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal; neither any man, nor the children of men; neither Adam, your father, whom I created." (D&C 29:34.) To build effectiveness into our lives through our work becomes one of our greatest opportunities and our most demanding responsibility, as well as one of our most important blessing possibilities.

Recently I read a helpful little book on this subject written by Og Mandino. It recounts an interesting legend of some two thousand years ago about a young camel boy by the name of Hafid who served in one of the important trade caravans of the wealthy Pathros. Pathros was a very prosperous merchant, a dealer in fine linens, rugs, robes, parchments, honey, carpets, glass, nuts, and figs. He had oil from Asia; balsam from his own country; textiles and drugs from Palmyra; ginger, cinnamon, and precious stones from Arabia; corn, paper, granite, and alabaster from Egypt; tapestries from Babylon; paints from Rome; and statues from Greece.

Hafid had been very happy while serving as a camel boy for such a successful man, but when he had fallen in love with Lisha, the daughter of wealthy Calneh, he had suddenly been impressed with the idea that he wanted to become a man with more difficult and important things to do than watering camels. He also wanted to do some part of the work of the world that carried a greater reward than watering camels. Hafid was a fine young man and he desired to grow. He wanted to be a good family man, to be helpful to other people, and to have some importance in his own right. He had often heard his master say that no other trade or profession offered more opportunity for one to rise from poverty to success and great wealth than that of a salesman.

It was the men who sold his goods that had made the great warehouses, caravans, and trade empire of Pathros possible, and because Pathros was getting on in years, he needed someone to whom he could pass the custody of the great secrets responsible for his own outstanding success. All of his life, Pathros had treasured this understanding of success above all of his other wealth. It was not only the source of all of his other wealth, but it was also the source of much of his happiness as well. This knowledge had come to him as a special gift. The principles were written down on ten scrolls that Pathros kept securely locked in a wooden chest. Pathros felt that Hafid might be the one who should follow him as the possessor of these important success secrets.

After questioning him and giving him special instructions, Pathros gave Hafid the scrolls. He pointed out to Hafid that there are certain fundamental laws of success, just as there are laws of gravity, laws of electricity, and laws of health. If the laws are followed, the results are absolutely certain.

Hafid started out with a great advantage because he firmly believed this. He had a solid faith that if he could master the laws written on these scrolls, he would become what Pathros had been—the greatest salesman in the world. In trying to teach right principles, Pathros said: "If this room were filled to its beams with diamonds, their total worth would not surpass the value of the ideas written on these ten scrolls."

One of the requirements for receiving the scrolls was that Hafid should give one-half of all the money that he earned to those in need. What we give to help others is a kind of seed corn for our own success. As a good farmer always puts withdrawn fertility back into the soil, so a good worker puts back into the community a large part of that which he takes out. He always does more than he gets paid for. He always produces more than he consumes. He always goes the second mile.

Hafid agreed to follow instructions and to fully memorize each scroll in turn. He would understand, believe, and master every word. He was committed to repeat each law to himself three times each day for thirty days—once when he arose in the morning, a second time just after he had had his noonday meal, and again just before he went to sleep at night. Then he would specifically practice the law each day for thirty days. After thirty days of drill on one law, he practiced for a similar period on the next law, and the next, until all had been perfectly mastered.

Hafid believed without any question that if he properly followed these instructions, the law could not fail. But following these laws of success would also make one a great husband, a great banker, a great teacher, a great church worker, or a great human being, and it would be worth a room filled to its beams with diamonds. These are the ideas written on the scrolls:

Scroll No. 1: "I will form good habits and become their slave." The greatest power in the world is the power of habit. Good, well-established habits absolutely control our success. Our habits determine what we are. Most of us err in this important success requirement because we don't know how to build a habit. Most people do things only when they feel like it. When we do things irregularly, we are doing as much toward tearing the habit down as we are in building it up. We should all make a list of our necessary habits and then become their slaves.

Scroll No. 2: "I will greet this day with love in my heart." I will love the sun, for it warms my bones. I will love the earth, for it furnishes me with food. I will love life, for it is my most precious possession. I will love my job and with a whole heart carry on that particular portion of the world's work that life has given me to do. I will love great ambitions, for they can inspire me. I will even love failures, for they can teach me. I will love people, for they are a part of me. I will love myself with such honor and respect that I will never allow myself to do one wrong thing. I will remember that the most important part of my wealth is not in my purse but in me.

Scroll No. 3: "I will persist until I succeed." I know that failure will never overtake me if my determination to succeed is strong enough. I will remove from my vocabulary such false words as fail, quit, and discouragement. I will avoid despair, but if this disease of the mind should infect me, then I will work on in despair. I know that the easiest thing in the world to do is to quit, and it doesn't matter much what the thing to be discontinued is.

Scroll No. 4: "I am nature's greatest miracle and I will believe in myself." I have unlimited potential, only a small part of which I have ever used. I will increase the accomplishments of yesterday by a hundredfold. I will practice my skills, and I will improve and polish the words and expressions that I utter in selling my goods. Many have attained great wealth and success with only one good sales talk. I am nature's greatest miracle, and my nature shall never permit any defeat.

Scroll No. 5: "I will live this day as if it were my last." Because the sand cannot flow upward in the hourglass, I will waste not a moment of this precious day. I will make this day the best day of my life. I will push my muscles until they cry for relief, and I, not they, will determine when I rest. I know that no one ever found himself on the top of the mountain because he fell there. I will work harder, sell more goods, and have more joy than I or anyone else has ever had before.

Scroll No. 6: "Today I will be the master of my emotions." The great driving forces of the world are not intellectual but emotional. Therefore, I will control, purify, and powerize my feelings. I will develop the finest attitudes. I will motivate my greatest ambitions. I will bring about my own highest destiny. I will think no little thoughts, no groveling thoughts, no cowardly thoughts, no ugly thoughts, and no dirty thoughts. I will have no traffic with hatred or folly. I will make no little plans and do no little deeds.

Scroll No. 7: "I will laugh at the world." I will always have great joy in my heart. No living creature except man can laugh or even smile, and yet a man who can't smile is not much worse off than one who doesn't smile. The emotion behind a smile is a fine medicine for the soul. It has an untold value. Joy is the wine that sharpens the taste of life.

Scroll No. 8: "Today I will multiply my value a hundredfold." I shall set great goals and achieve them. I shall have high aims and reach them. I shall live by a schedule. Others may build a cave out of the clay of their lives if they wish, but I will build a castle with mine.

Scroll No. 9: "I will act now." I will be a doer. I will not vacillate nor procrastinate. I will remember that the firefly gives off light only when it is on the wing. When the lion is hungry he eats. When the eagle is thirsty he drinks; unless they do, they must both perish. I hunger after success. I thirst for happiness and peace of mind, and if I do not act, I will perish also. I will not waste my success in failure, misery, or sleepless nights. I will effectively command myself, and I will strictly obey my own commands. I will not expect success to wait for me. I will be there on time. This is the hour! This is the place! I am the man, and I will act now!

Scroll No. 10: "I will trust in God." He is my Father who has given me breath and an opportunity for all of life's good things. I will honor him. I will follow him. His commandments are the greatest of all success laws. I will always work for the best interests of all right principles. I will always work for the best interests of those whom I serve. I will allow no shoddiness in my work or in my goods or in my life. I will never compromise with sloth or mediocrity or evil. I will always trust God so that he can always trust me.

And I promise God and myself that I will always think and live and worship and work at the very top of my condition.
