Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

Titles

WE HAVE an interesting custom among us of putting titles on things and on people for various purposes. The dictionary says that a title is an inscription or a label. It is a notice put over, under, or upon something to distinguish or explain it. On June 30, 1906, the Federal Congress passed the national Pure Food and Drug Act, which prohibits the manufacture of adulterated foods or drugs. It also requires that the ingredients with which foods and drugs are made up be clearly specified on the labels.

We do something similar to this when we put titles on our books and give them chapter headings describing their contents. The deeds for our properties usually show their metes, bounds, and descriptions. There is also a kind of pure food and drug act for people, where we attempt to specify the ingredients in the title. The scripture speaks about Elijah the prophet, John the Baptist, Simon the sorcerer, Judas the betrayer, and doubting Thomas. We call one group of people doctors and another group lawyers. We have bankers, teachers, students, and citizens. Some titles show rank, some are a mark of virtue, some indicate an office held. Some show an achievement made or a privilege given or respect granted. Titles may be classified as those having to do with sovereignty, heredity, ability, money, rank, or membership. Frequently we honor men by bestowing their titles upon them as they are earned.

We crown kings, elect presidents, and appoint a great variety of people to rank and office. We develop titles for warriors, rulers, businessmen, and educators, and we put such labels on them as presidents, managers, salesmen, bookkeepers, or professors. We sometimes raise or lower our our own titles. A student may finish his school work with the designation of magna cum laude, and another may have the title of dropout placed on him long before he reaches graduation. It is about the same with life.

This Pure Food and Drug Act idea provides for our stimulation as well as for our protection. If we are dealing with one who has the title of Communist or dope addict, we may better judge how we should proceed with him. It may also help us if we know which man is the general and which is the private. We should also be aware of a man's label before we go too far in identifying with what he has in the package, as we usually adopt the traits and use the motivation of those with whom we associate and identify.

Sometime ago an enterprising life insurance sales agency organized among themselves what they called a Barons Club. Formerly the title of baron was widely used in some European countries. This title was placed upon certain people whose lives contained very special ingredients. An order of barons was founded in England in 1611 by James the First, and later Napoleon the great established an order of barons in France. Napoleon bestowed this title of baron on those who rendered a high grade of effective service to their country and to their emperor. In some cases a baron was also entitled to have the title of sir prefixed in his Christian name. These barons were not only honored and held in high esteem, but they were also men having great possessions. This idea has seemed to carry over in our minds as we still speak of land barons, steel barons, and oil barons. With a related idea in mind, this enterprising group of life insurance men organized themselves into an association of sales barons.

Of course, with every honor there must always be a corresponding responsibility, and to qualify as a member of this Barons Club, the applicant must prove his continuing ability each month by having a specified volume and a satisfactory quality in his sales. Just as there would be no point in Napoleon bestowing the title of baron upon someone who was disloyal to France or incapable of rendering effective service to Napoleon, so these salesmen must demonstrate their increased knowledge, growing industry, more dependable character, and greater ability to serve the needs of those with whom they do business. To add something to the spirit of their enterprise, they have some smart-looking dinner jackets tailored with a baron's crown and shield embroidered thereon as well as a few points of extra significance which they themselves have added.

The bottom of the crown is lined with ermine, signifying royalty. The crest is ornamented with the six-crown points, which was the number permitted the French barons by Napoleon. These standards on the crown's crest symbolize such traits as high spirits, self-confidence, courage, loyalty, character, and their pride of accomplishment. Of course, no sales baron would ever be guilty of allowing himself to be crestfallen or violate any of the other emblems shown on his crown. The shield is also embroidered on their dinner coats to serve as a kind of protection against any unwanted weakness. Three battle axes are shown on the shield, signifying the salesman's fight against the economic miseries of death, disability, and old age.

In this idea these salesmen identify themselves with James, who said, "Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world." (James 1:27.) When these insurance men visit the widows and the fatherless, they want to be able to notify them that the proper financial benefits have already been provided and this before the ravages of death, disability, or old age have done their damage. It is their responsibility to put into force in the lives of all breadwinners the philosophy of the apostle Paul, who said, "But if any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel." (1 Timothy 5:8.)

Once each month the members of this group put on their baron jackets and have dinner together. In the pleasant company of each other, they relate their experiences, exchange ideas, and motivate themselves to greater accomplishment and better work. They do not tolerate improper conduct in themselves or in each other, and they try to avoid such occupational vices as ignorance, idleness, and call reluctance. As they work and eat together, and as they are interested in each other, they make and increase their own strength and ambition sufficient to cover their own needs.

There are some other organizations and titles that we should be familiar with. In the meridian of time, the Son of God came into the world and organized his church. He placed his own name on its label. He ordained twelve men to preside over it whom he called apostles. Others were called to be high priests, seventies, elders, bishops, priests, and deacons. He gave each of these office holders a set of job specifications to go with their labels. The purpose of this organization was to build character, educate people, and save souls. The title placed on the church members themselves was saints. Christ also placed in his church the doctrines of eternal truth, and he included his program of redemption, resurrection, and eternal happiness. He also established the rules of conduct necessary to bring about the eternal exaltation of all those who lived his laws. He sent out his messengers to perform the prescribed initiatory ordinances, saying to them, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." (Mark 16:15-16.)

In projecting the future of the faithful he said, "Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High." (Psalm 82:6.) Jesus made no little plans for members of his church, nor did he set low goals. He said, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matthew 5:48.) Later in vision John the Revelator saw a great group of the redeemed with the name of God "written in their foreheads." (Revelation 7:3, 14:1.)

The Master directed that church members should meet together often to teach and inspire each other. He prescribed that each Sabbath day they should partake of the emblems of his atoning sacrifice. The words of a sacred prayer were also prescribed by him with which those authorized should bless the emblems, and all should renew their covenants of faithfulness. This prayer is, "O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it, that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him and keep his commandments which he has given them; that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen." (D&C 20:77.)

He has indicated that we should be informed on all of his doctrines and his directions for salvation. He said, "... seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith." (D&C 88:118.) It is important that we think noble thoughts and do great deeds, for as has been said, "As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he."

What a great idea it would be if in our work, our worship, and our study we actually lived his precepts and identified ourselves effectively with him. We are the children of God, and we should cling to our inheritance and be constantly reaffirming it in our lives. We should never corrupt ourselves by profaning that glorious being in whose image we were created nor think of ourselves as something less than we are.

When Jesus tried to get the people to think of themselves as children of God, they refused his concept of their future and straightway accused him of blasphemy and sought to crucify him. Generally most people are too prone to load themselves down with all kinds of guilt and inferiority complexes. We are too accustomed to identifying ourselves with sinners, weaklings, and ne'er-do-wells, and then that is what we become. The Hungarians and the Czechoslovakians once began a friendly association with the Russians, and they were soon made into Russian slaves. That is also something like what happens to those who put themselves in Satan's sphere of influence.

On the other hand, what a great privilege it ought to be for us to take upon ourselves the name of Christ and join his church. We can identify with the Lord's program and follow him in our lives. Every Sabbath day we can put on our best clothes, dress ourselves in our most happy attitudes, and go to the house of worship and offer up our hearts to God. It is in our interest to frequently sing the great hymns of praise to worship God and to motivate ourselves with the great scriptures. It helps us to get the spirit of devotion when we have the fellowship of the saints and heartily shake hands with our brothers and sisters in greeting.

Through our own repentance we need to get all of the evil out of our hearts and then learn to love God and each other with more sincerity and vigor. This would not only make us more happy, but it would solve almost all of our other problems more or less automatically.

A man who is now a patient in a mental hospital began one of the most unhappy portions of his life by hating his little brother. The hating habit grew on him until it spread to a dislike for many other people. When anyone crossed him or disagreed with him, he would get a little more antagonism settled in his own soul. Then he denied forgiveness and refused to identify with any of those who had offended him. His problems started a number of internal conflicts. He taught a Sunday School class and drank a little liquor on the side. He was unfaithful to his wife and unfaithful to God. Because he was not very successful financially, he began downgrading those who were.

He found employment with a racial minority group because their members would give him more attention than he deserved. He built up this outside relationship to the exclusion of his own family and people. He asks for God's blessings while violating God's laws. He tries to get people's sympathy by throwing tantrums and feeling sorry for himself. He has lost his power to reason clearly or to see justice in any fact that is unfavorable to himself. He makes a very high percentage of bad decisions because he lives on the low level of his emotions, and he does only what pleases his distorted, undependable tastes. Even when people try to help him, he rejects them if they disagree with him.

He says that he feels like Satan and wants to go to hell where he belongs, and he seems to be deliberately trying to make himself as depressed, lonely, and unhappy as possible. He has no peace in his heart and seems to want none. He has joined the wrong club and has the wrong rules of behavior and is labeling himself with the wrong kind of titles. Unless he can make an almost impossible change, he may have a long, unhappy, unbalanced eternal life ahead of him. Under a kind of divine pure food and drug act, he may be accused of manufacturing adulterated products. Even the inscription of his eternal label may not give him much hope.

This again brings us back to the thought that the greatest idea there is in the world is to take upon ourselves the name of Jesus Christ and to live in the way that he has directed. He would not have organized his church unless he wanted us to join it and to live its doctrines.
