Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

To Be Complete

EMERSON ONCE said that he had never seen a whole man but only parts of men. What he meant was that he had never seen any man as perfect as the man that he could imagine. There are millions of perfect birds, flowers, trees, and animals. But there are no perfect men. A one-year-old mother bird is a model of faithful performance. She never deserts her young; she never gets drunk; she never loses her way. Similarly, there are millions of others of God's plants and animals that fill the measure of their creation in a way that leaves nothing to be desired. Certainly all people have some good in them, but it is also people who launch the crime waves, break the laws, and fill the earth with sin.

Someone has given his opinion that this would be a great world if it were not for people. It is the primary job of every individual during his lifetime to make himself whole, wholesome, holy, and complete. The Master said: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matthew 5:48.) In one of the most important pronouncements of our literature, Jesus pointed out the fact that "man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." (Matthew 4:4; Deuteronomy 8:3.) To maintain our physical health, we must have a well-rounded and well-balanced diet of bread. But by itself that is not sufficient. We also need to live by those all-important doctrines that are necessary for our eternal exaltation. We need a strong vitalizing faith that needs to be nourished by a lot of good ideas. We can live much more fully if we have strong convictions and high ideals supported by righteous activities. It is necessary that we have a wholesome diet of bread, but there are also necessary diets made up of hope, ambition, enthusiasm, and joy that we cannot very well get along without. Someone has pointed out that we can live on less if we have more to live for.

Mark Twain once said that he could live for two weeks on a compliment. But we can live for a much longer period on the right quality of love, righteousness, success, and that comfortable feeling that our own lives are worthwhile. We need a feeling of acceptance by God and a pleasant fellowship with our fellowmen. The purpose of our lives is to develop in ourselves the greatest possible abundance of good.

One of the most important sources of this life's abundance comes from heeding the Master's two-word success formula in which he said: "Follow me." Our greatest life's abundance depends upon a strong obedience to the word of the Lord as found in the holy scriptures. One of the magnificent treasures of our literature is the apostle Paul's famous thirteenth chapter of First Corinthians. This is the finest discussion of the great law of love that we have in our language. In his twelfth chapter to the Corinthians Paul made another famous statement on completeness. As an example for every success, the great apostle sets up God's incomparable invention of the human body. He says:

"For the body is not one member, but many.

"If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body?

"And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body?

"If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where were the smelling?

"But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him.

"And if they were all one member, where were the body?

"But now are they many members, yet but one body.

"And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you.

"Nay, much more those members of the body, which seem to be more feeble, are necessary:

"And those members of the body, which we think to be less honourable, upon these we bestow more abundant honour; and our uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness.

"For our comely parts have no need: but God hath tempered the body together, having given more abundant honour to that part which lacked:

"That there should be no schism in the body; but that the members should have the same care one for another.

"And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member be honoured, all the members rejoice with it." (1 Corinthians 12:14-26.)

It is interesting to try to imagine a more magnificent creation than the human body, where even the smallest members have great importance. It would be difficult to conceive a more important lesson on completeness, unity, and cooperation than this one that the great apostle is trying to teach. We could greatly increase our own productivity and the constructive joy we might get from our own self-image if we fully appreciated those mighty individual body members which distinguish us as God's greatest masterpiece. Think of the boost that we might give to our self-prestige if we understood and fully employed the majestic wonders of the human brain. God created man out of the dust of the ground, to which a great deal of water has been added. It has been said that the brain itself is 70 percent liquid. The brain is made up of fourteen billion cells and may contain more information than can be put in ten truckloads of books. A well-trained brain is the greatest problem solver. It is the most magnificent creator.

Out of the brain of Thomas A. Edison came a whole string of electric lights, radios, refrigerators, phonographs, washing machines, and all sorts of things that no one had ever heard of before. But just think of the many uses to which each individual may put his own brain. He may endow it with occupational knowhow, financial skill, reason, discernment, good judgment, love, and compassion that is worth everything in life. Just suppose that we were minus this great mental organ. If our brains do not meet their full potential, then God is not getting a good return on his money and neither are we. We ourselves may upgrade our minds and make them as alert and capable as we desire.

Or who can conceive of anything more miraculous than that eyesight which reaches out across space and brings back to us all of the beauty and harmony of the universe. Or think of that great manufacturing plant called the digestive system, which takes into itself all kinds of grains, meats, fruits, vegetables, and liquids and out of them manufactures intelligence, reason, energy, love, and compassion. Or think of the mighty wonders of the human personality, the reproduction system, and a pair of willing hands. Then add to these the miracle of the circulation system, the nervous system, the body's locomotion facilities, and its self-healing ability. Man is the only part of God's creation that can smile or pray or aspire, and we have literally hundreds of the most worthwhile members and abilities, every one of which is absolutely necessary. If we took a dime's worth of iodine out of the thyroid gland or robbed the body of its functioning pituitary, our great human masterpiece might lie in ruins. A couple of pin pricks and one may be blind. Even the greatest member cannot say to the least, "I have no need of thee."

However, in his famous twelfth chapter, Paul did not exhaust all the possibilities of this idea of cooperation and unity. The scriptures also compare the parts of the body to the members of the church, and the Lord has said, "Also the body hath need of every member, that all may be edified together, that the system may be kept perfect." (D&C 84:110.) In his great human creation God made no duplicates, and everyone is given a mission that no one can do except him. No one is ever born into the world whose work is not born with him. Each can do some part of the work of the world better than anyone else. The world is not complete if anyone is missing. The world cannot say to any of its members, "I have no need of thee."

For a very important purpose the Lord has organized his church upon the earth and has placed in it certain necessary officers. And he has said to us:

"Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God;

"And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone;

"In whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord." (Ephesians 2:19-21.)

All of these offices and officers are necessary, and all of them were to always remain in the true church organization.

Paul said:

"And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets, and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;

"For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ:

"Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ." (Ephesians 4:11-13.)

Some churches have said to these offices, including the very foundation of apostles and prophets, "we have no need of thee." Some churches have also done this with great life-saving doctrines of salvation. A great furor is going on in so-called Christendom about which parts of Christ's theology they are to believe. But we must live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God. Following are some of the doctrines that Jesus put in the church that have been deleted and yet are as necessary now as they ever were. First, we cannot say of faith, repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, "I have no need of thee." We need the Ten Commandments, the Sermon on the Mount, the doctrines of the eternity of the family unit, marriage for time and eternity, the payment of tithing, the Word of Wisdom, the literal bodily resurrection, the three degrees of glory, and salvation for the dead. There is the Lord's command that church ministers must not choose themselves or minister in his name without his authorization.

Jesus taught the necessity for continual revelation upon which his church itself was built. He taught the literal second coming of Jesus Christ, the millennium of a thousand years of peace, and the reality of the final judgment. These were given specifically "for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ." (Ephesians 4:12-13.) But sometimes in our lethargy or disbelief we say of these great doctrines, "We have no need of thee."

The Lord has also placed certain necessary gifts in the church. The Bible says:

"For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit;

"To another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit;

"To another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues:

"But all these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will." (1 Corinthians 12:8-11.)

The Lord also put some signs that were to always identify the true church of Christ. He said:

"And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues;

"They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." (Mark 16:17-18.)

Nature also effectively operates on this idea of cooperation. The scientists have discovered 104 elements in nature. There are nitrogen, hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, iron, etc. These are nature's building blocks. When nature puts these elements together in the right combinations and proportions, she is able to fashion any of the material things of the world. But this same idea also works in our individual success. Someone has pointed out that in human personality we have fifty-one elements. We have kindness, faith, intelligence, integrity, courage, industry, judgment, righteousness, friendliness, and ambition. When these are put together in the right combinations and proportions, we have what someone has called a magnificent human being. We sometimes fall far below what God intended us to be because we say to our industry or our morality or our faith, "I have no need of thee." Then we become mere parts of men.

When someone mentions the word automobile we may think of just one thing. But recently I saw a sign posted on an automobile sales window that said that an automobile is actually 3,375 things. There is a steering wheel, a speedometer, a gas tank, a rear seat, a bumper, and some 3,370 other things. And if even the slightest gadget is not functioning in the carburetor, the most beautiful, valuable automobile may be made comparatively useless. There are some people who want to become followers of Christ while believing just a few of his doctrines and keeping just some of his commandments. Even some churches specialize in a limited area of doctrines. Their belief centers in healing, or they focus their faith in a particular day on which they should worship, while they let other things that may be even more important pass them by unnoticed.

Jesus mentioned this kind of situation when he said to the Pharisees, "But woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye tithe mint and rue and all manner of herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of God: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone." (Luke 11:42.)

When God created the world, he looked out upon it and pronounced it very good. I suppose that the thing that would now please him more than any other thing would be to look out upon it and to see it inhabited by his children, all of whom were complete. That would be where they understood all of his doctrines, honored all of his commandments, and lived by every word that proceeds forth from him so that they would make the greatest possible development of themselves.
