Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Tree of Knowledge

I NEVER CEASE to feel lifted up as I read that thrilling story of creation found in the book of Genesis. Moses records part of the great revelation given to him by saying:

"In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.

"And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.

"And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.

"And God saw the light, that it was good. . . ." (Genesis 1:1-4.)

Then God went on to create for our benefit our topsoil, our seasons, our atmosphere, our rainfall, and all of our plant and animal life. Moses recorded the most important event that ever took place when he said:

"So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.

"And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth." (Genesis 1:27-28.)

This was a heavenly creation. The record says: "Thus the heavens and the earth were finished. . . . And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground." (Genesis 2:1, 5.)

Then the record says:

"And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul.

"And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed." (Genesis 2:7-8.)

Then the first question that Adam and Eve had to decide was whether or not they would eat the fruit from the tree of knowledge of good and evil. And after they had eaten God said, "Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil. . . ." (Genesis 3:22.) I would just like to point out in passing that the right kind of knowledge still tends to have that effect on people. To know good and evil still tends to make men and women become as God.

A flaming sword was placed in the Garden of Eden to guard the tree of life, but fortunately for us there is no flaming sword guarding the tree of knowledge, and everyone may eat to his heart's content. One of the distinguishing characteristics of our world is that it is full of opposites that must be decided, and one reason for having opposites is that we can always see light things best on a dark background. We have the contrasts of knowledge and ignorance, good and bad, success and failure, right and wrong, struggle and ease.

The great prophet Lehi said: "For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so . . . righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad. . . ." (2 Nephi 2:11.)

He explains what would have happened if Adam and Eve had not partaken of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. He said:

"And they would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin.

"But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things.

"Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy." (2 Nephi 2:23-25.)

Above almost every other thing it is important that we be able to distinguish between good and evil. To help us to do this, God has given us a mind and a conscience as well as his own written direction on almost every important question in life. Yet one of our most serious mistakes is that we do not always distinguish between right and wrong.

A young woman was recently asked by a reporter for a national magazine whether or not she believed in the Ten Commandments. She said, "Who am I to say what is right and wrong?" This young woman is making a very serious mistake. If she claims not to know whether or not the Ten Commandments are true, what does she know? If she believes the word of God, she can easily know whether or not the Ten Commandments are true. And if she lives these laws of righteousness, she will have a second avenue for knowing that they are true.

Jesus said, "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (John 7:17.) And if one uses his own righteous reasoning, he would also know that the Ten Commandments are right. However, it is pretty difficult to teach a group of sinners what is right, for when someone is doing what is wrong, they are usually persuading themselves that it is right.

In one of the greatest success formulas ever given, Jesus said: "Follow me." If we follow him we will believe him, and we will know that his word is truth. Where else could we turn? God is the only sure and dependable judge. He is the God of truth and cannot lie. He does not rationalize nor alibi nor weaken nor fail. It is human nature to be very interested in what other people think. We conduct polls to find out what the Republicans think and what the Democrats think and what other groups think. But a poll has already been conducted to tell us what God thinks. If everyone in the world would do exactly as he is directed in the written word of the Lord, this world would be God's paradise.

Unfortunately, even many ministers do not believe in or follow Christ. On many occasions the Lord has made a serious accusation against so-called ministers—that they teach for commandments the doctrines of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof.

The Prophet Joseph Smith describes a part of his first vision as follows. He said:

". . . I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. . . . When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him.

"My object in going to inquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be able to speak, than I asked the Personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was right—and which I should join.

"I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof." (Joseph Smith 2:16-19.)

This judgment might seem a little harsh, as everyone knows religious ministers who are kind, thoughtful men who want to be helpful. But how many virtues would it take to make up for teaching any false doctrine or perverting in any measure the word of the Lord?

Sometime ago I listened to one of the most famous ministers in the world. The people he influences are numbered by the millions. Yet he has never been baptized, and he freely and eloquently teaches everyone else that baptism is not necessary. To teach false doctrine is a very serious sin, and the Lord has said: "Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. . . ." (Matthew 5:19.) Actually, no one should be very interested in what I think or what this minister thinks. The thing that is important is what the Lord thinks. And on this point the facts are perfectly clear. As Jesus was about to ascend unto his Father in heaven, he stood above the Mount of Olives and said to the apostles who stood at his feet: "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." (Matthew 28:19.) He said: "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." (Mark 16:16.)

His meaning here is also perfectly clear. More than about any other thing, the Lord has said over and over again that no man should tamper with his doctrines or change them in any way. But this minister stands up and directly contradicts the word of the Lord by saying that baptism is not necessary. Jesus himself thought it necessary for him to be baptized, but this minister disputes the issue. The young woman previously referred to might say, "Who am I that I can judge between the Son of God and this minister who so freely airs his own mistaken opinions as the truth?"

The apostle Paul was speaking for Christ when he said: "But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed." (Galatians 1:8.)

It is small wonder that the Lord has been so disturbed at ministers who presume to take his name upon themselves to teach what they believe. Unauthorized ministers, teaching their own doctrines, have caused some of our world's most serious problems. As Isaiah has said: "The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate. . . ." (Isaiah 24:5-6.)

In the very last and one of the most important ideas in the New Testament the Lord said:

"For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book:

"And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in this book." (Revelation 22:18-19.)

The sin of changing his doctrines has also been reemphasized by God in our own day. And yet this changing continues to go on. Some people have taken it upon themselves to change every one of the Ten Commandments. One minister said that he never taught the Ten Commandments in his church anymore because they were so much out of date, and besides, their strong language was too harsh for our weak sensibilities. Therefore the new morality has been substituted for the seventh commandment. Many ministers openly teach that hunting, fishing, picnicking, athletics, immoral movies, and other so-called recreational activities are as acceptable to them on Sunday as on any other day of the week. One minister said, "We have no special Sabbath day." He said, "We leave our people free to be guided by their own consciences before God. We look on Sunday as being like any other day. The man who works might well spend his Sabbath on Saturday or Monday or any other day, it makes no difference." But it does make a difference, as this is the one day a week set apart for worship and study. If we destroy this day, we largely destroy our worship and study.

Those people who remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy will be a different kind of people from those who don't. As we get to the place where we are using the Lord's day for everything but worship, we are on dangerous ground. Very frequently, we ought to reread all of the Ten Commandments and all of the others and then follow them to the letter.

In the fourth commandment the Lord said:

"Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.

"Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work:

"But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates." (Exodus 20:8-11.)

I can understand that some people might disobey God and desecrate the Sabbath day, but we must know what we are doing. Certainly I must know the right answer when someone asks us about one of the Ten Commandments. If I don't know that which God has said is true, then I should eat a little more fruit from the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

In addition to my faith, my reason also tells me that it is right to obey God, to avoid profanity, to honor my parents, and to keep every other one of the commandments. Our final success will depend upon how well we can distinguish between good and evil.
