Sterling W. Sill, Principles, Promises, and Powers ( 1973)

The Uniform

IT HAS been said that one of the greatest inventions of all time took place at Platea when an obscure Greek perfected the process of marching men in step. When it was discovered that the attention of a great group of men could be coordinated and focused on a single objective, that day civilization began. Another great invention took place when someone invented the uniform with which all soldiers could be given an added significance.

A recent moving picture showing the life story of General George W. Patton goes into great detail about his insistence that all of his soldiers should take proper care of their uniforms. They always had to have their shoes shined, their trousers pressed, their hair cut and combed, and their bodies clean. Their spirits also should be dressed in the proper attitudes. General Patton would not tolerate cowardice or any of the other forms of improper spiritual dress in those soldiers who fought under his command.

It has been said that things are sometimes more important for what they stand for or are a sign of, or what they get us to think about, than they are for themselves alone. And, of course, this is an idea that reaches far beyond the army. Knute Rockne was one of the most famous football coaches who ever lived. Rockne borrowed a lot of ideas from the theater. He always went to the sell-out performances to find out why some plays attracted more people than others. He discovered that the spectators were pleased with the beauty, rhythm, harmony, color, and timing of the girls singing and dancing in the chorus. He noticed that when their costumes were new and pretty, they made a better impression than after their outfits had become frayed from many performances.

Audiences also liked to see rhythm and color. So Rockne organized his football plays on this basis. He arranged for his players to have the smartest-looking uniforms that could be seen on any football field. He said to the members of his team, "We want to look like football players, even if we aren't." Each player stood for the team and the team stood for Notre Dame. Rockne had their uniforms specially designed, not only to promote comfort and speed in the players, but also to give pleasing sensations of style and color to those in the stadium. Rockne not only had color in the uniform; he also had colorful plays. Because Notre Dame had color and excellence in its traditions, there must be color and excellence in all of Notre Dame's players.

A player once came out onto the field with a hole in his stocking. Rockne said, "What team do you think you are playing on—Coxey's Wildcats?" Then he said to the player, "Go back into the dressing room and change your stocking and don't come back onto the field until you get a proper sense of pride about your dress."

Every Notre Dame player understood that Rockne would not stand for carelessness or slovenly habits or negative attitudes. These are lessons that should also be learned by every salesman and every doctor and every wife and every husband and every other person desiring to make the most of his own life. Someone has said that clothing doesn't make the man, but it does make 95 percent of what you can see of him. Just suppose that a general or a coach should let down his discipline and allow everyone to dress as he pleased. Suppose that he allowed his soldiers or players to shave or not, according to how they felt. If they looked like hobos, they would probably act or fight or play like hobos. The general might rule that instead of saluting their superior officers, soldiers could shout obscenities at them and call them pigs. If soldiers looked like freaks out of the circus sideshow, that is the kind of an army they would make.

This idea of excellence in appearance is also a pretty good one for every part of life. Not only should we keep our homes clean and orderly, but we should dress our minds and attitudes in righteousness. The Lord has said that cleanliness is next to godliness. The scripture says that God "cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance." (D&C 1:31.) The Lord has also made a commitment to harmony and unity. He said to his disciples: ". . . if ye are not one ye are not mine." (D&C 38:27.)

Every one of us should be properly groomed and our bodies should be kept clean, healthy, and well-dressed. Recently I interviewed a young man who has been a part of this modern phenomenon where some young people band together to dress in ludicrous clothing, let their hair grow, refuse to bathe, and make themselves about as personally unattractive as possible. I asked this young man if he would explain his behavior to me. He was not very coherent. I asked him if he would feel better if he took a good, hot, soapy bath, had a haircut, and did some useful work to provide for his needs and help build up his sunken chest. Perhaps he ought to go to school to beautify his thoughts and prepare himself to make some worthwhile contribution to the world.

He said that his reformation would make his friends feel uncomfortable in his presence. He said they would accuse him of desertion. I asked him what he would be deserting that would be so important to them. Then he tried to explain to me as best he could about the stand that these young people had taken for rebellion. They were committed to tear down the establishment and refuse to do what would please their parents. He said that if he got a haircut and looked respectable or went to work, it would be a visible sign that would cause his friends to reject him. I felt very sorry for this sunken-chested, low-thinking, physically lazy young man who was making a weak attempt to untwist his attitudes. It seemed to me that he must never have had a manly experience in his life, or certainly he would be well rid of those so-called friends who had helped to bring him to his unpleasant state. He seemed like a half-reformed gangster who was afraid to break with the mob.

Many young people join together for protection in their evil, immoral purposes. Then, no matter how wrong they are, they can still get some satisfaction from the praise and support that they give to each other. It is pretty difficult to help, discipline, or even make suggestions to a mob. Criminals and sinners have found that they have more power in a group than if each one were to stand on his own feet. One of the first steps to being a hippie is to put on the hippie uniform.

In the beginning of our world's history, Cain took an oath in which he agreed to serve Satan. In our day many people gang up for that same purpose. Some of these groups actually call themselves by such names as "Hell's Angels" and "Devil's Diciples." Some of these groups have initiation requirements that compel the candidate to take a human life or destroy the virtue of a woman against her will. Their outside dress usually indicates what they are on the inside.

Recently I was asked to interview a man who had made application for employment as a schoolteacher. After discussing some character questions and his academic preparation, I asked him if he would tell me the reason for his unconventional hair style. He said, "I suppose I just like hair." I said, "What are some of the other reasons?" Then he said, "Jesus had long hair, didn't he?" I said, "I suppose that he did, but if he did it was for a completely different reason. In those days everyone had long hair. They also had a different kind of dress, a different kind of footwear, and rode on the backs of mules."

The applicant said, "If I get this job, will I have to cut my hair?" I said to him, "I'm not the one who decides either of those questions, but so that you may present your own side of the case to your prospective employer, I will tell you what I am going to say in my report. Whether you cut your hair or not, I would not hire you. In my opinion, your primary problem is on the inside. The guise you are wearing on the outside is just a manifestation of what you are underneath the whiskers."

Then I tried to explain to him what seems to me to be one of the most serious problems of our world, and his group is the one that is being hurt the most. We are presently living in a world that is being torn to pieces by deadly ideological warfare. There are some people who feel that they have a kind of divine right to tear down the establishment and destroy property belonging to other people. Some think that if they don't agree with the government, it becomes their privilege to try to destroy it.

They feel that it is their privilege to fight law and order, steal food, throw rocks at the police, and call law enforcement officers obscene names. What a dreadful sin against themselves, for these young people commit themselves to rebel against their own parents while they themselves need guidance so badly. In their immaturity, they feel that they have a right to overthrow authority, rebel against education, fight against government, destroy morality, and displease God. These rebels scoff at our finest social conventions. They are often unemployed and unemployable. They have a dreadful shortage of basic ideals, character, ambition, and industry on the inside, a shortage that is vividly pictured on the outside. It is certain that everyone in each group does not do all of these things personally, and yet they wear the uniform and support the causes of those who do.

All of us must be judged by the company we keep. Suppose that while our nation was fighting the German madman Hitler, a soldier had appeared in the ranks wearing a Nazi uniform, waving the swastika, and shouting "Heil Hitler"; someone might have taken the occasion to believe that this man was either out of his mind or that he was trying to get himself executed. While the Communists are talking about burying us, if some American soldier should go about waving the banner of the hammer and sickle, there might be some question about his loyalty. His portestations that he didn't believe all that some Communists did would be completely beside the point. Likewise, if someone insisted on going into the army with a sloppy appearance, smelly clothing, and uncombed hair, he might well expect to have some problems.

What chance would any army have to protect its rights if even one soldier were allowed to scoff at military discipline? This probably applies in every other field. No one would want to be operated on by a doctor who hadn't washed his hands or taken a bath. No one would want his children to be at the mercy of a teacher who had his mind dressed in immorality, sedition, rebellion, and negative attitudes. Everyone who engages in this great enterprise of living ought to clothe himself in the uniform of humanity at its best. Certainly anyone who wears this uniform of evil should not object to being judged by that for which it stands.

Recently I visited in the home of a man who is the president of a bank. He and his wife are wonderfully intelligent people. Both have come up by hard struggle from very lowly beginnings, have gotten good educations, and have built fine characters into themselves. They are both very good church members and each carries a big load of civic responsibilities. Their children are all well-behaved except one boy, who had chosen to put on the dirty uniform of rebellion and follow this senseless course of evil. His appearance fitted him for some kind of circus sideshow. He was blackmailing his parents with threats. He would accept no discipline. If they didn't do as he said, he would run away and join a camp practicing complete immorality and degradation. He knew that his parents would submit to any of his evil demands to prevent such a thing from happening to him.

However, they could not help but feel terribly ashamed of him. Though they were having their hearts broken, they would have given everything to be able to remove this foul disease from his heart. They realized that their permissiveness is not the answer. In fact, there doesn't seem to be any answer. If he breaks his last tie with respectability, he will probably sink to the depths attained by his dope-addicted associates. But if his parents treat him kindly, he will probably leave them sooner or later anyway because of the terrible malignancy that is already forming in his soul.

By way of contrast, what a thrill to see some fine young man wearing the uniform of cleanliness, respectability, and industry. How inspiring to see someone nobly wearing the uniform of his country. Instead of bitterness, hate, and rebellion, his heart is filled with loyalty, patriotism, and devotion. We too can enlist in the service of God and put on the uniform of righteousness and acquire a love of truth, justice, and accomplishment. 1973
