Sheri Dew, No Doubt About It (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Introduction

I Have Come to Know for Myself

Although there are many things about this life that I do not understand, there are some truths about which I no longer have any doubt.

A FEW YEARS AGO I was waiting to catch a plane in New York City, and in uncharacteristic fashion I was there enough ahead of time to actually sit down in the airport. As I scanned a newspaper, a commotion caused me to look up, and what I saw made me smile. Walking down the concourse was a large group of missionaries who were talking, laughing, and just generally causing a stir. As they turned en masse into my gate and began to present their tickets to the gate agent, it became obvious that we were on the same flight to Salt Lake City. Before we boarded the plane, we had a chance to get acquainted, and I learned that they had each been serving somewhere in eastern Europe Romania, Ukraine, and Russia among them. These young men and women were bubbling over with the exuberance (and no doubt the anxiety) of returning missionaries and were eager to talk to anyone who would listen about their two-year adventure serving the Lord.

One elder in particular was unforgettable. A young farm boy from central Utah, he had been serving in Bulgaria. When I asked him about his mission, he said with no small amount of enthusiasm and energy, "It was great!"

At that, I pursued a little further: "Elder, I understand that Bulgaria has its challenges. Was your mission difficult?"

"Oh," he responded with passion, "it was so hard! You can't imagine how hard it was. My mission must have been the hardest mission in the world!"

I was grinning when I responded: "Well, Elder, if your mission was so difficult, then why was it so great?"

With a flair for the dramatic, he struck a Napoleon-like pose and declared, "Because I did what they sent me to do. And I left Bulgaria better than I found it!"

As we flew back to Salt Lake City, this elder's words kept running through my mind. When it comes time to step across the veil, don't we each hope to be able to give a similar report at the end of our mission here, "I did what I was sent to do. And I tried to leave the people I met and the places I went better than I found them."

President Gordon B. Hinckley expressed a similar sentiment, but with more eloquence: "You are good. But it is not enough just to be good. You must be good for something. You must contribute good to the world. The world must be a better place for your presence. And that good that is in you must be spread to others" (BYU Speeches of the Year, 1996).

Playwright Maxwell Anderson put these words into the mouth of the French peasant girl Joan of Arc: "Every woman gives her life for what she believes. Sometimes people believe in little or nothing, nevertheless they give up their lives to that little or nothing. One life is all we have, and we live it as we believe in living it, and then it's gone" (Joan of Lorraine, act 2).

I have felt grief. You have felt grief. But I can't imagine pain greater than stepping across the veil and realizing I had not done what I had come here to door realizing that I had given up my life to little or nothing, only then to find that it was gone.

We have the magnificent blessing, and the accompanying responsibility, of knowing precisely what we are here for. Our stint in mortality is a "probationary state; a time to prepare to meet God" (Alma 12:24), a time to "repent and serve God" (Alma 42:4), a day "for men [and most assuredly women] to perform their labors" (Alma 34:32), a time to prove whether or not we will do all things that the Lord commands us to do (see Abraham 3:25).

How critical, then, that we be wise and not waste this marvelous but challenging opportunity to prepare and prove ourselves worthy of returning to live with our Father and His Son. Jacob set forth the challenge succinctly: "O be wise; what can I say more?"(Jacob 6:12). And Brigham Young said it this way: "This is a world in which we are to prove ourselves. The lifetime of man is a day of trial, wherein we may prove to God, in our darkness, in our weakness, and where the enemy reigns, that we are our Father's friends" (Discourses of Brigham Young, 87). He continued: "You were organized, and brought into being, for the purpose of enduring forever, if you fulfil the measure of your creation, pursue the right path, observe the requirements of the celestial law, and obey the commandments of our God" (Discourses of Brigham Young, 87).

So, what have weas men and women of God, as the Lord's covenant peoplecome here to do? And amidst all of the challenges and roadblocks, the disappointments and discouragements, the stresses and pressureshow do we do what we have come here to do?

There is much we can learn from Joseph, who was sold into Egypt. Imagine the trauma of being betrayed by his older brothers, separated from his family as a boy, and forced to survive in a completely foreign (and initially hostile) environment. And yet, in spite of these difficult circumstances, Joseph lived with integrity, virtue, and faith.

When he was reunited with his conniving brothers many years later, courtesy of a famine in Canaan that forced them to seek grain in Egypt, an interesting scenario played out. Joseph dispatched his brothers back to Canaan to retrieve their father. Of all the things he could have said to his unreliable brothers as they prepared to depart, his last words of instruction were simply, "See that ye fall not out by the way" (Genesis 45:24).

His words, which are words to live by, remind me of a telegram President George Albert Smith sent to BYU basketball coach Stan Watts and the BYU team prior to their 1951 NIT championship game at Madison Square Garden: "From the top of the Rockies I send my love and blessing. Many thousands share my pride in your record. I have faith in your abilities. Play clean. Play hard. Play fair. Play to win. Return with honor. God bless you." Can't you just picture our Father saying something similar as we prepared to leave our premortal heavenly home and embark upon our mortal experiment? "From the heavens I send with you my love and blessing. Countless of your associates here share pride in your record. I have faith that you can do what you are going to earth to do. Stay clean. Work hard. Be fair with your brothers and sisters. Don't get distracted from doing what you are going there to do. And then return Home, with honor."

President Smith's and Joseph's advice make the reality of the Apostle Paul's final words all the more meaningful: "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord . . . shall give me at that day" (2 Timothy 4:7-8). Again, words to live byor at least to aim for.

Paul's declaration reminds me of the hymn "Put Your Shoulder to the Wheel," which we sang almost weekly in our little Kansas branch because Grandma played the piano and chose the songs, and she loved the last verse: "Then work and watch and fight and pray with all your might and zeal. Push ev'ry worthy work along; put your shoulder to the wheel" (Hymns, no. 252).

All of these words illuminate our goal and our challenge: to keep from falling out by the way on our mortal sojourn. To wage a good fight against the enemy of all righteousness. To finish the custom-made course prepared for each of us. To nourish our faith in Jesus Christ. And then to return Home with honor. In other words, to do what we have come here to dowhich will happen only if we work and watch and fight and pray.

Indeed, this process in which we are engaged is glorious but difficult. There are many reasons for this, one of which I learned as a five-foot, ten-inch tomboy who lived and breathed sports. Basketball was my sport of choice, but with a love for sweat socks, the pungent smell of deep-heat ointment, and competition, I played whatever was in seasonincluding fast-pitch softball. During the eighth grade, our small country school had a great fast-pitch softball team, and as the pitcher and captain, I was determined to lead our team to the league championship. Our season went well, and ultimately we found ourselves playing for the title. Everyone turned out for the deciding game, including, of course, my family. The game was tight from the opening pitch, but as we went into the final inning we were ahead 2-1. Then things began to unravel.

First, I walked the lead-off batter. Then the next hitter popped a fly ball to the shortstop, who dropped it. The third batter grounded to the third baseman, who let the ball get past her. The bases were loaded. The next batter hit a line drive right at the first basemanwho ducked. Two runners scored, and my vision of trophies began to evaporate. Then the next hitter whacked the ball deep, and as the left fielder chased it into the corner of the outfield, all of the runners scored.

It perhaps seems odd that I can recall such specific details this many years later. But the episode is engraved in my memory because at that point something happened that I still can't quite explain. From the mound, I began shouting at my teammates. Unfortunately, these weren't the "come-on-you-can-do-it" words of encouragement you would expect and hope to hear from a team captain. This was a good, old-fashioned tongue-lashing in which I basically chewed out the entire infield. This scene had gone on for perhaps a minute when suddenly I realized that I was not alone on the mound.

For there stood Mother, who had seen enough. Taking me by the arm, she escorted me off the field and motioned me into a nearby school bus. Action on the field stopped. The umpire and coaches looked back and forth at each other and then at the school bus where, with her index finger waving in a steady beat, Mother was issuing an imperative that became indelibly etched in my heart and mind: "You are out of control. You have forgotten who you are, where you are, and what is really important. And if you would ever like to play ball again, I suggest that you correct this mistake right now."

Suddenly horrified at the realization of what I had done, and humbled by Mother's chastening, I walked sheepishly off the bus. With hundreds of pairs of eyes watching me, I walked to the umpire and apologized. Then to my coach and apologized. Then to my teammates and apologized. And then back to the mound to play out the final inning.

We lost the game.

But worse, I lost the opportunity to accept defeat graciously, to support my teammates in a time of disappointment, to lose with honor and self-respect.

Mother was right. I had been out of control. I had forgotten who I was and what standard of behavior was expected of me; where I was and what was appropriate on a ball diamond and during a game; and what was important which was not only to play well but to behave well.

It seems to be easy here in mortality to do what I didto lose sight of who we are and what we're here for, and as a result to become distracted from what is really important. If we don't have a clear sense of our identity and purpose, we are much more vulnerable to Lucifer. He of course knows this and accordingly attempts to blur our vision. He lies. He shades and obliterates truth. He makes evil look good and good look unenlightened and unsophisticated. Make no mistake about it: Lucifer will do anything to derail, disappoint, dishearten, discourage, and deceive usand particularly those who have made and are seeking to keep sacred covenants. His motives are entirely self-centered, selfish, destructive, and evil.

From the adversary's point of view, we are dangerous. Righ teous women and righteous men dedicated to the Lord and united in the cause of goodness threaten Satan's work. Of course he would target and attempt to deceive us, women who have a clear understanding of who we are. For we are not ordinary women.

We know that we are beloved spirit daughters of heavenly parents, and that our lives have meaning, purpose, and direction, as the Relief Society Declaration asserts (see Ensign, November 1999, 92-93). We are women who seek to hear the voice of the Lord. We are women dedicated to strengthening our marriages, families, and homes; women whose covenants and influence span generations; women who are not easily deceived; women of faith, virtue, vision, and charity not to mention integrity and purity. We are women who understand that to qualify for eternal life, we must deal with a full range of difficulty and disappointment here. We are free to choose how we live, where we spend our temporal, emotional, and spiritual resources, and to what and whom we devote ourselves.

My first seminary teacher, who remained a dear friend and example throughout his life, seized every opportunity to teach the gospelincluding during a hospital stay where he learned that his nurse was taking the missionary discussions. One evening they talked for several hours about the plan of salvation. At the conclusion of their talk, she summed up their conversation by saying, "Satan sure doesn't end up with much, does he?"

No, Satan won't end up with much, and neither will those who are duped into following him. Hence our challenge to walk the straight and narrow path until the end of our probation. To not fall out by the way. To do what we have come here to do. And to leave the people we meet and the places we visit better than we found them.

Our ability to successfully negotiate this spiritual mine field called mortality improves dramatically if we are clear about who we are and what is important. And what is important is eternal life. Said President Spencer W. Kimball, "Since immortality and eternal life constitute the sole purpose of life, all other interests and activities are but incidental thereto" (The Miracle of Forgiveness, 2).

Does that mean there should be no ballgames or barbecues or ballets? Of course not. But it does mean that we must be riveted on our goal. Anything that takes us closer to exaltation is worth our time and energy. Anything that doesn't is a distraction. Brigham Young taught: "To be sealed up to the day of redemption and have the promise of eternal lives, is the greatest gift of all. The people do not fully understand these things and have them not in full vision before their minds, if they did I will tell you, plainly and in honesty, that there is not a trial which the Saints are called to pass through that they would not realize and acknowledge to be their greatest blessing" (Journal of Discourses, 2:301).

Of course our faith will be tried. Of course we will have tests of our will, of our endurance, of our desires, and of our determination and conviction. Lorenzo Snow said: "The Lord . . . will try us until He knows what He can do with us. He tried His Son Jesus. Thousands of years before he came upon the earth the Father had watched His course and knew that He could depend upon Him when the salvation of worlds should be at stake. . . . He will . . . continue to try us, in order that He may place us in the highest positions in life and put upon us the most sacred responsibilities" (Millennial Star, 24 August 1899, 532).

It is in moments of disappointment, heartache, and loneliness that we often make the decisions that forge our faith, mold our character, and fortify our convictions about the only source of strength and solace that satisfies. And that is Jesus Christ. How do we know if we are honest, unless our honesty is put to the test? How do we know if we are filled with virtue, unless there are opportunities to choose a nonvirtuous path that we then resist? How do we know if we can bear up under challenge and trial, unless we have challenge and trial? And how can we expect to feel and taste the pure sweetness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, meaning specifically the power and peace of the atonement of Jesus Christ, unless there are times in our lives when we desperately need and seek that peace and power?

Weekly we partake of the sacrament to renew our covenant to "always remember" the Lord (Moroni 4:3; 5:2). Imagine how our perspective and behavior would be affected if we truly always remembered Him, because remembering the Lord and remembering who we are seem to be inseparably connected.

In the movie The Lion King, the lion cub Simba forsakes his heritage and turns to riotous living after the death of his father, Mufasa. But when that lifestyle fails to satisfy his inner self, Simba turns to the heavens in a moment of desperation. His father responds by appearing to him, and after listening to Simba's attempts to justify his behavior, Mufasa delivers profound parting words: "You have forgotten who you are, because you have forgotten me. You have become less than who you are."

Like the lion cub Simba, we live in a complex world, one filled with choices and opportunities and also with confusion and conflicting voices. It is a world that increasingly doesn't know God and certainly doesn't know how (or even believe it is possible) to communicate with God; a world where conspiring and confused men and women call evil good and good evil; a world where many have lost sight of values and don't even believe a code of ethics is realistic anymore. In our world there are ongoing debates on the national and international stage about topics that would have seemed ludicrous a decade or two ago, topics such as what is and is not moral, what is and is not honest and whether or not morality or integrity even matter. Our elected officials disappoint and even lie to us, and a proliferation of loud and conflicting voices are bent on getting our money, our support, our vote, and even our virtue. Many, perhaps most, of these voices are motivated largely by self-interest and have no concern about what is best for us or about what is right or wrong.

No wonder Elder Neal A. Maxwell said that "though we have rightly applauded our ancestors for their spiritual achievement . . . those of us who prevail today will have done no small thing. The special spirits who have been reserved to live in this time of challenges and who overcome will one day be praised for their stamina by those who pulled handcarts" (Notwithstanding My Weakness, 18).

So, what are we to do? Life is filled with moments of joy, but life is also hard. It is an unmistakable privilege to be here in mortality, but the burden we carry is weighty, relentless, and laden with importance. So I repeat two questions posed earlier: What have we come here to do? And how will we do it?

There are many things about mortality that I do not yetand may never in this life understand. But there are some truths about which I no longer have any doubt, truths that I believe are keys to successfully negotiating mortality.

With Alma, I say that there are some things I have come to know of myself (see Alma 5:46): that Jesus is the Christ, that His gospel has been restored, and that living the gospel is the only way to find happiness here or hereafter.

I know that the light of Jesus Christ is stronger than any kind of darkness we face here; that we each have purpose; that understanding who we are and who we have always been is central to our mortal success and eternal progression; that the family and the Church family are where we can find safety and refuge; that while life is a test, we have magnificent spiritual privileges as members of the Church to help us meet that test.

I know that, as difficult a challenge as mortality is, we are not alone here, because among our privileges as covenanted members of the Church are the gift of the Holy Ghost, the power of the priesthood, ordinances that bind us to each other and to the Lord, and a living prophet. I know that as we let the world go and become consecrated followers of Jesus Christ, we will be better able to fill our foreordained missions here in helping build the kingdom of God. And I know that every one of us is vital to building that kingdom.

These are some of the truths upon which I have focused this book.

We have so much more than we sometimes realize. I thought about this when we, as a Relief Society general presidency, were invited to attend a luncheon honoring representatives of a national Christian organization. I was quite taken with one of the guests, a woman who was herself a minister, whose husband was a minister, and whose parents on both sides of the family were ministers. She had been raised to believe in Jesus Christ. She had been to divinity school, was a judicious student of the Bible, and had devoted her life to teaching the gospel as she knew it. I liked this woman instantly. She was obviously a great mother and a devoted wife. I found myself wishing I could live next door to her.

Toward the end of our luncheon, she commented on the kindness of everyone at Church headquarters and how much she had enjoyed her trip to Salt Lake City. And then she said something I will never forget: "I want you to know that I believe in God. I don't really know how He talks to us, but I know that He does."

It was everything I could do to not leap to my feet and exclaim, "We know! We know how the Lord talks to us. May we tell you?" I felt bad for this good woman, who despite all of her study didn't begin to comprehend the scope of the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ. She didn't have the privilege of a living prophet, or the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost, or access to priesthood power. She had a sense that God watches over us and communicates with us, but she didn't know how.

As you read this book, I invite you to consider anew what you know and what you have; what you are here for and where you are going; and how you are going to do what you have come here to do. I invite you to go before the Lord and ask the Spirit to talk to you through these pages, so that you can learn and hear what you need to learn and hear. And I pray that through this exercise, you will solidify in your heart and in your mind those things about which you, too, have absolutely no doubt. 2002
