Sheri Dew, No Doubt About It (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 1

The Light Is Stronger Than the Dark

God is our Father, Jesus is the Christ, and, as a prophet has said, our greatest need is to increase our faith. Thus, our connection with the Divine depends almost entirely upon us.

SOME YEARS AGO on a trip to Dallas, Texas, I took in an evening basketball game with friends. When we emerged from the arena, we found the area socked in with a dense, almost suffocating kind of fog. With little choice but to try to find our way home, we joined the hundreds of other cars inching their way down the freeway. The fog was so thick and heavy that we couldn't see the ornament on the front of the hood, let alone the lines on the side of the road. It felt as though we were driving straight into a clam-chowder-like abyss. It was unnerving and tediousenough so that my friends' young son began to get restless and climb from seat to seat.

But then without warning something through the front windshield caught his attention, and he quieted down. Pointing toward the two thin streams of light coming from the headlights, which were cutting narrow channels in the dense fog before dissipating into the dark of night, he said to his father, "Look, Dad, the light is pushing away the dark. How does it do that, Dad?" Before his father could respond, the boy interrupted: "Oh, I know. The light is stronger than the dark, isn't it, Dad?"

That was nearly two decades ago. But I can still picture looking at this boy's mother, who had also been struck by her son's comment, and then sitting back to ponder the significance of the truth he had unwittingly articulated.

The light is stronger than the dark, and Jesus Christ is the Ultimate Light. During His earthly ministry the Savior proclaimed, "I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life" (John 8:12). And to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery He explained, "I am the light which shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not" (D&C 6:21). It is as Abinadi taught the unrepentant Nephites, "He is the light and the life of the world; yea, a light that is endless, that can never be darkened" (Mosiah 16:9; emphasis added).

There are many kinds of darkness that can come into our lives. Loneliness, discouragement, and disappointment can cause us to feel a kind of darkness. Betrayal and pain can do likewise. When we make foolish mistakes or succumb to sin, we can expect to feel varying degrees of darkness, depending on our motive and intent as well as on the light and knowledge we have enjoyed previously. But there is one source of Light that pushes away all darkness, as the Lord taught the Prophet Joseph through revelation: "That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day. . . . And I say it that you may know the truth, that you may chase darkness from among you" (D&C 50:24-25).

That little boy fascinated with the fog taught a profound truth: The light is stronger than the dark. The power of Jesus Christ is stronger than anything we can expect to face in this world, including the power of Satan. The Savior's light is greater than any heartache or loneliness, more powerful than any kind of pain, stronger than any weakness or temptation.

No wonder, then, that faith is the first principle of the gospel of Jesus Christ, for it is our willingness and ability to believe in Jesus Christto believe that He is who He has said He is, and that He will do for us what He has said He will dothat activates the power of the Atonement in our lives.

A ten-year-old girl caught the essence of this. After watching a science fiction series on television, she said in the family prayer, "Please bless the earth that it will be protected by a force field." In essence, that is what the Lord has pledgedthat if we come unto Him, have faith in Him, and seek after Him, He will push the darkness of mortality away from us with His power. "If your eye be single to my glory," He said, "your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things" (D&C 88:67).

How crucial it is for each of us to understand the source and power of the Ultimate Light, the Light that can push away the various kinds of darkness of mortality, the Light that will illuminate the path that leads back Home.

It was when I was a young BYU student that I learned a little something about staying on course, or on the right path, when heading home. One Christmas Eve morning my younger brother and I left to drive from Provo, Utah, to our parents' home in Kansas. Early in our journey we learned via radio reports that our path was taking us directly into a huge snowstorm, so we pulled out a map, identified a detour that we thought would skirt the edge of the storm, and headed into parts unknown. Our creative navigating proved dangerous, for our new route was totally unfamiliar, and we still ran right into the blizzard. To make matters worse, late that night as we were creeping along in blinding snow on an obscure highway in the middle of nowhere, our old Ford quit. We were stranded. And we had absolutely no idea where we were.

Eventually, and fortunately, we caught a ride to the nearest town, where we found that we were still hours from home and marooned in a little wide spot in the road called Last Chance, Colorado. At that point there was only one thing to do. We called home for help. In the middle of the night our father left to come and rescue us. He found the car we had abandoned at the side of a deserted, two-lane country highway. More importantly, he found us. By the next afternoon we were all safely home.

I'll never forget Christmas Eve in Last Chance, where we were immobilized by a problem largely of our own making that we were unequipped to solve. That day our father did for us what we could not do for ourselves. He rescued us and helped us resume our journey home.

Now, each one of us is on the path toward our eternal home. And for various reasons and at varying times we all need rescuerescue from loneliness and heartache, from despair and disillusionment, from the consequences of innocent mistakes and blatant sin.

Where do we turn for help? Toward the Light. For "in the gift of his Son hath God prepared a more excellent way" (Ether 12:11). The Savior isn't our last chance; He is our only chance. Our only chance to overcome self-doubt and catch a vision of who we may become. Our only chance to repent and have our sins washed clean. Our only chance to purify our hearts, subdue our weaknesses, and avoid the adversary. Our only chance to obtain redemption and exaltation. Our only chance to find peace and happiness in this life and eternal life in the world to come.

Left to his own devices, the natural man almost inevitably succumbs to Satan (see Mosiah 3:19), who ensnares his prey and then fails to support them once he has lured them from the straight and narrow path. But the Savior will guide those who follow Him all the way home. Lehi's family endured an intense wilderness experience designed to teach, test, and sanctify them. Likewise, the path from our former home to eternal life runs right through this earthly wilderness, where we may expect similar challenges and difficulties. But in our journey we are not alone, for the Lord's promise to Nephi is the same to us: "I will prepare the way before you . . . [and] inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments ye shall be led towards the promised land. . . . After ye have arrived . . . ye shall know that . . . the Lord, did deliver you" (1 Nephi 17:13-14). Remember what the Lord has pledged to all who diligently seek after Him: "I will be a light unto them forever, that hear my words" (2 Nephi 10:14).

The Lord knows the way because He is the way. He is our only chance for successfully negotiating mortality. His Atonement makes available all of the power, peace, light, and strength that we need to deal with life's challengesthose ranging from our own mistakes and sins to trials over which we have no control but still feel pain.

The Lord has promised to heal our broken hearts and "to set at liberty them that are bruised" (Luke 4:18); to give power to the faint, to heal the wounded soul, and to turn our weakness into strength (see Isaiah 40:29; Jacob 2:8; Ether 12:27); to take upon Him our pains and sicknesses, to blot out our transgressions if we repent, and to loose the bands of death (see Alma 7:11-13). He has promised that if we will build our lives upon His rock, the devil will have no power over us (see Helaman 5:12). And He has vowed that He will never leave us or forsake us (see Hebrews 13:5). There is simply no mortal equivalent, not in terms of commitment, power, or love. He is our only chance. He is the Ultimate Light.

Our responsibility, then, is to learn to draw upon the power of the Atonement. Otherwise we walk through mortality relying solely on our own strength. And to do that is to invite the frustration of failure and to refuse the most resplendent gift in time or eternity. My brother and I would have been foolish to not seek or accept our father's help when we were stranded. Likewise, the Lord is our advocate, and He "knoweth the weakness of man and how to succor them who are tempted" (D&C 62:1). In other words, He knows how to succor all of us. But we must activate the power of the Atonement in our lives. We do this by first believing in Him, by repenting, by obeying His commandments, by partaking of sacred ordinances and keeping covenants, and by seeking after Him in fasting and prayer, in the scriptures, and in the temple.

All of this requires our faith in the Lord. President Gordon B. Hinckley has said that "if there is any one thing you and I need . . . it is faith" (Teachings of Gordon B. Hinckley, 186). To have faith in Christ is to believe in Him, follow Him, and rely on Him. And it is to be blessed with the peace of conscience and mind that the Apostle Paul spoke of when he said, "I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me" (Philippians 4:13).

During the 1950s, Elder Ezra Taft Benson served for eight years as Secretary of Agriculture under U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower. In addition to his high-pressure Cabinet assignment, which often found him in the midst of controversy spawned by his agricultural policies, he was a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and as such represented the Church in every setting in which he found himself. On top of that, he was a husband and a father of six. A Church member who worked in the Department of Agriculture asked Elder Benson one day how he did ithow he managed to handle the workload, the pressure, and the relentless criticism aired regularly on the nightly news, and to do so while retaining the dignity and deportment of his Church calling. He replied in words to this effect, "I work as hard as I can, and I try my best to be obedient so that the Lord knows I am mindful of Him. Then I have the faith that He will make up the difference between what I am able to do, and what I am not able to do. And He does." That is simple but pure faith.

I recall a meeting we had, as a Relief Society general presidency, with two journalists from a nation in eastern Europe who were intrigued about service that had been performed by our sisters in their country. We explained that from its earliest days this grand organization of righteous women had sought not only to "relieve the poor but to save souls" (Relief Society Minutebook, 9 June 1842). When these European journalists asked if we helped women with their "emotional problems," explaining that many in their country were discouraged, we responded that in Relief Society we study the doctrines of the gospel, and the gospel teaches us how to be happy even when life is hard. One of the reporters was incredulous: "Is it possible?" she asked. "Is it possible to be happy when life is hard?" Her question tugged at me. I knew that, for her, life was an exercise in enduring drudgery, and that she did not know where to turn for peace.

Is it possible to be happy when life is hard? Can we feel peace amid uncertainty, or hope in the midst of cynicism? Is it possible to change, to shake off old habits and become new again? Is it possible to live with integrity and purity in a world that no longer values the virtues that distinguish the followers of Christ?

Yes. The answer is an unqualified yes because of Jesus Christ, whose Atonement and Light ensure that we need not bear the burdens or the darkness of mortality alone. There is nothing this confused world needs more, nothing that inspires a greater sense of well-being, nothing that has greater power to strengthen families than the gospel of Jesus Christ. Elder Howard W. Hunter said that "whatever Jesus lays his hands upon lives. If Jesus lays his hands upon a marriage, it lives. If he is allowed to lay his hands on the family, it lives" (In Conference Report, October 1979, 93; emphasis added). The Savior will do for each of us what He has promised to doif we will have faith in Him and receive His gift.

Through the years I, like you, have experienced pressures and disappointments that would have crushed me had I not been able to draw on a source of wisdom and strength far greater than my own. Jesus Christ, the source of ultimate power and light, has never forgotten or forsaken me, and over time I have come to know for myself that He is the Christ, the Redeemer of us all, and that this is His Church. With Ammon I say, "Who can glory too much in the Lord? Yea, who can say too much of his great power, and of his mercy . . . ? Behold, . . . I cannot say the smallest part which I feel" (Alma 26:16). During this day when Lucifer is working overtime to jeopardize our journey home and to separate us from the Savior's atoning power and light, the only answer for any of us is Jesus Christ.

May we therefore recommit to seek after this Jesus, of whom the prophets have testified. May we yoke ourselves to Him, draw liberally upon the matchless power of His Atonement, and rise up as sons and daughters of God and shake off the world. To "those who will have him to be their God" (1 Nephi 17:40), the Lord has extended a magnificent promise: "I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up" (D&C 84:88). Jesus Christ is not our last chance, He is our only chance. He will show us the way because He is the way, and He lights the way. 2002
