Sheri Dew, No Doubt About It (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 2

The Miracle of Parley Street

When we come to know for ourselves that Jesus is the Christ, our lives can never be the same again.

I WAS RAISED ON A FARM in Kansas where we lived next door to my Grandma Dew, and I was her shadow. We went everywhere togetherto the bank, the doctor, the Early Bird Garden Club, and an endless procession of Church meetings. When it came to the gospel, Grandma was zealous. She would talk about the gospel anytime, anywhere, and with anyoneincluding her eldest granddaughter. During most of my growing-up years, she served as a family history specialist for our mission, which then took in four states, and when she traveled she often took me with her. So we went to a lot of meetings together.

I'll never forget an interchange she and I had one night as we drove home from yet another long meeting. It began when I blurted out a question that flashed through my eight-year-old mind: "Grandma, what if the gospel isn't true and we've been going to all of these meetings for nothing?"

"Sheri, you don't need to worry about that," she answered, "because the gospel is true. I am sure of it."

I didn't understand how she could be so sure, and so I challenged her: "But how can you know for sure?"

Several seconds passed before she said slowly, "I know for sure that the gospel is true because the Holy Ghost has told me that Jesus Christ is our Savior and that this is His Church."

"But Grandma," I protested, "there is no way you can know for absolute sure."

There was a pause, and then she added something I will never forget: "Sheri, I do know. The Lord has told me. And He'll tell you too. And when He does, your life can never be the same again."

I still vividly remember what happened next. A sensation unlike any I had ever experienced charged through my body, and then I began to cry. Though I didn't understand the reason for my outburst, I'm sure Grandma realized exactly what was happening. The Spirit was bearing witness to me that what she had said was true.

Now, nearly four decades later, I am grateful that during the intervening years I have come to know for myself that Jesus is the Christ, our Savior and our Redeemer, and that once you have that knowledge your life can never be the same again.

Prophets, ancient and modern, have urged us to come unto Christ (see Ether 12:41; Moroni 10:32). President Gordon B. Hinckley declared that "[Jesus Christ] is the pivotal figure of our theology and our faith. Every Latter-day Saint has the responsibility to know . . . with a certainty beyond doubt that Jesus is the resurrected, living Son of the living God" (Ensign, May 1983, 80).

The admonition to "come unto Christ" is the hub around which everything in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints revolvesand for good reason. The verb come implies action on our part. In the familiar New Testament passage about the hereafter in which many plead their case with the Lord by listing all of their good deeds, Christ responds, "I never knew you" (Matthew 7:23). Joseph Smith's inspired translation of that same passage, however, notes a profound distinction: "[You] never knew me" (JST, Matthew 7:33; emphasis added). That places responsibility for coming unto the Savior squarely upon our shoulders.

Jesus Christ Himself has promised, "Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you; seek me diligently and ye shall find me; ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you" (D&C 88:63). There are no disclaimers or exceptions in His invitation. We are the ones who determine whether or not we will come unto Him. The drawing near, seeking, asking, and knocking are up to us. And the more we know about the Lord meaning the more we experience His mercy, devotion, and willingness to guide us even when we may not feel worthy of His directionthe more confident we become that He will respond to our petitions.

A single mother of six who had been divorced for more than ten years wrote this in a letter to Church headquarters: "A month before my divorce was final, I was in an accident where I broke ten bones in my foot. Within the next four years, I had more than fourteen surgeries and continued raising my children as well as keeping my teaching certificate current. I found so much peace through my obedience in daily scripture study and prayer with my children, as well as my own individual study. I also received great inner strength through my regular attendance at the temple. I can testify that when we do what the Lord has asked us to do, He will bless us. I am so thankful for my testimony and to know that I am a child of God and that He will not give us more than we can bear."

As this sister expressed, when we increase our interaction with the Lord, we learn for ourselves that He will never betray us, never forget us or leave us alone, never turn away, never change His criteria for our coming unto Him. His attention is riveted on us, His brothers and sisters.

There are many ways to draw near, seek, ask, and knock. If, for example, our prayers offered to Heavenly Father in the name of Christ have become a little casual, could we not recommit ourselves to meaningful prayer, offered in unrushed solitude and with a repentant heart? If we have not yet come to appreciate the peace and the power of temple worship, could we partake of the ordinances of the house of the Lord as often as our circumstances allow, pleading with the Lord to help us understand how what we are learning can strengthen, protect, guide, and help us solve our daily problems? If we have not yet found that ongoing immersion in the scriptures increases our sensitivity to the Spirit, could we consider incorporating the word of God into our lives more consistently and regularly, and with greater intent? There is no better time to begin than today.

These efforts and many others increase our connection with Jesus Christ. As our testimony of Him expands and matures, we begin to care more about life forever than life today, we begin to care less about the enticements of the world and more about the possibility of life everlasting and never-ending happiness. And we have no desire but to do what He needs us to do and to live as He has asked us to live. President Ezra Taft Benson taught that "when you choose to follow Christ, you choose to be changed" (Ensign, November 1985, 5). It is a lot like what Grandma told me: "When you have a testimony of Jesus Christ, your life can never be the same again."

I remember with delight a vacation I took to the exquisite Oregon coast. Because I was there over a weekend, I had the chance to visit a ward there, and at the conclusion of sacrament meeting I was a little surprised when a woman approached me and asked, you the woman I think you are?" She thought she recognized me, and her question referred to my identity, but it is a question that has haunted me ever since. Am I the woman I think I am, the woman I want to be? More importantly, am I the woman the Savior needs me to be?

There is a connection between my Oregon friend's question and the lesson I learned from Grandma, for there is a direct relationship between how we see ourselves and how we feel about Jesus Christ. We cannot increase our devotion to the Savior without also obtaining a greater sense of purpose, identity, and conviction.

When I think of having a sense of purpose, I always think of the early members of the Church. I love Nauvoo. The feelings and thoughts I have there are unique. I love to walk the roads, to gaze upon the temple lot that now houses a magnificent temple, to imagine Joseph and Brigham and Emma and Eliza and Heber and so many others coming and going, preaching and prophesying, and building the small but growing kingdom of God. But there is one place in Nauvoo that, for me, evokes unusual emotion.

Every time I visit the City of Joseph, I walk to the end of Parley Street, where the Saints lined up their wagons as they prepared once again to leave their homes and evacuate the city. There I try to imagine how our pioneer sisters must have felt as they loaded what little they could into their wagons, glanced a final time at the nearly completed temple on the hill and at their homes, and then followed their faith into the wilderness. It's a miracle, reallya miracle wrought by faith.

I always weep on Parley Street because I can't help but wonder, Would I have loaded that wagon? Would my testimony of a modern-day prophet and my faith in Jesus Christ have been strong enough that I would have given up everything and gone anywhere?

I had the same kind of reaction at Albert Dock in Liverpool, England the dock from which thousands of British converts departed the British Isles in the 1840s and 1850s to join the Saints in the West. Once again, as I walked across the rough-hewn cobblestones that Brigham and Heber and Parley trod when they arrived in England to spread the gospel, I wondered: Would I have done it? Would I have boarded a small ship, sailed out into the Irish Sea, crossed the Atlantic, and headed for parts unknown? Would my testimony of a modern-day prophet and my faith in Jesus Christ have been strong enough that I would have given up everythingeven my native landand gone anywhere?

Perhaps few of us today will be called upon to suffer deprivation because of what we believe. Perhaps few will be required to sacrifice our homes or the soil where we have grown gardens and raised our families. But we have been called to live in a time when the chasm between the philosophies of men and the teachings of the Master gapes wider than ever. We have been required to face the world at its worst, and to stand true and faithful in spite of the temptations to the contrary.

Each day we stand at the end of our own Parley Street. Each day we stand on our own pier at Albert Dock. Each day we have the privilege of choosing whom we will follow. Each day we have opportunities to bolster and strengthen and exercise our faith. The Lord needed the strength of the women of this Church as the seeds of the Restoration were planted and nourished. And He needs us today. He needs us to speak up for what is right, even when doing so is unpopular. He needs us to develop the spiritual maturity to hear the voice of the Lord and detect the deceptions of the adversary. He needs us to be everything we can be, to "arise and shine forth, that [our] light may be a standard for the nations" (D&C 115:5).

Are we the women we think we are? Are we the women the Lord needs us to be? Have we received a testimony of Jesus Christ and His gospel such that our lives can simply never be the same again?

I will not soon forget a brief conversation I had with President Hinckley during which, in response to a question he raised about my calling to serve in the general presidency of the Relief Society, I said, "I love being with the women of the Church. They are so good." Instantly he corrected me: "No, Sheri. They aren't good. They are great!"

I take prophets at their word. And our prophet believes in us. He believes in our spiritual strength and our resilience, in our faith as well as our faithfulness. Regardless of your marital status, your age, or the language you speak, you are a beloved spirit daughter of Heavenly Father who is destined to play a critical part in the onward movement of the gospel kingdom. Eliza R. Snow proclaimed that "it is the duty of each one of us to be a holy woman. . . . There is no sister so isolated, and her sphere so narrow but what she can do a great deal towards establishing the Kingdom of God upon the earth" (Woman's Exponent, 15 September 1873, 62).

Remember Grandma? She lived a simple life in an obscure corner of the vineyard. Her face never graced a magazine cover. She never obtained riches or became famous by the world's standards. At this point, there are only a handful of people still living who even remember her.

But I remember her. Though she died when I was just eleven, I was profoundly influenced by this one faithful woman. Like Grandma, each of us is vital to the Lord's cause and each of us is in a position to have profound, everlasting influence. How much good might we do if, without delay, we rededicated ourselves to Him who is our Redeemer and our Rescuer? How much righteous influence might we have if we joined the Young Women in their pledge to "stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places" (Mosiah 18:9)?

Happily, we are all in this together. But the question remains: Are we the women the Lord needs us to be? Might we not commit to do just a little better than we have been doing, and in the process marshal our forces to lead the women of the world in all that is Godlike and ennobling?

My grandma was right. When we come to know that Jesus is the Christ, our lives can never be the same again. With Grandma, I know that the Savior is the one source of strength and comfort and light that we can count on. He came to succor us in our infirmities and to heal our broken hearts. As Mormon told his son Moroni, after describing the depraved state into which the Nephite nation had fallen, "Be faithful in Christ; and may not the things which I have written grieve thee, to weigh thee down . . . but may Christ lift thee up" (Moroni 9:25). Indeed, the Savior is eager to light our path and to lift us upif we will come unto Him.

Moroni's benedictory testimony charts our course: "Awake, and arise from the dust, O Jerusalem; yea, and put on thy beautiful garments, O daughter of Zion. . . . Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ" (Moroni 10:31-32).

Everything the Savior did in the Garden of Gethsemane and on the cross at Calvary was for us. Other than fulfilling the obligation He had made to His Father, there was nothing in it for Him personally. He was already the God of the Old Testament, the Creator of the heavens and the earth. God gave us the sacrifice of His Son, and His Son gave us His life. That is how important we are to our Father and to His Only Begotten Son, our Elder Brother.

Our challenge, then, is to strengthen our resolve to follow our Savior and to be the women that He needs us to be. 2002
