Sheri Dew, No Doubt About It (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 3

Remembering Who You Are . . . and Who You Have Always Been

When we come to understand not only who we are but who we have always beenand therefore who we may becomethe choice between following Christ or embracing the world is really no choice at all.

RECENTLY MY SIXTEEN-YEAR-OLD NIECE Megan and two of her friends came for a sleepover. As we talked that evening, I asked, "What do you think someone my age doesn't understand about being your age?" Were they ever eager to talkabout peers and pressure and so on. At one point, one of them asked me what it had been like growing up on a farm in the olden days. (Of course, I guess that was no worse than a returned missionary who recently said, "Sister Dew, if I were just forty years older I'd marry you!") Anyway, I told the girls that in the "olden days" I had been painfully shy and had always felt awkward, inferior, and that I just didn't measure up.

"How did you get over feeling that way?" Megan asked. A pat answer was on the tip of my tongue when I stopped, sensing that these terrific young women were ready for and deserved to hear more. So I told them that the answer had two parts: that while the requirements of my profession had helped ease some of my inherent shyness, the real reason was a spiritual one. It wasn't until I began to understand how the Lord felt about me that my feelings about myself began to change. Their questions then came in a flurry: How did I know how the Lord felt? And how could they know how He felt about them? For hours, scriptures in hand, we talked about learning how to hear the voice of the Spirit. We discussed how eager the Lord is to unveil the knowledge stored safely inside our spirits about who we are and what our mission is. And we talked about the life-changing difference it makes when we know.

I have no doubt about what I told those girls that evening. Truly, there is nothing more vital to our success and our happiness here in mortality than learning to hear the voice of the Spirit, for it is the Spirit who reveals to us our identitywhich isn't just who we are, but who we have always been. And when we know, our lives take on a purpose so stunning that we are changed forever.

As a people we talk and sing constantly about being sons and daughters of God. Three-year-olds know the words to "I Am a Child of God." As our youth walk out the door, we call behind them, "Remember who you are!" The second Young Women's value is divine nature. The Proclamation on the Family declares that we each have "a divine nature and destiny." And the first words in the Relief Society Declaration are "We are beloved spirit daughters of God, and our lives have meaning, purpose, and direction." And yet, with all our talk, do we really believe? Do we really understand? Has this transcendent doctrine about who we are, meaning who we have always been and therefore who we may become, penetrated our hearts?

Our spirits long for us to remember the truth about who we are, because the way we see ourselves, or our sense of identity, affects everything we do. It affects the way we behave, the way we respond to uncertainty, the way we see others, the way we handle pressure and disappointment, the way we feel about ourselves, and the way we make choices. In short, it determines how we live our lives. So, the question we might all do well to ponder is not only who we are, but who we have always been.

Lorenzo Snow taught that "Jesus was a god before he came into the world and yet his knowledge was taken from him. He did not know his former greatness, neither do we know what greatness we had attained to before we came here" (Office Journal of Lorenzo Snow, 8 October 1900, 181-82). But President Snow also taught that during the Savior's life "it was revealed unto Him who He was, and for what purpose He was in the world. The glory and power He possessed before He came into the world was made known unto Him" (in Conference Report, April 1901, 3; emphasis added). Just as the Savior came to understand exactly who He was, so may we.

Unlocking this knowledge would be easier if we could remember what happened in the premortal world. But we can't. We can't remember the glory of our former homewhich is just as well, for "we would pine for it," said President George Q. Cannon, who served as a counselor to four presidents of the Church (Gospel Truth, 8). We have forgotten the language we spoke there and our dear companions with whom we associated. We can't remember how we lived there or in what configurations. We cannot recall the "first lessons [we learned] in the world of spirits" (D&C 138:56) or the identities of our heavenly tutors and trainers who taught us perfectly. We can't remember what promises we made to ourselves, to others, and to the Lord. Nor can we remember our place in the Lord's heavenly kingdom or the spiritual maturity we achieved there. Thus, at times, we may feel more like "strangers and foreigners" than "fellowcitizens with the saints" (Ephesians 2:19).

There are, however, some remarkable things we do know. We know that we were there, in the heavenly councils before the foundations of this earth were laid. Said President Joseph F. Smith, "We were there; we were interested, and we took a part in this great preparation. We were unquestionably present in those councils . . . when Satan offered himself as a savior of the world if he could but receive the honor and glory of the Father for doing it. . . . We were, no doubt, there, and took part in all those scenes, we were vitally concerned in the carrying out of these great plans and purposes, we understood them, and it was for our sakes they were decreed, and are to be consummated" (Gospel Doctrine, 93-94).

We were there when our Father presented His plan, and we saw the Savior chosen and appointedand, as the Prophet Joseph taught, we "sanctioned it" (Teachings, 181). We were there among the heavenly host who sang and shouted for joy (see Job 38:7). And when Satan unleashed his anger against the Father and the Son and was cast out of heaven, we were there, fighting on the side of truth. In fact, President George Q. Cannon said that we "stood loyally by God and by Jesus, and . . . did not flinch." (Gospel Truth, 7; emphasis added). We believed. We followed. And when we fought for truth in the most bitter of all confrontations, we did not flinch.

We were there. That means we existed. That means we were someone, that we as spirit children had identity and personality and the right to choose. Does it not therefore seem likely and logical that we had some kind of role in the premortal world before we came here? That we served each other and loved each other and led and taught and testified to each other? That we rallied and encouraged each other, and looked forward with enthusiasm to the high adventure of mortality? And that we were constantly learning and growing and preparing for the moment when our turn would arrive to embark upon our mortal sojourn?

Not only did we choose to follow Christ in the premortal world, but we qualified by virtue of our spiritual valor to be born into the House of Israel, which lineage President Harold B. Lee called the "most illustrious lineage" of all who would come to earth (Ensign, January 1974, 5). Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote that "the whole house of Israel, known and segregated out from their fellows, was inclined toward spiritual things" (The Mortal Messiah, 1:23). He also noted that the foreordination to come to the earth as a member of the House of Israel was "an election, . . . for those so chosen, selected, or elected become, in this life, the favored people [in that] though all mankind may be saved by obedience, some find it easier to believe and obey than others" (A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, 512-13).

On the matter of being born into the House of Israel, President Lee elaborated: "Surely [this] must have been determined by the kind of lives we had lived in that premortal spirit world. Some may question these assumptions, but at the same time they will accept without any question the belief that each one of us will be judged when we leave this earth according to his or her deeds during our lives here in mortality. Isn't it just as reasonable to believe that what we have received here in this earth life was given to each of us according to the merits of our conduct before we came here?" (Ensign, January 1974, 5).

Now we are here, separated from the safety of our heavenly home, serving a mission in this lone and dreary worlda mission designed to prove whether or not we want to be part of the kingdom of God more than we want anything else. The Lord is testing our faith and our integrity to see if we will persevere in a realm where Satan reigns. Happily, despite taking this test in a turbulent era of mortality, we have once again chosen to follow Christ. The Lord was speaking of us when He said, "My sheep hear my voice, . . . and they follow me" (John 10:27). We have heard His voice because we remember and recognize His voice.

For we are among the elect whom the Lord has called during this "eleventh hour" to labor in His vineyard, a vineyard that "has become corrupted every whit" and in which only a few "doeth good" (D&C 33:3-4). God, who saw the "end from the beginning" (Abraham 2:8), foresaw perfectly what these times would demand.

George Q. Cannon repeatedly taught that God reserved his "noblest spirits" to come forth in this last dispensation (Gospel Truth, 1:8). "God has chosen us out of the world and has given us a great mission," he said. "I do not entertain a doubt myself but that we were selected and fore-ordained for the mission before the world was; that we had our parts allotted to us in this mortal state of existence as our Savior had his assigned to him" (Juvenile Instructor, 1 May 1887, 22:140). Further, he declared that the Lord saved for now those spirits who would have the "courage and determination to face the world, and all the powers of the evil one," and who would "build up the Zion of our God, fearless of all consequences" (Journal of Discourses, 11:230; emphasis added).

Can you imagine that God, who knew us perfectly, reserved us to come now, when the stakes would be higher and the opposition more intense than ever? Can you see that He sent us at a time when He would need women who would raise and lead a righteous generation in the most lethal spiritual environment? Can you imagine that He chose us because He knew we would be fearless in building Zion?

I can, because of what the Spirit has repeatedly whispered about the sisters of this Church as I have sought the Lord in their behalf while serving in the Relief Society general presidency. Though we are sometimes far too casual about our spiritual livesthough we get distracted by the world and live beneath ourselvesthe fact remains that we have always been women of God. We have repeatedly made righteous choices, on both sides of the veil, that demonstrate our faith and our faithfulness. We have bound ourselves to the Lord with the most binding covenants of mortality. We have been and are so much more valiant than we think. We have so much more divine potential than we can comprehend.

The Lord told Abraham that he was among the "noble and great ones" chosen for his earthly mission before he was born (Abraham 3:22-23). And President Joseph F. Smith saw in vision that many choice spirits reserved to come forth in this dispensation were also "among the noble and great ones" (D&C 138:53, 55). Elder Bruce R. McConkie said, "A host of mighty men and equally glorious women comprised that group of 'the noble and great ones.' . . . Can we do other than conclude that Mary and Eve and Sarah and myriads of our faithful sisters were numbered among them? Certainly these sisters . . . fought as valiantly in the War in Heaven as did the brethren, even as they in like manner stand firm . . . in mortality, in the cause of truth and righteousness" (Sermons and Writings, 198; emphasis added).

So what about us? Is it possible that we were among the noble and great? I believe it is more than possible, and that if we could even glimpse our premortal valor we wouldn't find it very difficult to keep the commandments and stay on the straight and narrow path here. The Prophet Joseph taught that "every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose . . . before this world was" (History of the Church, 6:364). And President Spencer W. Kimball gave this additional insight: "Remember, in the world before we came here, faithful women were given certain assignments while faithful men were foreordained to certain priesthood tasks. While we do not now remember the particulars, this does not alter the glorious reality of what we once agreed to" (Ensign, November 1979, 102). I cannot imagine that we who have been called to bear and rear and nurture and teach and lead a chosen generation of children, youth, and women this late in the final dispensation were not among those deemed noble and great.

Noble and great. Courageous and determined. Faithful and fearless. That is who you are and who you have always been. And understanding it can change your life, because this knowledge carries a confidence that cannot be duplicated any other way.

Consider these words from Elder McConkie: "All Israel . . . have it in their power to gain exaltation; to be like the Son of God, having gained his image; to be joint-heirs with him; to be justified and glorified; to be adopted into the family of God by faith; to be participators with their fathers in the covenant that God made with them; and to be inheritors, to the full, of the ancient promises. Implicit in all this is the fact that they are foreordained to be baptized, to join the Church, to receive the priesthood, to enter the ordinance of celestial marriage, and to be sealed up unto eternal life" (A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, 513).

No wonder President Joseph F. Smith said during his ministry, to the Relief Society sisters, "It is not for you to be led by the women of the world; it is for you to lead . . . the women of the world, in everything that is praise-worthy, everything that is God-like, everything that is uplifting and that is purifying to the children of men" (minutes of the General Board of the Relief Society, 17 March 1914, 54).

Sister Eliza R. Snow, the second general president of the Relief Society, said that her desire was that "we may as mothers and sisters in Israel teach and defend truth and righteousness, and sustain those who preach it. Every sister in this church should be a preacher of righteousness. . . . Let us be more energetic to . . . develop that strength of moral character which cannot be surpassed on the face of the earth. . . . The circumstances in which we are placed and our positions in life demand this of us, because we have greater and higher privileges than any other females upon the face of the earth" (Evening News, 14 January 1870).

Despite such divine potential and lofty injunctions, I imagine most of us wonder, at least at times, if we're up to it all. I doubt many of us feel very noble or great. But then, neither did Enoch, who was stunned when the Lord called him into service: "Why is it that I have found favor in thy sight, and am but a lad, and all the people hate me; for I am slow of speech?" (Moses 6:31). The Lord responded to Enoch by promising to walk with him and give power to his words. Surely this encounter with the Lord gave Enoch a new vision of himself. And the result was magnificent, for so powerful was Enoch's word that when he "spake . . . the earth trembled, and the mountains fled." Most important, his people qualified to be taken up into heaven (Moses 7:13; see also verses 18-21). But it happened after Enoch understood who he was and that he had a sacred mission to perform.

Queen Esther came to understand something about fulfilling her divine destiny. When she was chosen, because of her beauty, to be the queen of King Ahasuerus, she elected not to reveal her Jewish lineage. Later, when the king issued a decree to exterminate the Jews, she and her people were in instant peril. It was after Mordecai gave her a vision of her mission with these words, "who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?" (Esther 4:14), that she stepped forward, revealed her nationality, and obtained a reversal of the death decree.

The First Vision was all about identityabout the appearance of the Father and the Son to a boy whose sincere seeking opened the heavens after centuries of darkness. Imagine what that vision did to the teenage Joseph's sense of who he was and what he had been called to do. Though it would yet be some years before his mission as the Prophet of the Restoration began to unfold in earnest, surely his image of himself changed instantly. And three years later, feeling some concern about the weaknesses to which he had succumbed during his youth, Joseph again petitioned the Lord, "that [he] might know of [his] state and standing before him [meaning the Lord]" (JS-H 1:29). In other words, he wanted reassurance; he wanted to see himself as God did.

Saul, who made sport of persecuting Christians, was instantly converted after seeing the Savior and learning that he was a chosen vessel called to stand as a witness of Christ (see Acts 9:5; 22:15). There surely wasn't another Christian breathing who would have described Saul of Tarsus as "chosen"at least not based on his earthly conduct. He must have been chosen before. And when Saul understood that, he changed his life and his name. The Apostle Paul's conversion was at least partly about coming to understand who he had always been.

As we increasingly come to understand the same thing, we will feel a greater sense of mission and more confidence living as women of God in a world that doesn't celebrate women of God. We will cheer each other on and lift others rather than compete with each other, because we'll feel secure in our own standing and status before the Lord. And we'll be eager to stand for truth, even when we must stand alonefor every consecrated, covenanted woman will have times when she must stand alone.

Satan of course knows how spiritually potent the knowledge of our divine identity is. He hates women of the noble birthright. He hates us because he is almost out of time, while we are en route to everlasting glory and a fulness of joy. He hates us because of the influence we have on husbands and children, family and friends, the Church and even the world. It is no secret to him that we are the Lord's secret weapon.

Thus it should not surprise us that the master of deceit is going all out to keep us from comprehending the majesty of who we are. He offers an array of seductive but sorry substituteseverything from labels and logos to titles and statushoping to preoccupy us with the world's artificial identifiers. Not long ago a book listing The 100 Most Influential Women of All Time caught my attention. Mary, the mother of Christ, was mentionedthough not prominently. But Eve, the Mother of All Living, the woman without whom any of us wouldn't even be here, didn't even make the list. Come on! I won't reveal who was number one because I refuse to mention her name in the same context with Eve and Mary. This pitiful list demonstrates how absurd and skewed the world's view of women isa view orchestrated by Satan.

In a prominent news magazine, a recent cover story titled "The Quest for Perfection" promoted a definition of perfection that was disgusting and, frankly, evil. It listed every available bodily lift, tuck, and augmentation, while not so much as mentioning virtues or values, marriage or motherhood or anything, for that matter, that matters to the Lord.

Clearly, Satan wants us to see ourselves as the world sees us, not as the Lord sees us, because the world's mirror, like a circus mirror in which a five-foot, ten-inch woman appears two feet tall, distorts and minimizes us. Satan tells us we're not good enough. Not smart enough. Not thin enough. Not cute enough. Not clever enough. Not anything enough. And that is a big, fat, devilish lie. He wants us to believe that there is no status or significance in being a mother. That is a lieand an evil lie. He wants us to believe that the influence of women is inherently inferior. And that is a lie.

Yet we often buy into Satan's superficialities. After speaking in a general meeting on satellite, I received a letter that began, "Sister Dew, I can relate to you. I relate because I can see that you understand what it means to have a bad-hair day." Frankly, I've had years of bad-hair days. But though we don't always see beyond our hair and the labels on our clothing, the Lord does. For He "seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart" (1 Samuel 16:7).

Hence Satan's all-out attempt to prevent us from understanding how the Lord sees us, because the more clearly we understand our divine destiny, the more immune we become to Satan. When Satan tried to confuse Moses about his identity, saying, "Moses, son of man, worship me," Moses refused, responding: "I am a son of God" (Moses 1:12-13; emphasis added). He knew who he was because the Lord had previously told him, "Thou art my son; . . . And I have a work for thee" (Moses 1:4, 6). Surely one reason Moses was able to hold his ground with Satan while the great deceiver ranted and railed was because Moses knew clearly who he was.

So it is with us. We will never be happy or feel peace; we will never deal well with life's ambiguities; we will never live up to who we are as women of God until we overcome our mortal identity crisis by understanding who we are, who we have always been, and who we may become.

The Spirit is the key, for as President Joseph F. Smith taught, it is through the power of the Spirit that we may "catch a spark from the awakened memories of the immortal soul, which lights up our whole being as with the glory of our former home" (Gospel Doctrine, 14). It is the Spirit that allows us to pierce the veil and catch glimpses of who we are and who we have always been. Thus we need to be able to hear what the Lord through the Spirit has to say.

Asking in faith, fasting and praying, repenting regularly, forgiving and seeking forgiveness, worshiping in the temple where we may "receive a fulness of the Holy Ghost" (D&C 109:15), and being obedient all help us better hear the voice of the Lord in our minds and hearts (see D&C 8:2). Conversely, there are things we cannot domovies and television programs we cannot watch, clothes we cannot wear, lyrics and music we cannot listen to, gossip we cannot spread, Internet sites we cannot visit, thoughts we cannot entertain, books we cannot read, and dishonesty we cannot tolerateif we want the Spirit to be with us.

I can think of nothing more deserving of our energy than learning to better hear the voice of the Spirit. When the Nephite Twelve prayed for "that which they most desired," it was the gift of the Holy Ghost (3 Nephi 19:9). Why? Because the Holy Ghost "will show unto [us] all things" (2 Nephi 32:5), including who we are. I know this is true.

One day while rocking a niece who was then three months old, I was overwhelmed with an impression about the valor of her spirit. My tears flowed as I rocked and wondered just whom I was rocking. Now that my niece is older, I have told her about that experience, hoping to encourage her onward.

Similarly, when I was that shy farm girl, both Mother and Grandma often told me that there was something chosen about me and my generation. I couldn't quite imagine it, but my spirit wanted me to believe. So, in spite of my many insecurities, I quietly hung on their words and hoped they were true. Is there anything more meaningful a mother or any of us can do for the youth we love than to help them begin to see who they really are?

I heard a young man say just prior to departing for the mission field that he hadn't wanted to serve a mission until he received his patriarchal blessing and realized for the first time that the Lord knew him and was counting on him. In other words, he saw a glimpse of who he has always been.

How many of us don't understand the simple principles C. S. Lewis expressed in his oft-quoted statement that "it is a serious thing to live in a society of possible gods and goddesses, to remember that the dullest and most uninteresting person you talk to may one day be a creature which . . . you would be strongly tempted to worship. . . . It is in light of these overwhelming possibilities, it is with the awe and circumspection proper to them, that we should conduct all our dealings with one another. . . . There are no ordinary people. You have never talked to a mere mortal. Nations, cultures, arts, civilizationsthese are mortal, and their life is to ours as the life of a gnat. But it is immortals whom we joke with, work with, marry, snub, and exploitimmortal horrors or everlasting splendours" (The Weight of Glory, 14-15).

Brigham Young said: "I want to tell you, each and every one of you, that you are well acquainted with God our heavenly Father, or the great Elohim. You are all well acquainted with Him, for there is not a soul of you but what has lived in His house and dwelt with Him year after year; and yet you are seeking to become acquainted with Him, when the fact is, you have merely forgotten what you did know. . . . There is not a person here to-day but what is a son or a daughter of that Being" (Journal of Discourses, 4:216). He taught on another occasion: "When we look upon the human face we look upon the image of our Father and God; there is a divinity in each person male and female; there is the heavenly, there is the divine" (Journal of Discourses, 9:291).

As vital as the knowledge of our divine potential is, however, it alone doesn't make mortality failsafe. President Harold B. Lee warned that "there are many who were foreordained . . . to a greater state than they have prepared themselves for here. Even though they might have been among the noble and great, . . . they may fail of that calling here in mortality" (Ensign, January 1974, 5). In other words, "many are called, but few are chosen" (D&C 121:40). And we do the choosing, because the sobering reality is that whether or not we live up to our premortal promises is entirely up to us.

But the effort required is well worth it, for if we could comprehend how majestic and glorious a righteous woman made perfect in the celestial kingdom will be, we would rise up and never be the same again. We would gladly take upon us the name of Christ (see Alma 46:15)which means following Him, becoming like Him, and dedicating ourselves to Him and His work. Women of God who honor their covenants look differently, dress differently, respond to crisis differently, and act and speak differently from women who have not made the same covenants. Women of God who know who they are have unusual influence.

There is a shop in New York City that I visit when I am there. I don't much care for the shop's snobby atmosphere, but because they carry skirts long enough for a tall woman, I endure the experience. On a recent visit, I made plans to meet a friend at this shop, and when I walked through the door at the appointed hour, a saleswoman was already waiting for me. "Mizz Dew?" she said with a charming European accent.

"Yes," I responded with surprise.

"Follow me," she answered, "your friend is already downstairs."

I had never had such a warm reception, and for the next hour my friend and I became acquainted with this delightful woman from eastern Europe. After a time, our new saleswoman friend unexpectedly said, "There is something different about you two. What is it?"

"Do you really want to know?" we asked, almost in unison. When she nodded yes, I said, "Sit down." For an hour we told her what made us different. Since then we've sent materials explaining more. And we've just sent her something elsemissionaries who will call on her.

What does knowing who we are and who we have always been have to do with bearing witness and testifying of Jesus Christ? It has everything to do with our mandate to take the gospel to every nation, kindred, tongue, and peoplenot to mention to our families and the neighbors next door. Because once we understand who we really are, we are not only beholden to the Lord to help others discover the same truths, we cannot be restrained from doing so. If a missionary moment can unfold in a stuffy New York dress shop, it can happen anywhere. And it will happen as the joy of the gospel and the reality of our mission light our faces and energize our lives.

I know a woman who responded to a nonmember friend wanting to sell her cosmetics by saying, "You can give me a facial if I can talk about the gospel." Both agreed. There is no more persuasive missionary messenger than a woman of God who knows who she is, and who is thrilled with what she knows. And there is no more important missionary work we will ever do than that within our own families, as their conversion is our highest priority.

Our objective through all of this isn't to build a bigger church, it is to bless the lives of peoplemothers and fathers, sons and daughterswho deserve to know who they are, who they have always been, and who they may become. Let's not make this harder than it needs to be. We can begin simply by praying for opportunities to serve and for ways to more fully live the gospel, for we will do more missionary work through our example than we ever will pounding a pulpit. Last year the sisters in an Arizona ward provided service, no strings attached, to a nonmember family whose infant son was undergoing open-heart surgery. Those simple acts of kindness launched a remarkable sequence of events, and that family has now been baptized and that mother, father, and their three sons are beginning to find out who they are.

Repeatedly President Gordon B. Hinckley has pleaded with us to "become a vast army with enthusiasm for this work" (Ensign, May 1999, 110). In the 2000 General Relief Society Meeting, I invited the sisters of the Church to look for missionary opportunities. And at the 2001 General Young Women Meeting, Sister Margaret D. Nadauld invited every young woman to reach out to one girl and bring her into full activity during the year. Within a week several of my teenage nieces had already made contacts with nonmember friends. In other words, they enlisted immediately in the army.

Can we do any less? If the women and young women of this Church would join together in this glorious work, we would become a vast, enthusiastic, irresistible part of the Lord's army.

None of us can reach everyone, but we can all reach someone and, over the course of a lifetime, many someones. The gospel kingdom will not move forward as it must until we as mothers and grandmothers and favorite aunts become full and eager participants.

My plea is that you enlist, and enlist now, in the Lord's army. And in doing so I make this promise: As soon as we, the sisters of the Church, commit fully to this work, it will explode in an unprecedented way because of our unique, nurturing influence and because of the spirit and influence that accompanies righteous women. It will flourish because children and youth who see their mothers and leaders fearless about sharing the gospel will do likewise.

I will take the challenge. Will you join with me? Ask the Lord to help you, and He will. Begin by reading D&C 138 and Abraham 3 about the noble and great ones, and ask the Lord to talk with you, through the Spirit, about you. When you understand, without equivocation, that you were chosen and reserved for now, and when you live in harmony with that mission and with the promises you made premortally, you'll be happier than you have ever been before. That is a promise.

Will you seek to remember, with the help of the Holy Ghost, who you are and who you have always been? Will you remember that you stood by our Savior without flinching despite the most difficult of opposition? Will you remember that you were reserved for now because you would have the courage and the determination to face the world at its worst and to help raise and lead a chosen generation? Will you remember the covenants you have made and the power they carry? Will you remember that you are noble and great and a potential heir of all our Father has? Will you remember that you are the daughter of the King?

God is our Father, and His Only Begotten Son is the Christ. We are Theirs. They have bought us with a price. We will be fearless in building up Zion, as we come to know who we are and who we have always been. 2002
