Sheri Dew, No Doubt About It (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 4

Lessons from the Dust Bowl

Our homes and families are the best places to learn about life, about love, and about the Lord. And the Church family can also provide a place of refuge and security from the world's storms.

MY GRANDPARENTS HOMESTEADED our family farm on the great plains of Kansas in 1916. By the time I came along, they had survived tornadoes, hail the size of grapefruit, the Depression (which drove countless farmers from the unforgiving prairie), and the Dust Bowl.

I loved to hear Grandma talk about the "olden days," but far and away my favorite stories ones that I asked to hear over and over againwere about the Dust Bowl, that unusual phenomenon that she and Grandpa, along with my father and uncle, somehow weathered in their little house on the prairie.

In 1931 the farmers in western Kansas enjoyed good rainfall and thus a fruitful harvest. But the next year the rain stopped. Day after day, week after week, and unfortunately month after month my grandparents looked heavenward, hoping for signs of moisture. But none came. As a result, some 300,000 square miles of prairie turned dry, then drier, and then to powdery dust.

On the Great Plains, the wind blows sideways. (It is always a bad-hair day in Kansas.) The perpetual wind, combined with no rain, spelled disaster. Those strong prairie winds would kick up huge clouds of dirt that Grandma said looked like mountains in the distance. Some days the dust was so heavy that if farmers or livestock were caught in the fields, they suffocated for lack of oxygen. The only protection for man or beast was to come inside where it was safe.

For several years running, Grandpa planted a crop only to have the tender plants suffocate from lack of water. The dirt was so thick and came in such waves that after a while dust banksjust like snow banks, but made of dirt formed against sides of barns, fences, and anything that would catch the dirt and allow it to accumulate. On my grandparents' farm a dust bank against the side of the barn allowed them to walk right up onto the roof. It has been estimated that during one horrible storm aloneon May 11, 1934more than 300 million tons of Midwest topsoil (or roughly the amount of earth dredged from the Panama Canal) blew away. Grandma told me that on days like that, the dust was so dense that it became dark in the middle of the day.

And it all happened because there was no water.

There are lessons to be learned from the Dust Bowl.

First, there are times when the only way to survive the elements is to seek safety inside. Grandma constantly urged Grandpa to keep an eye on the weather so that if the wind began to kick up, he could get home before conditions became dangerous.

In similar fashion, the best place for us to seek safety and security against the dangerous elements of society is also insidemeaning, inside the home and family. We all need "places of security" (Alma 49:5), as Captain Moroni phrased it when he directed the Nephites to build fortresses against the marauding Lamanites.

The family is the foundational unit of society and of the Church, and it can provide a kind of nurturing protection and security that no other institution can duplicate. Ideally, the family is a place where we may safely retreat, where we may safely be vulnerable, where we develop resilience and replenish our emotional supply, and where we are taught what is important, what is good, and where happiness really comes from.

No wonder the family "is central to the Creator's plan for the eternal destiny of His children," as the Proclamation on the Family declares (Ensign, November 1995, 102). As President Gordon B. Hinckley has written: "Society's problems arise, almost without exception, out of the homes of the people. If there is to be a reformation, if there is to be a change, if there is to be a return to old and sacred values, it must begin in the home, with parents instilling within children the virtues that will make them into strong, contributing members of society" (Standing for Something, 165).

Not only do husband and wife have a "solemn responsibility to love and care for each other and for their children," but "parents have a sacred duty to rear their children in love and righteousness" (Ensign, November 1995, 102). In other words, just as in the Dust Bowl, when the weather outside (physical, moral, and spiritual) gets stormy, the best place to find protection is inside the home and family.

Periodically over the last fifty years, the Gallup Poll has asked respondents, "What is the most important problem facing the country today?" In a recent iteration (1999), and for the first time in the history of that poll, concerns over ethics, morality, and family decline topped the list. One in six adults listed these as the country's most pressing problems, followed by concerns over violence, economy, gun control, and education (Emerging Trends, 21:7; September 1999, 1-2).

About that same time, the Relief Society general presidency had the privilege of hosting a luncheon in the honor of Mrs. Jehan Sadat, wife of Egypt's former president Anwar Sadat. When the lunch-table conversation turned to concerns in the schools, and in particular the tragic events at Columbine High in the Denver suburbs, a gentleman at the table opined that the problem was really a failure of law enforcement to control the situation. Immediately Mrs. Sadat interrupted the conversation, with words to this effect: "No, that is not the problem," she said. "The problem is in our homes. Too many parents don't know what is happening to their children. Too many have abdicated responsibility for teaching their children what is important."

More than twenty years ago, President Spencer W. Kimball declared that the time would come "when only those who believe deeply and actively in the family will be able to preserve their families in the midst of the gathering evil around us" (in Conference Report, October 1980, 3). The home is the ideal place to come in from the storm.

Second, persistent inclement weather builds character and strength, particularly when we help each other. Our little farm created hard, back-breaking work for everyone in the family: Grandma and Grandpa and their two sons. In those early days, my grandparents had only the Lord and their boys to rely on. But the combination of the Lord and a family working together for one goal wasand isa successful pattern.

While writing the biography of President Ezra Taft Benson, I unexpectedly came across a piece of correspondence that had personal meaning. Written by Central States Mission President Sam Carpenter to then-Secretary of Agriculture Ezra Taft Benson, it mentioned, of all people, my grandparents. In part, it read: "In 1916 Brother and Sister Charles L. Dew moved into southwest Kansas where they took up a homestead. Today . . . they are farming many acres of land. For many years now they have been stalwart members of the Church. . . . During the past weekend . . . I looked over their farming operations and was thrilled with what I saw. West Kansas is truly marvelous country. But it is no place for a tenderfoot. It takes people who are strong both physically and spiritually to battle the farming conditions in that area. The Dew family has stuck it out through all of the troubles that they have had out there. . . . You would recognize them as the kind of family that has built the farming areas of this country, and you would be inspired by their strength and their testimonies" (Sam Carpenter to Ezra Taft Benson, 1 December 1959).

By the world's measure, my grandparents weren't remarkable in any way. They were "just" farmers. But they built a farm and a family that have stood the test of timeand in the process they established a pattern of hard work, virtue, and resilience that has blessed their posterity.

Life is no place for a tenderfoot, but the family can prepare, strengthen, and insulate its members to deal with whatever kind of weather comes.

Third, water sustains life. Plants need water. The earth needs water. And we need water. Without water, the earth literally blew away in the Dust Bowl. In like manner, without Living Water we will face eternal dissolution.

With this in mind, consider the remarkable interchange of the Savior with a Samaritan woman at Jacob's Well. When the Savior asked if He might have a drink, this woman expressed surprise that He would approach her of all people, a Samaritan woman, as the Jewish people and the Samaritans were not friendly with one another. Jesus responded in curious fashion: "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water."

She responded, "From whence then hast thou that living water? Art thou greater than our father Jacob, which gave us the well, and drank thereof himself, and his children, and his cattle?"

The Savior's answer may have seemed like a riddle: "Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again," he said, referring to the water in the well. "But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life" (John 4:10-14).

The Living Water, or the healing, redeeming power of Jesus Christ, is as essential to our well-being here and hereafter as water is to plants or to the preservation of the earth or to the sustaining of our physical lives. Jesus Christ is that Living Water, and in Him reside the means for us to flourish here in mortality and to live eternally.

The family is the ideal place to learn how to drink of that Living Water.

Aside from our personal testimonies, which anchor us to Jesus Christ and His gospel, the most vital place of security on this earth is the family. President Howard W. Hunter called it "the most important unit in time and in eternity and, as such, [it] transcends every other interest in life" (Ensign, November 1994, 50).

Sociologists and family historians predict that the twenty-first century will bring a dramatic redefinition of the familyone that will almost certainly undermine what God intended it to be. But then, the Proclamation on the Family warns that "the disintegration of the family will bring upon [us] . . . the calamities foretold by ancient and modern prophets" (Ensign, November 1995, 102).

I have no doubt about the prime importance of home and family. About this issue the leaders of the Church have been abundantly clearthat "the family is ordained of God"; that "marriage between man and woman is essential to His eternal plan"; that "children are entitled to birth within the bonds of matrimony, and to be reared by a father and a mother who honor marital vows with complete fidelity"; and that "happiness in family life is most likely to be achieved when founded upon the teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ" (Ensign, November 1995, 102).

In a letter to members of the Church throughout the world dated February 11, 1999, the First Presidency said that "the home is the basis of a righteous life, and no other instrumentality can take its place or fulfill its essential functions."

Although many in the world may have long since dismissed some of these principles as medieval and even unrealistic, the fact remains that the family is the Lord's organization for most effectively nurturing His children. It is the best institution for rearing responsible men and women. It is the only organization that can truly teach, lead, love, and care for children as the Lord would have them cared for.

And yet we see everywhere polarized views regarding the family, gender, marriage, and the rearing of children, as well as evidence of the disintegration, dissolution, and destruction of the family. The statistics on issues related to the family are compelling: children who don't live with both parents are more likely to grow up poor, have problems in school, get into trouble with the law, and have health and emotional disorders (see Standing for Something, 147).

The Wall Street Journal published the results of a two-year study sponsored by the Council on the Family in America in 1995: "American society would be better off if more people got married and stayed married" (Standing for Something, 146). It's interesting that it took a two-year study to corroborate what the Lord has taught again and again in the scriptures and through the mouths of prophets and apostles.

We as women have unique and vital roles to play in protecting and defending the family. President Gordon B. Hinckley was speaking to us when he declared that "the home is under siege. So many families are being destroyed. . . . If anyone can change the dismal situation into which we are sliding, it is you. Rise up, O women of Zion, rise to the great challenge which faces you. . . . My challenge to you . . . is that you will rededicate yourselves to the strengthening of your homes" (Ensign, November 1998, 99-100).

Two years later President Hinckley spoke again to the sisters of the Church: "You have nothing in this world more precious than your children. When you grow old, when your hair turns white and your body grows weary, when you are prone to sit in a rocker and meditate on the things of your life, nothing will be so important as the question of how your children have turned out. . . . The searing question that will cross your mind again and again will be, How well have my children done? If the answer is that they have done very well, then your happiness will be complete. If they have done less than well, then no other satisfaction can compensate for your loss" (Ensign, November 2000, 97).

If the world can't look to us for a clear signal about the sanctity of marriage, motherhood, and the family, where can it look? This statement from President Heber J. Grant is classic: "The mother in the family far more than the father, is the one who instills in the hearts of the children, a testimony and love for the gospel . . . ; and wherever you find a woman who is devoted to this work, almost without exception you will find that her children are devoted to it" (Gospel Standards, 101).

Research conducted by the Church indicates that the single biggest factor affecting a child's participation in and attendance at church is the mother's attendance. This is not to say that the father's activity and participation are unimportant, but it is principally mothers who help their children prepare talks for Primary, who make sure their youth make it to girls camp and Mutual and youth conference, who help their children get ready on Sunday morning. Mothers are the emotional glue that holds the family together. President Joseph F. Smith said: "There are people fond of saying that women are the weaker vessels. I don't believe it. Physically, they may be; but spiritually, morally, . . . and in faith, what man can match a woman who is really convinced?" (quoted in Widtsoe, Priesthood and Church Government, 86).

As women, our physical endurance is not as great as that of men. But women bring a remarkable strength to the family that is both distinct and irreplaceable.

Though there are those who will disagree, I acknowledge my belief that there is nothing a woman can do that is more significant than rearing children to live righteous, contributing, faith-filled lives. I believe it not only because of the teachings of prophets and apostles but because of what I have experienced and observed. I can think of nothing a woman can do in a board room, at a conference table, or in front of a camera that begins to equate with helping shape someone's life, with helping someone else do what he or she has come here to do.

Women, beginning with mothers, are uniquely stationed at the crossroads of the lives of youth and children as well as many othersand are in a position, day in and day out, to teach and model virtues and values.

And clearly, there are certain values that are best taught, modeled, and reinforced in the home. Here are just a few:

First, teach your children to tell the truth. Abigail Adams, the wife of President John Adams, wrote her friend Mercy Otis Warren that the first thing she should instill in her children was "a sacred regard for Veracity" because it makes "everything else come easier" (quoted in Spirit of America, 233). Honesty has become increasingly difficult to teach, as the conduct of many in the public eye has made the virtue of integrity seem outmoded and unrewarded. And yet, do you care if the principal of your son's high school tells the truth? Or your investment banker? Or your insurance adjustor? Or the circuit court judge hearing your case? Or the fellow selling you a car? Honesty and integrity are the threads that weave the fabric of society together, and the best laboratory for learning and practicing these virtues is within the family.

Teach children the benefit and blessings of moral virtue. It is curious that so many today feel that morality is antiquated, for I have yet to meet the man or woman who is happier because of adultery, infidelity, or other breaches of integrity. Immorality breeds not only disease but discontent, a lack of self-respect, and anxiety. And immorality devastates the family. Our youth don't get that picture at school, in the movies, or from their peers, however, where too often they see sex exploited, celebrated, and encouraged. Immorality is the most offensive kind of dishonesty, and the best chance our youth have of learning this in a society intoxicated with sexuality is from us, as we show them the virtue of having virtue. This leads to the next point best learned at home.

Teach your children to have confidence in standing up for what they believe. I think of a teenage niece who declined the invitation to attend a party at a friend's home because she knew there would be R-rated movies shown there. Not wanting to make it an issue with her friend, she simply said she couldn't attend. But the friend persisted, until my niece quietly explained that she didn't want to impose her beliefs on anyone else, but that she wouldn't be comfortable in a situation where rough movies were shown. My niece's friend asked if she would select the movies for the evening. The problem was solved, and everyone benefited.

Teach your children to serve and care more about others than themselves. When my nephew Tanner completed his Eagle Scout project, having arranged for more than 500 school kits to benefit humanitarian services, I called him to say, essentially, "Way to go!" His instant reply was, "You should tell Mom way to go, because I never would have made it without her." No doubt every mother of an Eagle Scout relates to this. So often, mothers are the ones who help their children experience the joy of doing something for someone other than themselves.

Teach your children to work and to recognize that there is a sense of fulfillment in honest work and a job well done.

Teach them to have tolerance for others who are different, without surrendering their own values. President Hinckley has told about uttering a racial slur as a boy, at which point his mother promptly washed his mouth out with soap. The point was made, and he never forgot it.

Teach your children to forgive, and that it is possible to solve almost every problem if you can learn to both apologize and accept an apology. These skills are best modeled by parents who are willing to ask for and extend forgivenessparticularly with their children.

Teach them to love to learn and to master their talents. Again, President Hinckley has often described his modest childhood home as having a library filled with books. His parents loved reading, and that was the beginning of his own lifelong fascination with books and reading. He still refers to a set of Harvard Classics, a prized possession from his father's library.

Teach your children to be kind, and that there is nothing ever gained by anger, by unfair accusation, or by hurting someone else.

Teach them to love life and to find joy and adventure in the journey.

Teach them the difference between right and wrong. Parents and other adult members of the family are in an ideal position to make it fashionable again to be good and to do goodto live exemplary moral lives.

Teach your children the sanctity of marriage. I love what John Adams wrote to his beloved wife, Abigail: "I must intreat you, my dear Partner in all the Joys and Sorrows, Prosperity and Adversity of my Life, to take a Part with me in the Struggle" (quoted in Spirit of America, 290). Teach your childrenby examplethat marriage can make "the struggle" easier, rather than be "the struggle" itself.

A colleague, a man of considerable professional accomplishment, told me one day that women have more influence on men than men have on men. I questioned him about this, but he insisted, "Compliments or kindness sound and feel different to a man when they come from a woman; they mean something different and have a different kind of impact." And then he added, "No one has more influence on me than my wife."

Teach your children how valuable they areto you and to the Lord. Grandma used to take me with her everywhere. Just the fact that she wanted me with her made me feel important. I loved hearing her introduce me to someone new with words as simple as, "This is my eldest granddaughter, Sheri. Aren't I lucky to have her with me today?"

Teach your children that virtue leads to happiness, and that the commandments are guidelines to keep us within the path that leads to joy.

Teach them to love being obedient, and that there are consequences for being disobedient.

Teach them to love the scriptures, and that the scriptures are a conduit for personal revelation. As in all things, parents are the best teachers. If children can see that the people they respect love the scriptures, at some point they'll give them a try.

Teach them how to pray and to fast, and that fasting and prayer connect them with the heavens and draw upon a kind of power that transcends anything earthly.

Teach them how to hear the voice of the Lord. Talk to them about it. Help them identify the stirrings of the Holy Ghost. I think of a friend who took her eight-year-old grandson to a temple dedication. When the choir sang "The Spirit of God Like a Fire Is Burning" combined with the "Hosanna Anthem" at the conclusion, the boy turned to his grandmother and said that he could feel something through his entire body. Later she took the opportunity to tell him that what he had felt was the Holy Ghost.

Teach your children to love the Lord more than the world, more than their friends, more than anyone. Once again, this is best taught by example. If children see their parents devoted to the Lord, they are likely to follow that same path.

Now, lest you become frustrated and give up, wondering if it is possible to teach all of these things in your family, take heart. We don't have to do it all at once, and we don't have to do it alone. The Lord will help us, as will friends, leaders, and teachers, but the familyincluding the extended familyis the best arena for these kinds of virtues and values to take root and then begin to grow.

In so many ways, teaching values and principles begins with us, the women of the familymothers and grandmothers, but also sisters, nieces, and aunts. It begins with the way we live, with what we model for our children and grandchildren, our sisters and nieces. Do we tell the truth? Do we bring refinement and strength and optimism and kindness and nurturing to the family? There are few things more unappealing than a coarse, overexposed, immodest, deceitful woman. And there are few things more delightful and appealing than a woman of integrity, grace, strength, and conviction who blesses those she loves.

I have a friend, a distinguished educator, who was raised by his widowed mother. She had just two dresses, one for weekdays and one for Sunday. The Sunday dress never came out during the week. When my friend ran in his high school election for student-body president and won, he wanted his mother at the assembly where his election would be announced, but he was worried that she would come wearing her weekday dress. The morning of the assembly, he kept scanning the crowd for his mother, but couldn't find her. Then later, as he was giving his acceptance speech, he saw her, wearing her weekday dress but standing behind the bleachers where she couldn't be seen. He knew instinctively that she had sensed his discomfort about having her there, yet neither could she stay away. "I will never forget that moment," he says. "I was so ashamed of myself. And yet I learned something I have never forgotten: that in my mother I had a true champion, someone who believed in me completely and would never let me down. I also learned that she cared a lot more about my feelings than she did her own. Having her there was more important than the entire cheering student body."

We as women can help those we love do more and be more than they thought they could do or be on their own. Our nurturing helps create a sense of belonging. We all have a longing to belong, and hence our fascination with logos and brands and teams and clubs. But the most important place we can belongthe place that has greatest influence on our moral, emotional, and spiritual developmentis the family.

Just because I have not had the privilege of bearing children does not mean that I am unconcerned about the family, for we are all responsible to help rear and lead a chosen generation. I have a family that includes seventeen nieces and nephews, and I work very hard at being their favorite aunt. Though I would do anything for these children, I have often wondered just who is helping whom. I will never forget one such experience.

In the early spring of 1999 I received an assignment to speak at the April general conference. Such an assignment is both a privilege and a pressure, and it took me many weeks of hard work to complete the message I had felt prompted to prepare.

But then, just days before conference, I came to understand that the talk I had prepared was not the one I should deliver on Easter Sunday. It seemed inconceivable to start over, but that was what I had to do. I had just three days to prepare an entirely new addresssomething that looked nothing short of impossible. After having slaved day and night for weeks on the first message, I was emotionally, physically, and spiritually spent.

All of this transpired on a Friday, so I went home, opened my scriptures, turned on my computer, and basically went brain dead. All afternoon, all through the night, and all the next day I workedor tried to work. But by Saturday evening I had nothing but a floor littered with dozens of crumpled wads of paper to show for my work. I was exhausted. I was depressed. I had no ideas. The Spirit seemed to have vanished. And fear was gripping every cell of my body. Late Saturday evening I decided to lie down for a few hours.

Then something happened unlike anything I have experienced before with relation to preparing a talk. When I arose at 3:00 A.M. Sunday morning, after what was little more than a good nap, I felt optimistic and full of energy. I again turned on my computer, opened my scriptures, and began to write. Some crumpled-up wads of paper still hit the floor, but nine hours later the talk was done. Parting the Red Sea would have been no more miraculous to me.

Now, for the rest of the story. When my two sisters had learned about my plight on Friday evening, they had sprung into action, contacting everyone in our family and asking them to fast, beginning Saturday at noon. "We'll get all of your nieces and nephews fasting for you. That will work," they said.

When I felt clear-headed and rejuvenated Sunday morning, and as ideas for the talk began to come, I had the impression that I was being strengthened beyond any normal capability because of the fasting and prayers of my family, and perhaps particularly because of nieces and nephews willing to help their Aunt Sheri. I have never experienced such a restoration of mind and spirit in so short a period of time. I simply could not have done what I had to do if my family had not united to call upon the Lord in my behalf.

What if our parents had not taught us to fast and pray as children? And what if my siblings hadn't continued this pattern in their own homes? But everyone was ready and willing to respond when I was in need. No one had to be "taught" how to fast for this emergency. Fasting and praying as a family, and even as an extended family, was standard operating procedure. Even Natalie, who was then just seven, completed for her first time a full twenty-four-hour fast, because she "knew Aunt Sheri needed help." And did she ever!

My family provided a welcome safety net during a time of great challengea place to come in from the storm.

The foundation of the Church and the hope of the future are in the family, and there is no place of security like it. There is power in the family that we will find nowhere else, a power that spans generations and reaches across the veil.

My Grandma Dew's last written words were addressed to her priesthood leader asking to be released from her calling because she had become so ill. She wrote, "I hope the Lord does not think I have said no to Him. I love the gospel so very much and also this work." Grandma died one week later. But she left behind a legacy of faith that has had a profound influence on me.

Grandma was a prolific genealogist, but she failed to keep a journalor so I thought. Then, not long ago, one of my sisters came across a brief life history wherein Grandma had recounted some of the events of her life, including the loss of her eldest son. About that incident she wrote, "This has been a very hard thing for us to take. It has left such a great vacancy that cannot be filled in this life. But because the sealing power of the gospel is upon the earth and because we did have our sons sealed to us in the temple, we do have hope that they, with their families, will be ours for eternity."

The tenderness of that passage notwithstanding, the poignant aspect of this entry is contained in the next sentence, where Grandma wrote, simply, "The Lord has been good to us." The juxtaposition of her faith in the Lord with the painful reflection of her son's loss spoke volumes to me, her eldest granddaughter.

Then, continuing, I found that she had written something to meor at least it felt as though it had been written to me: "I wish to say, for the benefit of our posterity who may read this history, whatever you do, work with as much determination to secure enough to keep you for the eternity. Do not be slack in your duties. The gospel is true. We must always be found defending it. But yea more, we must be found teaching it, by word and something much more noticeable, by our every action. We are children of God, but to be a joint-heir with Jesus Christ, we must take into our lives the attributes he had."

Through her words, it felt as though Grandma had reached through the veil to talk directly to meagain. Though she has been gone more than thirty-five years, her lingering influence has been immeasurable. Sometimes the image of her standing at a pulpit teaching the gospel keeps me going. Her faith strengthens mine. I want her to be proud of me. And I am trying to live as she lived, though that is a tall order.

Yes, our eternal families provide a vital place of securitya place to come in from the storm; a place to build character and strength, for life is no place for a tenderfoot; and a place to learn how to drink of the Living Water from which we will never thirst.

In addition to the nuclear family, the Church family provides a solid place of security. As individuals and families we need additional protection from the storms of the world, as spelled out in a revelation Joseph Smith received on April 26, 1838: "That the gathering together upon the land of Zion, and upon her stakes, may be for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth" (D&C 115:6).

The Lord made it known early to the Saints in this dispensation that it was His will that all who would call on His name and worship Him according to His everlasting gospel "should gather together, and stand in holy places" (D&C 101:22). In addition, there are many members of the Church whose immediate and even extended family are not members of the Churchindividuals who are not able to go home and talk with a spouse or children or siblings about the gospel and thus find reinforcement. Hence the reason that the stakes of Zion, meaning the Church family, can provide a defense and a refuge from the storm for all weary, worthy travelers along the road of life.

I have experienced this for myself, for as much as I love my family and depend upon them, life would seem empty were it not for my Church family. I have often been asked why I feel so comfortable as a never-married member in such a family-oriented Church.

I do not understand this question, which implies that I would be happier if I were not a member of the Church. It also implies that happiness comes only to those whose lives are ideal, which would make, incidentally, for a very small group of happy people. So perhaps the question on some people's minds is really, How does someone in nontraditional circumstances feel a sense of belonging in The Church of Jesus Christ?

The answer has been articulated repeatedly by President Hinckley when he has identified the three things each new memberand may I suggest each memberof the Church needs: friends, a responsibility (or meaningful opportunities to serve), and the privilege of being taught by the Spirit, or nurtured by the good word of God (see Ensign, May 1999, 108).

As I have reflected on my experience in the Church and on the reasons I have felt so at home within this divinely inspired organization, I have concluded that it is because I have been blessed to have these three essential ingredients since the time I was young.

To begin with, my dearest friends, with few exceptions, have come into my life as a result of our service together in the Church. Most of these friends hail from backgrounds far different from mine. Most are married. Most have children. Many have grandchildren. We have laughed together and enjoyed each others' successes, and we have cried together and shared pain and disappointment. Through it all I have come to find, gratefully, that marital status, background, and life circumstances have almost nothing to do with friendship. I can't imagine where I would be were it not for the friends who have come into my life as a direct result of active participation in all levels of Church service.

Likewise, I began as a young girl to have opportunities to serve in our small branch, where each of us was called upon frequently to speak, teach, lead the singing, and play the piano. I was barely sixteen when I was first called to serve in a presidency, as second counselor in our branch's Primary presidency. I don't remember much about that experience, and I don't suppose I did a very good job. But I felt needed, and I began to learn what presidencies do and how they function. Similar opportunities have continued to the present day, my marital status notwithstanding. I will be forever grateful to the stake president who called me to serve as the Relief Society president in a stake where nearly every other woman was married. In my call he sent a messageto me and to my sistersthat what we have in common is far more important than any circumstantial life differences we may have.

If there is anywhere in the world where every one of us, regardless of our personal circumstances, should feel accepted, needed, valued, and loved, it is within our Church family. And every one of us can reach out to others and help them feel a sense of belonging.

The Lord intended for us to take care of each other. We all must work out our salvation on our own, but there is no reason we should have to do it alone! How, after all, did the Savior spend His last hours in mortality? He dined with His trusted friends, His disciples. He washed their feet, filthy from the dusty streets of Jerusalem. He counseled them. And He gave them hope for the days ahead while articulating His expectation of His followers: "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you. . . . By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another" (John 13:34-35). Indeed, as President Joseph F. Smith taught, the "test . . . of our soul's greatness is . . . to be sought in our ability to comfort and console, our ability to help others, rather than in our ability to help ourselves and crowd others down in the struggle of life" (Gospel Doctrine, 265).

Within our Church structure, the Lord in His wisdom and mercy has provided many opportunitiesthrough visiting teaching and home teaching, through leading and teaching, through unending calls to render compassionate servicefor us to learn how to put someone else's needs ahead of our own.

It matters not that our personal circumstances differ. Some struggle with illness from infancy, while others are robust until the day they die. Some feel the sting of divorce or the sudden loss of a loved one; others deal with the debilitating effects of addiction or the regret and disappointment of missed opportunities. Some are married and juggle large households; others wish they had husbands and posterity to complicate their lives. It doesn't matter that we have not experienced each other's woes. What does matter is our reservoir of compassion and our testimonies born of experience that the Lord is the ultimate Healer and Source of peace. What we have in commonincluding our values, our goals, our ultimate potential, and the covenants we have madeis so much more important than the incidental life details that distinguish and too often separate us from each other.

If for nothing else than an expression of gratitude for the Savior's resplendent gift, can we help and care for each other? Imagine the cumulative, magnifying, multiplying effect if each one of us helped strengthen just one or two others during the next twelve months. It would be impossible to measure the influencefor those we help, and for us as well. It is as an angel told Paul while on his perilous journey to Rome: "Fear not. . . . God hath given thee all them that sail with thee. Wherefore, . . . be of good cheer" (Acts 27:24-25). The Lord has given us each other. He doesn't intend us to sail through this life alone.

I will never forget the first time I spoke from the Tabernacle pulpit in a general meeting. I had prepared for weeks. I had fasted and prayed. But as my turn to speak approached, I began to have what could only be described as a meltdown. I had expected to be nervous, but the "terror of the Tabernacle" was far worse than anything I had imagined. At one point, I literally couldn't breathe. As I pleaded silently with the Lord for help, I mentioned that it would be important to be able to get air into my lungs when I stepped to the pulpit.

And then, just moments before I stood to speak, an unexpected image came to mind. It was of a group of sisters in Montreal, Canada, where I had visited a few weeks earlier. They had promised to pray for me at this meeting, and I knew they were keeping their promise, for a feeling of total and immediate calm washed over me.

Not long thereafter when a friend visited Montreal, I asked her to tell the Relief Society president of the Montreal French-speaking stake that she and her sisters had made all the difference for me that night. Upon hearing the story this woman exclaimed, "We just knew she knew that we were praying for her!"

Do we understand how sustaining relationships communicated by the Spirit can be? Do we understand the strength of righteous sisters caring for one another? That night, the concern and caring of sisters from another country whom I had met but once made all the difference.

The Lord intended for us to mean a lot to each otherboth within our families and within the Church family. Both kinds of family provide places of security where we may come in from the storm. They teach us character and instill the values that enable us to deal with the rugged environment around us. And they teach us how to drink from that Living Water that will quench our thirst eternally. 2002
