Sheri Dew, No Doubt About It (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 6

We Are Not Alone

The challenges of life notwithstanding, we have nothing to fear. For those who have been given the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost need never feel alone.

IT HAS BEEN NEARLY THREE YEARS since I received one of those dreaded early-morning phone calls. My younger brother Steve, who was just thirty-nine, had suffered a massive heart attack and died during the night. In an instant, and without warning, my brotherand my most trusted friendwas gone.

During the next few days many who loved Steve and his wife and children traveled to their home in Colorado. But it wasn't until after the funeral, when our family greeted friends who gathered at the cemetery, that I realized that seven dear friends of mine had made the long trip from Salt Lake City to attend the service. What made their attendance all the more remarkable was that not one of them had ever met my brother. They had come to support me. You can imagine my emotions as they encircled me and said, "We just didn't want you to be alone today." In word and deed, they taught a divine principle: It is not good, nor is it intended, for any of us to be alone.

The pain and pangs of loneliness of one kind or another seem to be part of the mortal experience and of the process leading to sanctification. But the Lord in His mercy has made it so that we need never deal with the challenges of mortality alone.

I was thinking about this on one occasion as I sat through a meeting where the speaker seemed preoccupied with focusing on "how hard it is to live the gospel." By the end of the meeting, I felt depressed. He had made living the gospel seem like a sentence to life on the rock pile. As I thought later about why that message was so unsettling to me, I realized that it was because he had put the emphasis in exactly the wrong placea common mistake, by the way. It's not living the gospel that's hard. It's life that's hard. It's picking up the pieces when covenants have been compromised or values violated that's hard. The gospel is the Good News that provides us with the tools to cope with the mistakes and miscalculations, the heartaches and heartbreaks, the pressures and disappointments we can expect to experience here in mortality.

How often do we make the mistake of talking to our youth and to each other about how hard it is to do everything that's expected of us, how difficult it is to maintain self-control and resist the enticements of the world? Shouldn't we instead be focusing on the doctrine of joy wrapped up in the gospel of Jesus Christ?

When Joseph Smith was asked how the Church differed from other religions of the day, he responded that the distinction lay in the gift of the Holy Ghost and that "all other considerations were contained in [that] gift" (History of the Church, 4:42). It therefore should behoove all those who are serious about being followers of Christ to pray for the influence and guidance of the Holy Ghost as the heavenly gift we most desire.

Nephi taught that those who receive the Holy Ghost may "speak with the tongue of angels" (2 Nephi 32:2), and that the Holy Ghost will show its recipients "all things what [they] should do" (2 Nephi 32:5). Consider for a moment the extent and impact of such a promise: that if we truly receive the Holy Ghostwhich could be interpreted to mean not only receiving the ordinance but receiving the gift by striving to live worthy of it we may have the companionship of a member of the Godhead. What a transcendent privilege and promise!

On one occasion Brigham Young was asked how he guided his people by revelation. He answered: "I teach them to live so that the Spirit of revelation may make plain to them their duty day by day that they are able to guide themselves. To get this revelation it is necessary that the people live so that their spirits are as pure and clean as a piece of blank paper that lies on the desk before the inditer, ready to receive any mark the writer may make upon it" (Journal of Discourses, 11:241).

On another occasion he taught: "Take a course to open and keep open a communication with your Elder Brother or file-leaderour Saviour. Were I to draw a distinction in all the duties that are required of the children of men, from first to last, I would place first and foremost the duty of seeking unto the Lord our God until we open the path of communication from heaven to earth from God to our own souls. Keep every avenue of your hearts clean and pure before him" (Journal of Discourses, 8:339).

President John Taylor was also abundantly clear about the properties and the necessity of the Spirit. "I do not care how learned a man may be, or how extensively he may have traveled," he said. "I do not care what his talent, intellect, or genius may be, at what college he may have studied, how comprehensive his views or what his judgment may be on other matters, he cannot understand certain things without the Spirit of God, and that necessarily introduces . . . the necessity of revelation. Not revelation in former times, but present and immediate revelation, which shall lead and guide those who possess it in all the paths of life here, and to eternal life hereafter" (The Gospel Kingdom, 35).

Lorenzo Snow said that it is the "grand privilege of every Latter-day Saint . . . to have the manifestations of the spirit every day of our lives . . . [so] that we may know the light, and not be groveling continually in the dark" (in Conference Report, April 1899, 52). And his sister Eliza, who was present at the founding of the Relief Society and served as its second general president, said this about the gift of the Holy Ghost: "When you are filled with the Spirit of God, and the Holy Ghost rests upon you . . . do you have any trials? I do not think you do. For that satisfies and fills up every longing of the human heart, and fills up every vacuum. When I am filled with that spirit my soul is satisfied; and I can say, in good earnest, that the trifling things of the day do not seem to stand in my way at all. But just let me loose my hold of that spirit and power of the Gospel, and partake of the spirit of the world, in the slightest degree, and trouble comes; there is something wrong. I am tried; and what will comfort me? You cannot impart comfort to me that will satisfy." Thus, she concludes, "Is it not our privilege to so live that we can have this constantly flowing into our souls?" (Woman's Exponent, 15 September 1873, 63).

In the same address Eliza declared: "You may talk to the [Saints] about the follies of the world . . . till dooms day, and it will make no impression. But . . . place them in a position where they will get the Holy Ghost, and that will be a sure protection against outside influences."

In short, we have been promised the constant companionship of the third member of the Godhead and hence the privilege of receiving revelation for our own lives. We are not alone!

The Holy Ghost enlarges our minds, our hearts, and our understanding; helps us subdue weaknesses and resist temptation; inspires humility and repentance; guides and protects us in miraculous ways; and gifts us with wisdom, divine encouragement, peace of mind, patience, a desire to change, and the ability to differentiate between the philosophies of men and revealed truth. The Holy Ghost is the minister and messenger of the Father and the Son, and He testifies of both Their glorious, global reality and Their connection to us personally. Without the presence of the Spirit, it is impossible to comprehend our personal mission or to have the reassurance that our course is right. It is impossible to detect the subtleties and avoid the distractions and deceptions of the adversary. No mortal comfort can duplicate that of the Comforter.

Is it any wonder, then, that President Gordon B. Hinckley has said: "There is no greater blessing that can come into our lives than . . . the companionship of the Holy Spirit" (Boston Massachusetts Regional Conference, 22 April 1995).

The Lord places no limits on our access to Him. But we, unfortunately, often do. We limit ourselves when we sin; when we are lazy spiritually; when we get so busy that we are doing little more than going through one frenetic, frenzied day after another; when we fail to ask and seek.

The sixth section of the Doctrine and Covenants is a rich tutorial about our accessibility to the Spirit. In it, we are told that if we ask, we will receive; that if we inquire, the mysteries of God will be unfolded to us; and that if we build our lives upon the rock of Jesus Christ, neither earth nor hell will prevail against us. In the Sermon on the Mount the Savior promised that "every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth" (Matthew 7:8; emphasis added). He didn't say just the adorable ones, or the cute ones, or the really smart ones, or those with two or more children. He said every one who seeks and asks.

The best way I know to strengthen our personal testimonies and protect ourselves from evil is to seek to have as many experiences with the Lord as possible. When Satan tempted Moses, he rejected him outright, saying, "I will not cease to call upon God, . . . for his glory has been upon me, wherefore I can judge between him and thee" (Moses 1:18). Moses resisted the master of evil by relying upon previous experience with God, which had taught him to discern good from evil and to treasure the fruits of the Spirit.

There is nothing as exhilarating as the Spirit, and those most susceptible to Satan are those who haven't tasted of its sweetness, who do not hearken to its promptings, and who are left to deal with life alone.

This Church is a church of revelation. Our challenge is not one of getting the Lord to speak to us. Our challenge is hearing what He has to say. He has promised, "As often as thou hast inquired thou hast received instruction of my Spirit" (D&C 6:14).

Remember young Samuel, who lived with the priest Eli? One night the Lord called Samuel's name. Thinking it was Eli, Samuel ran to Eli's room. This happened three times before Eli realized and explained to his young charge Who was calling. When the Lord called again, Samuel was able to recognize the voice and respond: "Speak; for thy servant heareth" (1 Samuel 3:10). In order for us to say, "Speak; for thy servant heareth," we've got to be able to hear what the Lord, through the Spirit, has to say.

Learning to hear the voice of the Lord is like learning a language, the language of revelation. Learning any language takes time. It takes repetition and practice. It takes an immersion in that language. And it takes learning the rules that govern the language. If we were learning Portuguese or Chinese, we would not only have to memorize vocabulary words but learn syntax and grammar as well. Similarly, as we set out to better learn the language of revelation, there are guidelines and rules to govern us.

The rules of the language of revelation are found in the scriptures, which teach that we are the ones who initiate personal revelation. We do so first by having faith or believing that the Lord will respond when we ask. Sometimes we must ask many times, over a period of time, before certain answers become clear. But if we ask, we will receive (see D&C 6:5).

Thus, if you still wonder what the Spirit feels like or "sounds" like in your heart and mind, ask. As you begin to pray, ask if the Holy Ghost will come and be with you. Ask to learn what it feels like when He does. Ask if the Lord will help you understand, little by little as you work and pray, to better recognize His promptings and whisperings. Ask.

Remember what Alma taught? That we should "cry unto God for all [our] support." That all of our doings should be unto the Lord. That whithersoever we go, it should be unto the Lord. That all our thoughts should be directed to him, and that we may counsel with Him in all our doings (see Alma 37:36-37). We cannot comprehend the extent of the Lord's interest in us, and the reach of His mercy. But as remarkable as it may seem, He has issued an open invitation: "Ye are commanded in all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally" (D&C 46:7; emphasis added). Notice, He didn't say, "Ask me about the top items on your list, and perhaps, just maybe, I'll respond." He said, "Ask me about everything, and I will respond freely and generously." But it all begins when we ask.

The scriptures also teach that there are other things we can do to improve the line of communication between ourselves and the Lord. These include fasting and praying, which invite the spirit of revelation (see Alma 17:3); worshiping in the temple, where we are "prepared to obtain every needful thing" (D&C 109:15); immersing ourselves in the scriptures, which are a Liahona-like conduit for personal revelation; both forgiving and seeking forgiveness; and repenting regularly, which is the key to increasing personal purity and therefore receptiveness to the promptings of the Holy Ghost. Repentance increases our desire to be obedient, and our obedience is fundamental to hearing the voice of the Lord.

These are just a few of the "rules" governing the language of revelation. Indeed, the promises the Lord makes to us are stunning in this regard: "To them will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom. . . . Yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, . . . and their wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven; . . . For by my Spirit will I enlighten them, and by my power will I make known unto them the secrets of my will" (D&C 76:7-10).

Consider just a few of the gifts we receive from the Holy Ghost. First and foremost, the Holy Ghost testifies of Christ. The presence of this gift is foundational to our faith, for our testimonies begin and are subsequently enlarged by witnesses of the Spirit that Jesus is the Christ. The Holy Ghost also helps us acknowledge and overcome our weakness (see Ether 12:27); prompts us to repent (see Moses 5:14); teaches us all things (see John 14:26); inspires charity and love; prompts, warns, and guides us (see D&C 8:2-4); helps us forgive ourselves as well as others; heals relationships and tempers emotions; warns and guides us; helps us comprehend things we will never understand on our own; increases discernment and enables us to receive personal revelation (see D&C 11:13-14); inspires tenderness and humility; strengthens us during trials and brings comfort and peace; enhances any natural abilities we have; helps us obey; enlightens our minds and fills our souls with joy (see D&C 11:13); enables us to teach and testify (see 2 Nephi 33:1); helps us detect deception and identify truth; and even makes us more beautiful, as Parley P. Pratt suggested (see Key to the Science of Theology, 61). (That last one alone ought to catch our attention.)

If we hope to avoid the distractions and deceptions of the adversary; if we hope to feel peace even when life's circumstances are troubling; if we hope to have divine direction for our lives, it is vital that we learn to hear the voice of the Lord. Yet too often we fail to seek and ask. Perhaps we don't know how and haven't made it a priority to learn. Or we're so aware of our personal failings that we don't feel worthy, don't really believe the Lord will talk to us, and therefore don't seek revelation. Or perhaps we've allowed the distractions and pace of our lives to crowd out the Spirit. What a tragedy! For the Holy Ghost blesses us with optimism and wisdom at times of challenge that we simply cannot muster on our own. No wonder one of the adversary's favorite tactics is busynessgetting us so preoccupied with the flurry of daily life that we fail to immerse ourselves in the gospel of Jesus Christ.

But we simply can't afford not to seek the things of the Spirit. There is too much at stake. Too many people are depending on us as parents and siblings, leaders and friends. A person led by the Lord knows where to turn for answers and for peace. Such people can make difficult decisions and face problems with confidence because they take their counsel from the Spirit and from their leaders who are also guided by the Spirit.

One day while reading about Nephi's instructions to build a ship, I found myself thinking, But how did Nephi understand so clearly what the Lord was telling him? That question launched me on a search for every scriptural evidence I could find of direct communication between God and man. At each one I made a little red x in the margin of my scriptures. Now, many years later, my scriptures are littered with little red xs, each an indication that the Lord does indeed communicate with His people. At least one crucial reason we have been admonished to immerse ourselves in the Book of Mormon and other latter-day scripture is that these holy books are filled with evidences of the Lord's willingness to communicate with His children.

I have experienced this for myself. I remember a time when a personal disappointment left me exquisitely lonely. One day while searching the scriptures for consolation, I had the impression that I needed to focus on one particular versea verse that I had read countless times but that suddenly revealed a depth of dimensions I had never considered before. That verse led me to literally hundreds of others in what became a period of intense searching. But it wasn't until three years later that another passage leaped out at me as if in neon. Only then was I given to understand what the Lord had been trying to teach me all that time about the power of the Atonement to ease our burdens. Some of the clearest promptings I have ever received have come while I was immersed in the scriptures. They are a conduit for revelation. They teach us the language of the Spirit.

Our ability to hear spiritually is linked to our willingness to work at it. President Hinckley has often said that the only way he knows to get anything done is to get on his knees and plead for help and then get on his feet and go to work. That combination of faith and hard work is the consummate curriculum for learning the language of the Spirit. The Savior taught, "Blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost" (3 Nephi 12:6; emphasis added). Hungering and thirsting translate to sheer spiritual labor.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie said, "There is no price too high, . . . no sacrifice too great, if out of it all we . . . enjoy the gift of the Holy Ghost" (A New Witness for the Articles of Faith, 253). What are we willing to do, what weaknesses and indulgences will we give up, to have as our personal protector and guide the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost?

It is a question worth asking, for there is a truth about which we ought to be very clear: The adversary will do anything to separate us from the Spirit. Lucifer wants us to feel alone and isolated. He wants us to try to live drawing solely upon our own genius and without the influence of the heavens, because he knows that we will never do as well or feel as well on our own as we do when we have the Spirit to guide us, strengthen us, protect us, and soothe us. And if he can keep us off balance, never really realizing our potential or capacity, he can undermine our progression and the welfare of our families as well as the entire Church.

In the spring of 1998 I spent a day in Siberia. As I walked into a drab rented hall to meet with the sisters there, the Spirit overwhelmed me and turned that dreary setting into an oasis. I knew that I was in the presence of women who were beloved of the Lordour sister pioneers in Russia. I wondered if that was what it would have felt like to be with Emma and Eliza in Nauvoo. I wasn't the only one who felt it. Near the meeting's end, Sister Efimov, the mission president's wife, leaned over and, in what few English words she knew, whispered, "Very Holy Ghost." Very Holy Ghost indeed! The Spirit simply cannot be restrained among righteous women who are doing their best.

No wonder President Joseph F. Smith said that "it is the right and privilege of every man, every woman, and every child who has reached the years of accountability, to enjoy the spirit of revelation, and to be possessed of the spirit of inspiration. . . . It is the privilege of every individual member of the Church to have revelation for his own guidance, for the direction of his life and conduct" (Gospel Doctrine, 34).

It is the Holy Ghost who leads us to the Lord, who binds us to Him, and who irrevocably seals our testimony of Him. Just as my friends supported me in a time of great need, so may we have the Holy Ghost to strengthen and to guide us in times of need and challenge.

We are not alone. The Lord will never forget us. He will never leave us alone or let us down. For His promise is clear and unimpeachable: "As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints" (D&C 121:33). 2002
