Sheri Dew, No Doubt About It (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 7

Membership Has Its Privileges

Because of our membership in the Lord's church, we have a host of magnificent spiritual privileges that allow us to regularly communicate with and receive encouragement from Home.

ONE LABOR DAY a friend asked if I would like to accompany her family on a hike of Mount Olympus, an imposing peak on the eastern rim of the Salt Lake Basin that I had always wanted to climb. "Sure," I said. It sounded like the perfect way to spend a holiday. Until, that is, we got there and I took a closer look at the height of the peak we were going to scale. It hadn't looked that tall from the car as I zoomed past it every day on my way to work. But my perspective changed dramatically standing at its base.

We hiked, and hiked, and hiked. Like most things in life, the idea of climbing a mountain and breathing in all of that great alpine air is more romantic than actually doing it. The terrain proved to be, well, a whole lot more vertical than I had bargained for, and that day the heat exacerbated the experience. After a couple of hours of escalating pain in lungs and limbs (not to mention my feet because of shoes that didn't fit properly) it dawned on me that there were better ways to spend a day off. So, in the most nonchalant tone I could muster (I had my pride to contend with, after all), I called out between huffs and puffs to my friend on the trail ahead of me, "How much farther is it? Can we see exactly where we're going yet?" She looked up at the mountain range ahead of us and pointed to a peak that didn't seem too far away. I was just beginning to think that maybe I could do it when her husband interrupted and said, pointing his index finger upward at a ninety-degree angle, "No, that's not Mount Olympus. The peak we're going to is over there."

That peak "over there" was a huge summit a long way away, and with one glimpse I was convinced there was no way I would be able to drag my body that high or far. It took only a minute for me to say, again trying to sound casual and carefree, "You know, I don't think I really want to go to the top today. I think I'll stay and explore this part of the mountain, and then meet you at the bottom later on."

My friend, who is the ultimate "never-say-die" sort of gal, didn't so much as glance back over her shoulder as she called back to me, "Oh, no you don't! You're not getting off that easily. You're going to the top. Trust me on this one. It will be worth it."

For the next few minutes I silently debated the pros and cons. Was I going to keep climbing, or was I not? No one could make me keep climbing, after all. But then, somehow, my sense of competition kicked in. If everyone else could do it, I could do it. I didn't want to be the only laggard.

Thankfully, I wasn't. I lost two toenails and pulled a hamstring in the process, but thanks to my friend's prodding, I made it. And she was right. Was it ever worth it! The view from the top of that jagged peak was breathtaking and more than worth the blisters and pounding lungs. As we sat at the pinnacle and watched the eagles soar beneath us, I thought, I wouldn't have missed this for the world.

But I almost did miss itas well as some fundamental principles that the climbing of Mount Olympus reinforced firsthand:

First, when the going got hard, I was ready to give up and settle for something much less than the reward I ultimately received by reaching the top.

Second, had it not been for the encouragement from a friend who had been to the top before and knew what awaited us there, I would have stopped.

Third, there came a point where I had to decide for myself if I was going to keep going or not. All the encouragement notwithstanding, no one could force me to go to the top.

Fourth, what I found on top was more spectacular than anything I had imagined or been able to see from down below. The reward exceeded all expectations.

And fifth, to have the mountaintop experience, I had to make the climb. There was no shortcut.

That experience on the mountain is a lot like mortality. In fact, our mortal probation is a mountain filled with ridges and peaks and steep hikes. Sometimes, when the going gets difficult, we feel like giving up. We've perhaps all had days or moments along our mortal climb toward sanctification and ultimately eternal life when we have said to ourselves, if even momentarily, "This is too hard. I can't go another step. Whatever is up there can't possibly be worth what I am going through down here." Othersprophets, apostles, family members, leaders, and friends can urge us onward and help us through the discouraging times. But when it comes right down to it, we have to decide for ourselves if we are willing to make the climb.

There is no shortage of mountains to climb. And as painful and difficult as some of these tests of endurance, sheer will, and faith are, they are often the catalyst to our greater understanding. They teach us that because of the Atonement there are power, peace, comfort, healing, and strength available to help us make the climb.

Thank heavensliterallyfor the magnificent gift of the Lord Jesus Christ. For we all encounter obstacles and disappointments in this life. They are part of the journey.

I laughed when I opened a greeting card that showed five dogs on the front who had cornered a cat. The front panel of the card read, "They say you learn the most from your most difficult experiences." Inside: "What a stupid system."

Challenges and trials do, however, appear to be part of the Lord's "system," for he "seeth fit to chasten his people; yea, he trieth their patience and their faith" (Mosiah 23:21). Apparently, because of our natural-man tendencies, we are responsible for bringing at least part of this on ourselves, for "except the Lord doth chasten his people with many afflictions, . . . they will not remember him" (Helaman 12:3).

What that greeting card really says is that the mortal climb is hardharder, in fact, than anything we have experienced to this point in our eternal existence, and perhaps the most difficult period we will ever experience. Things don't always turn out as we think or hope they will. Prayers aren't always quickly and neatly answered. Children don't always obey, despite the best efforts of devoted parents. Our health doesn't always hold up, even if we live the Word of Wisdom faithfully. Money doesn't always appear when we need it, even if we're faithful to the tithe. Interactions with employers and neighbors and business associates and family members and a myriad of other circumstances aren't always fair (which is one sure sign that your individually tailored curriculum is on course). Those we love don't always love us back or honor their commitments. Loved ones die, despite prayers and pleadings for healings and protection. Marriages sometimes fail. Trusted friends and colleagues at times undermine and betray us.

We have all stood at the base of plenty of mountains. There was a time when I was working at a small company where I shouldered much of the responsibility and pressure for bringing in enough money to make payroll. I was working many more than forty hours a week, and in my spare time trying to complete a project that was in itself a major undertaking. It was during this period that my mother was diagnosed with cancer. In the middle of her chemotherapy treatments, she became deathly ill with a blood clot in her lung and had to be hospitalized. Then, while she was in the hospital recuperating from the blood clot, her mother passed away. I'll never forget walking into Mom's hospital room to tell her that her mother was gone. I returned to Utah to represent Mother at Grandma's funeral, and a few days later the company I was working for went out of business and I was out of a job.

I remember thinking that the solution to these problems was to never answer the phone again, as every ring seemed to bring more bad news. Then one day, in the midst of despair, I happened upon a verse of scripture that leaped off the page: "If it so be that the children of men keep the commandments of God he doth nourish them, and strengthen them, and provide means whereby they can accomplish the thing which he has commanded them" (1 Nephi 17:3). Emotionally, physically, and spiritually exhausted, I was in desperate need of nourishment and strength. That verse was like a spiritual elixir because it reminded me that I wasn't supposed to make this climb alone, that there was help from a Source far greater than anything earthly.

Since that time, there have been other mountains even steeper and more difficult to climb. But I have come to understand that the mountainsmeaning challenges and obstaclesare designed to help lead us ultimately to the Mountmeaning the Mount of the Lordwhere there awaits more than we can possibly imagine from here below.

One sister who crossed the plains with the early pioneers described the process well in her journal: "It wouldn't be bad to walk fifteen hundred miles if one had a feather-bed to sleep on at night. But no matter how I folded it, it was too bulky. When it came to choosing between Zion and a feather-bed, well, it was a little too late to turn my back on Zion" (quoted in Proctor, The Gathering, back cover).

Indeed: It is too late to turn our backs on Zion.

Moses could teach us something about getting sidetracked en route to the Mount. There he was on the mount communing with the Lord, desperately wanting his people to make the spiritual climb ahead of them and claim this reward for themselves. But instead, down below in the valley his people had already become so restless that they had molded a golden calf and proclaimed it their god. Finally the Lord instructed Moses to return to his people: "Go, get thee down; for thy people . . . have corrupted themselves: They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them" (Exodus 32:7-8).

Moses had talked with the Lord face to face. He had learned what it was to be endowed with power from on high. But the children of Israel were not willing to make the climb.

It is by climbing the spiritual mountain that we learn how to deal with the other mountains, or problems, in our lives, that we find the power and energy and insight and strength to deal with what lies along and in our path.

The question, then, is, How do we climb the spiritual mount?

Some years ago a credit card company launched a campaign designed to attract customers by appealing to the desire to become a member of an elite group entitled to special privileges. The "membership has its privileges" campaign was a clever tactic, for who doesn't appreciate privileges?

Although the privileges associated with that particular company are debatable, there is no debate that membership in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints does have its privileges, remarkable spiritual privileges. Consider a few of the obvious ones:

First, as stated previously, we have the Holy Ghost to guide us, bless us, protect us, and make us smarter than we are. Said President John Taylor, "Without revelation religion is a mockery and a farce. If I can not have a religion that will lead me to God, and place me en rapport with him, and unfold to my mind the principles of immortality and eternal life, I want nothing to do with it" (The Gospel Kingdom, 35). Happily, our Father has provided many ways for His children to communicate with and receive instruction from Himbeginning with the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Further, we know who we are and Whose we are. We understand why we are here and where we may ultimately go, and therefore have a sense of purpose and direction and potential. We understand the Great Plan of Redemption. We have a living prophet who provides clear, unbiased, inspired direction that we may rely on with complete confidence. We have in our midst the priesthood, which is the greatest power on earth and the only power that can and will be used only to bring about righteousness. Because of priesthood power, we may receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, participate in ordinances that bind us to each other and to the Lord, and have access to "all the spiritual blessings of the church" (D&C 107:18).

Temples where we may be endowed with power from on high and learn more about parting the veil between ourselves and the Lord now dot the earth. Modern-day scripture provides insight into the Atonement and the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ available nowhere else. Among other things, we know that the Lord is the "same yesterday, today, and forever," and that all the spiritual gifts of which He has ever spoken "never will be done away" (Moroni 10:19) and are therefore available to us todaythe gift to behold angels, the gift to heal and be healed, the gift to "work mighty miracles" and teach the word of knowledge, the gift to speak in "divers kinds of tongues," and the gift to have "great faith" (Moroni 10:8-16).

The spiritual privileges available to us are remarkable, for they allow us to regularly communicate with and receive encouragement from home, meaning our heavenly home.

Brigham Young taught that "if the Latter-day Saints will walk up to their privileges, and exercise faith in the name of Jesus Christ, and live in the enjoyment of the fulness of the Holy Ghost constantly day by day, there is nothing on the face of the earth that they could ask for, that would not be given to them" (Discourses of Brigham Young, 156). What a promise!

And yet, on another occasion, he lamented: "There is no doubt, if a person lives according to the revelations given to God's people, he may have the Spirit of the Lord to signify to him His will, and to guide and to direct him in the discharge of his duties, in his temporal as well as in his spiritual exercise. I am satisfied, however, that in this respect, we live far beneath our privileges" (Journal of Discourses, 12:104; emphasis added).

One can't help but wonder how many gifts of the Spirit, how much spiritual direction, and how many spiritual privileges we haven't received because we are living beneath themmeaning that we don't have the faith to receive them, or that we aren't living worthy of them, or that we feel we're not worthy, or because we are lazy or inexperienced or distracted or any number of reasons that we don't actively seek after them. Once again, the sobering reality is that we determine how clear our communication will be, how strong our bond will be, how thin the veil will be, and how many spiritual privileges we will claim.

I am technologically impaired. I can't even make my VCR stop blinking. But I've used a computer for twenty years, and I can't imagine life without it though frankly I know how to do only a few things well. Compared to my brother, who works in the software industry, I'm computer illiterate. He knows how to do much more than I do using the same computer and the same programs. At least a hundred times he has offered to show me how to work better and faster. But he always seems to offer when I'm facing a huge deadline and don't have time to learn to do things better and faster. (Note the irony.) I continue to just get by, doing what little I know how to do but leaving a tremendous source of power untapped.

How many of us are spiritually just getting by rather than learning how to access the divine power available to those who seek after it?

The Prophet Joseph rehearsed a vision he had where he saw nine of the Twelve serving in a foreign land, presumably England. Gathered in a circle, his brethren appeared discouraged and downtrodden. But standing above them was the Savior, who was weeping as He looked upon His servants. The Prophet's impression was that Christ wanted desperately to comfort them and lift them up, but they didn't see Him because they were looking down, not up (see Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 107).

The Lord told Nephi that "unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have" (2 Nephi 28:30). In this case, could the word receive have several meaningsto accept, to believe, to seek after? Don't we actually "receive" what the Lord has for us when we believe Him and His doctrine, and when we then seek after the gifts He has made available?

The best way I know to strengthen our personal testimonies, to draw upon the privileges available to us, and thus to protect ourselves and our families from evil, is to seek to have as many experiences with the Lord as possible. Meaningful experiences with the Lord increase (in quantity and quality) as we yield to the enticings of the Holy Spirit. Yielding to the Spirit is the only way we can hope to overcome the natural man, who wants to control, is self-indulgent and self-absorbed, rarely if ever wants what is good for him, and is impatient, egotistical, and demanding. When Jesus said, "The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak" (Matthew 26:41), he was doing more than commenting on sleepy disciples.

Yielding ourselves to the Lord always requires sacrifice and often a sacrifice of our sins. How many favorite sins are we holding on to that alienate us from the Spirit and keep us from turning our lives over to the Lord? Do we cling to things such as jealousy, or holding onto a grudge, or being casual about the Sabbath day or the way we wear the garment, or undisciplined about what we watch or read? Consider the rippling impact on our lives and our families if every one of us determined to sacrifice something that is dulling our spiritual senses!

Yielding ourselves to the Lord, from whom we may obtain greater strength than we will ever muster on our own, is the only source of strength in this life and happiness in the life to come. I think of a sister missionary who was the first young woman in her Bulgarian city to be baptized. Her family subsequently disowned her. Yet she said through her tears: "I had never heard of Jesus Christ. But when the missionaries taught me about Him, it was like hearing something I already knew. I love this gospel, and now I have a great responsibility in how I live, because Jesus Christ has changed my life."

Such change, born of faith, is just one of the privileges we may claim as followers of Christ. In the benedictory chapter of the Book of Mormon, Moroni exhorts us to not deny the gifts of God: "Remember that [Christ] is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and that all these gifts of which I have spoken, which are spiritual, never will be done away, even as long as the world shall stand, only according to the unbelief of the children of men" (Moroni 10:19). Thus, we are as entitled to the gifts of believing and healing and working miracles and beholding angels as anyone has ever been. We are as entitled to climb the spiritual mount as any people have ever been. But these gifts are necessarily activated by our faith. And it is our willingness to believe, our willingness to "experiment" upon the word (Alma 32:27) and take the Lord at His word, and especially our willingness to seek after the spiritual privileges the Lord has made available to us, that makes us equal to the climb.

As we do this, we will make Eliza R. Snow's statement a realitythat the day would come when we, the sisters of the Church, would stand "at the head of the women of the world" because we had "greater and higher privileges than any other females upon the face of the earth" (The Evening News, 15 January 1870).

Those greater and higher privileges are spiritual privileges available to us because of our membership in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. 2002
