Sheri Dew, No Doubt About It (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 8

Practice Makes Perfect

When Alma invited us to experiment upon the word, He was encouraging us to practicemeaning to put the Lord to the test, and in the process to come to understand the full majesty of His mercy and power.

ONE YEAR WHILE I WAS ATTENDING BYU I invited a friend to drive home with me to Kansas for Thanks giving. As we prepared to leave, the weather forecast looked threateningparticularly through Colorado and over the Rockies so the night before we left, my father called and told me to buy snow chains, just in case. I resisted at first; I didn't have a clue about how to put them on, even if I did need them. But Dad prevailed, and I bought the chains. As it turned out, however, the drive home was uneventful, and the shiny new chains never came out of the box.

While we were home, Dad insisted on showing my friend and me how to install the snow chains again, just in case. Again, I resisted. I couldn't be bothered. But my friend was willing to endure Snow Chains 101, and she learned how to put them on. That was more than good enough for me. I had made that drive a hundred times, sans chains, and I knew we wouldn't need them.

The trip back to Provo, Utah, proved to be unlike any other, however. We were barely into the Rockies when we came upon the iciest roads I had ever seen. For an hour or so we inched along, the speedometer needle scarcely registering. Finally my friend asked if we shouldn't put the chains on. But I didn't want to take the time. Surely the icy conditions wouldn't stretch much farther.

Not five minutes later we crept around a hairpin curve just in time to see a car slide off the road ahead of us and plummet into the Colorado River several hundred feet below. At that, my obstinacy having suddenly run its course, I pulled over and we began the ordeal of attempting to install the chains. Ordeal is not too strong a word here. The process proved aggravating beyond beliefand no doubt hilarious to anyone watching. Unfortu nately, because I had paid scant attention to Dad's snow chain tutorial, it was left to my friend to patiently lead us step-by-step through the process. Ninety frozen minutes later, we finally had the "easy-install" chains in place and were back on the road. But even after all that, we had done something incorrectly, for as we headed down the road the chains clanked against the chassis with every revolution of the tires.

By now I had lost my sense of humor. And the banging chains didn't help. So you can imagine my reaction when, less than fifteen minutes later, we drove suddenly out of the ice into sunny skies and onto bare roads. Muttering that I had known all along that we didn't need to put those blasted chains on, I pulled over, removed the chains, and threw them into the trunk. We had wasted more than an hour, and for no good reason.

For several hours we drove on, attempting to make up time as we went. But we were so far behind schedule that we were still on the road late that night. Sometime past midnight we ran into a horrible blizzard halfway up the last mountain pass between us and home. Unable to see even the sides of the road, we inched along until we finally arrived at the summit, where a turnout area allowed us to pull over, along with dozens of other motorists. The snow was coming down hard and sideways, and it was bitter cold. Conditions were ten times worse than they had been when we put the chains on the first time, but we had no choice. Bracing ourselves, we hopped out, pulled the chains from the trunk, and began the ordeal all over again.

This time, however, the episode wasn't nearly as aggravating. Because we had been through the process just a few hours earlier, we had the routine down. In fact, a truck driver who had also pulled over approached us and said, "Well, I was coming over to help you girls, but it looks as though you know what you're doing," and walked off. Chivalry is dead, I thought.

Thankfully, in ten minutes we had the chains on and were headed back down the roadand without that telltale clanking this time. The second time around we had done a much better, quicker job.

I have thought about the "parable of the snow chains" many times. There is no way we could have installed those chains in the dark of night in a blinding blizzard with three feet of snow already on the ground if we hadn't had a practice run earlier that day.

Practice is a wonderful concept. To do anything wellwhether it's perfecting a turnaround jump shot, mastering a Rachmaninoff concerto, or excelling at open-heart surgerywe've got to practice.

The same is true with developing our faith, our spiritual sensitivity, our ability to hear the voice of the Lord in other words, our spiritual skills. They require practice. Consider the interchange between David and Goliath. An adolescent boy, dwarfed by the veteran warrior Goliath, pledges to go up against him in hand-to-hand combat. David's courage may have seemed foolhardy at the time, but he knew what he was doing because he had been practicing. His confidence came from previous experience: "The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine," he explained (1 Samuel 17:37). Twice before David had done the improbable. And because of those experiences, he knew the Lord would magnify him again and enable him to subdue Goliath.

When Moses arrived at the shores of the Red Sea, leading the children of Israel with Pharaoh and his armies in hot pursuit, did he simply wave his arms and magically part the waters? Surely he wouldn't have led his people there, knowing they could have been trapped between the sea on one side and Pharaoh's army from the rear, had he not been able to discern directions from the Lord. He had already seen and worked many miracles in which the elements were controlled. So now, when the stakes were high, Moses knew what to do. He had been practicing.

Is it possible that some of Nephi's trialsretrieving the brass plates from Laban under the most threatening conditions, breaking his bow, being bound with cords and persecuted repeatedly by his older brothers were in fact opportunities the Lord provided for Nephi to practice so that when it came time to build a ship (with no tools, no skills, no knowledge, and little help) he would have the spiritual confidence to proceed? "If God had commanded me to do all things I could do them," he responded in faith to his taunting brothers who mocked him for even thinking about building a ship (1 Nephi 17:50).

The Lord, through our individually tailored mortal tutorials, gives us opportunities to practice, rehearse, refine, and develop our spiritual skills and in particular, to practice having and exercising faith. With that principle in mind, consider President Spencer W. Kimball's words: "We need a storage of faith that can carry [us] over the dull, the difficult, the terrifying moments, disappointments, disillusionments, and years of adversity, want, confusion, and frustration" (Faith Precedes the Miracle, 110-11).

How do we increase our faith and stockpile a spiritual reserve? Among other things, we practice. Like anything else, developing the spiritual skills that can be ours takes practice, repetition, experience, and sustained effort. Alma taught it this way: "Behold, if ye will awake and arouse your faculties, even to an experiment upon my words, and exercise a particle of faith, yea, even if ye can no more than desire to believe, let this desire work in you" (Alma 32:27). Alma's invitation is filled with mercy and patience. It's as though the Lord is saying, "Just experiment. Put me to the test. See if I won't do for you what I have said I will do." In other words, practice.

It is practicepractice in building our faith, practice in obtaining spiritual gifts and accessing our spiritual privilegesthat will make us perfect.

When you face seemingly insurmountable problems, when you plead with the Lord for help with something that you can't manage on your own, when circumstances call for direction and strength from a Source greater than anything mortal, have you found yourself wondering, as I have at particularly difficult times, I know the Lord can help me, but will He?

These verses in the Doctrine and Covenants are reassuring: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye are little children [and aren't we all children spiritually?] and ye have not as yet understood how great blessings the Father hath in his own hands and prepared for you; and ye cannot bear all things now; nevertheless, be of good cheer, for I will lead you along. The kingdom is yours and the blessings thereof are yours, and the riches of eternity are yours" (D&C 78:17-18).

We are little children, and we have no concept of the vast store of riches, spiritual riches, the Lord has available for us. But He has promised that if we will let Him, He will lead us alongno doubt by providing opportunities for us to experiment upon His word, opportunities to practice. We can practice having greater and more complete faith in him as our Savior, our Redeemer, and our Rescuer.

Moroni recorded these transcendent words of the Lord: "My grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them" (Ether 12:27). Consider the ramifications of such a promise! We are all painfully aware of our mortal weaknesses. Imagine, then, the impact of the promise that the Savior can make our weak things become strong. This doctrine is more profound than any behavior-modification course, more penetrating than any resurgent attempts at willpower.

We can either attempt to lift the burdens (and climb the mountains) of our lives alone, or we can link ourselves to and seek help from Him who wrought the Atonement expressly so that there would be Someone to whom we could turn for help and healing.

Consider the sequence of these verses from the Doctrine and Covenants: "Look unto me in every thought; doubt not, fear not," the Lord has said. "Behold the wounds which pierced my side, and also the prints of the nails in my hands and feet" (D&C 6:36-37). It is because the nails pierced His hands and feet, because He submitted Himself to the Father in our behalf, that we need not fear or doubt. It is because of the power and scope of the Atonement that we have access to power to help us deal with our mortal weaknesses, our fears, our anxieties, and our lack of peace. We are connected to Someone who can and will make up the difference between who we are and who we want to be, between where we are and where we want to beif we will come unto Him.

I, like you, have been blessed with many opportunities to exercise faith in Jesus Christ, experiment upon his word, and practice what I believe. Through those experiences I have come to know that because of the phenomenal act of atonement begun in the Garden of Gethsemane and completed on the cross at Calvary, there is power, peace, comfort, healing, and strength available to help us as we attempt to negotiate life's challenges.

I think of opportunities in recent years to practicechallenges that have demanded more patience, more energy, more wisdom, more understanding than I would ever have been able to muster on my own. I have felt the sting of betrayal; I know what it is to be the subject of widespread gossip; I know the pain of being falsely accused, undermined, and misunderstood; and like you, I have found myself again and again in circumstances that boggled my mind.

But through these challenges large and small, I am learningas you arethat the Savior truly did compensate for all of the difficulty, the heartache, the betrayal, the disillusionment and disappointment, and the pain we feel and face. I have learned that, in a tangible way, He would be my companion. And through it all I have found that He will never let me down or leave me alone.

In a letter to Church headquarters one sister shared feelings that perhaps you have had at some point in your life: "I believe in the Atonement. But I fear that belief, and faith in the Savior, aren't going to keep me hanging on. I am so tired and discouraged and sad. The 'reality' we hear about in the hymns and from our Sunday talks and lessonsabout day dawns breaking, and all being well, and angels from the realms of gloryis not the reality of my life, and everyday reality has become a very tough thing to continuously fight against. Endurance is beginning to look like a severely overrated commodity. I just don't feel strong anymore, and I guess I'm not sure I want to keep trying so hard to be strong."

At the time she wrote this letter, this sister believed in the Savior but didn't really believe Him. Some time later, after she had been able to consider the Atonement and its power to help us withstand our individual crucibles, she wrote this: "The assertion that the Atonement compensates not only for our repented-of sins but will also relieve the painful experience of mortality struck me deeply. If this is true, it answers my frustration, the feeling that I can't keep getting through these life experiences on whatever internal strength my individual faith and determination have produced. The strength must come from somewhere else, a source that is not weak, does not give out, will not falter as I am doing. I am studying the suggested scriptures, fasting, praying. I am testingand trusting the declaration that I can find how to access these blessings of the Atonement for myself, that He really is there in that capacity, that He will not step back from us while we endure these experiences."

The difference for this sister, and the key to her change of heart, was her willingness to practice and to experiment upon the Lord's words. Although the Lord Jesus Christ won't usually take away our problems, He also won't leave us to face them alone. Said Elder Jeffrey R. Holland: "[We] fear that God in his heaven, with all of his urgent national and international, galactic and intergalactic business, is certain to be occupied with things other than your hopes and happiness. I do not know exactly how He does it, but . . . my testimony . . . is that nothing in this universe is more important to him than your hopes and happiness. . . . When we pass through the veil, it will be thrilling to learn how God watches over us and cares for us, how he knows our every thought. For now it is enough to know simply that he does it" ("Considering Covenants: Women, Men, Perspective, Promises," 96-97).

With each new challenge, each new opportunity to increase our faith, comes the privilege of practicing what we believe and exercising our spiritual privileges while adding to the "storage of faith" President Kimball spoke of. Just as school requirements become more challenging from grade to grade, so do the Lord's spiritual requirements of us increase as we progress, grow, and develop. The faith we have had in the past most likely will not be sufficient to sustain us in the days aheadboth because of the world's escalating depravity and because the Lord will give us opportunities to grow and progress spiritually. Each new challenge we face can result in a deeper faith in the Lord and greater confidence in the spiritual privileges that are ours. Dealing with difficult circumstances seems to prepare us to handle even more complicated opportunities for growth.

When I was asked to help prepare President Gordon B. Hinckley's biography, I was honored, but I was also overwhelmed and more than a little terrified at the prospect. I had a demanding job, was serving as a stake Relief Society president, and now was responsible for a project filled with enough pressure, stress, and workload to itself deserve full-time attentionnot to mention someone with a lot more talent.

I reorganized my life to be as efficient as possible and then began working on the book, usually scheduling time in the evening after a long day at the office to research and write. But this system didn't work. There were too many interruptions in the evenings, and it was impossible for me to do the hardest work of the dayfilling a blank computer screen with coherent sentenceswhen I was mentally spent.

About this time, my stake president informed me that both of my counselors were wanted back in their respective wards and that I needed to select two new counselors. I was disheartened. Our presidency had been together for more than three years, and at that point we worked so seamlessly together that we could finish each other's sentences. I couldn't imagine breaking in two new counselors when I was under more pressure than I had ever been. But through prayer, I realized that the stake president was right, and I went about the process of selecting new counselors. They were called, and I was with them when they were set apart. Before we began, the first counselor in the stake presidency, who knew nothing of the extra load I was carrying, said that though there was no need to set me apart again, he wondered if it might be appropriate for the stake president to give me a blessing.

I was grateful for the suggestion and was subsequently amazed when the stake president acknowledged, during the blessing, the weighty responsibilities that had fallen upon my shoulders, and my concern about being able to handle them all. Then he spoke these words: "I bless you that your body will require less sleep, insomuch that you will not fall asleep in the many meetings you have to attend."

For several days thereafter I pondered the implications of that promise. Finally, I began to calculate just how early I would have to get up to do my writing before I left for work. There would be fewer interruptions, and I would be doing the hardest work of the day when I was mentally fresh. No matter how I figured the time, however, it looked as if I would have to arise at 3:00 A.M. I am an early riser, but 3:00 A.M. seemed absurd. Yet, I could not get the words of that priesthood blessing out of my mind. I kept thinking about some of the challenges I had faced and mountains I had climbed in the past and the way the Lord had shored me up, strengthened me, and made me able to do things I could never have managed on my own. Did I, or did I not, believe that He would support and sustain me again? Surely He would. But would He really help me get by with less sleep? At first, I couldn't quite imagine it.

After pondering the blessing for several days, I decided to experiment upon His words. The long story made short is that for twenty-three months, six days a week, I arose at 3:00 A.M. Did I have the physical or mental stamina, in and of myself, to do such a thing? Absolutely not. My role in this process was simply to believe that the Lord was able and willing to do something for me that I could not do myself.

Many times during recent years as the weight of responsibility has intensified, I have looked back longingly at that period of time and realized that it really wasn't all that difficult. But with every experience we have experimenting upon or practicing the Lord's words, the stronger grows our faith and the greater becomes our storage of faith.

The Lord will do for us exactly what He has said He will doif we will believe in Him and seek His divine direction and intervention in our lives. Strength and power, insight and wisdom far greater than our own are available to us. It is simply not possible for the Lord to forget us. "For can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee," promised the Lord, who then reminded His followers of the sobering and spiritually sensational reality of His sacrifice for us: "Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands" (1 Nephi 21:15-16).

Do you believe that the Savior will really do for you what He has said He will do? That He will give you strength and insight to deal with the challenges at hand? That He will lighten your burden and turn your weakness into strength? That He will heal your broken heart and fill you with hope? That He will renew your energy and help you forgive? That He will help you deal with disappointment and loneliness, and fill you with the sweet knowledge of how precious you are to Him? That He will help you resist your greatest temptation? That He will respond to your deepest hurt or longing and bless you with a spirit of good cheer, optimism, and faith? That He is the only source of comfort, strength, information, knowledge, and peace that will not change, will not move, will not betray you, and will never let you down?

Mahatma Gandhi said this: "God is the hardest taskmaster I have known on this earth, and he tries you through and through. And when you find that your faith is failing or your body is failing you, and you are sinking, he comes to your assistance somehow or other and proves to you that you must not lose your faith and that he is always at your beck and call. . . . So I have found. I cannot really recall a single instance when, at the eleventh hour, he has forsaken me" (The Treasure Chest, 86).

The Lord's exquisite sensitivity to each of us is hard to comprehend, but it exists nonetheless. In 1985 Elder M. Russell Ballard, then of the presidency of the Seventy, and Glenn L. Pace, then representing the welfare department, traveled to Ethiopia to determine how to allocate several million dollars the Church had collected in special fasts. Ethiopia was suffering a horrid drought. There had not been rain in Addis Ababa for months. Upon arriving there they found one Church member, and on Sunday the three of them met together.

They partook of the sacrament and all bore testimonies. Then Elder Ballard suggested that they kneel in prayer. About that experience he recorded: "I pronounced a blessing, a benediction upon our fast and testimony meeting, and was impressed to invoke, by the power of the Holy Priesthood and in the name of the Lord, a blessing upon the land. This certainly was not a dedicatory blessing in any way, shape, or form, since that was not my commission or responsibility, but I felt impressed . . . to plead with the Lord in His name and by the power of the priesthood to bring rain."

After the meeting the men returned to their own rooms. Elder Ballard described what then happened: "About two or three hours into the afternoon, it clouded up and rain came pouring down. As I stood on the balcony of that hotel, tears streamed down my cheeks and I found myself on my knees expressing gratitude that the Lord had acknowledged that we were in Ethiopia on this special assignment."

Just as the Lord knew that Elder Ballard and Brother Pace were in Ethiopia, He knows where we are, what our needs and concerns are, and whether or not we are striving to have faith in Him. He is eager to respond to our inquiries and to bless us with strength and inspiration. He is willing to give us as much information, wisdom, insight, spiritual power, and peace as we are ready to handle and willing to ask for.

I repeat: The Lord will never forget us. He will never leave us alone or let us down. He has offered us, through membership in His Church, magnificent spiritual blessings the greatest of which is the knowledge that the Savior is who He says He is, and that He will do for us what He has said He will do. Therefore, "let us cheerfully do all things that lie in our power; and then may we stand still, with the utmost assurance, to see the salvation of God, and for his arm to be revealed" (D&C 123:17). 2002
