Sheri Dew, No Doubt About It (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 10

Follow the Prophet; He Knows the Way

The living prophet will help us find the way. But if we don't listen to the prophet, we might as well not have one.

ON THE FARM WE LEARNED TO DRIVE as soon as we could reach the pedals and see over the steering wheel, which for me was age ten; so by the time I was thirteen, I was a veteran behind the wheel. It was therefore not unusual when one winter Saturday during my eighth-grade year, Dad called up to the house from his shop and asked if I would drive his new pickup around to the back of the farm, adding a caution: "Sheri, be sure to scrape the windshield. It has a thick layer of ice on it."

Unfortunately, Dad had not summoned me at a convenient time. It was a Saturday afternoon in January, and I was doing what I did every Saturday afternoon in Januarywatching the Kansas University Jayhawks play basketball. To make matters worse, it was the fourth quarter and the game was on the line. But I had learned from sad experience that when Dad needed help, he meant now; so in sub-zero weather, I dashed out of the house in my shirtsleeves, ran to the pickup, and began chipping away at a stubborn layer of ice. Ten minutes later, when I had been able to clear only a small area about six inches in diameter, I was both frozen and frustrated because the game was going on without me.

Then, in a flash of thirteen-year-old wisdom, I decided it couldn't possibly hurt to drive the pickup the five hundred yards or so to Dad's shop. This was just the farm, for heaven's sakes. There probably wasn't another vehicle within miles. What could possibly go wrong?

So I hopped in the pickup and began to inch my way around to the back of the farm. But I was basically driving blind because that tiny hole allowed for no peripheral vision, and it quickly fogged over anyway. I hadn't gone fifty yards when I felt a thud and heard a sickening scraping sound. I slammed on the brakes, jumped out of the pickup, and immediately saw that I had hit our huge, ugly mailbox. The left mirror and trim dangled like limp appendages from the pickup body, and an ugly gash ran the length of the pickup bed. Instantly the basketball game faded in importance. I was horrified! Panicked! "Beam me up, Scotty!" I remember saying out loud in a spirit of desperation.

What happened from there is probably not important, other than to say that on several levels it turned out to be a painful experience made all the more so because it need never have happened. Dad had warned me to scrape the windshield. But I had been impatient and focused on my own interests.

Just one of the lessons I learned from that incident (not meaning to slight those about obedience and patience and selflessness) is that it is almost impossible to find your way if you can't even see the way, or to stay on the path if you can't see the path. Further, when you can't see where you're going, there is no way to avoid the obstacles in front of you.

We are currently on a path designed to lead us home to our Heavenly Father, but that path is littered with obstacles that can be dangerous if not lethal. We are in trouble when our spiritual windshield is frosted over with anything: a preoccupation with the things of this world, pride, busyness, or out-and-out sin. In other words, there are many huge, ugly mailboxes along our path, each of them an invitation to temporal or spiritual disaster.

How often are we driving blind along the path of life, having scraped only a small clearing on our spiritual windshield, relying on our own wisdom rather than seeking counsel from those called to guide us and keep us in the center of the straight-and-narrow path?

Samuel the Lamanite delivered a stinging rebuke to the Nephites for rejecting the prophets in favor of self-appointed leaders who spoke flattering words and condoned their iniquities. "O ye wicked and ye perverse generation . . . how long will ye suffer yourselves to be led by foolish and blind guides? Yea, how long will ye choose darkness rather than light?" he declared (Helaman 13:29; emphasis added).

Mercifully, the Lord has not required us to find our way along the path alone. In addition to gifting us with the constant companionship of the Holy Ghost, with the magnificent power of the priesthood that blesses and protects us, and with the word of God as revealed by ancient prophets, He has provided us with a living prophet who testifies of and leads us to Christ, who Himself does not, indeed cannot "walk in crooked paths" (Alma 7:20).

There is nothing the world needs more than the message of Jesus Christ. And there is no one in mortality who has the mantle to deliver that message more powerfully and with greater clarity than a prophet, for everything about a prophet points to and testifies of Christ. Prophets stand as the mortal link between man and God. Jesus Christ and His prophets are inseparably connected.

I have a friend who walks each morning with a nonmember neighbor who often raises moral and social issues on her mind. My friend, her walking partner, refers to this woman as her "deep-thinking friend." One morning as these two neighbors walked, the "deep-thinking friend" raised an issue that was bothering her. After a few minutes of discussion, she suddenly said to my friend (who at the time was serving as a stake Relief Society president), "I've been thinking about something you'll probably think is crazy, but I've been reading the Bible, and do you know what we really need? We need a prophet, like in ancient times, who can tell us how to handle these problems we can't seem to solve."

My friend's response was immediate: "I don't think you're crazy. In fact, I agree that only a prophet can help us find solutions to some of our difficult problems. But I must tell you that we have a prophet. And we receive guidance from him on a regular basis on issues such as the one you have raised." My friend's walking partner was amazed, curious, and eager to hear more, because the concept of a living prophet rang so true to her.

This leads to the question that we who believeor profess to believein a living prophet might wish to ask ourselves. The question is, simply: So what? What difference does it make in our lives that a prophet walks the earth? When the prophet speaks, do we do anything differently? Do we modify behaviors or life patterns? Do we stop doing some things and begin doing others? In the fall of the year 2000, President Gordon B. Hinckley spoke in separate settings to the mothers, fathers, and youth of the Church. How many of us heard what he saidsuch that we have made changes in our lives?

Just prior to President Hinckley's fireside for youth, one of my nieces had pierced her ears a second time. After the fireside, she went home and took out the second pair of earrings. She admitted that she didn't really understand why wearing an extra set of earrings was a problem, but that if the prophet asked her to do it, that was good enough for her. Removing those earrings may or may not have eternal impact for this young woman, but her willingness to obey the prophet will. And if she'll obey him on a relatively simple issue, how much easier it will be to follow him when greater issues are at stake.

In short, living prophets point us to Christ and teach us truths about Him, including the following:

Christ's church, which is "built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone" (Ephesians 2:20), cannot exist without prophets and apostles. In all of scripture there is no evidence of the Lord identifying a people as His own and then failing to provide them with a prophet to communicate His will. And the implications of the merciful gift of a living prophet are stunning.

There aren't many guarantees in this life. There isn't a car made with a warranty that covers everything. No bank can guarantee that your money is safe. Even Good Housekeeping's seal of approval has a disclaimer of sorts on it. But that is to be expected, because nothing man-made can ever be guaranteed. Hence this miracleand evidence of the Lord's mercy to His childrenthat He will choose the prophet, and that He will never let him lead us astray. It is an unimpeachable guarantee.

Prophets are not motivated by money or power. Their words haven't been polluted by the philosophies of men or by self-interest. Their objective is to take the gospel of Jesus Christ to every person who will listen, and then to help them live it. And their mission is to testify and bear witness of Christ. There is no source of information on earth as pure and unsullied. It is that simple. It is that profound.

The Lord is at the helm of his church, and nothing demonstrates that more than the manner in which He directs the selection and preparation of prophets. Said President Spencer W. Kimball, "[A new President is] not elected through committees and conventions, with all their conflicts, criticisms, and by the vote of men, but [is] called of God and then sustained by the people. . . . The pattern divine allows for no errors, no conflicts, no ambitions, no ulterior motives" (Ensign, January 1973, 33).

"Every man," said the Prophet Joseph, "who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. I suppose that I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council" (Teachings, 365).

Nowhere is the Lord's view of His children more apparent than in the selection of prophets, many of whom had humble beginnings. Elias was a farmer. Peter, James, and John were fishermen. Joseph Smith was an unschooled farm boy at the time of the First Vision. Brigham Young was a carpenter. Moses lamented the fact that he was "slow of speech, and of a slow tongue" (Exodus 4:10). Enoch was amazed when the Lord called him to serve as His mouthpiece. Truly, the Lord "seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart" (1 Samuel 16:7).

President George Q. Cannon said: "God has chosen [the prophet] to stand where he doesnot you or me; and He knows every secret thought of men's hearts. His all-piercing eye has penetrated the innermost recesses of his heart, and He has seen all there is about him, inside and out. He knows him thoroughly, because He created him. He knew his past history; He knows his present history. And knowing this He has chosen him. What can we do better than to show respect to our God by listening to His servant, by treating him with reverence, asking his counsel and seeking for his guidance?" (Gospel Truth, 231).

The life of every prophet reveals not only his foreordination but his intense spiritual training, a tutorial designed and administered by the Divine Schoolmaster Himself. President J. Reuben Clark Jr. taught, "No man ever comes to lead God's people whom He has not trained for His task" (Deseret News, 5 May 1945).

A review of recent Church history bears this out. When President David O. McKay died at age ninety-six in January 1970, because of his lingering ill health and his age, it was a sad but expected day. Joseph Fielding Smith became president of the Church, and when he passed on eighteen months later at age ninety-three, again there was sadness but not great surprise. But when Harold B. Lee, who was then ordained president of the Church at seventy-three, a relative youngster, died suddenly eighteen months later, the Church was stunned.

Elder William Grant Bangerter described the events that followed this way: "Suddenly [President Lee] was gone. . . . It was the first time since the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith when the president had died before it was time for him to die. . . . [Could] the Church survive this emergency? Of course, we knew that the Church would survive, but it could not possibly be the same. We had never expected Spencer W. Kimball to become the president, and we had not looked to him for the same leadership evident in the life of Harold B. Lee. We knew, of course, that he would manage somehow, until the next great leader arose, but . . . it would not be the same. 'O Lord,' we prayed, 'please bless President Kimball. He needs all the help you can give him.'"

Elder Bangerter then described what happened the first time President Kimball addressed the General Authorities. "As [President Kimball] proceeded with his address . . . he had not spoken very long when a new awareness seemed suddenly to fall on the congregation. We became alert to an astonishing spiritual presence, and we realized that we were listening to something unusual, powerful, different from any of our previous meetings. It was as if, spiritually speaking, our hair began to stand on end. . . . President Kimball spoke under this special influence for an hour and ten minutes. . . . When [he] concluded, President Ezra Taft Benson arose and . . . said, . . . 'President Kimball, through all the years that these meetings have been held, we have never heard such an address as you have just given. Truly, there is a prophet in Israel'" (Ensign, November 1977, 26-27).

Today, is there any question about the inspired leadership that was provided by Spencer W. Kimball? The Lord knew then as He knows now who has been foreordained to lead the Church.

This same divinely inspired pattern is evident in the life of President Gordon B. Hinckley. At the time he was called to serve as a counselor to President Kimball in July 1981, both the first and second counselor in the First Presidency were in reasonably good health. Some might have wondered about the call of an additional counselor. But six weeks later President Kimball underwent his third brain surgery, from which he never completely recovered. And within a year and a half, President Marion G. Romney's health had deteriorated and President N. Eldon Tanner had died, at which time the weight and responsibility of conducting the affairs of the First Presidency fell almost entirely to President Hinckley. What if President Kimball had not extended the call to President Hinckley when he did? But there are no "what ifs" with the Lord, not when it comes to the leadership of His Church. As with each of his predecessors, everything about President Hinckley's life testifies of that fact.

Just one example of the Lord's hand in preparing President Hinckley is in the area of public relations. During his time as president of the Church, he has been interviewed by more journalists than all of his predecessors combined, including unprecedented network interviews with Mike Wallace and Larry King, and an appearance before the National Press Club. His deft ability to tell the Church's story under the camera's glare is remarkable. Consider the following interchanges with Mike Wallace during their interview for CBS's 60 Minutes.

Mr. Wallace began their first interview by asking, "Mr. President, why did you agree to give us this rare interview?"

GBH: "Because I felt it was an opportunity to tell the people of America something about this great cause in which I have such a keen interest."

Wallace: "But that is not traditional with Mormons."

GBH: "Oh, I don't know."

Wallace: "Can you tell me the last president of the Mormon Church who went on nationwide television to do an interview with no questions ahead of time so that you know what is coming?"

GBH: "No, I don't remember one."

Wallace: "So, Gordon Hinckley decided, apparently, that there is a message that the Mormon Church has for America and, for that matter, the world."

GBH: "Yes, indeed."

Wallace: "And that message is?"

(Freeze frame for a moment. The camera is rolling and there's time for only a sound-bite. How does one respond to such an all-encompassing question? President Hinckley said this:)

GBH: "That message is that there is a way to greater peace. There is a way to greater harmony in our living. . . . There is a way to improve things. That is what I would like to say."

Here's another exchange:

Wallace: "You have retained a public relations agency. . . . Is that to proselytize, . . . or to tell the rest of us heathens what we are missing?"

GBH: "It is to tell the rest of you what you are missing, yes."

Wallace: "And what is it that we are missing?"

(Now, again, with just a few seconds to answer, how would you respond?)

GBH: "You are missing the lift that comes of living close to the Lord, walking with faith and with purpose, with a feeling that life is really purposeful, that it is a mission rather than just a career. There is something wonderful about having some concept of who you are, as a [child] of God, with a divine destiny, and the knowledge that you can make more of your life than you may have been making of it."

When asked if he believed in an afterlife, President Hinckley responded, "I certainly do. I think life after this life is as certain as life here. I believe we lived before we came here, that we live here for a purpose"

"Wait, wait," Wallace interrupted. "You believe we lived before we came here?"

"Oh, absolutely, as intelligences, as spirits," President Hinckley replied.

"There was a spirit of Gordon Hinckley?" Wallace asked.

"Absolutely, and of Mike Wallace."

"I hope not," Wallace joked.

Now notice the way President Hinckley introduces the concept of an eternal plan: "Life is an eternal thing, Mike. It is part of an eternal plan, our Father's plan for His sons and daughters, whom He loves. His work and His glory is to bring about the immortality and eternal life of His sons and daughters. It has purpose. It is meaningful."

When asked how he accounted for the rapid growth of a church that was so demanding of its people, President Hinckley turned a perceived negative into a positive: "Yes, it is demanding. And that is one of the things that attracts people to this Church. It stands as an anchor in a world of shifting values. They feel they have something solid that they are standing on while the ground is moving beneath them. People are looking for something of substance and strength, based on eternal truth and eternal values."

Clearly the Lord magnified President Hinckley during this sensitive interview. But the Lord sustained him not only during the interview itself but through decades of preparation, beginning seventy years earlier when, as a young returned missionary, he was named to sit with six members of the Twelve on the first Church committee assigned to develop tracts and filmstrips for missionaries. Imagine the tutoring he received from Elders Stephen L Richards, John A. Widtsoe, and others as they designed ways to tell the Church's story to the world.

In addition, repeatedly during more than forty years as a General Authority, Elder Hinckley was assigned to handle nearly every sensitive issue that arose with the press: Utah's debate over liquor-by-the-drink, the MX missile controversy, the clash over the Equal Rights Amendment, priesthood restrictions to African-Americans, forged historical documents that called into question the veracity of Joseph Smith's story, and so on. When the Church celebrated its sesquicentennial in 1980, whom did President Kimball assign to appear on The Today Show with Tom Brokaw? Elder Hinckley. Very simply, for years the Lord had been tutoring him and providing opportunities to "practice" the craft of presenting the Church's message to the world. Thus, as president of the Church in an age dominated by around-the-clock media coverage, his skills and life experience are allowing him to fulfill his unique mission. As Elder Neal A. Maxwell told a group of missionaries: "You are the first generation to see the globalization of the Church. No one has played a greater role in that effort than President Hinckley" (Dew, Go Forward with Faith, 547).

What a magnificent source of security, in a society whose underpinnings are constantly shifting and whose leadership so often rests in the hands of the most articulate or charismatic rather than the most trustworthy, to know that the Lord prepares and then puts in place the man foreordained to lead us!

On occasion there have been those who advocated removing an aging president from office in favor of a more energetic leader. Such a suggestion results from either a lack of understanding or phenomenal arrogance. The gospel kingdom is not a democracy. The Lord has not invited us to nominate candidates but to indicate our support of His anointed. Were it not so, the Church would be no different from any other institution, religious or secular. The president of the Church doesn't become such throughout campaigning or because of his earthly qualifications, but because He has the endorsement of the Lord.

There is no faith unless it is in Jesus Christ. Otherwise, it is only a belief or an idea, neither of which has the power to save. What Christ requires first is that we believe in Him. The Apostle Paul said that "without faith it is impossible to please [God]: for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him" (Hebrews 11:6).

Without exception, prophets are men of profound faith. Captain Moroni's unflagging trust in the Lord allowed him to lead the Nephites to victory against the larger, stronger Lamanite armies. When the Prophet Joseph was seized upon by a dark, unseen power in the Sacred Grove, he instinctively called upon God for deliverance (see JS-H 1:16). It was faith that enabled Brigham Young to lead his weary band of Saints to an uncharted, uncultivated desert in the West.

President Hinckley has also repeatedly turned to the Lord in faith. A journal entry he made while serving as President Kimball's counselor reveals his dependence upon the Lord: "The responsibility I carry frightens me. . . . I pray each day for strength and wisdom and inspiration. . . . Sometimes I could weep with concern. But there comes the assurance that the Lord put me here for His purpose, and if I will be humble and seek the direction of the Holy Spirit, He will use me according to His will to accomplish His purposes" (Dew, Go Forward with Faith, 393). Repeatedly he has said, "Walk by faith. . . . When there is no way, [God] will open the way" (Teachings of Gordon B. Hinckley, 196).

On the same day in April 1961 that Elder Hinckley offered a prayer inaugurating missionary work in the Philippines, he received a rejection on the application he had filed in behalf of the Church for visas allowing missionaries to enter the country. Borrowing a typewriter, he went to his hotel room and wrote a lengthy reply to emigration officials, noting: "We must now pray and wait. However it is in the hands of the Lord. We shall do our best and await the outcome. If we cannot get what we need through one channel we shall try every other until we secure the proper entry documents. . . . Somehow it will go forward. This is the Lord's work and while it may be delayed, it will not be stopped" (Dew, Go Forward with Faith, 227).

A few months later, having rejoiced when the way opened to obtain the necessary visas, he returned with the first four missionaries assigned to Manila. Sister Hinckley accompanied him. As they prepared to leave, her mothering instincts momentarily got the best of her, and she asked, "You're not really going to leave those four boys here alone in this huge city, are you?" His reply was immediate: "They are not alone. The Lord is with them."

Faith in Christ carries with it the assurance that we are not alone. Faith is also the seedbed of hope, for true hope is always the result of faith in Christ. Though all prophets know sacrifice and loneliness, their bedrock faith in Christ allows them to hope for not only the best in this world but the glorious reality of eternal life.

President Hinckley's confidence in the Divine has given him a buoyant optimism that has governed his attitude about life and its myriad of challenges. When for example in the mid-1960s an anxious mission president wrote to report that monsoon rains had damaged both the mission home and his spirits, Elder Hinckley replied, "Needless to say this was a frightening experience. . . . You may be interested to know that the night before the London Temple was dedicated we had a flood of serious proportions there. I stood in water to my waist . . . bailing it out. This went on for hours. I only want to suggest that your experience is not peculiar. . . . Noah had a worse time. Sincerely, your brother" (Dew, Go Forward with Faith, 287).

When confronted by challenge, President Hinckley typically utters his trademark phrase, "Things will work out." This statement to General Authorities is indicative of countless others: "We have critics, not a few. They come and go. They do little hurt to anyone but themselves. It all works out to the blessing of the work. This has become the motto of my life. It will all work out. . . . We are in the hands of the Almighty, whose cause this is. . . . He who is our God, and whose Church this is, will prevail" (meeting with General Authorities, 3 April 1997).

As faith increases, and hope fills our souls, our concern for others intensifies. The natural extension of faith and hope is charity, the pure love of Christ. Said the Prophet Joseph, "The nearer we get to our heavenly Father, the more we are disposed to look with compassion on perishing souls" (History of the Church, 5:24). Just as Christ ministered one by one to those in need, His prophets have an overarching concern for every individual. That is just one of the reasons President Kimball petitioned the Lord with such fervor regarding the ordination of all worthy males to the priesthood. It is just one of the reasons President Hinckley has pleaded with us repeatedly to welcome each new member into the embrace of the Church and to help them make the transition that inevitably accompanies baptism.

Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world, performed the ultimate act of submission. Consider His role in the premortal council where, after Satan offered to redeem all mankind in return for the honor, Christ proclaimed to the Father, "Thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever" (Moses 4:2).

Consider the humility of Joseph Smith, who saw Deity and conversed with angels, but who recognized that he did not have the authority to organize a church or confer priesthood ordinances until he received such authority from on high. Said President George Q. Cannon, "There are few men . . . who, if they had obtained the gifts that he possessed, would not have overstepped the limit of their calling and authority and done something beyond their province. But Joseph did not err in this way" (Gospel Truth, 198).

Prophets mirror the humility of Him whose servants they are. It is not that they are unaware of their skills and native talents. It is simply that they realize where their talents come from and to Whom they belong. Their focus has shifted from themselves and their own importance to the work of the Lord and its transcendent importance.

As President Hinckley said to a group of young adults, "Don't be arrogant. The world is full of arrogant people. . . . How obnoxious is an arrogant man!" (CES Young Adult Meeting, 14 April 1996). He, like other prophets, has managed to avoid the arrogance trap. Consider the sentiment he expressed to his Brethren of the General Authorities: "I just cannot get over the tremendous responsibility we have. There has been laid upon us as people of ordinary talent the work of carrying the gospel of Jesus Christ to all the world. . . . I just speak of myself and wonder if I should be doing a little more" (meeting with General Authorities, 9 October 1996).

Indeed, President Hinckley and other prophets follow the pattern of the Savior: "And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant: Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many"(Matthew 20:27-28).

One of the reassuring lessons from the First Vision is that the heavens are open and that God speaks to those who will listen. Nonetheless, there must be order in the Lord's kingdom. Therefore, when the Lord has something to say to His people as a whole, He will say it through His prophet, for "there is never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this priesthood are conferred" (D&C 132:7). This fundamental principle of order eliminates confusion as well as the jockeying for position that occurs in every organization created and directed by man.

The Lord through His prophet will keep us informed. The question is, Are we listening? The story is told that Brigham Young, after having urged the people in certain communities to clean up their properties, refused to go back to preach to them, saying something along these lines: "You didn't listen to me last time when I urged you to fix up your premises. The same doors are off their hinges; the same barns are still unpainted; the same fences are partly fallen. I will return when you are ready for the next sermon but you haven't done anything about the first one yet" (See 1978 Devotional Speeches of the Year, 136).

If we don't listen to the prophet, we might as well not have one. Said President Harold B. Lee, "The men who preside in this church are only prophets to those who accept them and their teachings as the prophecies from the living God" (BYU Devotional Address, 3 October 1950).

A while ago I found a copy of a talk I gave when I was about nine. The talk, "Yes. Wilco. Mobile Now. Out," was about following the prophet. This is what I wrote so long ago: "Yes, President McKay, I have received your message. Wilco, I will comply with your request. Mobile now. I am going to start and do it right nownot when I get time, but right now. Out! I don't need any further convincing the fact that you suggested it is good enough, because I know you are a phrophet [sic] of God."

Nearly forty years later, I can't improve on that message. Again, if we don't listen to the prophet, we might as well not have one. Do we know what President Hinckley has said about strengthening our families, about getting out of debt, about abortion and spouse abuse and pornography, about pierced ears and the roles of fathers and mothers? Have we as sisters studied the magnificent addresses he gave at the 1998 and 2000 General Relief Society Meetings, which set a standard for every Latter-day Saint woman? Again, from Elder Harold B. Lee: "Every soul today that is not hearkening unto the . . . inspired counsel that comes from the [Lord's] leaders is being deceived by the power of Satan, and they are gradually coming to be in his power. . . . Satan never goes on vacation. He never sleeps" (Children's Friend, June 1949, 254-55).

History has repeatedly demonstrated the wisdom of following the prophet. Consider the events of 1837. The previous year the Kirtland Temple had been dedicated, and a magnificent outpouring of the Spirit had increased the faith of the Saints. But soon the adversary began moving with renewed determination through the Church, and many apostatized. Dissension threatened to sap the lifeblood of the Church. It was in this climate that Joseph Smith went to Heber C. Kimball in the Kirtland Temple and said, "Brother Heber, the Spirit of the Lord has whispered to me: Let my servant Heber go to England and proclaim my Gospel" (History of the Church, 2:490). Joseph's declaration made no sense. Heber was one of his most loyal advocates. Surely Joseph needed him at his side. It was like a CEO sending his board of directors away with their company on the verge of a hostile takeover.

But Heber accepted the Prophet's call, as did others of the Twelve. With faith and little else (Heber had five dollars in his pocket), they left for England. In time, the Lord's reasoning and the Prophet's wisdom would become obvious. For the mission of the Twelve to England in the late 1830s proved critical to the growth and stability of the Church. It was the infusion of thousands of British Saints into the weakened body of the Church in the early 1840s that revived it. Who, with the Church in such precarious condition, would have sent his most trusted advisors an ocean away? Only a prophet who knew what the Church and its people needed in that day.

Fast-forward to 1844 and 1845. The Prophet Joseph was gone, and mobs were terrorizing Nauvoo. The Saints were emotionally, physically, and spiritually spent. The temple, which they had been commanded to build, wasn't completed. Who would have dared say to that bedraggled group, "Load up, we're going west to a place the Lord has shown me." The Lord's presiding high priest, who knew what the Church and its people needed in that day.

Again, fast-forward to the 1980s when an emotional debate raged over the proposed Equal Rights Amendment. On the surface, it seemed to some that this bill would only benefit women, particularly those who worked outside the home until a prophet spoke and exposed the subtle distortions embedded in that legislation that threatened to undermine and blur the divine distinctions between men and women. Who could have seen through the political and social fog and understood so clearly the negative ramifications of that bill? A prophet of God relaying information from the Lord.

It was President Ezra Taft Benson who said that "God's revelations to Adam did not instruct Noah how to build the Ark. Noah needed his own revelation" (BYU Speeches of the Year, 1980, 26).

Those who are willing to heed and hear a prophet's voice will find it almost impossible to stray from the path or to hit the mailboxes along the way. A favorite Primary song expresses it well: "Now we have a world where people are confused. If you don't believe it, go and watch the news. We can get direction all along our way, if we heed the prophets follow what they say. Follow the prophet, follow the prophet, follow the prophet . . . he knows the way" (Children's Songbook, 111).

President Harold B. Lee said much the same thing: "We have some tight places to go before the Lord is through with this church and the world in this dispensation. . . . The power of Satan will increase; we see it in evidence on every hand. . . . The only safety we have as members of this Church is to . . . give heed to the . . . commandments that the Lord shall give through His prophet. . . . You may not like what comes from the authority of the Church. It may contradict your political views. It may contradict your social views. . . . But if you listen to these things, as if from the mouth of the Lord Himself, . . . the promise is that 'the gates of hell shall not prevail against you'" (in Conference Report, October 1970, 152-53). It may be that the most vital lesson we can learn ourselves and then teach our children and families in this critical era is to follow the prophet.

Every prophet from Adam to the current day has testified that Christ will lift us up, if we will let Him (see Moroni 9:25-26). He will lift our sights, sharpen our vision, bless us with hope and peace of mind, and strengthen us with the resolve to rise above the world. It was so as the Nephite civilization crumbled. It is so today, as the moral underpinnings of our society rot with decay. The only answer to the challenge of mortalitythe only place we can find the strength and peace we must have is in the Lord Jesus Christ, whose atonement not only paid the price for sin but compensated for all of the pain and bitterness we face along this part of the path.

The preeminent witness of Christ in this dispensation is the Prophet Joseph, whose testimony of the Father and the Son is the wellspring of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: "And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God" (D&C 76:22-23).

Joseph's successors have likewise stood as witnesses of Christ, and the fruits of their labors speak for themselves. The Church continues to march steadily forward, as President Hinckley has often said, with never a backward step. Its history is heroic. Its members are a covenant people. Temples are dotting the earth. This work hasn't been led by idle dreamers. It has been led by prophets of God.

President Hinckley has urged us forward with these words: "The time has come for us to stand a little taller, to lift our eyes and stretch our minds to a greater . . . understanding of the grand millennial mission of this The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This is a season to be strong. It is a time to move forward without hesitation" (Ensign, May 1995, 71).

The days ahead promise high adventure as well as spiritual challenges that will rival anything the world has ever seen. At times the path we are on will feel tight and narrow. And the path will ever be littered with big, ugly mailboxes. But if we will keep our spiritual windshield clear so that we can keep our eye on the prophet, we will stay on course.

What difference does it make that we have a prophet? It makes all the difference. Either we have a prophet, or we don't. If we don't, we have nothing. If we do, we have everything. Joseph saw what he said he saw in a grove of trees in upstate New York. It is because of him that we know why we're here, where we're going, and that we have on earth a prophet who will lead us there.

It has been my privilege to spend time with two presidents of the ChurchPresident Ezra Taft Benson and President Gordon B. Hinckley in the preparation of their biographies. Never have I been with either of these men that the Spirit has not made me aware, instantly, that I was in the presence of a prophet of God.

The message of this millennium is that Jesus is the Christ, that His gospel has been restored in its fulness to the earth, and that we are led by a prophet who will help us find our way. 2002
