Sheri Dew, No Doubt About It (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 11

The Parable of Panmunjom

Nothing brings more peace of mind, security, and safety than living on the Lord's side of the line.

WHEN I WAS A STUDENT AT BYU, I took a year off from my studies to tour with a professional USO group that entertained at military bases around the world. One trip took us to the Far East, and before we left, my father gave me a strong warning. "I am worried about this trip," he said. "If something were to happen to you, we might never get you back. Be careful. Don't go anywhere you shouldn't go." This wasn't the first time I had been out of the country, and his words caught me by surprise. But, frankly, as our adventure in the exotic Orient began, I forgot about his warning until, that is, one day when we were scheduled to perform at a military base near the Demilitarized Zone that separated North and South Korea.

When our escort officer asked if we would like to go into the DMZ and visit Panmunjom, where the peace treaty ending the Korean War had been signed, I was instantly interested. I was a history major, and this was a place of great historical significance. Relations between the two Koreas were strained at the time, however, and we asked if it was safe. The officer assured us it was, but then promptly furnished waivers we were to sign absolving the military of responsibility in the event of accident or death. I suddenly remembered Dad's warning: "Be careful. Don't go anywhere you shouldn't go." But not wanting to be the killjoy, and being curious myself, I shrugged off my worry, signed the waiver, and headed into the DMZ, where we were no longer under the protection of the U.S. Armed Forces.

That reality was immediately evident as we drove past rows of somber North Korean soldiers sporting machine guns. "Don't look them in the eyes," we were warned. "Anything can set them off." As we joked about our bodies never being found, my stomach started to churn and my father's warning played in my mind in digital, Dolby sound. I knew that I had indeed gone somewhere I shouldn't have gone. The experience was nerve-racking. I felt as though I was behind enemy lines. As fascinating as the excursion was, I couldn't wait to get out of there. It wasn't until we crossed the border back into South Korea that I again felt a measure of peace. And, as it turns out, for good reason. Later that week three Americans were shot in the Demilitarized Zone.

With this experience in mind, consider these words from George Albert Smith, delivered when he was a member of the Quorum of the Twelve: "There is a division line well defined that separates the Lord's territory from Lucifer's. If we live on the Lord's side of the line Lucifer cannot come there to influence us, but if we cross the line into his territory we are in his power. By keeping the commandments of the Lord we are safe on His side of the line, but if we disobey His teachings we voluntarily cross into the zone of temptation and invite the destruction that is ever present there. Knowing this, how anxious we should always be to live on the Lord's side of the line" (Improvement Era, May 1935, 278).

If we live on the Lord's side of the line, Lucifer cannot come there to influence us. What an offer of safety and security in a world that Lucifer has turned into enemy-occupied territory; a world where his enticements are more provocative and enslaving than ever; a world where he will resort to any tactic to lure us to his side of the line where we are no longer under the influence and protection of the Holy Ghost. Fortunately, Satan can't make us do anything. The Prophet Joseph said: "As well might the devil seek to dethrone Jehovah, as overthrow an innocent soul that resists everything which is evil" (History of the Church, 4:605).

And everyone has the power to resist evil. "It is true that some have greater power of resistance than others," said Elder George Q. Cannon, "but everyone has the power to close his heart against doubt, against darkness, against unbelief, against depression, against anger, against hatred, against jealousy, against malice, against envy. God has given this power unto all of us, and we can gain still greater power by calling upon Him for that which we lack" (Gospel Truth, 1:16).

Thus, the only power the adversary has is power we give him when we intentionally or knowingly sin or break our covenants. Happily, we have not been left to withstand the wiles of the adversary unaided, for the power of Jesus Christ is stronger than the power of the devil. Hence we have the promise that Lucifer cannot influence us when we stay on the Lord's side of the line. No wonder we are counseled, "Pray always lest that wicked one have power in you, and remove you out of your place" (D&C 93:49; emphasis added). No wonder we have been admonished, "Stand ye in holy places, and be not moved" (D&C 87:8; emphasis added).

Very simply, our physical and spiritual safety lies in never even getting close to the line that separates light from dark, good from evil. Jesus Christ showed us how to deal with the adversary. When Satan tempted Him, there was no clever repartee or debate, no battle of wills, just immediate dismissal: "Get thee behind me, Satan. . . . Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God" (Luke 4:8, 12). If the omniscient Jehovah wasn't willing to debate the adversary, how quickly ought we to run for our livesour eternal lives when confronted with even the slightest hint of evil.

By and large, the men and women of this Church are bright and capable. But none of us is that smart. None of us is resilient enough to tango with the adversary. We can never match his cunning or his talent for deception and diversion. He will outsmart, outmaneuver, and outlast us every time we willingly consent to a duel. Lucifer is like the ultimate carnival barker: "Step right up. Come on in. Don't miss the greatest show on earth." But as soon as he has you inside his tent, he will leave you to twist in agony and isolation and darkness.

Happily, the choice about which side of the line we stand on is ours, for we "are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great Mediator . . . , or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil" (2 Nephi 2:27). The choice is ours. If we will allow Him to, Jesus Christ will shield and deliver us from Lucifer, who because of his rebellion and arrogance and thirst for power forfeited his inheritance and is now bent on jeopardizing ours. How crucial it therefore is that we become steadfast and immovable on the Lord's side of the line, where we are not only protected but ultimately sealed up unto the Lord (see Mosiah 5:15).

The principle of being steadfast and immovable reminds me of the North Carolina Tar Heels. As a product of the great basketball state of Kansas, I have watched many a ball game between the K. U. Jayhawks and the Tar Heels, and that unusual mascotthe Tar Heelshas always intrigued me. When I found out the genius of the phrase Tar Heels, I was even more impressed. During the Civil War those tough Carolina farm boys refused to concede ground to the Union army, and it came to be said that they stood as though they had tar on their heels. They would not budge.

Being steadfast and immovable with our heels in tar on the Lord's side of the line is the only strategy that will work long term against Lucifer. Some of his enticements are blatant and cause those who succumb to take giant leaps into his territory. Any breach of morality is immorality. Anything that isn't honest is dishonest. Any exposure to pornography, drugs, alcohol, and even excessive materialism is championed by the father of lies.

Breaches of integrity, large and small, are always associated with leaps onto Lucifer's side of the line. Just prior to the 2000 presidential election, I was assigned to speak to a professional, East-coast organization about the subject of leadership. Because a large portion of the audience were members of the Church, I approached the topic by discussing what we could learn about leadership from prophets of God, whom I consider the ultimate in mortal (and moral) leadership. Drawing from the lives of prophets ancient and modern, we discussed fundamental characteristics of true leadership, and naturally one of the characteristics was integrity. After the seminar, a prominent professional woman, a nonmember, approached me and said, "You know, I've never given much thought to the notion that we ought to expect our leaders to be honest, but I can see now that organizations fall apart when people don't tell the truth."

I found it startling that someone so accomplished professionally would never have considered the question of ethics and honesty in any setting, let alone our government. But then, recent events on the national political and social stage would suggest there are many whose attitudes reflect that woman's. Ten years ago the word spin meant what happens inside one of Disneyland's famous teacups. Today the word means coloring and shading the facts to prove whatever position you want to prove.

There is nothing new about dishonesty. There is nothing creative or clever or admirable about the breach of one's integrity. After Cain had slain Abel, the Lord asked him where his brother was. In response, Cain both lied and tried to divert attention away from himself: "I know not," he said. "Am I my brother's keeper?" (Genesis 4:9). Dishonesty didn't work then, and it doesn't work now. The Lord knew better. "What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me from the ground. And now art thou cursed from the earth" (Genesis 4:10-11). Cain's troubles began with pride and jealousy, but they were fueled by dishonesty.

How serious is dishonesty? Satan himself is often called the father of lies because his tactics always involve prevarication, deception, and, yes, "spin." Said President Gordon B. Hinckley: "In our day . . . those found in dishonesty [are not] put to death for their misdeeds, as in biblical times. But something within them dies. Conscience chokes, character withers, self-respect vanishes, integrity dies" (Standing for Something, 16).

Society begins to collapse when people don't tell the truth. Dishonesty corrodes companies, creates toxic corporate cultures, destroys unity and love within a family, wrecks relationships, mauls marriages, undermines unity in any setting, and leads always to breaking other commandments. Always. That is why the adversary is bent on attacking our integrity in ways large and small.

If he can't get us to succumb to blatant evil, he tries to coax us onto his side of the line by resorting to strategies that are sometimes more difficult to detectstrategies that slowly wear us down, weaken our resolve, and dim our memory of who we are. Whenever we succumb to the adversary's tactics, be they blatant or subtle, we experience what I did that day in the DMZfear and anxiety because with all of his cunning, the adversary cannot duplicate joy or peace. That is why there is such safety on the Lord's side of the line, where the power of the priesthood and the Holy Ghost protect us.

So how do we stay on the Lord's side of the line? How do we stand in holy places and be not moved? In the twenty-first century there is a great deal we can learn from Helaman and his two thousand stripling warriors. The story is a familiar one. Two thousand righteous young men stepped forward to fight in the stead of their fathers, who had made a covenant never again to shed the blood of their brethren (see Alma 24:18). These young men were ultimately victorious against a larger, more experienced Lamanite army for several reasons:

There is power in making covenants. Weekly, as we renew our covenants and promise to take upon ourselves the name of the Son, to always remember Him, and to keep His commandments, we receive in return a transcendent promise, one filled with heavenly power: that we "may always have his Spirit to be with [us]" (Moroni 4:3). Having the Holy Ghost with usand learning to hear His voiceis a key, perhaps the single most profound key, to remaining steadfast and immovable on the Lord's side of the line. And it all begins by making a covenant.

After President Hinckley was interviewed by Mike Wallace for 60 Minutes, I had occasion to talk with Mr. Wallace about their conversation. Of all the things he mentioned admiringly about President Hinckley, it seemed that Mr. Wallace was most impressed with the fact that President Hinckley had done everything in connection with the interview that he had promised to do. When I later offered to show Mr. Wallace how I intended to quote him in President Hinckley's biography, he replied, "That's not necessary. You're a Mormon. I trust you." Do you really think this seasoned journalist believes that every member of the Church is trustworthy? Of course not. He is not that naive. His expression was not a reflection of me or even of the Church at large; it was a reflection of his experience with President Hinckley. In effect, he was saying, "If you are associated with that man, then I assume that you, too, will do what you have said you will do."

The integrity of another modern-day prophet, President Ezra Taft Benson, also caught the attention of the press. When Elder Ezra Taft Benson was serving as Secretary of Agriculture under President Dwight D. Eisenhower, his agricultural policies often took a beating on Capitol Hill and therefore in the media. But at the same time his policies were criticized, his moral fiber and character were repeatedly championed, as they were in one New York Times Magazine article: "One reason [for Secretary Benson's inner calm] is his religion. . . . He acts like a man whose conscience is always clearhis testimony [before Congress] today will be the same next week or the week after or a year from now. He doesn't have to remember what he said to an opposition Senator at their last meeting. This is a built-in ulcer-saving device not always found in Washington" (Dew, Ezra Taft Benson, 295-96). A reporter from American magazine asked him his secret, and Elder Benson replied, "It's easy to keep calm if you have inner security and peace of mind. . . . I try to do the thing I believe to be right and let the chips fall where they will." In fact, Elder Benson often told his Capitol Hill colleagues, "I feel it is always good strategy to stand up for the right, even when it is unpopular. Perhaps I should say, especially when it is unpopular" (Dew, Ezra Taft Benson, 296, 303.)

Are we true at all times to the things with which we have been entrusted? Do we stand up for the right, even when it is unpopular? Do we do something so simple and basic as tell the truth? Are we true to those who have trusted us with their love and their confidence? Are we true to the knowledge that we are sons and daughters of God with an eternal future? Are we true to the whisperings of the Spirit? Are we true to our temple covenants? Are we doing what we promised we would do before we came here and promised again when we were baptized and endowed?

The stripling warriors not only kept their covenants but performed "every word of command with exactness" (Alma 57:21). In other words, they kept their covenants with precision. A half-hearted effort to keep the Sabbath day holy or to be morally clean or to tell the truth or to dress modestly is really no effort at all. Joseph Smith didn't say that we sort of believe in being "honest, true, chaste, benevolent, [and] virtuous" (Articles of Faith 1:13). On Mount Sinai the Lord didn't declare, "Thou shalt not stealunless you're in a real bind." He didn't say, "Thou shalt rarely covet." He didn't say, "Thou shalt not commit adulteryvery often." He said, "Thou shalt not," clearly delineating lines we are not to cross lines that represent breaches in integrity or morality or virtue so serious that they drive the Spirit away and lead ultimately to the destruction of our souls; lines to stay away from lest we lose control of our thoughts, our motives, or our actions and step into Lucifer's territory where we come under his control.

Men and women who sell their birthright for a mess of pottage almost universally confess that their demise began with something small, with some seemingly insignificant breach of integrity that escalated. The little things do matter. It is not pos sible to profess righteousness while flirting with sin. Believe me, Lucifer wants those of the noble birthright. He wants our minds and our bodies and our souls. I daresay there is no greater smirking in the underworld than when he gets his chains around a man or woman who has made sacred covenants.

It is as we keep the commandments and our covenants with exactness that the Lord strengthens us. The supreme example is the Savior Himself. In Gethsemane, after He renewed His covenant to follow through on the most dramatic but vital commitment associated with this eartha commitment critical and central to our Father's plansaying, "Not my will, but thine, be done," after that, "there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him" (Luke 22:42-43) so that He could endure what lay ahead. On the cross when He uttered the words, "It is finished, thy will is done" (JST, Matthew 27:54; see also John 19:30), He became the greatest example in time or eternity of keeping covenants. There would have been no Atonement had the Lord not kept His covenant precisely as He promised. It is the same with us. As we recommit ourselves, the Lord strengthens us to withstand any temptation.

Living as Latter-day Saints is not easy. But it is easier than the alternative. The cost of discipleship, as high as it may be, is less than the price of sinless costly than having the Holy Ghost withdraw or losing self-respect or jeopardizing eternal life.

Not only was their faith in the Lord strong at the beginning of their march, but it remained strong throughout their ordeal. Every one of these young men was wounded, and at one point they nearly starved to death (see Alma 57:25; 58:7). Yet instead of wavering, they turned to the Lord and pled for strengthwhich they received (see Alma 58:10-12). Having faith didn't make their challenges disappear. It didn't make marching in Helaman's army easy. It didn't disqualify them from pain. But their faith did enable them to draw upon the power of God. Consequently, they "fought as if with the strength of God; yea, never were men known to have fought with such miraculous strength; and with such mighty power" (Alma 56:56).

We will not win the battle in which we are engaged if we do not fight as with the strength of God, for the voices of Satan are noisy, relentless, and celebrated. The gap between the way men and women of God and the way men and women of the world live will only grow wider. But that's okay, as long as we, the Lord's covenant people, feel confident about who we are.

We have every reason to, for when Nephi foresaw the latter-day Church, he "beheld the power of the Lamb of God, that it descended upon the saints of the church of the Lamb, and upon the covenant people of the Lord, who were scattered upon all the face of the earth; and they were armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory" (1 Nephi 14:14).

Nephi was seeing you and me. We may be small numerically, but the influence of those armed with righteousness and the power of God in great glory will be felt far beyond our numbers. We can't win this battle alone, but we aren't required to, for it is in the strength of the Lord that we can do all things (see Alma 26:12). And that process begins with our faith.

Satan tries to confuse us about voices and heroes and role models. He encourages us to worship the bright and beautiful regardless of their values or motives. He makes the lives of the rich and famous look intoxicating when in reality many are just intoxicated. Just because someone can shoot a ball through a hoop or record a hit song or launch a billion-dollar IPO doesn't mean that he or she deserves our respect, and it certainly doesn't mean their lives should be patterns for our lives. Jesus Christ gave us the one sure pattern. If we are wise, we will follow only those who lead us closer to Him. That is the litmus test for evaluating anyone's motives.

Here is just one example. In today's world, where immorality is celebrated on nearly every world stage, succumbing to moral temptation is depicted as being easier and even more desirable and enlightened than maintaining moral purity. But it isn't. The moment of sexual transgression is the last moment immorality is easy. I have never known anyone who was happier or who felt better about themselves or who had greater peace of mind as a result of their immorality. Never.

As someone who has remained unmarried two and a half decades beyond a traditional marriageable age, I know something about the challenge of chastity. It is not always easy, but it is far easier than regret or the loss of self-respect, than the agony of breaking covenants, than struggling with shallow and failed relationships. This is not to say there are never temptations. Even in my late forties, having long ago decided how I wanted to live my life, I have to be careful all the time. Morality isn't automatic; it requires constant awareness and effort. There are things I simply cannot watch, cannot read, cannot listen to because they trigger thoughts and instincts that drive the Spirit away and that edge me too close to the moral line. But those supposed sacrifices are well worth it.

It is so much more comforting to live with the Spirit than without, so much more joyful to have relationships of trust and true friendship than to indulge in a physical relationship that would eventually crumble anyway. Whereas Satan's lies lead only to enslavement, the Savior's promise is one of exaltation and endless lives. In other words, we shall have joy in this life and a fulness in the life hereafter. Righteousness begets happiness.

There are many other lessons we could learn from the sons of Helaman. We could talk of service and selflessness, of obedience and consecration and endurance. But I turn now to the final and perhaps most compelling point.

As with Helaman's young army, our young adult men and women are the cavalry, here to carry on the work of the Lord at an intense and vital stage of the battlea battle that began with the war in heaven and that rages to this very day. Helaman told Moroni that his "little force" had given the Nephite army "great hopes and much joy" (Alma 56:17). As compared with Helaman's two thousand, today there are nearly two million young men and women in this Church between the ages of eighteen and twenty-five. Nevertheless, compared with the world's population and its escalating depravity, they are a "little force." But also, as in Helaman's day, we of older generations must rejoice in their strength and in their goodness. They bring great hope and much joy to the body of the Church. They are latter-day reinforcements prepared during aeons of premortality to face the enemy, reinforcements who must now step up to strengthen the body of the Church and help us keep moving steadily forward. And it is the responsibility of all of us their parents and grandparents, aunts and uncles, teachers and friendsto help raise and lead this chosen generation.

Relief Society assignments have taken me to many countries where I have witnessed a remarkable trend. In countries such as Cambodia, Indonesia, Ghana, and Kenya, where the Church is young but the Spirit is strong, it is young men and women who are recognizing the truth, joining the Church, and being called upon to lead. The district Relief Society and Young Women presidents in Phnom Penh are each scarcely twenty years old. And I will never forget a Cambodia district conference when thirty handsome young Cambodian men stood and sang, "We are as the army of Helaman. We have been taught in our youth" (Children's Songbook, 172-73). They are the future of the Church in Cambodia. They will help save the day in their corner of the worldas will every one of our youth who lives on the Lord's side of the line.

After President Hinckley's appearance on 60 Minutes, a non-LDS viewer sent this note to CBS: "I enjoyed your Mormon segment Easter Sunday. . . . These people do provide an anchor in a sea of ever-changing values. Fifty thousand chaste missionaries in 150 countries probably do more good for society than all the government social programs put together" (Tom Thorkelson to 60 Minutes, 8 April 1996). Imagine then what an army of two million chaste, honest, dedicated young men and women filled with the power of God in great glory can doand must do! There is no greater cause. There is no greater army for righteousness.

The Lord needs faithful, articulate, committed men and women, and young men and young women, who are undaunted by what lies ahead and who are willing to stand up for what is right again and again; who do not doubt what the Lord will do for them; who keep their covenants with exactness; and who have decided that, at all costs, they will live on the Lord's side of the line.

Will you commit to be true to who you are? To plant your feet in tar on the Lord's side of the line? I invite you to begin by taking inventory. There may be clothes or videos or books or magazines or CDs you need to throw out. Just do it. Toss out those movies that contain foul language and violence and sexual innuendo. If you can't resist adult Internet sites, unhook the Internet. No video or CD or Web site is worth crossing over into Satan's territory. No enticement is worth losing your exaltation. You will love how this kind of spiritual spring cleaning feels.

But that is just part one, the easy part. Part two involves taking an inventory of your language, your integrity, your dedication, your virtue, and the way you treat others. One by one, will you begin to throw out thoughts and behaviors and habits that pull you toward enemy territory? I'll take the challenge. Will you? The Lord will help us with this exercise, for if we will humble ourselves before Him and really believe in Him, He will bless us with strength we have never had before. He will help us turn our weakness into strength (see Ether 12:27). And every small victory over the natural man will be a victory over Satan and yet more evidence of the grand, sweeping, redemptive power of Jesus Christ. Let's begin now.

Make no mistake about it, the restored gospel will cover this earth. The battle will be rigorous, but the Lord will not concede and His kingdom will not fail. His power and glory will exceed anything we have ever seen in terms of dramatic finishes. For each of us, then, only this question remains: Will we stand steadfast and immovable on the Lord's side of the line? The Lord will be on our side if we will stay on His.

Every one of us has been prepared to stand where we stand in the kingdom of God, and we will be triumphant if we stand in holy placeson the Lord's side of the lineand be not moved. 2002
