Sheri Dew, No Doubt About It (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 12

Letting the World Go

We are not women of the world, we are women of Godwhich means that we no longer have the luxury of spending our energy on anything that doesn't lead us and our families to Christ.

I WILL NEVER FORGET a professional assignment that required me to travel to Jerusalem. I had been to Israel only once previously, and was eager to return. But I felt such a foreboding about the trip that I seriously considered canceling. Before doing so, however, I sought a priesthood blessing.

In that blessing I was warned that the adversary would attempt to thwart my mission, and that physical and spiritual danger lay ahead. I was also counseled that this was not to be a sightseeing or shopping trip, but that if I would focus on my assignments and seek the direction of the Spirit, I would return safely home.

The warning was sobering. But as I proceeded, pleading for direction and protection each step of the way, I realized that my experience wasn't all that unusual. Might not our Father have said to you and to me as we left His presence, "The adversary will attempt to thwart your mission, and you will face spiritual and physical danger. But if you will focus on your assignments, heed my voice, and refuse to reduce mortality to a sightseeing or shopping trip, you will return safely home."

The adversary is delighted when we act like sightseers, meaning those who are hearers rather than doers of the word, or shoppers, meaning those preoccupied with the vain things of this world that suffocate our spirits. Satan baits us with perishable pleasures and preoccupations our bank accounts, our wardrobes, even our waistlinesfor he knows that where our treasure is, there will our hearts be also (see Matthew 6:21). Unfortunately, it is easy to let the blinding glare of the adversary's enticements distract us from the light of Christ. "For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" (Matthew 16:26).

Prophets ancient and modern have admonished us to be in but not of the world, to forsake the world and turn our hearts to Jesus Christ, who promised, "In this world your joy is not full, but in me your joy is full" (D&C 101:36). And for good reason. For in this mortal sojourn, wrestling as we do with the natural man's cravings for the enticements of the world, it can be easy to find ourselves lured away from the light of Christ by the adversary's blinding glare. Satan brilliantly blurs the line between the eternal things of God and the temporary, superficial creations of man. As President Spencer W. Kimball taught: "If we insist on spending all our time and resources building up for ourselves a worldly kingdom, that is exactly what we will inherit" (Ensign, June 1976, 6).

How often are we so focused on pursuing the so-called good life that we lose sight of eternal life? It is the fatal spiritual equivalent of selling our birthright for a mess of pottage.

The Lord revealed the remedy for such spiritual disaster when He counseled Emma Smith to "lay aside the things of this world, and seek for the things of a better" (D&C 25:10). And Christ provided the ultimate pattern, declaring prior to Gethsemane, "I have overcome the world" (John 16:33). The only way we can overcome the world is by coming unto Christ. And coming unto Christ means walking away from the world.

It means placing Christ and Christ only at the center of our lives so that the vanities and philosophies of men lose their addictive appeal. The Prophet Joseph stated simply, "If you wish to go where God is, you must be like God, or possess the principles which God possesses, for if we are not drawing towards God in principle, we are going from Him and drawing towards the devil" (Teachings, 216). Satan is the god of Babylon, or the world, and although his temptations may seem enticing they are temporary, deceptive, and laden with inevitable sorrow. Christ is the God of Israel, and His atonement gives us power to overcome the world. "If you expect glory, intelligence, and endless lives," said President Joseph F. Smith, "let the world go" (Deseret Weekly, 5 May 1894, 608; emphasis added).

As sisters in Zion we can be obstacles to the adversary's conspiracy against families and virtue. No wonder he tempts us to settle for earthly pleasures rather than seek eternal glory. A forty-five-year-old mother of six admitted that when she stopped poring over magazines that plagued her with images of how her home and wardrobe should look, she began to feel more at peace. She said, "I may be chubby, gray, and wrinkled; but I am a chubby, gray, wrinkled daughter of God Who knows me and loves me."

Relief Society can help us turn away from the world, for its express purpose is to help sisters and their families come to Christ. We simply no longer have the luxury of spending our energy on anything that does not lead us and our families to Christ. In the days ahead, a casual commitment to Christ will not carry us through.

As a young girl I saw commitment in my grandmother, who helped Grandpa homestead our farm on the Kansas prairie. Somehow they outlasted the Dust Bowl, the Depression, and the tornadoes that terrorize the Great Plains. I've often wondered how Grandma put up with years of meager income and hard work, and how she went on when her oldest son died in his early thirties in a tragic accident. Grandma's life wasn't easy. But do you know what I remember most about her? Her total joy in the gospel. She was never happier than when she was talking to someone new about the gospel or teaching a Sunday School class or speaking extemporaneously in sacrament meeting or doing family history research. She had laid aside the things of this world to seek for the things of a better.

To the world, my grandma was ordinary. She never made a best-dressed or a best-anything list. She never graced the cover of Time magazine. But to me, she represents the unsung heroines of this century who lived up to their premortal promises and left a foundation of faith upon which we may build. Grandma wasn't perfect, but she was a woman of God. Now it is for you and for me to carry forward the banner into the next century. For we are not women of the world. We are women of God. And women of God will be among the greatest heroines of the twenty-first century.

This is not to diminish the lives of countless good women throughout the world. But we are unique. We are unique because we have made sacred covenants, because of our spiritual privileges, and because of the responsibilities attached to both. We understand where we stand in the Great Plan of Happiness. And we know that God is our Father and that His Son is our unfailing Advocate.

At times the demands of our discipleship are heavy, for "of him unto whom much is given much is required" (D&C 82:3). But shouldn't we expect the journey towards eternal glory to stretch us?

We sometimes rationalize our preoccupation with this world and our casual attempts to grow spiritually by trying to console each other with the notion that living the gospel shouldn't be all that hard or require all that much of us this despite the Prophet Joseph's declaration that "a religion that does not require the sacrifice of all things never has the power sufficient to produce the faith necessary unto life and salvation" (Lectures on Faith, 6:7). If we can't manage the relatively small requirements the Lord has asked of us, we'll never manage the larger questions the largest of which is simply whether we have or have not truly chosen the Lord, as capsulized in Joshua's simple but profound declaration: "Choose you this day whom ye will serve; . . . but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord" (Joshua 24:15).

The Lord's standard of behavior will always be more demanding than the world's. But then, the Lord's rewards are infinitely more gloriousincluding true joy, peace, and salvation, which is the "greatest of all the gifts of God" (D&C 6:13).

As Eliza R. Snow said, "[We] might as well have been born in some other . . . dispensation, unless [we] can feel that [we] have a mission in Zion. . . . [We] are living to be Saints" (Woman's Exponent, address given 14 August 1873, 63).

How then do we, as women of God, fill the full measure of our creation? The Lord "is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him" (Hebrews 11:6). We seek Him not only by studying and searching, by pleading and praying and watching always lest we enter into temptation, but by giving up worldly indulgences that straddle the line between God and mammon. Otherwise we risk being called but not chosen because our hearts are set so much upon the things of this world (see D&C 121:34-35). Consider the principle taught in the sequence of this scriptural injunction: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy might, mind, and strength" (D&C 59:5; emphasis added).

What the Lord requires first and foremost is our hearts. Said the Apostle Paul, "Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth" (Colossians 3:2). Imagine how our choices would be affected if we loved the Savior above all else. How we would spend our time and money, or speak about each other, or dress on a hot summer day, or respond to the call to visit teach, or react to media that offends the Spirit?

Discipleshipand that is exactly what this process isgives us cause to "rejoice evermore" (1 Thessalonians 5:16), for it is by letting the world go and coming unto Christ that we increasingly live as women of God. We were born for eternal glory. Just as faithful men were foreordained to hold the priesthood, we were foreordained to be women of God. President Gordon B. Hinckley has referred to the sisters of the Church as "the crowning glory" of the Lord's creation (Ensign, November 1995, 98). As the Relief Society Declaration proclaims, we are women of faith, virtue, vision, and charity who rejoice in motherhood, womanhood, and the sanctity of the family. We are not panicked about perfection, but we are working to become increasingly pure. And we know that in the strength of the Lord we can do all righteous things because we have immersed ourselves in His gospel.

I repeat, we cannot be women of the world, for we are latter-day women of God. As President Spencer W. Kimball explained, "No greater recognition can come to [us] in this world than to be known as [women] of God" (Ensign, November 1979, 102).

I will never forget my first experience on the Mount of Beatitudes overlooking the Sea of Galilee. As I sat on that storied place, I saw in the distance a city built on a hill. The visual image of a city that could not be hid was stunning, and as I pondered the symbolism I had an overwhelming impression that we as women of God are like that city. If we will leave behind the things of the world and come unto Christ so that the Spirit radiates through our lives and from our eyes, if we will cherish our covenants and "hold out faithful to the end" (D&C 6:13), our collective and individual uniqueness will be as a light unto the world. As sisters of Relief Society, we belong to the most significant community of women on this side of the veil. We are a spectacular city set on a hill. And the less we look and dress and act and talk like the women of the world, the more they will recognize something "different," even peculiar, in us, and over time, the more they will look to us as a wellspring of hope, peace, virtue, and joy.

More than twenty years ago President Kimball made a statement we have quoted ever since: "Much of the major growth that is coming to the Church in the last days . . . will happen . . . to the degree that the women of the Church are seen as distinct and differentin happy waysfrom the women of the world" (Ensign, November 1979, 103-4). We can no longer be content to just quote President Kimball. We are the sisters who must and will make his prophecy a reality. But we can do it. I know we can.

We can begin by identifying at least one thing we can do to come out of the world and come closer to Christ. And then next month, another. And then another. Sisters, this is a call to arms, a call to action, a call to arise. A call to rely on the arm of the Lord rather than the arm of flesh. A call to "lift up the hands which hang down" (D&C 81:5). A call to bear righteous arms in the battle against the father of all lies and in defense of the Savior we have committed to serve and follow and emulate. A call to "arise and shine forth, that [our] light may be a standard for the nations" (D&C 115:5). A call to live as women of God so that we and our families may return safely home.

We have such cause to rejoice, for the gospel of Jesus Christ is the voice of gladness (see D&C 128:19)! It is because the Savior overcame the world that we may overcome. It is because He rose on the third day that we may arise as women of God. May we lay aside the things of this world and seek for the things of a better. May we this very hour commit to come out of the world and to never look back.
