Sheri Dew, No Doubt About It (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 13

Stand Tall and Stand Together

We who are women and young women of God are the Lord's special treasuresnot to mention His secret weaponsand we have a vital role to play in helping build His kingdom.

BY THE TIME I TURNED TWELVE, I was a five-foot, ten-inch social disaster. Towering over my friends was the bane of my adolescence. I didn't want to stand outat least not that way and so I compensated by slouching. As a result, Mother was constantly urging me to "stand up straight." Well, I didn't want to stand up straight then, but I do now. For we have all been admonished to "stand up" (2 Nephi 8:17), to "stand with brightness" before the Lord (2 Nephi 9:44), to "stand fast in the Lord" (Philippians 4:1), to stand for truth and righteousness (see Ephesians 6:14), and to stand as a witness (see Mosiah 18:9), so that we may "stand blameless before God at the last day" (D&C 4:2). I can find absolutely no scriptural injunction to slouch in Zion. Instead, we are repeatedly told to get on our feet, to "arise and stand up" (3 Nephi 20:2).

As a teenager I did not realize or fully appreciate that blending in with the crowd would never be my lot. Nor is it the lot of any woman of God who has made, and is striving to keep, sacred, holy, eternal covenants. The calling and expectation and responsibility of women of God is to stand tall precisely so that we will stand out from the rest of the world. Only in doing so may we hope to find joy. Finding joy and standing tall, not in feet or inches but as ambassadors for the Lord, are directly connected.

My family learned this truth in a most poignant way. I have seventeen nieces and nephews who are a pure delight. We have hiked and biked and fasted and prayed together. And we have also cried together. During the summer of 2000 we suffered a crushing loss when a fatal automobile accident took the lives of two of my sister Cindy's childrenAmanda, who was eleven, and Tanner, who was fifteen. Because we have lived together in love, we have truly wept for the loss of them that died (see D&C 42:45).

Our friends in our small Kansas hometown, most of them nonmembers, wept with us, and with the outpouring of sympathy and concern that followed the deaths we realized that these people's hearts might never be more open to truth than on the day two caskets rested in our little hometown chapel. So we decided to dedicate the funeral entirely to testifying of Christ and the restored gospel. Afterward many told us how moved they were by what they heard and by what they felt. We were told that the common sentiment expressed in various groups around our little town was that they had never experienced anything quite like the funeral for Amanda and Tanner. Some even asked to learn more. It remains to be seen if anyone will join the Church as a result of our children's deaths. But this we know for sure that standing up for what we believe and teaching the gospel to friends who had never before been willing to listen helped soothe our pain and bring us joy as a family.

In this world, the only true joy comes from the gospelthe joy that radiates from the Atonement and from ordinances that transcend the veil, and from the Comforter, Who salves our souls. I'll never forget receiving a letter from my niece Aubrey, then eleven years old, who had written her life history. Her words were unusually poignant because she had lost her father at the age of six and had had many subsequent changes in her life with which to deal. In her life story she told about a close friend, a nonmember, who had asked her why she didn't seem sad about the deaths of her father and her two cousins. Aubrey's reply was classic: "Not sad?" she said. "Trust me, we are sad. But we know that we will be together again, so we don't worry as much."

As a family, I imagine we have cried as much as any family does who loses loved ones. But there is no question that, because of what we know and what we believe, we don't worry as we would if we hadn't felt the transcendent reach and healing power of Jesus Christ. The gospel really is "beauty for ashes" (Isaiah 61:3), it is "the oil of gladness" (Hebrews 1:9), it is the "glad tidings" (D&C 76:40). It is such good news!

Though our children are gone for now, we have the glorious reassurance that we haven't lost them. But what about our Father's children, our brothers and sisters, who are lost and who thus face not only physical but spiritual death? The gospel of Jesus Christ is all about people. It is about leaving the ninety and nine and going into the wilderness after those who are lost. It is about mourning with those who mourn and bearing one another's burdens, with the ultimate burden anyone can bear being walking through life without gospel light without a knowledge of who they are and who they have always been, without understanding why they are here having this mortal experience, and with no idea of where they may ultimately go.

Hence the Lord's latter-day plea, "The field is white already to harvest; and it is the eleventh hour, and the last time that I shall call laborers into my vineyard." He goes on to explain that though His vineyard has become corrupted "every whit," He will gather His elect from the four quarters of the earth, "even as many as will believe in [Him], and hearken unto [His] voice." As a result, He counsels us to "thrust in [our] sickles, and reap with all [our] might, mind, and strength," and then gives this glorious promise: "Open your mouths and they shall be filled" (D&C 33:3-4, 6-8).

Ancient prophets foresaw a day "when the knowledge of a Savior [would] spread throughout every nation, kindred, tongue, and people" (Mosiah 3:20). That day has come. And it is our turn to thrust in our sickles and help the Lord of the vineyard with the harvest. That we are here now is no accident. For aeons of time our Father watched us and knew He could trust us when so much would be at stake. For we are women of God, and the work of women of God has always been to help build the kingdom of God.

When in premortality we accepted our Father's plan, said Elder John A. Widtsoe, "we made a certain agreement with the Almighty. The Lord proposed a plan, conceived by him. We accepted it. Since the plan is intended for all men, we became parties to the salvation of every person under that plan. We agreed, right then and there, to be not only saviors for ourselves, but measurably saviors for the whole human family. We went into a partnership with the Lord. The working out of the plan became . . . not merely the Father's work, and the Savior's work, but also our work" (Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, October 1934, 189). Then, when we were baptized here on this earthchoosing to follow the Lord a second time we renewed our commitment to, and our covenant with, the Lord. No wonder President Gordon B. Hinckley has declared that "if the world is going to be saved, we have to do it. . . . No other people in the history of the world have . . . received a . . . more compelling mandate than we [have] . . . , and we'd better be getting at it" (Church News, 3 July 1999, 3).

We have our work cut out for us. The Prophet Joseph charged the Relief Society with the work of saving souls (see History of the Church, 5:25), for it is the very nature of women to nurture, to care about the well-being of others, and to search after those who are lost. And yet, more than a century after the Prophet's statement, President Spencer W. Kimball lamented that there was a power in the Relief Society (and therefore among the women of the Church) that had not "yet been fully exercised to strengthen the homes of Zion and build the Kingdom of God" (Ensign, March 1976, 4). For all the good it has done in the past, Relief Society has yet to help move this latter-day work forward as it must. Its members have yet to open their mouths and have them filled to the degree that the Lord is counting on. The time has come to unleash the power of righteous happiness that exists among women of God. The time has come for the women of the Church to be anxiously engaged in the work of teaching truth and saving souls. The time has come for the sisters of Relief Society to stand with and for the prophet in helping build the kingdom. The time has come for each of us to stand tall, and then, in doing so, for us to stand together.

Standing tall begins with our own conversion, for when we taste the gospel's "exceeding joy" (Alma 36:24), we want to share it. The casseroles and quilts we have made to relieve suffering in more than 160 nations of the world are splendid acts of kindness. It would be impossible to quantify the impact that the 140,000-plus quilts made by the sisters of Relief Society during 1999 had not only on the Kosovar refugees for whom they were originally intended, but for countless others in need. It would be impossible to measure the cumulative impact of all of the acts of compassion and meals and home visits that 4.7 million women are offering every day of every year. The lives that have been touched and strengthened, the men and women and families who have felt the gift of kindness and true charity, cannot be numbered or measuredqualitatively or quantitatively. But absolutely no ser vice compares with that of leading someone to Christ, of helping someone discover who they are, what they are here for, where they are headedand how to get there.

Do you want to be happy? And I mean really happy? Then nurture someone along the path that leads to the temple and ultimately to Jesus Christ.

The most effective way to share the gospel is to live it. When we live like disciples of Christ should live, when we aren't just good but happy to be good, others will be drawn to us. We need to be happy about the way we've chosen to live, happy because we're not constantly reshaping ourselves in the world's image, happy because we have "the gift and the power of the Holy Ghost" (1 Nephi 13:37), happy to stand tall so that we will stand out.

Every time we strengthen our own testimonies or help someone else strengthen theirs, we build the kingdom of God. Every time we choose honesty or stand up for decency, we displace evil and therefore build the kingdom of God. Every time we mentor a newly baptized sister or befriend a wandering soul without judging her or invite a nonmember family to home evening or give a Book of Mormon to a colleague or lead a family to the temple or exemplify modesty or celebrate motherhood or invite the missionaries into our homes or help someone discover the power of the Word, we build the kingdom of God. Imagine how it lifted my sister's spirits when she read this journal entry Tanner had made just days before he died: "Thanks, Mom and Dad, for teaching me about Christ."Is there anything that builds the kingdom more than does raising up a child to the Lord?

With the exception of those serving full-time missions, we need not don name badges or knock on doors to help build the kingdom. This process doesn't have to be scary; it doesn't need to be intimidating or overwhelming. For though some in the world would portray us as dowdy and dominated rather than the dynamic, radiant women we are, no woman is more persuasive, no woman has greater influence for good, no woman is a more vibrant instrument in the hands of the Lord than a woman of God who is thrilled to be who she is! I like to think of us as the Lord's secret weapon. For few people can resist a woman who lives and conducts her life under the influence of the Holy Ghost.

Imagine what would happen throughout this Church if every morning 4.7 million of us got on our knees and pleaded with our Father to know whom He needed us to reach out to that day. And then imagine if we followed those promptings! Imagine if we consecrated our energy and our focus en masse to the greatest service of all, that of leading our sisters and brothers to Christ. Imagine if we prayed every day for a missionary experience (which prayers are almost always answered, and quickly). Imagine what will happen when we mobilize the sisters of Relief Society as well as our spectacular young women, who President Hinckley has declared are part of the finest generation to ever come to earth and are thus among the finest women to have ever lived, to stand together to help build the kingdom. We will see the awakening and arising of a sleeping, slouching giantthe giant that President Kimball said had yet to reach its potential or maximize its mission.

President Gordon B. Hinckley has repeatedly invited us to rededicate our lives to building the kingdom. "I wish I could awaken in the heart of every man, woman, boy, and girl . . . the great consuming desire to share the gospel with others," he stated at a regional conference in Anchorage, Alaska. "If you do that you live better, you try to make your lives more exemplary because you know that those you teach will not believe unless you back up what you say by the goodness of your lives. Nobody can foretell the consequences of that which you do when you teach the gospel to another" (Teachings of Gordon B. Hinckley, 374).

The Lord has invited us, has pleaded with us, has admonished us to stand tall and to thrust in our sickle and join in this work, His work, with vigor. To reach out to someone who has wandered. To take new members under our wing and help them make the sometimes difficult transition into full-fledged fellowship in the Church. To consider serving missions with our husbands. To look and pray for missionary experiences and opportunities and moments. To make a difference in someone's life spiritually, especially the members of our own families. None of us have to reach everyone. But what if we all reached someone? And then someone else? And so on. President Hinckley has asked us "to become a vast army with enthusiasm for this work" (Ensign, May 1999, 110). As we do so, we will become one of the mightiest forces for good this world has ever seen. For we, the sisters of Relief Society, are women of God. And the work of women of God and the work of the Relief Society has always been to help build the kingdom of God. I believe that we can do more than we have ever done before to help our priesthood leaders with this great work, beginning with our prophet and continuing to include every bishop and branch president in the Church.

In my nephew's priesthood quorum, just a few hours before he died, Tanner said this: "You know, if I were to die soon, I would want my funeral to be a missionary farewell." Could we not be equally clear about our mission as women of God? We do not belong to just a really nice church that teaches really nice ideas so that we can live really nice lives. We belong to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which is endowed with His power and charged with carrying His truth to the ends of the earth. I love our Father. And I love His Son. This is Their work and Their glory, and we are the most blessed of all women to have such a vital part in ita part that no one else can duplicate or replace.

We will find and experience joy as we lift our "voices as with the sound of a trump" (D&C 42:6), for as we stand tall and stand together we will see the work of God go forward boldly and nobly until "it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done" (History of the Church, 4:540). 2002
