Sheri Dew, No Doubt About It (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2002)

Chapter 14

Shall We Not Go Forward in So Great a Cause?

As an ancient prophet foretold, we have been armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great gloryand thus our influence will far exceed our numbers.

NOT LONG AGO, we welcomed in a new millenniumand not just any old millennium, but the era foreseen by prophets from the beginning of time. What a magnificent time to take our turn in helping shoulder the glorious burden of the gospel kingdom!

I love the magnitude and the drama of it all. But then, I love drum rolls and bugles and big finishes and anything that stirs our souls and moves us to righteous action. This is just one reason I am drawn to the Prophet Joseph's exuberant declaration: "Now, what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness! . . . Shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward and not backward. Courage, . . . and on, on to the victory!" (D&C 128:19, 22).

Doesn't that just make you want to climb a rooftop or go on CNN and tell the whole world what you know and believe? We are engaged in the glorious cause of Jesus Christ. Nonetheless, standing firm in that cause is not always easy to do.

When I was fifteen, I was invited to speak about the Church in my high school. Everyone knew I was LDS. Some of my friends had even come to Mutual with me. But as the only LDS girl in school, I often found myself trying to maintain that delicate balance between standing up for what I believed while not standing out. As the day of my presentation approached, I began to panic. How would my friends react to the story about Joseph Smith and angels and gold plates? I am sorry to admit that fear got the best of me, and I backed out. Afterward I was so ashamed. I had let the Lord down, and I knew it. But I had been more concerned about the praise of the in-crowd than the praise of the Lord. I had cared more about belonging to the "right" group than standing as a witness.

I imagine we have each had moments when we could and should have been more valiant in our testimonies of Jesus Christ, moments when in our desire to belong we turned our backs on the Master. We each have a longing to belongto feel that we "fit in," to be part of something greater and grander than we areso we scurry about, sometimes chasing worldly distinctions that give us the illusion of importance and acceptance. But ironically, as the Lord's covenant people, we already belong to an extraordinary crowd," and we have the potential of belonging to the most exclusive group in time or eternity: the family of Christ. That depends, however, on our willingness to go forward in the glorious cause of Christ.

Each of us, regardless of (or perhaps because of) our personal circumstances, has a role to play in the latter-day kingdom of God. Said President Joseph F. Smith: "He that sent His only-begotten Son into the world to accomplish the mission which He did, also sent . . . every man and woman in the world to accomplish a mission. . . . We [must] learn the obligation that we are under to God, and to each other, and . . . to the cause of Zion" (in Conference Report, October 1907, 3; emphasis added).

I acknowledge that not everyone is interested in focusing on the challenge of living up to our individual missions. After delivering a major satellite address in which I had touched on this subject, one sister wrote to say how she felt about what I had said: "I did not like Sheri Dew's remarks. She robbed life of all its joy and fun. . . . We need to be more casual about things. She sounded like a voice of doom. I was very disappointed. I did not like being told all I needed to be and do. I have struggled to not get overwhelmed by all the Church requires. Telling me the Lord expects valiant women did not help me. I don't want to be incredible. I want to be me."

I agonized over that letter, because the last thing I want to do is discourage anyone. But on the other hand, I dare not back away from what I taught that day or from what I wish to reaffirm here.

For there are three things about which I am absolutely certain: That Jesus is the Christ, that His gospel has been restored to the earth, and that every one of us has been foreordained to stand where we stand in the latter-day kingdom of God. We can't risk being casual about the Savior's work or about our role in it. No one else can fill my mission, and no one can fill yours. This knowledge shouldn't increase our burden; it should only reconfirm that we are beloved spirit daughters of God whose lives have meaning, purpose, and direction.

When Nephi saw our day in vision, he saw that those who would seek to bring forth Zion in these, the latter days, would be blessed, for we would have the "gift and the power of the Holy Ghost" (1 Nephi 13:37). Thus, during this culminating millennium, the influence of the righteous (that's you and me) will be far greater than our numbers or our natural abilityif we go forward in so great a cause.

It is on standing joyfully where we have been foreordained to stand, and going forward in so great a cause, that I wish to focus, drawing upon three principles from the Relief Society Declaration.

I have come to believe that whatever we really want, we'll probably get. If we really want money and status, we'll find a way to get them. By the same token, if we really want to overcome bad habits or cultivate integrity or become more pure so that we can better hear the voice of the Spirit, we'll find a way to do those things as well. Fifty years from now, what we have become shouldn't surprise us, because we will have become what we have set our hearts upon. As Alma taught, the Lord "granteth unto men according to their desire" (Alma 29:4).

Satan is also after our hearts, because he knows that if he can control our feelings and desires, he can control uswhich is why he tries to harden our hearts, puff up the pride of our hearts, and set our hearts upon the vain things of the world (see 4 Nephi 1:28; 2 Nephi 33:2; 28:15; Helaman 12:4). The Nephite civilization collapsed entirely once the people were past feeling (see Moroni 9:20). Likewise, we have been warned that in the last days "men's hearts shall fail them" (D&C 88:91), and the nightly news verifies this sad reality. Children killing children. "Spin doctors" celebrated for their articulate cunning rather than censored for breaches of integrity. Violence that knows no bounds.

No wonder we are commanded to "come unto the Lord with all [our hearts]" (Mormon 9:27). No wonder the Lord "requireth the heart and a willing mind" (D&C 64:34). Notice that He said nothing about how gorgeous or thin, educated or affluent, wealthy or influential we must be. He simply asks for our hearts and our will, because that's all we have to give Him. Everything else is already His.

Ultimately we will become what we give our hearts to, for we are shaped by what we desire and seek after. If we love the Lord such that our hearts are changed, His image will fill our countenances. But if we love the world more, we'll slowly take upon us those characteristics. As Truman G. Madsen has said, "At youth our face reveals genetics. At fifty, we have the face we deserve."

I'll never forget a visit I made to the Missionary Training Center when an instructor there said that the missionaries liked to refer to the MTC as a concentration camp but that he thought of it as a consecration camp. Life is the ultimate consecration camp, where we learn to turn our lives and our will over to the Lord. Only in giving all we have may we receive all our Father has.

In early 2000 a Relief Society assignment took me to Africa, and the images of our beautiful African sisters are still vivid in my heart and mind. Their countenances reflect the image of Christ. When they pray, they pray. It's as though they reach right through the veil and talk to a trusted Friend. And despite severe temporal challenges, they are a happy lot. By the world's measure, they have little except happiness. By contrast, many of us have everythingexcept happiness. Their optimism springs from a bedrock faith in Jesus Christ, to Whom they have given their hearts. I've found myself wondering who the Lord is most concerned aboutthose whose temporal challenges are extreme but whose hearts are fixed on Him, or those who have more things of this world but who haven't offered their whole souls unto Him (see Omni 1:26). Hunger may be a problem in Africa, but our sisters there aren't starving spiritually.

Several years ago, I had an unforgettable conversation with a friend who listened patiently while I whined about all the pressure I was under. Finally he said, "Sheri, you always take on more than you have time for. You must want to live this way." You should have heard my rebuttal. I had to work. I was a stake Relief Society president. And I was consumed by a huge project that was demanding every spare minute. He countered: "But you don't have to do any of those things. You must want to do them."

It was several days before I admitted to myself that he was right. But coming to the realization that I did indeed want to do everything I was doing was liberating, and it made the burden lift. By the same token, once we have turned our hearts over to the Lord and decided we want to be like Him and are willing to pay the requisite price, the process of following Him becomes one of joy rather than white-knuckled endurance.

This is crucial, because even as we turn our hearts to the Lord, we don't suddenly become perfect. We do have to endure to the end, and we'll all make mistakes and have lapses in judgment along the way. But when our hearts are changed, we have "no more disposition to do evil" (Mosiah 5:2), which means that we no longer want to make mistakes. And the Lord judges not only our works but our desires.

The question we might therefore want to ponder is simply this: What do we really want? And what are we willing to do to get it? When we were baptized, we said we wanted to come into the fold of God (see Mosiah 18:8). But do we really? Do we delight in being called His people, though that probably means looking and acting and talking and behaving and dressing differently from the rest of the world? If so, are we willing to yield our hearts to the Lord? Those who do will be born again as the sons and daughters of Christ (see Mosiah 5:7). The choice is ours. For what we really want, we'll ultimately get.

I once attended a fireside where a General Authority began by asking the question, "How can you tell if someone is converted to Jesus Christ?" We gave dozens of answers about service and commitment and obedience, none of which satisfied him. Finally he said that although our comments were all good, he believed that the one sure measure of a person's conversion was how he or she treated others.

I frankly expected something more profound, but his assertion so intrigued me that it drove me to the scriptures, where after much study I began to see how profound his message was: When we turn our hearts to the Lord, we instinctively open our hearts to others.

After the sons of Mosiah were converted, their thoughts turned immediately to their people, for they "could not bear that any human soul should perish" (Mosiah 28:3). After Enos's all-night conversion, he "began to feel a desire for the welfare of [his] brethren . . . ; wherefore, [he] did pour out [his] whole soul unto God for them" (Enos 1:9). The Savior taught Peter, simply: "When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren" (Luke 22:32).

Almost every major scriptural sermon focuses on the way we treat each other. In His Sermon on the Mount, the Savior taught us to turn the other cheek, to be reconciled to each other, and to love our enemies and pray for those who despitefully use us (see Matthew 5:39, 24, 44). King Benjamin admonished his people to serve each other and avoid contention (see Mosiah 2:17, 32), to administer to each other's spiritual and temporal relief (see Mosiah 4:26), and to impart of our substance to one another (see Mosiah 4:21). Alma the Elder spoke of mourning with those who mourn, bearing one another's burdens, and comforting those who stand in need of comfort (see Mosiah 18:8-9). Joseph Smith taught, "The nearer we get to our heavenly Father, the more we are disposed to look with compassion on perishing souls" (History of the Church, 5:24). He also said that "it is natural for females to have feelings of charity" (History of the Church, 4:605.)

Knowing this, Lucifer works hard at undermining our divine gift. All too often we fall into traps he has designed that estrange us from each other. He delights when we gossip and criticize and judge, when we stew over perceived offenses or measure ourselves against each other, or when we succumb to such envy that we even begrudge each other's successes. All of these spiritually debilitating behaviors wreak havoc in relationships. Let us not forget that Satan resents any righteous relationshipbecause he will never have even one. Thus his never-ending efforts to alienate us from one another.

A while ago a woman approached me after a fireside and asked, "Don't you feel guilty for choosing a career over marriage?" Her words hurt. But perhaps her comment would have been different if she had known my heart, or if she had known how much time I've spent fasting and pleading with the Lord in the temple, seeking to understand His will for me. Only He knows how painful this process has been. But He also knows how grateful I am for the process, because it has sealed my heart to Him.

How often have all of us made judgments that are equally unfair? Why can't we resist the urge to second-guess and evaluate each other? Why do we judge everything from the way we keep house to how many children we do or do not have? Sometimes I wonder if the final judgment will be a breeze compared with what we've put each other through here on earth! I've had so much feedback about various aspects of my appearance when I've spoken in a meeting broadcast via satellite that I've wondered if we ought to have a special answering machine for calls that come in: If you liked our hair, push one. If you didn't, push two. If you liked the color of our clothing, push three. If you would like to nominate colors for the next meeting, push four.

All of this just wears me out, because the Spirit cannot dwell in a home, a ward, or a relationship where there is criticism. Contention neutralizes us spiritually. When we fail to champion one another, we in essence betray each other.

I love a story James Bender included in his book How to Talk Well. Apparently there was a farmer who annually grew corn that won top honors at the state fair. One year in a newspaper interview the farmer admitted that he shared his seed corn with his neighbors.

"How can you afford to share your best seed corn with your neighbors when they will enter corn in the same competition as you?" the reporter asked.

"Why, Sir," the farmer responded, "don't you know that the wind picks up pollen from the ripening corn and swirls it from field to field? If my neighbors grow inferior corn, cross pollination from their fields to mine will steadily degrade the quality of my corn. So if I am to grow good corn, I must help my neighbors grow good corn."

It is the same with each of us. Those who wish to live worthy, consecrated lives must help those closest to them do the same. Those who wish to live well must help those with whom they live also strive to live well. Those who want to be happy and feel joy must help others find happiness, for the welfare of each of us is connected to the welfare of us all.

No wonder in the second meeting of the Relief Society, Emma Smith urged her sisters to "divest themselves of every jealousy and evil feeling toward each other" (Nauvoo Minutes, 24 March 1842). And in a later meeting, the Prophet Joseph said, "Sisters of the society, shall there be strife among you? I will not have ityou must repent and get the love of God. Away with self-righteousness" (Nauvoo Minutes, 9 June 1842).

It is simply not for us to judge each other. The Lord has reserved that right for Himself, because only He knows our hearts and understands the varying circumstances of our lives. Principles and covenants are the same for all of us. But the application of those principles will differ from person to person. What we can do is encourage each other to constantly seek the direction of the Holy Ghost to help us make decisions and then to bless us with the reassurance that our lives are on course. Only when the Lord is directing our lives can we expect to feel peace about our choices. And His approval is so much more vital than anyone else's.

Another kind of judging is more subtle but equally destructive. How often do we describe a sister with words like these: She's a convert. She's been inactive. She's a Utah Mormon. She's single. She's a stay-at-home mom.

When we label one another, we make judgments that divide us from each other and inevitably alienate us from the Lord. The Nephites learned this lesson the hard way. After the Savior appeared on this continent, those converted to the gospel lived in harmony for two hundred years. Because they loved God, they also loved each other. And though previously there had been Nephites and Lamanites and Ishmaelites, there were now no "-ites," as the scriptures tell us (4 Nephi 1:17). They were one. The result? There was not "a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God" (4 Nephi 1:16). It wasn't until they again divided into classes that Satan began to win many hearts. The Nephites never recovered spiritually.

Can't we get rid of the "-ites" among us? Can't we avoid this "hardening of the categories"? We gain nothing by segregating ourselves based on superficial differences. What we have in common particularly our commitment to the same glorious causeis so much more significant than any distinctions in our individual lives. I think again of our sisters in Africa. The fact that my life is completely different from theirs didn't matter. When we left that last meeting in Ghana, I wept because I felt such a bond with them. We are our sister's keeper. Heaven forbid that we would ever make even one sister feel left out. If there is anyplace in all the world where a woman should feel that she belongs, it is in this Church.

None of us needs one more person pointing out where we've fallen short. What we do need are each other's compassion, prayers, and support. What if we were to each decide that from this time forward we would make just one assumption about each other that we are each doing the best we can? And what if we were to try a little harder to help each other? Imagine the cumulative effect, not to mention the effect on us spiritually. Followers of Christ who pray with all the energy of their hearts to be filled with His love, the pure love of Christ, will become like Him (see Moroni 7:48). As we are filled with this love, we no longer feel envy or think evil of others. That's because "charity never faileth" (Moroni 7:46).

Charity is demonstrated when we give someone the benefit of the doubt, or readily accept an apology, or refuse to pass along a juicy piece of gossip. Might we more often contemplate in prayer the grudges we need to put behind us, jealousies we should let go, and relationships we could improve by simply laying our pride aside?

President Gordon B. Hinckley said: "Do you want to be happy? Forget yourself and get lost in this great cause. Lend your efforts to helping people. . . . Work to lift and serve His sons and daughters. You will come to know a happiness that you have never known before. . . . Let's get the cankering, selfish attitude out of our lives . . . and stand a little taller . . . in the service of others" (Liverpool England Fireside, 31 August 1995).

Lucy Mack Smith's classic statement is thata classic: "We must cherish one another, watch over one another, [and] comfort one another . . . that we may all sit down in heaven together" (Nauvoo Minutes, 24 March 1842). There isn't anything righteous we can't accomplish if we will stand together.

When at age twenty-five I was called to serve as a ward Relief Society president, I wondered if my bishop was responding to inspiration or indigestion. I didn't fit the Relief Society profile, which I saw as older, married, bread-baking women. (Please, don't misunderstand. I love older, married, bread-baking women. Some are among my dearest personal friends. But it's a description that didn't seem to apply to me.) But now, after more than twenty years of Relief Society service on the ward, stake, and general levels, my view of our organization has changed dramatically.

The story of Relief Society is the story of prophets who have believed in the divine nature of women. It is the story of an organization destined to elevate women in their stature, their behavior, and their influenceboth in quiet, one-on-one ways, and in contributions that affect communities, countries, and even continents. It is a classic story of using the simple to confound the mighty and strong, for the Relief Society is the only organization for women on the face of the earth founded by a prophet and undergirded by the priesthood of God.

President Joseph F. Smith stated that this organization was "divinely ordained of God to minister for the salvation of the souls of women and of men" (Teachings of the Presidents of the Church, 184).

I believe that we as sisters in Relief Society have a divine mandate to help save souls, to lead the women of the world, to strengthen the homes of Zion, and to build the kingdom of God. Shall we not go on in so great a cause?

During the first general conference held in the magnificent new Conference Center, the huge hall was filled to capacity and thousands were still unable to get tickets. I half-expected President Hinckley to step to the podium and say, "This just goes to show that if we build it, they will come." In like manner, if we rally our sisters to build the kind of sisterhood the Lord intends Relief Society to be, the women of the world will come. If we radiate the light of Jesus Christ because His Spirit shines in our eyes, because we tell the truth and teach our children to tell the truth, because we treat each other with gentleness, because we are modest but beautiful in the way we dress and speak and act, because we are quick to attribute benevolent intent to each other's actions, because we are armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory, and because we love Jesus Christ and are trying to follow Him the good women of the world will look to us in increasing numbers and increasing ways. Our influence will be penetrating and persuasive. Make no mistake about it: We have been foreordained to lead the women of the world. To borrow a phrase commonly applied to the British Empire, the sun never sets on the work of Relief Society. Shall we not go on in so great a cause?

Some time ago I joined several other LDS women in hosting a group of wives of ambassadors to the United States. As we talked about the vital role of mothers and the family and the innate spirituality of women, several expressed curiosity about Relief Society. And when we exchanged good-byes, more than one ambassador's wife drew me aside and said, "There is such a wonderful feeling among your people. Could I find out more about your organization?"

If we build it, they will come. The Lord needs every one of us. He needs those leading our children and our young women. He needs every eighteen-and eighty-eight-year-old. Everyone who's been to college and everyone who hasn't. All who have borne children and all who delight in children. Lifelong members and those baptized yesterday. Those skilled at administering and those with a talent for ministering one-on-one. Those who speak Vietnamese and those who speak Portuguese. He needs sisters who can testify of the doctrines of the kingdom, sisters who can receive personal inspiration and teach with the Spirit, sisters who show by their actions that their hearts are centered on Him. He needs every one of us to fulfill our foreordained mission.

In the mid-1930s, Hitler began to make his play for power throughout the European continent. Winston Churchill saw through Hitler's rhetoric and began tromping up and down the British Isles sounding an alarm about this madman in Germany who was determined to control all of Europe. At the outset, Britishers accused Churchill of war-mongering and ignored his warnings. In those early days, it was unfashionable to oppose the charismatic German dictator. But the young Elder Gordon B. Hinckley, then serving as a missionary in London, found Churchill's petitions difficult to dismiss.

In June of 1935, at the conclusion of his mission, Elder Hinckley and two other missionaries being released left London and set out for a brief tour of the European continent en route home. For several days they saw the sights by day and took overnight trains to their next destination. The trains in Germany were filled with Nazi troops, and Elder Hinckley was fascinated with their appearance and demeanor. They were spit and polish, their uniforms pressed and immaculate, their manner efficient and precise as they goose-stepped in unison and on command thrust their fists into the air in salute.

In Munich the threesome witnessed a company of Hitler Youth marching through the streets. "It was incredible to contemplate," Elder Hinckley said, "that a people would take fourteen-and fifteen-year-old boys, put them in battalions, and raise up a generation of soldiers. If I hadn't seen it with my own eyes, I would not have been able to fathom the insanity of it all."

In Dresden, as they visited a memorial to an earlier war, an elderly woman approached the monument. Poorly dressed, her face wrinkled with age, she laid a bouquet of flowers at the Unknown Soldier memorial and then knelt to pray. As she arose, her eyes filled with tears, Elder Hinckley could hear the sound of drums and marching youth filling the air. "History is going to repeat itself," he said to himself. "In a coming day, men and women will kneel at this monument and mourn the loss of the youths marching just a block away."

When he and his friends crossed into France, the contrast was dramatic. The French troops were not as disciplined or precise in their dress or their movements. Their demeanor suggested that they weren't as concerned about or prepared for what lay ahead. Elder Hinckley later reflected, "Hitler had identified his object and knew what he was doing. But the rest of Europe was asleep. I sensed that I had a front-row seat on the bleachers of history" (Dew, Go Forward with Faith, 80).

Similarly, we have front-row seats on the bleachers of an era in which Satan is moving about largely uncontrolled and unchecked. When Britain could have opposed Hitler and stopped him early on, the Britishers were busy doing other less significant things. They didn't recognize their enemy, and as a result they didn't prepare or marshal their energy and resources to defeat him. Other Allied countries were similarly nonchalant. And the results proved fatal for thousands of soldiers.

Today we face an enemy ever so much more threatening than Hitler, for what we have to lose is our happiness and peace of mind here, and eternal life in the world to come. Satan's tactics are bold and brilliant in both their subtlety and their impudence.

Satan knows exactly what he is doing. But do we? Are we sleeping, or are we creating places of security where we may insulate ourselves from his advances?

If there ever were a time when the Lord needed righteous, determined women who can distinguish between the adversary's deceptions and the voice of the Lord, it is now. If there were ever a time when the Lord needed women of integrity and purity who live in the world but rise above it, it is now. If there were ever a time when the Lord needed His daughters to be alert to what is happening in society and to defend the sanctity of the home and family, it is now. If there were ever a time when the Lord needed mothers and grandmothers, leaders and friends to safeguard their youth and children, it is now. If there were ever a time when the Lord needed us to have a clear vision of who we are, where we are, and what is important, it is now.

It is therefore urgent that we covenant, and covenant now, to work and watch and fight and pray. To work to strengthen ourselves spiritually every week of every month of every year. To watch over and fortify our families and our Church family so that within the stakes of Zion will exist the strength and unity to help us withstand Lucifer's minions. To fight the adversary in every arena. And to pray with increasing strength and confidence and faith. The Lord has never expected more of faithful women than He does now. But we would not be here if we were not up to the challenge.

Historian Wallace Stegner concluded his foreword to The Gathering of Zion: The Story of the Mormon Trail with these words: "That I do not accept the faith that possessed [the Mormons] does not mean I doubt their . . . devotion and heroism. . . . Especially their women. Their women were incredible" (The Gathering of Zion, 13). Our sister forebears were incredible. And so are we, we who have come trailing clouds of glory, we who have foreordained missions that only we can fulfill.

Captain Moroni raised a title of liberty and invited all who would maintain it to "come forth in the strength of the Lord" (Alma 46:20). President Hinckley has done likewise: "We have work to do, . . . so very much of it. Let us roll up our sleeves and get at it, with a new commitment, putting our trust in the Lord. . . . We can do better than we have ever done before" (Ensign, May 1995, 88).

Among Mormon's last words to his son Moroni were these: "Let us labor diligently; for if we should cease to labor, we should be brought under condemnation; for we have a labor to perform whilst in this tabernacle of clay, that we may conquer the enemy of all righteousness, and rest our souls in the kingdom of God" (Moroni 9:6).

It is our faith and our works that will qualify us, through the Lord's mercy, for the exaltation of which Mormon wrote. May we labor diligently within our sphere of influence, large and small, to lead, guide, and persuade those we love and have stewardship for to come unto Christ, and to there partake of a goodness and sweetness that can be found nowhere else.

Shall we not, as women of God, go forward in so great a cause? Shall we not proclaim from the rooftops that the gospel is a gospel of gladness and that we are thrilled to be who we are?

I have reflected many times on the mistake I made in high school when I stumbled under the weight of popular opinion. But I won't do it again. I pledge to spend my life bearing witness of what I know to be true. Will you join with me? Can we stand together with our hearts devoted to the Lord and knit together in love one for another? If we will, the sisters of this Church will become a phenomenal force for good, a magnet and a beacon for those seeking truth, a haven for protecting the family and the nobility of womanhood. If we build a sisterhood filled with light, the women of the world will come. And we will become one of the greatest missionary forces this Church has ever seen. I repeat: The cause of women of God is to help build the kingdom of God. This is something we cannot be casual about. It is our stewardship, our privilege, our destiny.

Jesus Christ came to earth in the Meridian of Time and did what He promised premortally He would do. Just as He came then, He will come again. And although He did not come in glory when He first came to earth, when He comes again, things will be different. For He will reign as Lord of lords and King of kings. The restored gospel will cover the earth. The Lord's kingdom will not fail. This means that for you and me there is just this question: Will we go forward in so great a cause? I declare with the Apostle Paul what I wish I had said thirty years ago in high school, "For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ" (Romans 1:16). In a coming day, perhaps sooner than later, every knee will bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ.

Of this I am certain. About this I have no doubt. 2002
