My life has changed thanks to the Liahona (Spanish) magazine. During 1991 there were articles that helped me turn my life around, progress in the gospel, and encourage me to share the gospel message with others.

Keep publishing beautiful and meaningful articles that will soften hearts and change lives for the better just as mine was.

Magaly Mercado Martínez
August 15 Ward, Arequipa Perú Manuel Prado Stake

I am really thankful for the April 1991 issue of Seito no Michi (Japanese). I was especially impressed with the article “Staying Active—When Your Spouse Isn’t a Member.”

Even though I am not yet married, I was greatly encouraged by the article because I am the only member of the Church in my family.

I hope that someday I will be able to hold a family home evening with all the members of my family.

For me, the Church is my second family. I am grateful from the bottom of my heart for the wonderful gospel of Jesus Christ.

Mika Takeuchi
Taniyama Branch, Kagoshima Chiho Japan Stake

My two brothers and I would like to thank you for publishing the Tambuli (English-language edition for the Philippines).

I have been a regular reader since 1989, and I have enjoyed every issue. The messages from the Brethren and many of the other articles have been very helpful to me. As we learn more of the gospel of Jesus Christ, we strengthen our relationship with God. Hopefully, everybody, member and nonmember alike, would have the opportunity of reading such a powerful magazine.

Eden Tibayan Meneses
Urdaneta Second Ward, Urdaneta Philippines Stake

Thank you for your wonderful work in A Liahona (Brazilian).

I like to share the magazine with my nonmember friends, who enjoy it very much and praise your work. The content is different from any other magazine.

I am grateful to Heavenly Father for blessing our Church leaders with the inspiration to publish such a magazine. It is truly a banner for all nations.

Ana Claudia Souza Oliveira
Floresta Ward, Belo Horizonte Brazil Stake
