Church units worldwide received a DVD entitled A Brand New Year: 2010 Youth Celebration. The DVD introduces the 2010 Mutual theme and can be used to supplement youth classes, quorum meetings, Mutual, bishop’s youth discussions, and other activities throughout the year.

The 2010 Mutual theme is “Be strong and of good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the Lord thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest” (Joshua 1:9; emphasis added). The first segment of A Brand New Year: 2010 Youth Celebration features a special message from Elder M. Russell Ballard, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and a musical montage of youth throughout the world.

The DVD also contains nine additional segments, which include inspiring messages in the form of stories, testimonies, music, and special presentations from the Young Men and Young Women general presidencies. These segments focus on gospel standards from For the Strength of Youth, including education, family and friends, music and dancing, dating and virtue, health, service, and repentance.

Young people from all over the world share their thoughts and testimonies throughout the DVD.

“We are excited for the youth of the Church to be able to see each other on this DVD and be strengthened by each others’ testimonies,” said Elaine S. Dalton, Young Women general president. “Those who watch will see courageous youth everywhere choosing to live the standards [of the Church] and making a difference in the world. We hope priesthood and auxiliary leaders and teachers will use the DVD in their classes to teach standards and in activities to help youth commit to live and apply these standards in their lives.”

Church leaders have encouraged local priesthood and auxiliary leaders to review the DVD and use it in their meetings and activities. The first segment of the DVD can be used in New Year’s Eve activities or other special events where the theme is presented. The remaining segments are designed to be used throughout the year to expand upon the theme.

The segments are published with subtitles in Cantonese, English, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Mandarin, Portuguese, Russian, and Spanish. Material from the DVD is also available for download on the Internet.
