S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

PREFACE

"The Luckiest Boy"

Recently I returned to my boyhood home of San Bernardino, California. As I walked down the streets reflecting on my youth, many thoughts and emotions returned. I remembered all the insecurities and fears of my youth, especially those associated with my teenage years. I was small and often the object of bullying by boys older and bigger than I. During those years I did not consider myself as being very lucky, and I often envied others whose accomplishments or advantages seemed so desirable. I thought, "Thank heaven those days are over; I would not like to relive them again." I suppose I gave way to a good dose of self-pity.

My reflections continued for some time along these lines until finally the Spirit whispered a surprising and wholly unexpected truth. "You were the luckiest boy ever to grow up in San Bernardino," the Spirit said. The words came so powerfully and clearly that I could not mistake the source, but I did not believe the words that were spoken. "Not so! Not so!" I answered. "I was not the luckiest boy! How could I have been, considering all the experiences I remember?"

Once again, clear and strong, came the Spirit's peaceful voice: "You had the fullness of the gospel of Jesus Christ and a mother who knew it was true!" As I received this truth, I saw my youth clearly for the first time in my life. I was in reality the luckiest boy who ever grew up in San Bernardino, California, but I could not have accepted this truth until my life had shown me all the glorious aspects of the Savior's light.

This book is about only one ray of that light, that of the holy

temple. It is a ray I have come to love deeply. If, among all the wonderful, edifying subjects that belong to the gospel, all I ever knew was the temple, I would still have been the luckiest and most blessed boy. Its blessings alone are sufficient to render us all the most blessed people to inhabit the earth. That we receive so many other blessings with it is but a testimony of the grace and mercy of a compassionate and loving Father in Heaven. Against the backdrop of all the glorious blessings of the gospel, the temple stands out, to use Joseph Smith's words, as "this most glorious of all subjects belonging to the everlasting gospel." (D&C 128:17.)

I do not have a sufficient gift to describe all the glories of the gospel. Even John said the whole "world itself could not contain the books that should be written" (John 21:25) if all the teachings and beauty of the Savior's life and gospel were recorded. I am afraid I do not have the ability to write about even one aspect of the gospel, let alone that which is described as the most glorious. I have hesitated for a long time to attempt to speak or write about the temple. Perhaps others whose powers and gifts are far greater than mine would still not be able to do sufficient justice to so wonderful a topic, but my deep interest in the temple has urged me to make the attempt, perhaps only for my own clarification and edification. I hoped, as I commenced, that the Lord surely would not withhold his blessing on the labors of one who loved his subject so freely.

Regardless of the outcome, the labor itself has brought me many returns. I have often felt as Frederic Farrar did while attempting to write The Life of Christ. He too felt overwhelmed by his topic. In his preface he writes: "Whether this book be . . . blessed to high ends, or whether it be received with harshness and indifference, nothing at least can rob me of the deep and constant happiness which I have felt during almost every hour that has been spent upon it. . . . Even in the midst of incessant labor at other things, nothing forbade that the subject on which I was engaged should be often in my thoughts, or that I should find in it a source of peace and happiness different, alike in kind and in degree, from any which other interests could either give or take away." (The Life of Christ, p. 2.)
