S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 1

How High a Priority?

While I was teaching at BYU, I had the opportunity to participate in the inauguration of President Rex E. Lee. It was a wonderful occasion. On Friday morning the faculty, dressed in the robes of academia, waited in the parking lot for the processional to begin. At a given signal we all marched into the Marriott Center and took our seats. Thousands of students entered, and soon the auditorium was filled. All were excited, and the atmosphere of the Marriott Center was one of general anticipation.

Numerous dignitaries from the state and community arrived, taking their seats of honor. Finally a number of the General Authorities, including members of the First Presidency, arrived with President Lee. They took their seats on the stand, and the meeting began. It was truly an exciting and important event, and I felt privileged to be part of it.

As the ceremonies continued, I realized that among all the dignitaries and officials, President Ezra Taft Benson was not in attendance. I wondered if his health was failing and, therefore, he could not attend. I had heard him speak recently, and he had seemed vigorous and strong. Were there other meetings or duties he needed to attend to as he carried the weight of his prophetic mantle?

The inauguration lasted several hours. It was interesting and edifying, but I took home a tiny, nagging thought: Where was President Benson?

The next Friday, I attended a special ward endowment session in the Jordan River Temple. Before participating in the ordinances, we had the opportunity to listen to a member of the temple presidency. In his remarks I found an answer to my puzzlement of the week before. As well as I can remember, this is what he told us: "Every Friday morning, President and Sister Benson come to the Jordan River Temple to participate in an endowment session. We meet them at a private door and help them prepare for their session. Last Friday we assumed they would not attend the temple as they normally do because of the inauguration of President Lee at Brigham Young University.

"To our surprise they arrived at their usual hour, and we were not prepared to greet them and offer our customary assistance. We apologized, telling President Benson we enjoyed greeting them and helping them but had thought they would be at BYU. President Benson smiled and asked: 'What day is it?' 'Friday,' we answered. Then he replied 'Friday is my temple day. Where else would I be on a Friday morning?'"

As I listened to this tiny but wonderful story from the life of the president of the Church, I couldn't help but marvel at the power of his example. To the inauguration of the president of a great university, an event that takes place maybe once every ten years, President Benson could send a counselor. He, himself, would attend an ordinary endowment session in the Jordan River Temple as was his custom. That morning he chose to wear the sacred clothing of the temple rather than the honored robes of academia.

I realize that other factors could have entered into his decision to be in the temple that Friday morning. Other demands may have led to his choice. But I couldn't help but be impressed with his decision, and since that day the importance of attending the temple has been magnified in my eyes.

How high in our priorities have we placed the temple? Have we placed it as high as President Benson and other prophets who preceded him? He is not alone in his emphasis on the importance of the work that takes place in the House of the Lord. Holy men have so testified through the ages, and particularly during this last dispensation, for "it is in strict accordance with the divine will that the great work for the salvation of the dead was one assigned to those who lived in the dispensation of the fullness of times." (Joseph Fielding Smith, in Improvement

Era, April 1966, p. 273.) Let us review the emphasis placed on this edifying work by past prophets.

THE GREAT HYMN OF THE RESTORATION

In September 1842, the Prophet Joseph Smith was hiding in the house of Edward Hunter in Nauvoo. His enemies were after him again. He had been tormented and persecuted for so many years that he could write: "As for the perils which I am called to pass through, they seem but a small thing to me, as the envy and wrath of man have been my common lot all the days of my life." (D&C 127:2.) Yet it was in the cramped quarters of Edward Hunter's home that Joseph penned the most majestic hymn of praise of the Restoration.

Perhaps you have been to a symphony and listened to a piece of music that begins with a single, clear note played by a violin or a flute. The single instrument holds center stage for a time and then slowly, sometimes almost imperceptibly, is joined by other instruments. As the piece continues, the music swells as more and more instruments join in until all are playing and the whole hall is filled with the beauty of sound.

Or perhaps you have listened to a great choir perform. Often a single soloist with a clear voice will begin to sing. As with the symphony, that single voice sounds in our ears without distraction. Then, slowly, other voices begin singing until, in a wonderful unity of sound, all are singing as one.

This is the structure of Joseph Smith's hymn of praise, only it is a hymn not of voice in song or note of violin but in words played upon the soul and recorded in the scriptures. Joseph's hymn, too, begins with a single voice, "a voice of gladness." Listen to the words and see if you can hear the other voices join in to sing one unified song of praise for the blessings of the Restoration:

"Now what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness! A voice of mercy from heaven; and a voice of truth out of the earth; glad tidings for the dead; a voice of gladness for the living and the dead; glad tidings of great joy. . . .

"And again, what do we hear? Glad tidings from Cumorah! Moroni, an angel from heaven, declaring the fulfilment of the prophets. . . . A voice of the Lord in the wilderness of Fayette. . . . The voice of Michael on the banks of the Susquehanna. . . . The voice of Peter, James, and John in the wilderness. . . .

"And again, the voice of God in the chamber of old Father Whitmer. . . . And the voice of Michael, the archangel; the voice of Gabriel, and of Raphael, and of divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood . . . confirming our hope!. . .

"Let the earth break forth into singing. Let the dead speak forth anthems of eternal praise to the King Immanuel, who hath ordained, before the world was, that which would enable us to redeem them out of their prison. . . .

"Let the mountains shout for joy, and all ye valleys cry aloud; and all ye seas and dry lands tell the wonders of your Eternal King! And ye rivers, and brooks, and rills, flow down with gladness. Let the woods and all the trees of the field praise the Lord; and ye solid rocks weep for joy! And let the sun, moon, and the morning stars sing together, and let all the sons of God shout for joy! And let the eternal creations declare his name forever and ever! And again I say, how glorious is the voice we hear from heaven, proclaiming in our ears, glory, and salvation, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life; kingdoms, principalities, and powers!" (D&C 128:19-23.)

What could have possibly been on Joseph Smith's mind to bring forth from his pen such a beautiful summation of the Restoration? The central theme of section 128 is the salvation of the dead through the ordinances of the House of the Lord. Indeed, the verse immediately preceding Joseph's song of gladness speaks of a "welding link . . . between the fathers and the children," a link that would be "whole and complete and perfect." (D&C 128:18.)

Earlier in the letter, and serving as introduction to his song of praise, Joseph Smith told the Saints, "[The work of the temple] seems to occupy my mind, and press itself upon my feelings the strongest." He assured them, "These are principles in relation to the dead and the living that cannot be lightly passed over, as pertaining to our salvation." (D&C 128:1, 15.) Joseph understood that the culmination of the Restoration, the point to which all the voices were leading, was the temple and the redeeming work for both living and dead that would take place within its walls. Without that work, the song of the Restoration would have "become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal." (1 Corinthians 13:1.) Or, as Malachi wrote, "The whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming." (D&C 2:3.) Temple work was the soul of Joseph Smith's song as it is the soul of the Restoration.

THE KEYSTONE OF THE GOSPEL ARCH

Many other prophets have added their own testimony to that of Joseph Smith. Wilford Woodruff told the Saints that Joseph's "soul was wound up with this work [temple work] before he was martyred for the word of God and testimony of Jesus Christ. He told us that there must be a welding link of all dispensations and of the work of God from one generation to another. This was upon his mind more than most any other subject that was given to him." (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, p. 156; emphasis added.)

President Woodruff then added his own testimony: "Ye sons of men, I say unto you, in the name of Israel's God, those very principles that God has revealed are what have stayed the judgments of the Almighty on the earth. Were it not for these principles, you and I would not be here today. (Ibid., p. 154; emphasis added.)

Elder Boyd K. Packer said, "It is evident that the work relating to temples bothers the adversary the most." (The Holy Temple, p. 216.) It is this work that causes all "the bells of hell [to begin] to ring," as Brigham Young stated. (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 628.)

John A. Widtsoe called temple work "the keystone of the wonderful Gospel arch. If this center stone is weakened, and falls out, the whole arch falls into a heap of unorganized doctrinal blocks. It is a high privilege for young or old to be allowed to enter the House of the Lord, there to serve God and to win power." ("Temple Worship," p. 64; emphasis added.) In light of this perspective, is it any wonder "the devils in hell . . . [are] trying to overthrow" the Saints and stop the work? (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 618.)

Heber J. Grant, who, like President Benson, found "the time to go to the temple and do temple work once a week" (Gospel Standards,

p. 257) told the Saints of his day, "If you get it into your heart and soul that this is one of the most important things you as Latter-day Saints can do, you will find a way to do it." (Improvement Era, 44:459; emphasis added.) Joseph Fielding Smith called temple work the "greatest and grandest duty of all" and encouraged the Saints not to neglect "the weightier privilege and commandment, notwithstanding all other good works." (Seeking After Our Dead, p. 36; emphasis added.)

President Brigham Young said temple work "is to be the greatest work man ever performed on the earth." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 623.) President Spencer W. Kimball said temple work is "a grave responsibility that we cannot avoid," one that would place us "in jeopardy if we fail to do this important work." (Ensign, January 1977, p. 5.)

Perhaps King David best described the desired attitude toward the temple in the psalms. It is an attitude based on love of the temple, not a duty or responsibility placed upon his shoulders. The sweetness of David's words are an example to us all. "One thing have I desired of the Lord," David sang, "that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple." (Psalm 27:4.) In a later psalm he wrote, "I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord." (Psalm 122:1.) David's soul, with that of all the prophets, "longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord," for those courts are "amiable." (Psalm 84:1-2.) Should not all of our souls also long for them?

In light of this emphasis, it is not hard to understand why the prophet of the Lord chose to be in the temple on a Friday morning instead of in the Marriott Center for the inauguration of a new university president. It is not difficult to comprehend the hymn of praise Joseph Smith wrote while hiding in the cramped quarters of Bishop Hunter's house. Nor does it take great thought to see why President Howard W. Hunter issued an invitation at his first press conference (and reemphasized it in his first General Conference address) to all the Saints to "establish the temple of the Lord as the great symbol of their membership and the supernal setting for their most sacred covenants." He continued: "It would be the deepest desire of my heart to have every member of the Church temple worthy. . . . Let us be a . . . temple-loving people." (Church News, June 11, 1994, p. 14; emphasis added.)
