S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 2

Learning to Learn from Symbols

Most of us have a vivid memory of the first time we went to the temple to receive our endowments. I was a newly called missionary and had traveled to the Los Angeles Temple. I did not know what to expect. Although some aspects of my own endowment were wonderfully edifying to me, much of it was confusing. I left bewildered and a little frightened. I have since discovered that my experience was not unique. I have also discovered why my first experience was not all I had anticipated. I did not understand the manner in which the Lord teaches his children in his house. Had I understood, my anxiety and confusion would have disappeared, even though my comprehension level might have remained the same.

ENDOWED WITH POWER

The Doctrine and Covenants teaches us that in the temple we will be "endowed with power from on high." (D&C 38:32.) Much of that power comes from the knowledge or intelligence we receive. Therefore, to be endowed with the power the Lord wishes us to receive, we must learn how to learn in his house.

In the temple the Spirit is the teacher. It instructs us, most frequently, through the symbols that comprise the endowment. We must be alert and pay attention to all that we see and hear, thus allowing the Spirit to teach us and to bring us understanding. If we go to the temple and just sit, without making an effort to learn, we will miss most of the greatest blessings the temple has to offer. "When you return [to the temple]," Elder David B. Haight taught, "come with an open, seeking, contrite heart, and allow the Spirit to teach you by revelation what the symbols can mean to you." (Conference Report, April 1992, p. 20; emphasis added.) The true teaching in the temple is not group instruction. Each soul is invited to have his or her own personal tutor, that of the Spirit, who will tailor the symbols to specific needs and levels of maturity while inviting the active participation of each individual in the learning process. This type of teaching led Elder John A. Widtsoe to remark: "I wish instruction were given so well in every school room throughout the land, for we would then teach with more effect than we now do." ("Temple Worship.")

In the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple, Joseph Smith prayed that all who came to the temple might "grow up in thee, and receive a fulness of the Holy Ghost." (D&C 109:15.) This "fulness" is essential in uncovering the depths the temple ordinances reveal. Since worthiness and purity of life qualify us to receive the gifts and companionship of the Holy Ghost, the covenants and lifestyle taught in the temple, which we bind ourselves to live, in and of themselves bring the fulness promised in Joseph Smith's prayer. In addition, the serenity and peace of the temple itself also contribute to the fulness of the Holy Ghost. In the temple, our spirits are more calm, and we are removed from the noise and turmoil of the outside world, giving the Spirit more of a chance to whisper truth to our souls. With the fulness of the Holy Ghost, we can be taught on a much higher level.

Joseph Smith once instructed the Saints on the increasing power of the Spirit to reveal truth to our minds. He said: "A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas. . . . Thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 151; emphasis added.) Notice that we learn and grow into the principle of revelation. We may not receive a fulness at first, but it will come as we continue to seek understanding in the temple. Remember, we are also invited to "grow up" in the Lord's house. As our own spirits mature, we are more receptive to the teachings of the Holy Ghost.

This maturity cannot reach its fulness without the temple. In truth, the very word endowment suggests a gift that brings gradual yet continual growth.

An endowment is a gift, but it is a special kind of gift. Most secular endowments are established to be self-perpetuating. For instance, a company gives an endowment of a large sum of money to a university to fund the arts or medical research. The university does not spend the original gift. They are allowed to spend only the interest that the original gift generates. The temple endowment was designed in a similar fashion. Its symbolic nature allows it to teach or give continually through many years of a person's life. Jesus promised the woman at the well, "The water that I shall give . . . shall be . . . a well of water springing up into everlasting life." (John 4:14.) It would continue to pour forth its sweetness constantly. The endowment's power is its ability to send into our minds and hearts knowledge in an uninterrupted flow. The symbols are the original gift of the endowment. The multiplicity of meaning and edification are the self-perpetuating interest the original gift generates.

"VAST REALITIES"

Elder John A. Widtsoe explained, "The endowment itself is symbolic; it is a series of symbols of vast realities, too vast for full understanding. Those who go through the temple and come out feeling that the service is unbeautiful have been so occupied with the outward form as to fail to understand the inner meaning. It is the meaning of things that counts in life. . . .

"Temple worship implies a great effort of mind and concentration if we are to understand the mighty symbols that pass in review before us. Everything must be arranged to attune our hearts, our minds, and our souls to the work. . . .

"To the man or woman who goes through the temple, with open eyes, heeding the symbols and the covenants, and making a steady, continuous effort to understand the full meaning, God speaks his word, and revelations come. The endowment is so richly symbolic. . . . It is so packed full of revelations to those who exercise their strength to seek and see, that no human words can explain or make clear the possibilities that reside in the temple service. The endowment which was given by revelation can best be understood by revelation; and to those who seek most vigorously, with pure hearts, will the revelation be greatest." ("Temple Worship," p. 63.) It is this rich depth of symbolism that makes the endowment an inexhaustible source of knowledge and edification.

On occasion I have been asked, "Why are the symbols of the temple so different from anything we have experienced in the Church before?" They are different for a wonderful purpose that shows the great wisdom of the Lord. The different nature of the symbols itself demands explanation. It almost forces us to ask questions. It invites pondering and reflection. We find ourselves naturally asking: "What does that mean? Why do we do that? Why are we shown this? What is the meaning of the clothing?" Perhaps that is what the Lord wants us to do, and to keep doing it until answers come. The symbols are different so we will not become so accustomed to seeing them that we cease asking the questions. If you are puzzled by the symbols of the temple, perhaps that is as it should be. It is all right to keep on puzzling over them and pondering them and studying them, allowing the Spirit to reveal their power one by one. The danger is not that we think them unusual but that we stop thinking. The symbols stand out to help us overcome this human tendency.

It is also important to remember that the temple ordinances constitute a whole. They are like a four-act play, a beautiful poem with four stanzas, or a song with four verses. We may have a favorite act or stanza or verse, but to receive the full meaning of the work, we must remain aware of all four acts, stanzas, or verses. Let us return to the baptistry, frequently perform the initiatory ordinances, and participate in sealings. We will learn more if we do this than if we constantly repeat only the the endowment session.

THE POWER OF SYMBOLIC LANGUAGE

Teaching through symbols can be very powerful. Symbols can suggest many different truths to different people at different times in their lives. Thus they edify us according to our present needs and never become irrelevant.

The power of symbolic writing was wonderfully explained by George MacDonald, a mentor of Christian apologist C. S. Lewis. Although he was not speaking of temple symbolism, his insight is applicable. "A genuine work of art must mean many things," he wrote. "The truer its art, the more things it will mean." There is no truer artist than the Lord, and, of course, his masterpiece is found in the holy temple. If mortal symbols can mean many things, how much more can we expect to discover in the symbols presented by the Lord?

MacDonald continued his description of the power of symbolic language with these thoughts: "The best thing you can do for your fellow, next to rousing his conscience, is—not to give him things to think about, but to wake things up that are in him; or say, to make him think things for himself.

"The best Nature does for us is to work in us such moods in which thoughts of high import arise. Does any aspect of Nature wake but one thought? Does she ever suggest only one definite thing? Does she make any two men in the same place at the same moment think the same thing? Is she therefore a failure, because she is not definite? Is it nothing that she rouses the something deeper than the understanding—the power that underlies thoughts? . . . Nature is mood-engendering, thought-provoking. . . .

"In everything that God has made, there is layer upon layer of ascending significance; also he expresses the same thought in higher and higher kinds of that thought. . . .

"If a writer's aim be logical conviction, he must spare no logical pains, not merely to be understood, but to escape being misunderstood; where his object is to move by suggestion, to cause to imagine, then let him assail the soul of his reader as the wind assails an aeolian harp. If there be music in my reader, I would gladly wake it." (The Gifts of the Child Christ 1:23-28; emphasis added.)

MacDonald's insights are especially true of the temple. Generally speaking, we do not "learn" the meanings of the great, exalting symbols of the gospel. Rather we "remember" their meanings, for we were taught the power that lies behind them before our births. On earth, a veil has been drawn across our minds, but we are frequently reminded that the veil is thin in the Lord's house. The word awakening is a good description of how knowledge is often imparted in the Lord's house. Remember, the Holy Ghost is the teacher in the temple, and we are promised we can receive a fulness of his power. Jesus taught his disciples at the Last Supper that one of the missions of the Holy Ghost is to "bring all things to [our] remembrance." (John 14:26.)

President Joseph F. Smith also suggested this awakening to truths through the power of the Spirit: "All those salient truths which come home so forcibly to the head and heart seem but the awakening of the memories of the spirit. Can we know anything here that we did not know before we came? Are not the means of knowledge in the first estate equal to those of this?" But in order to tap into that knowledge we must struggle to get past "the prison-house of mortality." (Gospel Doctrine, p. 13; emphasis added.)

Hope and confidence are engendered in this truth. Our task of discovery in the temple appears more likely of success if we realize that the myriad truths found there are sleeping in our memories already. We must call upon the Spirit to help us awaken them.

Those who attend the temple frequently and are familiar with the Lord's way of teaching have already discovered that a meaning behind a symbol tends to come "all at once," as a remembered or awakened truth, or not at all. Or, as Joseph Smith said, "A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 151; emphasis added.)

C. S. Lewis, commenting on George MacDonald's understanding of symbolic writing, added insights from his own experience: "It goes beyond the expression of things we have already felt. It arouses in us sensations we have never had before, never anticipated having, as though we had broken out of our normal mode of consciousness and 'possessed joys not promised to our birth.' It gets under our skin, hits us at a level deeper than our thoughts or even our passions, troubles oldest certainties till all questions are re-opened, and in general shocks us more fully awake than we are for most of our lives." (George MacDonald, An Anthology, pp. 16-17.)

Though MacDonald's and Lewis's descriptions were written about literary works, they describe the essence of the temple mode of instruction. We must learn how to learn in the Lord's way. In his house that method is largely symbolic, because symbols provide one of the most all-encompassing and powerful ways to learn. We must learn to trust the power inherent in symbols, even though we may feel ourselves children in their deciphering. With time and patience, our spirits will mature, the fulness of the Holy Ghost will distill upon us, and the awakening will begin.

The truths of the temple are profoundly beautiful, edifying, and joyful. Our own desire and effort to discover them must be equal to that beauty if their full force and wonder is to be truly appreciated. Thus the Lord protects the sacredness of his deepest and most holy truths, presenting them only to those who most deeply desire them and whose lives of sacrifice and obedience have developed in them a closeness with the Spirit. Much is also accomplished outside the temple. The more our lives reflect the obedience and dedication the Lord desires, the more powerfully the Spirit operates within us. When we take this increased power of the Spirit into the temple, we can expect to be taught wonderful and edifying truths to bless our lives and those of our families.
