S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 3

Preliminary Lessons

The Lord does not leave us without help as we learn how to learn in his house. He prepares us in a number of ways. Some of these preparations begin early in our childhood. Others come as we enter his temple and participate in the ordinances. All of them continue throughout our lives.

SYMBOLIC ORDINANCES

Before we even go to the temple, we are introduced to symbolic ordinances. Through them we are shown how to respond to symbolic language. The sacrament and baptism are such ordinances. If those unfamiliar with LDS or Christian worship entered an LDS chapel and witnessed the sacrament or a baptism, it might appear strange to them. Unless they understood what the outward actions and objects represented, they might even be repelled by what they saw.

In the sacrament, the bread reminds us of the body of the Savior, and the water of his blood. When we partake, we think of his loving sacrifice in our behalf and of our covenants that make his sacrifice efficacious in our lives. The bread and water can also remind us that Jesus was "the bread of life" and that he is the source of "living water." (See John 6.) Our focus, therefore, is centered on the meaning of the symbol and not on the symbol itself. When we understand the meanings of temple symbols, their outward forms become beautiful, just as the sacrament is beautiful and edifying to us.

Baptism is an excellent ordinance to study to give us a better idea of how the Lord teaches in the temple. What does baptism symbolize? Some may say baptism is symbolic of a cleansing. The font reminds us of a bath where our sins are washed away. As we are immersed in the water, we become pure. This is taught in the scriptures.

Others may teach that baptism symbolizes a birth. The font represents the womb. As a newborn baby emerges from the water of the mother's womb, so too are we "born again" through the waters of baptism into a new and innocent life. This also is affirmed in the scriptures.

Others might add that baptism is a symbolic burial. The font suggests to the mind a grave. The old man of sin, the natural man, is buried in the water so that a new man of Christ may be resurrected. This we do in similitude of the Savior's death and resurrection. This interpretation is also suggested in the scriptures.

Is baptism a bath, a birth, or a burial? It is all of them. Because such symbols convey multiple meanings, they will, if we continue to ponder them, constantly edify and instruct us throughout our lives.

A MANUAL FOR THE ENDOWMENT

Just as we have considered the meanings of the sacrament and of baptism, so we must learn to do with all the ordinances of the Lord's house. The Lord has shown us a pattern in the sacrament and in baptism, but we do not need to uncover the layers of symbolic meaning without assistance. Help is available. All three of the above meanings of baptism are taught in the scriptures, as are the multiple meanings of the sacrament.

Occasionally I have been asked if I can recommend a good book or article to help people understand the temple ordinances. I have always answered, "Yes! There is a wonderful manual written to explain even the most subtle meanings of the endowment, and it is readily available to you." Excitedly the person takes out pencil and paper to write down the title. "The manual is the holy scriptures," I say. Disappointed, the person puts down the pencil and says, "No, really. Is there any other book you would recommend?"

What good is it to read anything else about the temple (including this present volume) if we have not studied deeply the greatest source of information available? Surely the prominent placement of the scriptures in the temple is a hint to us of their value in comprehending all that we see and hear within its walls. The scriptures will reveal deeper and broader meanings about the temple. Within their pages are the keys to much of the temple symbolism. Every time we are told to "seek . . . diligently . . . words of wisdom . . . out of the best books" (D&C 88:118), it is in the context of temple worship. The Lord is suggesting that insights to temple truths lie in a fuller and more intense study of the scriptures. The more we know the scriptures, the more the endowment will open to our understanding. Many have had the experience of pondering in the temple when a verse of scripture arises in the mind and insight about the "vast realities" is received.

The temple endowment is scripture, the highest form of scripture, not written down for all to read and see but engraved in the minds of those whose efforts and attendance show the depth of their desires. It is written on our hearts, not in the pages of a book. Occasionally we read of people who are shown truths or are taught principles they are forbidden to reveal or write down. Jesus prayed with the Nephites, for example, and "the things which he prayed cannot be written." (3 Nephi 17:15.) The moment was sacred, too holy and profoundly beautiful to commit to paper.

As an English major, I used to wish I could see or hear something so wonderful it could not be written. Then, one day, the Spirit whispered, "You have, many times, in the Lord's house." The endowment and other temple ordinances are too sacred to be written down for all to see. The Lord told Mormon when he was about to include more of the Savior's words in the Book of Mormon, "I will try the faith of my people." (3 Nephi 26:11.) So, too, the Lord tries the faith of his people before they receive the sacred truths and covenants of his house.

Since the endowment is scripture, and since scripture is the best commentary on other scripture, in our reading of the Standard Works we should expect to find insight about the endowment. This will occur especially if we remember that symbols can have multiple meanings. Perhaps an illustration of how scripture comments on scripture will help to clarify this point.

RUN AND NOT BE WEARY, WALK AND NOT FAINT

For many years I read the promises attached to the Word of Wisdom as they are recorded in section 89 of the Doctrine and Covenants. One of those promises indicates that we will "run and not be weary, and . . . walk and not faint." (V. 20.) For many years I thought I understood fully the meaning of this promise. It was an assurance of a healthy body if the counsel in the Word of Wisdom was followed. I still believe this is true and inherent in the promise.

However, one day I was reading Paul's epistle to the Hebrews and saw in his words a deeper and to me more powerful promise. Paul frequently used the image of an Olympic race to describe life to the early Saints. "Let us lay aside every weight," he wrote, "and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God. For consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds." (Hebrews 12:1-3; emphasis added.)

Three words from the promise in section 89 are also in Paul's encouraging words to the early Saints: "run," "weary," and "faint." But in Hebrews, the race is spiritual, not physical. Other scriptures then come to mind. We are frequently told in the scriptures not to be "weary of well doing" and to walk the "strait and narrow path."

If we put all these ideas together, a deeper meaning to the promise arises. The promise in the Word of Wisdom is also an assurance of spiritual endurance. We will run the race of life and not be weary in well doing, and we will walk the strait and narrow path and not faint. In other words, we will "endure to the end."

What we have done here with the Word of Wisdom can be done with the phrases, covenants, and promises we hear and see in the temple. New and wonderful insights will be laid at our feet if we are willing to pay the price by seeking "learning, even by study [of the scriptures] and also by faith." (D&C 88:118.)

SCRIPTURAL PRACTICE WITH SYMBOLS

The importance of scripture study as it relates to the temple is also seen in the fact that the scriptures themselves are symbolic and contain many layers of meaning. When my children have taken college entrance examinations like the ACT or the SAT, they have studied books that contain the kinds of questions they will encounter in the real tests. That allows them to practice taking the test and be better prepared.

We can also view the scriptures that way—as practice symbols, language, and ordinances. An excellent example is the book of Exodus. In a way, it is a Mosaic endowment. It is a small microcosm of life, just as the endowment is a microcosm of life. Almost everything that happens in it, from the freeing of the children of Israel to their entry into the promised land, can be symbolically applied to our own lives.

For example, let us study the pillar of fire or cloud that guided the Israelites as they traveled through the wilderness. Paul tells us that the crossing of the Red Sea was a symbolic baptism for Israel. After baptism, we are given the gift of the Holy Ghost, who serves as a guide throughout our lives. This gift remains with us as long as we are worthy.

The pillar of fire or cloud in Exodus suggests to our minds the Holy Ghost, who will guide us just as the pillar guided the Israelites across the wilderness. The wilderness suggests life on earth, and the promised land suggests the celestial kingdom. With this in mind, notice the powerful symbolic lesson this story teaches us. The attitude the children of Israel have toward the pillar of fire should also be our attitude toward the guidance of the Holy Ghost: "So it was alway: the cloud covered it by day, and the appearance of fire by night. And when the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle, then after that the children of Israel journeyed: and in the place where the cloud abode, there the children of Israel pitched their tents. At the commandment of the Lord the children of Israel journeyed, and at the commandment of the Lord they pitched: as long as the cloud abode upon the tabernacle they rested in their tents. And when the cloud tarried long upon the tabernacle many days then the children of Israel kept the charge of the Lord, and journeyed not. And so it was, when the cloud was a few days upon the tabernacle . . . they abode in their tents. . . . And so it was, when the cloud abode from even unto the morning, and that the cloud was taken up in the morning, then they journeyed: whether it was by day or by night that the cloud was taken up, they journeyed. Or whether it were two days, or a month, or a year, that the cloud tarried upon the tabernacle, remaining thereon, the children of Israel abode in their tents, . . . but when it was taken up, they journeyed. At the commandment of the Lord they rested . . . and at the commandment of the Lord they journeyed." (Numbers 9:16-23.)

What a marvelous lesson is suggested by this story if we understand the symbolism of the pillar that rested over the tabernacle. In our own lives, we must never journey without the direction of the Spirit. We must stay with the Spirit no matter when, where, or how long it journeys or rests. It controls the direction of our lives. Sometimes in the day the pillar would move, and sometimes at night. It didn't matter how long the people had camped, be it two days or a year. The pillar determined everything. Their desire was always to be where the pillar wanted them to be.

Other wonderful messages are contained in the story of the children of Israel. For example, they were instructed to gather the manna everyday. Moses tells us in Deuteronomy that the manna symbolized the word of God. (See Deuteronomy 8:3.) Should we not gather the words of God from the scriptures "every day?" Can we gather enough on one day to last the week? Do we not gather a little here and a little there until we have enough to satisfy our spiritual hunger? Work was necessary in gathering enough manna to feed one's family. Is not effort also required to gather from the scriptures and words of the prophets the wisdom to feed our modern families the "bread of life"? Jesus, referring to this story, called himself the "bread of life" in the sixth chapter of John. Here also we see multiple meanings in the richness of the scripture narrative. He also was the bread "which cometh down from heaven." (John 6:33.)

Israel followed Moses through the wilderness. Do we not follow living prophets through the wilderness of modern life? He led them to Sinai, the mountain of the Lord, where they were to "meet with God," hear his voice, and receive his law. Is not our own prophet, Gordon B.

Hinckley, seeking with all his heart to lead us to the mountain of the Lord's house, the Sinai of the temple, where we also meet with God, hear his voice, and receive his law? During their wanderings in the wilderness, Israel frequently desired to return to the "fleshpots" of Egypt. Egypt suggests the captivity and restraining power of the world and the adversary. Do we not also struggle to remain separate from the world, to feast continually on the manna of the Lord's word and not the "fleshpots" of worldly entertainments and appetites?

These and other stories teach us in a manner similar to the way the temple narrative instructs. We must learn to see ourselves in the images and story that are portrayed before us. A constant reading of the scriptures will give us practice in this method of instruction, particularly the stories and narratives of the Old Testament. In time we will become proficient, and the temple will begin to open up and weigh significantly on our everyday choices and activities.

We cannot speak outside the temple of the symbols or the narrative portrayed in the endowment, but we can discuss the story of the children of Israel and other scriptural stories all we like. We can help each other learn how to find personal relevance in the story of another person or people. In short, we can practice temple learning and help each other begin to see beyond the symbols to the vast realities they represent.

SIMPLE AND OBVIOUS SYMBOLS

The Lord helps us learn how to learn from the temple in other ways. He has deliberately made some of the temple symbols easy to understand. Some of these symbols have also been explained to us by the living prophets and apostles. For example, in the temple everyone wears white clothing, which symbolizes purity and cleanliness in the sight of God and each other. It has also been explained that it suggests an equality in the sight of God that creates unity and oneness in his children. Could it also teach that as white is a reflection of all the beautiful colors of the spectrum, so too our lives must reflect all the multifaceted beauty of the Savior's gospel light?

The reflecting mirrors that face each other in different rooms of the temple suggest to us eternity. This symbol is easy to understand if we take time to ponder. It is truly an appropriate symbol in the sealing rooms, for there eternal families are created and an eternal journey as husband and wife is commenced. The Lord designed the temple ordinances so that all of us can understand some of the symbols. This helps us avoid discouragement until we learn to unveil the deeper symbols with their multiple possibilities to edify and instruct.

DEEPER SYMBOLS

Some symbols of the temple are more difficult to understand, so we are given a meaning when they are presented to us. In some cases we are given multiple meanings. If we ponder the given explanation of the symbol and how it relates to the symbol itself, we will become more familiar with the Lord's teaching method. These symbols we hold sacred and do not speak of outside temple walls—not because we are secretive but because we reverence them too highly to allow them to become trivial in common conversation, open to anyone who is curious.

After presenting us with symbolic ordinances before we ever go to the temple, after giving us symbolic images and language in the scriptures, after presenting us with some easier symbols to understand, and after explaining the meaning of others that are more difficult, the Lord in essence says to us: "Do you now comprehend how I teach in my house? I have tried to prepare you for temple worship for a lifetime. Now that you have an idea of how I teach, spend the rest of your life frequently returning to learn all that my house can teach you. Ponder and pray until you understand the symbols I have not explained. Let every word, every act, and all you see be an opportunity for insight and edification." If we approach temple worship this way, every visit is an invitation for discovery. It requires effort and concentration, but the Lord assures us we will not be disappointed.

EVERYTHING CAN TEACH

We should also realize that everything in the temple can teach us. The words, the covenants, the clothing, and the architecture all present opportunities for wonderful insight. I once learned a great lesson on marriage while witnessing the sealing of a relative. After the ceremony,

I stood with my wife looking into the mirrors that reflect a strait and narrow path into eternity. As usual, I was moving this way and that way, trying to see a little farther, but my own reflection was in the way, and I could not see as far as I wanted. I remember consciously thinking: "I wish I could take myself out of the mirrors. I could see eternity better, but I keep getting in the way."

As I pondered this, the Spirit bore a strong witness to its truth. Concentrating too much on ourselves obscures our view of eternal things. I thought of all the couples I had counseled while serving as bishop and realized that in every case of marital conflict, one or both partners had focused so much on themselves that they could no longer see eternity. I wanted to bring each couple in my ward to the sealing room, stand them in front of the mirrors, and say: "Can you see what we sometimes do? Can you understand the problem and also perceive the solution? The mirrors teach us a powerful truth that can strengthen, enhance, or save our marriages."

My eyes rested on the chandelier that hung above the altar. It cast a soft and gentle light in the room and suggested to me the light that radiates from the Holy Spirit. I pondered all the other words from the scriptures that are associated with light, such as truth, spirit, intelligence, the Savior, and so on. I watched the chandelier's reflection multiply down the corridor created by the mirrors, and the Spirit seemed to whisper: "If you want your marriage to be eternal, you must take the Spirit, the truth, and the Savior with you. This light will guide you through the corridors of time and into eternity."

Perhaps this beautiful truth is suggested by President Wilford Woodruff in the dedicatory prayer he offered for the Salt Lake Temple: "Our Father in heaven, we present before Thee the altars which we have prepared for Thy servants and handmaidens to receive their sealing blessings. We dedicate them in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, unto Thy most holy name, and we ask Thee to sanctify these altars, that those who come unto them may feel the power of the Holy Ghost resting upon them." (Temples of the Most High, p. 125; emphasis added.)

These simple truths, among others, were taught to me by the furnishings of the sealing room alone. How much more can we learn when we consider the power of the ordinances themselves and the rich detail of their language? We must constantly ask ourselves each time we go to the temple: "What can this teach me? What can I learn from this part of the ordinance? How are these words and these images relevant to my life? Why is the Lord showing me this? Why does the Lord ask me to do this?"

Most of all, we must not become discouraged. It was never intended that we understand the temple ordinances all at once. They were designed to feed us for a lifetime. Joseph Smith once said, "The endowment you are so anxious about, you cannot comprehend now, nor could Gabriel explain it to the understanding of your dark minds; but strive to be prepared in your hearts, be faithful in all things." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 91.)

A wise man once told me never to read a book I could comprehend in one reading, for a book that could be grasped in one reading was not worth that reading. "Anything that is worth reading once is worth reading numerous times," he said. The temple ordinances, like the scriptures, are worth thousands of readings, and even then we shall not have sounded the depths of their possibilities. Therefore, let us be not discouraged but diligent. The Lord will lead us along.
