S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 4

A Formula for Temple Worship

A powerful and practical formula for temple worship is found in the Savior's words to the Nephites when he visited them after his Resurrection. Jesus spent the day with the Nephites, teaching them numerous beautiful truths, many of which they did not fully understand, particularly the Isaiah verses he concluded with. "I perceive that ye are weak," he told them, "that ye cannot understand all my words which I am commanded of the Father to speak unto you at this time." (3 Nephi 17:2.)

These words express how we often feel as we leave the temple. I know they express how I felt the first time I went to the Los Angeles Temple to receive my own endowment. We are all weak and cannot understand all that the Father has taught us. Occasionally we feel a bit guilty for not comprehending more, but guilt is not the proper response. Occasionally we feel apathetic and attend the temple less often, or we do not pay attention when we do come. These things are even more inappropriate.

What must we do? The Savior tells us to do five things, and the first is very easy: "Therefore, [1] go ye unto your homes, and [2] ponder upon the things which I have said, and [3] ask of the Father, in my name, that ye may understand, and [4] prepare your minds for the morrow, and [5] I come unto you again." (3 Nephi 17:3.) If we do not understand all we see and hear in the temple, we must not be fearful, guilty, or apathetic. We must go home, ponder, pray, prepare, and then return.

Far too often, the first step is the only one we take. We simply go home. Or we do step one and step five. We go home and we return, but we do not ponder, pray, or prepare. We must learn to do all five.

LEARNING TO PONDER

Pondering spiritual things is always an invitation to receive revelation. The scriptures give numerous examples of prophets who have reflected, pondered, meditated, or studied and received glorious spiritual experiences as the result. (See 1 Nephi 11, D&C 76, or D&C 138 as examples.) Pondering requires a deep concentration of thought and focus.

To effectively ponder the temple ordinances, we must be familiar with them. If we want to ponder the scriptures, we can read and reread them, focusing on each word or phrase and how it relates to other truths found elsewhere in the text. We can do this with the temple ordinances only if they are written in our minds and in our hearts, for we cannot study them on a printed page. This occurs the more frequently we participate in them. It is next to impossible to ponder something we are not familiar with.

At times, while listening to the endowment, we may want to pause and reflect about some insight we are discovering. We wish we could stop the session from continuing so we could reflect a little deeper. Sometimes we wish we could write ourselves a note about an insight we are receiving so we could reflect on it more when the ceremony is over. We are afraid we will forget our insight by the time the session is completed. Of course, we can neither write ourselves notes nor stop the session. We must learn to hold the thoughts in our minds and then, in quiet moments in and out of the temple, ponder them and let the Spirit teach us. The more we attend the temple, the more permanently the phrases and words of the endowment rest securely in our minds, where they are available for future pondering.

PRAY FOR UNDERSTANDING

We are told to pray for understanding. How often do we kneel before or after temple attendance and beseech the Lord to teach us some edifying truth from the endowment. The Lord is willing to teach if we will ask. We must allow him, however, to use his own wisdom about when and how to reveal a certain truth. Sometimes he will speak directly to our minds. Sometimes the answer will come in the scriptures. Insight might be presented to us by a spouse, a mother, or a father during a quiet conversation in the celestial room.

"TEACH ONE ANOTHER"

These conversations are completely appropriate and may be the means by which the Lord will answer our prayers for understanding. Occasionally we wonder what we can or cannot say about the ordinances of the temple. Outside the temple, we must use extreme care, speaking only of those things that are in the scriptures or in the official publications of the Church. Even then, we must let this counsel be our guide: "Remember that that which cometh from above is sacred, and must be spoken with care, and by constraint of the Spirit; and in this there is no condemnation." (D&C 63:64; emphasis added.)

Inside the temple, among those who are worthy of the ordinances, we may, again with the constraint of the Spirit, teach one another, particularly those in our own families. Some things we do not speak of even within temple walls, but these things are few and obvious. In the context of temple learning, the Lord instructs us in the following words: "As all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom." (D&C 88:118; emphasis added.) Remember, the temple is called "a place of instruction for all those who are called to the work of the ministry in all their several callings and offices; that they may be perfected in the understanding of their ministry, in theory, in principle, and in doctrine." (D&C 97:13-14; emphasis added.)

Ideally, the Spirit, using the symbols and the atmosphere of the temple, teaches each person according to his or her needs and in response to the person's individual prayers. But the Spirit can also teach through the words and insights of others. On occasion, Jesus' disciples did not understand the deeper meaning of his parables or figurative language. In private they would ask him the interpretation of these teachings. He rarely refused to explain. His disciples were weak but desirous of learning. We must not be afraid to ask for clarification from the Lord or from each other. When we have insight, it is appropriate, especially within our families, under the guidance of the Spirit, to teach and explain as did the Savior.

"Young people and sometimes older people," said Elder John A. Widtsoe, "will question this or that thing about the temple service. 'Is this or that necessary?' 'Is this or that thing reasonable?' 'Why should I do this or that?' Even though such questions should be needless, it is best to answer them, especially if they are asked by those who are untrained and inexperienced and therefore unable to think clearly for themselves." ("Temple Worship," pp. 59-60.) While we are learning to clearly receive instruction through the Holy Ghost, let us, without anxiety, "teach one another words of wisdom" inasmuch as we have wisdom to impart and the Spirit so directs. This sharing may be the Lord's answer to someone's prayers.

Within a family, this sharing of insight can be very uniting. As a teacher in the Church Educational System, I have shared many touching teaching moments with hungry students, but none have been as sweet as when I have sat quietly in the celestial room with my wife, my sisters, my children, or my parents answering questions to the best of my insight and receiving their insights in return. Many of my prayers about the temple have been answered in this manner. In doing this, we must always be careful to respond to the Spirit and never limit the meaning of the temple to our own thoughts. A world of meaning can be discovered if our minds remain open.

Often we must ponder and pray for many years before a certain symbol is revealed. I personally sought guidance about a symbol of the temple for over twenty years. Then one morning, while I was directing a session, the truth rose quietly and beautifully in my mind. When these experiences come to us, they give us confidence and hope. I do not know why the Lord did not answer my prayers about this symbol earlier. Perhaps I was unprepared to receive it, or other experiences in my life made it more powerful when it did come. The Lord is a much better judge in these matters than we are. We must have faith that when the time is right, he will answer our prayers and grant us understanding either directly, through the scriptures, or through the teachings and insights of others, especially those of our family.

ALL IS BEAUTIFUL

As we pray for understanding, we can be assured that everything in the temple is beautiful. "No jot, iota, or tittle of the temple rites is otherwise than uplifting and sanctifying," wrote Elder James E. Talmage. (The House of the Lord, p. 84.) I have seen the beauty behind the symbols enough to now know that everything in the temple is beautiful. If I do not yet understand a symbol, I trust that when I do understand it, it will be edifying and wonderful, for that has happened already with other symbols I have pondered and prayed about.

The temptation to reject a symbol as unedifying says much more about our ignorance of its meaning than about the symbol itself. If we understood it, it would be beautiful and powerful. We must constantly pray for understanding and, until it comes, trust that the Lord never presents to the human mind anything that is not edifying.

PREPARING THE MIND

We are told to prepare our minds to receive the Lord's words. How do we prepare our minds to receive revelation? We have already seen that pondering is an excellent form of preparation. The scriptures teach that humility, also, prepares the mind for revelation. The Lord told the early Saints: "Let him that is ignorant learn wisdom by humbling himself and calling upon the Lord his God, that his eyes may be opened that he may see, and his ears opened that he may hear; for my Spirit is sent forth into the world to enlighten the humble and contrite." (D&C 136:32-33.) Alma saw that the afflictions of the Zoramites had "truly humbled them, and that they were in a preparation to hear the word." (Alma 32:6.)

Hungering after righteousness prepares a mind to receive revelation. The promise is given that if we hunger after righteousness, we will be "filled with the Holy Ghost." (3 Nephi 12:6.) Since the Holy Ghost is the principal teacher in the temple, anything we can do to be "filled" with the Spirit will enhance our learning opportunities. In reality, we will learn relatively little in the temple without the Spirit.

I am a teacher by profession. In my experience, one thing is absolutely irresistible to a teacher—a hungry student. When I see a hungry student, eager to learn, giving me full attention, I want to teach him or her everything I know. I will spend hours with that student, poring over the scriptures and sharing insights. When I have a class where everyone is quiet, alert, and paying strict attention, I teach a much better lesson. I share things I would not ordinarily share. These are wonderful moments that every teacher desires.

When Jesus came to earth, he came as a teacher. I am sure that hungry students are also irresistible to him. Let us go to the temple hungry, with a desire to take in everything and to understand everything. If we go with this attitude, our minds will be prepared to receive whatever the Lord desires us to receive that day. We will leave the temple filled because we went there hungry.

Humility is important, for the proud think they know already. They are not hungry. They come to the temple already filled. The humble know they are empty, that they need nourishment. They come to the temple desiring to feast. The greater the hunger and the more directed it is to be satisfied, the greater the feast will be.

AVOIDING THINGS OFFENSIVE TO THE SPIRIT

Avoiding entertainments, environments, or activities that offend the Spirit helps prepare the mind for revelation. It would be inconsistent, for example, on a Friday night to attend a movie that contained crude or vulgar language or suggestive or violent scenes and then on Saturday morning hope to receive insight in the temple. It would be improper to listen to worldly music whose lyrics or beat was outside the standards set by the Lord while driving to the temple and then be sensitive to the still, small voice once inside its walls.

On occasion our dress and grooming can be offensive. Elder Boyd K. Packer taught this truth from his own experience: "On occasions, when I have performed a marriage in the temple, there has been one there to witness it who obviously has paid little attention to the counsel that the Brethren have given about . . . the extremes of style in clothing, in hair length and arrangement, etc. I have wondered why it is that if such a person was mature enough to be admitted to the temple he would not at once be sensible enough to know that the Lord could not be pleased with those who show obvious preference to follow after the ways of the world." (The Holy Temple, p. 74.)

In truth, frequent attendance at the temple protects us from becoming too caught up in the things of the world. President Brigham Young promised the Saints that if they "were in the temple of God working for the living and the dead, [their] eyes and hearts would not be after the fashions of the world nor the wealth of the world." (Discourses of Brigham Young, pp. 642-43.)

Arthur Henry King, a former president of the London Temple and a great educator, explained how the scriptures influence our ability to discern between those things that are offensive to the Spirit and those things that are acceptable. The truths he explained relative to the scriptures are equally true about frequent temple worship, for the endowment is one of the purest forms of scripture we have. He said: "When we have the scriptures in our heart and our mind and our soul, then we have a means of measuring all things; we have a means of judging everything else. . . . If we are soaked in the scriptures, we shan't want to look at bad things on our walls or listen to bad music, because they won't fit. We shall intuitively reject them, just as we shall embrace what is good, because we shall have in our minds a firm and sound sense of what is in good taste." (Abundance of the Heart, pp. 129-30.)

Consistent temple attendance helps us stay prepared to receive knowledge through the Spirit. It is a powerful motivator and guide to keep the desires, styles, entertainments, and fashions of the world out of our lives. With these distractions of worldliness less dominant, the Spirit provides more and more influence in our thoughts, desires, and appetites, bending them to the will of the Lord and making us receptive to further instruction.

WORK FOR OUR OWN ANCESTORS

Personal genealogical research also seems to prepare our minds for revelation. It helps create an environment that is receptive to spiritual things. I have noticed that when I am doing the work for one of my own or my wife's ancestors, the veil seems thinner, and the inspiration flows more readily. Perhaps that is the result of a deeper commitment to the ordinances because they are being performed for one of our own people. Our concentration seems focused a bit more sharply. At times we may even feel the presence of our ancestors beside us in the temple, teaching us the meaning and relevance of what we are watching and hearing.

President Howard W. Hunter spoke about receiving both halves of a blessing and related the following story to temple work: "Some members . . . engage in temple work but fail to do family history research on their own family lines. Although they perform a divine service in assisting others, they lose a blessing by not seeking their own kindred dead as divinely directed by latter-day prophets.

"I recall an experience of a few years ago that is analogous to this condition. At the close of a fast and testimony meeting, the bishop remarked, 'We have had a spiritual experience today listening to the testimonies borne by each other. This is because we have come fasting according to the law of the Lord. But let us never forget that the law consists of two parts: that we fast by abstaining from food and drink and that we contribute what we have thereby saved to the bishop's storehouse for the benefit of those who are less fortunate.' Then he added, 'I hope no one of us will leave today with only half a blessing.'

"I have learned that those who engage in family history research and then perform the temple ordinance work for those whose names they have found will know the additional joy of receiving both halves of the blessing. . . .

"What a glorious thing it is for us to have the privilege of going to the temple for our own blessings. Then after going to the temple for our own blessings, what a glorious privilege to do the work for those who have gone on before us. This aspect of temple work is an unselfish work. Yet whenever we do temple work for other people, there is a blessing that comes back to us." (Ensign, February 1995, pp. 4-5.)

Perhaps part of the other half of the blessing is increased receptivity to the spiritual promptings that open up the beautiful symbols.

WE MUST RETURN

The last aspect of our formula is to return. We must return as often as our circumstances permit. In frequent repetition, the layers of symbolic meaning were revealed. How often we can return varies from person to person. The Lord understands our limitations of time and distance.

I live about ten minutes from the Jordan River Temple. Obviously, the Lord would expect me to return more frequently than the families I knew in the mission field in France. I believe he considers these things and blesses us with insight, truth, and knowledge accordingly. He will touch the memory of those who cannot come as often and increase the understanding they receive, even if they can attend only once a year. He will magnify us according to our efforts and limitations. But for those of us who have the means to go more often, where "much is given much is required." (D&C 82:3.)

This, then, is the formula. When we feel weak and cannot understand all the words of the Father, let us go home, where we will ponder, pray, and prepare our minds. Then let us return frequently to the Lord's house, where our weakness in understanding can be strengthened by the Holy Spirit, who serves as a private tutor in all sacred things.
