S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 5

When Our Souls Are Calm

Sometimes the truths we learn in the temple are not taught through symbols. Often they come through the whisperings of the Spirit because our souls have been calmed through the serenity of the Lord's house. We cry out to the Lord in our anxiety, but most frequently he answers us when our minds and hearts are quiet. The temple creates an environment conducive to the Spirit, and we can be taught directly, perhaps even by those for whom we officiate.

I recall going to the temple for two different people who lived in vastly different situations. One was a man of great nobility; the other was a slave owned by one of my ancestors. I remember feeling pleased that I had a noble line in my family, and yet as I did the work for my ancestor, I sensed his embarrassment at my using his earthly title during the ordinances. It was as if he said to me: "These things have no relevance to us here. We do not think of them anymore. They are forgotten vestiges of the honors of mortal life."

I sensed as he was ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood that he considered it the supreme honor of his life, worth more than all the titles he had carried during his mortal existence. I carried these thoughts with me throughout the endowment session. I had in my own life recently lost what I thought was a position of respect and honor and was mourning a bit over its loss.

My impressions that day effectively cured me of my sadness. And since then, I have always looked at the honors of men, whether I received them or was denied them, in a much different light. I had found comfort in an earthly trial because the temple had calmed my soul and allowed me to be taught from beyond the veil.

the slave I learned the joy of total consecration of self to the Lord. This man had spent his whole earthly existence forced to give his time, labor, and life to a worldly master. I sensed his delight and gratitude that he could now freely give his whole soul, his heart, and all his time, energy, and talents to a heavenly master. I almost envied this unqualified release of his will to God. This was not slavery; it was not even duty. It was a son's full and trusting love, given freely to a Father worthy of its deepest intensity.

I have often wondered if such small gifts of insight and inspiration are not our ancestors' gifts to us in exchange for our time and service for them. They are the sweet rewards, granted freely, for hours of research in libraries and patient labor in temples.

PRACTICAL PROBLEMS

The calming influence of the temple also helps us receive answers to the practical challenges and decisions of our lives. President Ezra Taft Benson said, "By virtue of the sacred priesthood in me vested, . . . I promise you that, with increased attendance in the temples of our God, you shall receive increased personal revelation to bless your life as you bless those who have died." (Conference Report, April 1987, p. 108.)

Elder John A. Widtsoe, a brilliant mind in academic circles, received practical knowledge from the temple. "I would rather take my practical problems to the House of the Lord than anywhere else," he said. He shared the following experience with the Saints: "For several years, under a Federal grant with my staff of workers we had gathered thousands of data in the field of soil moisture; but I could not extract any general law running through them. I gave up at last. My wife and I went to the temple that day to forget the failure. In the third endowment room, out of the unseen, came the solution, which has long since gone into print." (In a Sunlit Land, p. 177.)

If the Lord will reveal solutions about soil moisture, surely he will give us guidance about our marriages, our children, our occupations, or any other decisions or challenges we are facing. "I can think of no better preparation," Elder Widtsoe said on another occasion, "for one's labor on the farm, in the office, wherever it may be, than to spend a few hours in the temple, to partake of its influence and to give oneself unselfishly for the benefit of those who have gone beyond the veil." (Improvement Era, October 1952, p. 719.)

We go to the temple when we need help with personal challenges, questions, or problems. In its atmosphere we are more awake to the promptings of the Holy Spirit. In the dedicatory prayer of Solomon's temple, Solomon prayed that the Lord would be gracious, merciful, and hearing when his people came to him with their needs.

"What prayer and supplication," he said, "soever be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel, which shall know every man the plague of his own heart, and spread forth his hands to ward this house: Then hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and do, and give to every man according to his ways, whose heart thou knowest." (1 Kings 8:38-39; emphasis added.)

In Chronicles Solomon's prayer is also recorded. There, different words are used to describe the needs of those who pray at the Lord's house: "Every one shall know his own sore and his own grief," the scripture records. (2 Chronicles 6:29; emphasis added.) In the serene atmosphere of the temple, we may receive the answers to our own sores and our own griefs and find help and healing because our spirits are calm.
