S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 6

"Waters to Swim In"

In the forty-seventh chapter of Ezekiel is a wonderful prophecy that teaches a profound and deeply beautiful lesson on the power and purpose of the temple. It also serves as an excellent illustration of the kind of symbolic teaching found in the House of the Lord. Of all the scriptural teachings on the temple, I love this one the most. Its power lies in its simplicity and in the beauty of its imagery.

Ezekiel saw in vision the temple that will one day be built in Jerusalem on Mt. Zion. When the temple was completed, Ezekiel was brought to the east doors, where he saw a spring of pure water "issued out from under the threshold of the house." (V. 1.) The spring formed a river, which began to flow eastward through the wilderness of Judaea until it finally emptied into the Dead Sea.

The wilderness of Judaea is a dead, sun-baked land where almost nothing grows, but Ezekiel saw that wherever the river flowed, life came to the barren desert. "At the bank of the river," Ezekiel said, "were very many trees on the one side and on the other." (V. 7.) The trees were "for meat, whose leaf shall not fade, neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed: it shall bring forth new fruit . . . because their waters . . . issued out of the sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf thereof for medicine." (V. 12.)

The river flowed into the Dead Sea, "which being brought forth into the sea, the waters shall be healed." Ezekiel further saw a "very great multitude of fish. . . . And it shall come to pass, that the fishers shall stand upon it from En-gedi even unto En-eglaim; they shall be a place to spread forth nets; their fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the great sea, exceeding many." (Vv. 8-10.)

Ezekiel describes the river's impact on all it touches with these words: "And it shall come to pass, that every thing that liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live . . . because these waters shall come thither; for they shall be healed; and every thing shall live whither the river cometh." (V. 9; emphasis added.)

As we read these words, the Spirit seems to whisper, "What will literally be true, one day, of the Lord's temple in Jerusalem, is true now, spiritually, of all the Lord's temples. From the doors of each one a healing, life-giving river flows."

Latter-day temples are the source of a powerful, deeply refreshing river. It is a river of peace, revelation, truth, light, and priesthood power. But above all else, it is a river of love. A careful reading of Lehi's dream reveals a second symbol that represents the love of God just as the fruit of the Tree of Life does. Nephi saw that "the rod of iron . . . led [also] to the fountain of living waters, . . . which waters are a representation of the love of God." (1 Nephi 11:25.) This fountain of love flows from the doors of the temples.

We learn from Ezekiel that the water of the river does two things to everything it touches: it gives life and it heals. The life it produces will not "fade," and that which it heals will live forever. The temple's flowing water will heal and give life to our marriages. It will give life to and heal our families. The Church will flourish and become strong and vital as will our individual lives as we plant ourselves near its banks and draw its moisture into our souls.

Doctrine and Covenants 97 speaks of the temple's "pure stream, that yieldeth much precious fruit." If Zion draws continually from that stream, "she shall prosper, and spread herself and become . . . very great . . . and the nations of the earth shall honor her, and shall say: Surely Zion is the city of our God, and surely Zion cannot fall, neither be moved out of her place, for God is there, and the hand of the Lord is there." (Vv. 9, 18-19.)

MEASURE THE DEPTH

In his vision, Ezekiel is instructed to wade into the river and measure its depth. The first time he enters it, "the waters were to the ankles." Now, an ankle-deep river is nothing to get excited about, but Ezekiel is instructed to walk down the bank a little farther and wade in again. This time "the waters were to the knees." He is told to continue down the bank and measure the depth again. "The waters were to the loins."

Ezekiel's last description of the river's depth contains a beautifully symbolic truth of what the temple can become for all of us if we wade into its waters again and again. "It was a river that I could not pass over: for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed over." (Ezekiel 47:3-5.) The water is now over his head, and he can immerse himself in its cool freshness.

The first time we enter a temple, we barely get our feet wet. We are barely introduced to the Lord's light and love. What a tragedy it is when members of the Church judge the temple to be shallow or not deeply refreshing based on that first experience. Yet all of us know that on a hot summer day, wading even ankle deep in a cool stream brings instant refreshment and a hesitancy to leave the flowing water to return to our shoes. In light of this, it is not difficult to feel Moses' sense of wonder when he was told to "put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground." (Exodus 3:5.) Elder Widtsoe cautioned that it is not fair "to pass opinion on temple worship after one day's participation followed by an absence of many years. The work should be repeated several times in quick succession, so that the lessons of the temple may be fastened upon the mind." ("Temple Worship," p. 64.) Little do the casual waders know that down the river, if they will patiently persist, are life-giving, healing "waters to swim in." For the water rises each time we wade. Little do they realize the power of those waters to heal the disharmony of our lives, our families, and eventually the world.

If we understand little or feel little the first time we enter the temple, at all cost let us not abandon the river. We must continue down the bank and wade in again and again. If we do that, we will feel the waters rise until they are over our heads, and we can plunge deeply into the refreshing, life-giving, healing waters of God's love and light. As we continue to wade in again and again, our understanding of the Lord's great plan of mercy and happiness as taught through the temple symbols will rise also. If you feel you are understanding the temple ceremonies at an ankle-deep level, do not despair. Wade in again and again and again. In time you will feel the water rise and your understanding deepen. When talking with children about the temple, I often tell them about Ezekiel's river. Their eyes are full of wonder, delight and anticipation at the thought that one day they too will be able to swim in Heavenly Father's river. We, who are older, can learn a great deal from their eagerness.

"ONE HEART AND ONE MIND"

Immersed in that loving light, we can become one, as Jesus and his Father are one. Jesus taught the Saints of this dispensation, "If ye are not one ye are not mine." (D&C 38:27.) Only the temple can make us one. It can create a Zion people who will be, as the scripture describes, "of one heart and one mind." (Moses 7:18.)

Think of all the unities we are taught in the Lord's house, both literally and through its most sacred symbols. Its healing, life-giving power will "seal" husband to wife for eternity and make them one. It will bind parent to child, brother to brother, and sister to sister and make them one. It will "weld" the living to the dead through countless generations into a "whole and complete and perfect" chain. (See D&C 128:18.) And most important of all, it will allow all humanity to embrace God, to know him as their Father, and to become "of one heart and one mind" with him. With the temple we cannot fail to build Zion; without it we can never become true disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ. All of these unities are implied in the beautiful greeting described in section 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants, which is a critical section in the development of latter-day temple worship: "Art thou a brother or brethren? I salute you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, in token or remembrance of the everlasting covenant, in which covenant I receive you to fellowship, in a determination that is fixed, immovable, and unchangeable, to be your friend and brother through the grace of God in the bonds of love, to walk in all the commandments of God blameless, in thanksgiving, forever and ever. Amen." (V. 133.)

I know of no more beautiful greeting in print. It surely has deep significance to the unity we are taught and that is created in the Lord's house. Through the healing, life-giving power of the temple, husbands and wives, parents and children, brothers and sisters, living and dead, all nations and races will be able to so greet each other.
