S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 7

Frequently, Constantly, Consistently

When I moved to Utah ten years ago, my children were entering their teenage years. Having taught teenagers in seminary, I knew how critical the next years would be, for during these years we win or lose so many battles for the souls of men. The more I thought about the world my children were growing up in and the pressures and opposition arrayed against them, the more anxious I felt.

I went to the temple one afternoon to seek guidance about my children. The calm, loving spirit of the temple seemed to magnify my natural love for my family, and I found myself offering a deeply sincere prayer filled with desire for my children. I told the Lord I was willing to offer any sacrifice if he would protect my children from Satan's power and bless them with his Spirit until they could come to his house and receive their own endowment. I do not think I offered a unique prayer. It is the uttered and unuttered prayer of every true Latter-day Saint parent, and I think most parents would give the Lord the sacrifice he required.

As I sat in the temple, an answer was given in which the required sacrifice was revealed to me. I thought the Lord would demand some great thing for the blessing I was asking, and had it been some great thing, I believe I would have been willing to fulfill it. Often we are more willing to do the great things than the small, everyday acts of obedience and sacrifice that comprise living the gospel.

However, the Spirit simply whispered: "This is the sacrifice I ask of you. Be in this house frequently, constantly, and consistently, and the promised protection you seek, which this house has the power to bestow, will be extended to those you love." For that blessing alone I would be in the temple as often as I could.

At first I thought this counsel was unique to me, but I came to realize as I read and studied the scriptures that it is a promise with much broader application. I found this promise again and again in both the scriptures and in the words of our living prophets and apostles. It was not a special request and promise to me, but one that was extended to all the Saints in behalf of those they love.

"UNSEEN ANGELS"

President Ezra Taft Benson counseled us to "make the temple a sacred home away from our eternal home." He then explained the power the temple can generate in a morally deteriorating world: "This temple will be a standing witness that the power of God can stay the powers of evil in our midst. Many parents, in and out of the Church, are concerned about protection against a cascading avalanche of wickedness which threatens to engulf Christian principles. . . . There is a power associated with the ordinances of heaven—even the power of godliness—which can and will thwart the forces of evil if we will be worthy of those sacred blessings. This community will be protected, our families will be protected, our children will be safeguarded as we live the gospel, visit the temple, and live close to the Lord. (The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, p. 256; emphasis added.)

Elder Boyd K. Packer taught: "No work is more of a protection to this Church than temple work and the genealogical research which supports it. No work is more spiritually refining. No work we do gives us more power. No work requires a higher standard of righteousness." But the work, although demanding, carries with it wonderful benefits. "Our labors in the temple," Elder Packer continued, "cover us with a shield and a protection, both individually and as a people." (The Holy Temple, p. 265; emphasis added.)

George Q. Cannon promised the Saints that when "other temples are completed, there will be an increase of power bestowed upon the people of God, and . . . they will, thereby, be better fitted to go forth and cope with the powers of darkness and with the evils that exist in the world." (Journal of Discourses 14:126; emphasis added.)

"Men grow mighty under the results of temple service," Elder Widtsoe testified; "women grow strong under it; the community increases in power; until the devil has less influence than he ever had before." ("Temple Worship," p. 51; emphasis added.)

"If we go into the temple," President Joseph Fielding Smith said, "we raise our hands and covenant that we will serve the Lord and observe his commandments and keep ourselves unspotted from the world. If we realize what we are doing then the endowment will be a protection to us all our lives—a protection which a man who does not go to the temple does not have." ("The Pearl of Great Price," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, July 1930, p. 103; emphasis added.)

Elder Vaughn J. Featherstone promised "that all who faithfully attend to temple work" will have "unseen angels watch over [their] loved ones when satanic forces tempt them." (In Royden G. Derrick, Temples in the Last Days, p. 103; emphasis added.)

Harold B. Lee taught, "We talk about security in this day, and yet we fail to understand that . . . we have standing the holy temple wherein we may find the symbols by which power might be generated that will save this nation from destruction." (Conference Report, April 1942, p. 87; emphasis added.)

These statements and others similar to them have been a constant source of comfort and hope to me. They are a reminder to return often to the temple, not only for my own edification or the salvation of the dead but also for the protection and blessing of my children.
