S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 8

In the Time of Trouble

The scriptures frequently teach the protecting power associated with the house of the Lord. "We need simply remember," Elder John A. Widtsoe affirmed, "that the story of ancient Israel, the chosen people of God, centers upon their temples." ("Temple Worship," p. 53.) More examples than we have time to present proves the connection between the temple and the saving power of Jehovah. A few examples, both ancient and modern, however, will be instructive.

In the Old Testament, David assures that "in the time of trouble [the Lord] shall hide [us] in his pavilion: in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide [us]; he shall set [us] up upon a rock." (Psalm 27:5.) In another psalm David calls the Lord "our shield" and then adds, "for a day in thy courts is better than a thousand. I had rather be a door-keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness. For the Lord God is a sun and shield: . . . no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly." (Psalm 84:9-11; emphasis added.)

A PREVAILING AND COMBINED ENEMY

In the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord explains to the Saints the condition of the world as the final days commence: "All flesh is corrupted before me; and the powers of darkness prevail upon the earth . . . and all eternity is pained, and the angels are waiting the great command to reap down the earth . . . and, behold, the enemy is combined." (D&C 38:11-12; emphasis added.) How do we as Saints and parents stand against a prevailing and combined (or organized) enemy? How can we keep our children and grandchildren from being overcome by such forces?

The Lord never describes a problem in the scriptures without also giving a solution. Notice how the words in Joseph Smith's dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple match the words from section 38: "We ask thee, Holy Father, to establish the people that shall worship, and honorably hold a name and standing in this thy house, to all generations and for eternity; that no weapon formed against them shall prosper; . . . that no combination of wickedness shall have power to rise up and prevail over thy people upon whom thy name shall be put in this house." (D&C 109:24-26; emphasis added.) Those who have the name of the Father placed upon them need not fear the "prevailing, combined" forces of evil.

THE NAME OF THE FATHER

Echoes of this doctrine are heard resounding from the Old and the New Testaments. In Revelation, John sees four angels holding back the winds of destruction previous to the Second Coming. A fifth angel appears with "the seal of the living God" and instructs the four angels not to unleash the winds until he has "sealed the servants of God in their foreheads." (Revelation 7:1-9.) Later we learn that the seal written in the forehead is the "Father's name." (Revelation 14:1.) "And they shall see his face and his name shall be in their foreheads." (Revelation 22:4.) A quick look in a thesaurus gives us four interesting words interchangeable with seal. They are mark, sign, symbol, and token. In using this imagery, John is alluding to two similar events recorded in the Old Testament: the Passover at the time of Moses, and a vision given to Ezekiel prior to the Babylonian captivity.

In the book of Exodus, the children of Israel are protected from the "destroyer" (Exodus 12:23) by having their doors marked with the blood of a lamb: "When he seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side posts, the Lord will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you." (Exodus 12:23.) In Hebrew the words "pass over" carry the connotation of "warding off a blow or opposing the threatened entrance of an enemy." (See Wilson's

Old Testament Word Studies, pp. 303-4.) This episode in Israel's history was to teach them that the atoning blood of Christ protects those who have faith in him from the power of Satan, who is a "destroying angel." The Savior's atonement will oppose Satan's entry and ward off his blows.

A similar pattern is found in the book of Ezekiel. Ezekiel sees in vision six men come to Jerusalem. Five of them come with "a slaughter weapon in his hand; and one man among them [the sixth] was clothed with linen, with a writer's inkhorn by his side." The man clothed with linen is a priesthood bearer. In this story the priesthood places the mark, sign, or seal upon the foreheads of the righteous. The Lord calls to the "man clothed with linen, which had the writer's inkhorn by his side; and the Lord said unto him, Go through the midst of the city . . . and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof. And to the others he said in mine hearing, Go ye after him through the city, and smite . . . and begin at my sanctuary." (Ezekiel 9:2-6.) The city is then destroyed, all but those who have the mark upon their foreheads.

It is interesting that in the last days, the final cleansing of the earth also begins at the Lord's house: "Upon my house shall it begin, and from my house shall it go forth, saith the Lord; first among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the midst of my house, saith the Lord." (D&C 112:25-26.)

In all three examples, Revelation, Exodus, and Ezekiel, a mark or seal of some sort was placed upon those who were to be protected from the forces of destruction. We learn from the book of Revelation that in our day that mark or seal will be the "name of the Father." We learn from the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple that the name of the Father is placed upon those who "worship, and honorably hold a name and standing in" the Lord's house. In the dedicatory prayer Joseph Smith also prays that the Lord's "servants may go forth from this house armed with thy power, and that thy name may be upon them, and thy glory be round about them, and thine angels have charge over them." (D&C 109:22; emphasis added.) The threatened entry of the enemy will be opposed for those who have received the Father's name. "Unseen angels" will "have charge over them." Worshiping in the temple will be as important in our day as it was for the children of Israel to mark their doorways with lamb's blood when the destroying angel passed through Egypt.

I do not wish to suggest there is some mystical manner in which we receive the name of the Father in the temple. We must be wise as we interpret and apply symbolic language. The early Israelites were told by Moses to "bind" the commandment to "love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might, . . . for a sign upon thine hand, and . . . as frontlets between thine eyes." (Deuteronomy 6:5-8.) In other words, the love and worship of God was to be constantly before their eyes, and their whole lives were to be guided by that love. They would have, in essence, an "eye single to the glory of God." (D&C 4:5.)

When we love and serve God with all our heart, soul, and might, we are truly his children. His name is upon us, just as the name of my own earthly father is upon me. We belong to his family and carry his name. Where, if not in the temple, do we as members of the Church promise that we will love and serve God with all our heart, soul, and might? Where are our eyes directed so completely to the glory of the Lord? When we make and strive to keep our covenants, his name is upon us. Then we need not fear the powers of the destroyer. The destroyer will pass us over. He cannot prevail, even though his forces are combined. His threatened entry into our homes and lives will be opposed.

In Revelation, John promised the Saints from Philadelphia that, if they overcame the temptations of their day, the Lord would make them "a pillar in the temple . . . [to] go no more out." Once they were in the temple, the Savior said, he would "write upon [them] the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, . . . and I will write upon [them] my new name." (Revelation 3:12.) Here again we see the relationship of temple worship to the name of God. But in order to receive this great blessing, we must overcome temptation enough to enter the temple. Once worthy to enter, we seek to become a "pillar" in the Lord's house, someone he can place weight upon, someone who is steady, strong, and constant.

TRUE WORSHIP

It might be helpful, in light of the greatness of the Lord's promised protection, to return to section 109 of the Doctrine and Covenants and examine a bit more closely what we need to do to have the name of the Father put upon us. Merely attending the temple may not be sufficient. Verse 24 states that we must do two things:

Worshiping God in his house means more than just going to the temple or "doing sessions." True worship is emulation or imitation. I remember once preparing a lesson on the third chapter of Helaman while lying on my bed. I had my red and blue pencils out and was underlining and making notes to myself. My six-year-old son watched me for a moment, then ran to his bedroom and returned with his own copy of the Book of Mormon. He positioned himself next to me, assuming my exact posture, and began to "color" in his Book of Mormon also. I was vaguely aware of what he was doing because I had seen him color in his scriptures before. About half an hour later, I finished my lesson and glanced at his book. There before my eyes was an exact duplicate of my markings in Helaman chapter 3. He had found the same page, underlined the same verses, drawn the same arrows, highlighted the same words, and even started to write some of the notes I had written in my margins, but of course his writing was much too big, so he only managed to get the first three words on the page.

There was a spot on my page where the red pencil had bled onto the next. It was very faint, so my son had colored the spot in his book and then erased it so it would look similar. When he saw me examining his page, he put his head down and almost started to cry. "What's the matter, son?" I asked him. In a timid voice he answered, "My lines are not as straight as yours are."

My son taught me the greatest lesson on the meaning of worship I have ever received. When we worship the Savior in his temple, we study carefully all that we learn about him there. Then we try to follow exactly every quality that is shown us. We want to walk, talk, forgive, love, obey, bless, pray, and endure as he did. Our "lines" will not be as straight as his are, but our truest efforts will always be acceptable to him. When we emulate the Savior, as we come to perceive him in the temple ordinances, we discover the meaning of true worship, and, of course, there is no better way to emulate him than to do the selfless, vicarious work for the dead that they cannot do for themselves, just as he vicariously gave his life for ours.

GROWING UP IN THE LORD'S HOUSE

In the fifteenth verse of Doctrine and Covenants 109, Joseph Smith prays that the Saints "may grow up in thee" while in the temple. When we are baptized into the Church, we are said to be "born again." We become innocent as a baby through the Savior's sacrifice. He is, therefore, the "father" of our rebirth. We then need to be nourished on the milk of his doctrines until maturity allows us to feast on the meat.

God does not intend for his newborn babes in Christ to remain babies; he wants us to grow up and reach full maturity. He desires to teach, protect, and guard us while we mature, just as any parent does. Each one must come to "the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ." (Ephesians 4:13; emphasis added.) Since Jesus is the father of our rebirth, and the temple is his house, he invites all of his children to "grow up" under his roof, where they can receive his guiding care. Here we can watch him and learn to emulate him.

If you think about it, next to our own homes, we have freer access to the temple than almost any other building. Even the chapels are closed to us more often than the temple. Of course, we must carry a key to the front door of the temple just as we carry a key to the front door of our own homes. The key to the temple is a recommend, but once worthy of a recommend, we can enter the temple any time we like, from five in the morning to ten at night, and we can stay as long as we wish while the temple is open. The temple is our second home. We are invited to "grow up there."

There, in his house, we learn how to reach the "full measure" of his stature, just as children in an earthly home learn by watching their parents' examples. In the temple we observe the Savior's perfect example and learn to walk in his footsteps. Without the temple we remain spiritual children. With the temple we can learn to emulate the mature image of the Savior.

"When I was a child," Paul wrote, "I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things." (1 Corinthians 13:11.) In the temple we learn to "put away" our childish things and reach spiritual maturity. This is how we worship the Lord in his house.

HONORABLY HOLD A NAME AND STANDING

The Kirtland Temple dedicatory prayer also instructs us that we must "honorably hold a name and standing" in the temple. In order to "grow up" and worship, we need a key to the front door. Each year we are given the opportunity to receive a temple recommend. It allows us to hold a name and standing in the Lord's house. But we must not only obtain a recommend; we must also "honorably" hold it.

The word honor has many connotations. It means to obey, to trust, to give glory to, to respect, and to conduct one's affairs with integrity. All of these meanings help us understand how to honorably maintain our standing in the temple.

It is now possible for our young people to receive group recommends that last for a year. How wonderful it would be if every member of the Church could honorably hold a recommend each year from age twelve to the day he or she died. What great lesson could we teach our children if we encouraged them to hold a group recommend throughout their youth and to perform baptisms for the dead as often as circumstances would allow?

The word standing implies frequent attendance. The dictionary's definitions of standing are "length of time or duration; permanent and unchanging; not movable; stationary; high reputation or esteem." (The American Heritage Dictionary.) All these meanings bear on the Lord's words in the Doctrine and Covenants and imply the constant, continual use of the recommend.

In conclusion, if we desire the promised protection of the Father's name, we must receive our temple recommends, hold them honorably, and use them frequently, not merely to attend the temple but also to worship there.
