S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 9

Isaiah's Prophetic Promise

A wonderfully comforting scripture in chapter 4 of Isaiah bears on the protecting power of the Lord's house. Speaking of the latter days, the Lord promises to "create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence.

"And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain." (Vv. 5-6; emphasis added.)

"Every dwelling place" is every home, and the "assemblies" are every ward and stake. Isaiah alludes to the pillar of fire that guided and protected Israel as they wandered in the wilderness. At that time, however, the pillar was over only the tabernacle, not over each family's tent. But in the last days each "dwelling place" will have the promised protection if we are worthy of it through faithfulness to our covenants. If we have the eyes to see, we can stand in front of our homes and know that, spiritually speaking, the Lord's glory, his pillar, is above them and will defend them. This is also true of our wards and stakes.

We are told in the scriptures that it is the will of the Lord "that all . . . who call on [his] name, and worship [him] . . . should gather together and stand in holy places" when the great problems of the last days begin to unfold. (D&C 101:22.) That does not mean to find a holy place and stay there. Rather, it means to "make a stand" or defend a position.

In battle, often a general will tell his soldiers to defend a certain position at all costs. "Here we will make our stand!" he might say to them. That is what the Lord is saying to us: "Latter-day Saints, make your stand against evil in holy places. Defend these positions at all costs!"

There are three holy places Isaiah describes. They are the home, the stake, and the temple. In these places we can defeat Satan. These positions we must defend. In them we will make our stand. We can triumph over the adversary only if we protect the home, the stake, and the temple. They, in turn, will give us protection. Here we will have the Lord's glory to defend and help us. We simply cannot allow the forces of the world to invade these three sacred places. If we do, the battle, indeed the war, will be lost.

A SHADOW FROM THE HEAT

Isaiah speaks of a tabernacle or temple. He gives three images to describe what the temple will do for the Latter-day Saints. The temple is a "shadow in the daytime from the heat." Sometimes the world is like a hot summer's day beating down on us. There are no clouds in the sky and no relief in sight. We search anxiously for a place of shade to shield us from the burning heat of the sun. When the world's heat becomes oppressive, the Lord says to us: "Come into the shade of my house. Be refreshed! Be renewed. No burning heat will reach you here. Drink from my fountain. Swim in my river, and you will be able to return to the challenges of life, prepared to meet them."

A PLACE OF REFUGE

Isaiah calls the temple a "place of refuge." This is an image of battle and war. In life we fight daily against the forces of Satan and temptation. When we feel we are about to be swept away by the adversary's powerful advance, the Lord says: "Come into my place of refuge. Rest awhile. No enemy shaft can find you here. Feast from my table. Be strengthened and invigorated. Let your fears subside. The battle does not rage within these walls. Then you can return to the battle and wield your sword with confidence and the assurance of ultimate victory." It is no coincidence that the walls of the Salt Lake Temple are crowned with battlements. They suggest a fortress where the forces of evil cannot penetrate and where the righteous can seek the safety of unconquerable walls.

COVERT FROM STORM

Isaiah calls the temple a "covert from the storm and from rain." Life's storms also beat upon us, threatening to "drag [us] down to the gulf of misery and endless wo." We look around for shelter when Satan sends forth "his mighty winds, yea, his shafts in the whirlwind, yea, when all his hail and his mighty storm . . . [beat] upon [us]" and buffet our faith. (Helaman 5:12.) The Lord calls to us through the wind and the lightning: "Come into my house and out of the storm. Wipe the rain off you, sit in the warmth of my eternal fire. No unhallowed gust can reach you here. When you are cheered and comforted by my house, the storm will not seem so black nor the sunshine so far away."

"Shadow." "Refuge." "Covert." Each word offers powerful images of hope and inspiration to those who live when darkness "prevails" and the enemy is "combined." We must not try to bear the heat, or fight the battle, or bend against the storm without accepting a gracious Father's invitation to be renewed occasionally by the cool, safe, and sheltered protection of temple walls.

CUMBERED, TROUBLED, AND CAREFUL

Once when Jesus came to Bethany, Mary and Martha prepared a meal for him. Mary sat at Jesus' feet to be taught by him, leaving Martha to "serve alone." The scriptures say that Martha was "cumbered about much serving." She turned to the Lord and asked him to tell Mary to help her. Gently, Jesus turned to Martha and said, "Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: but one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her." (Luke 10:38-42; emphasis added.) There are times for service and there are times to sit quietly and listen. We need not choose between Martha's devotion and Mary's eagerness.

I know in my own life I often feel cumbered, troubled, and careful about many things. They need not be storms or battles or burning days. They are not negative things or temptations. Sometimes our service weighs us down. Martha was not doing anything wrong; she was serving her Lord. But in spite of her service, something else was also "needful."

More times than we like to admit, we "need" to sit quietly and rest while we listen to the words of our Lord and Master. As strange as it sounds, we sometimes need to stop serving in order to listen more. Eventually, this will help us serve more effectively. In the Kirtland Temple dedicatory prayer, we are told that in the temple we would be prepared to "obtain every needful thing." (D&C 109:15; emphasis added.) Obviously "every needful thing" encompasses our need to sit, rest, and listen at the feet of Jesus. This is "that good part which shall not be taken away."

Often we spend many hours fulfilling our various church callings, family responsibilities, and occupational duties, all of which are important. But we feel cumbered, troubled, and careful. Months pass, and we have not sat quietly at the feet of the Lord to be refreshed. In the temple we are invited to lay the burdens down, to sit, to rest, and to listen, because it is "needful." From an eternal perspective, it is more needful than PTA conferences, Relief Society service projects, Scout camps, soccer games, car pools, or priesthood leadership meetings. It is needful so we will not fail to make our "stand" against the destroyer.
