S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 10

"No Might against This Great Company"

If we are tempted to minimize the temple's protecting power, we need only look through the scriptures to find additional testimony of its influence in earlier trying times. When Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, faced a strong combination of surrounding armies against which he knew his people could not stand, he called a "fast throughout all Judah," then went up to the temple to pray. Notice the words of his prayer: "O Lord God of our fathers, art not thou God in heaven? . . . Art not thou our God, who didst drive out the inhabitants of this land before thy people Israel, and gavest it to the seed of Abraham thy friend forever? And they dwelt therein, and have built thee a sanctuary therein for thy name, saying, If, when evil cometh upon us, as the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand before this house, and in thy presence, (for thy name is in this house,) and cry unto thee in our affliction, then thou wilt hear and help. . . . O our God, . . . we have no might against this great company that cometh against us; neither know we what to do: but our eyes are upon thee." (2 Chronicles 20:3-12.)

The Lord hearkened to the prayer of Jehoshaphat, telling him to "stand . . . still, and see the salvation of the Lord" (2 Chronicles 20:17), which they did the next day. The "great company" began to fight against themselves, and in their own bitter quarrels they left Judah alone. What the Lord was willing to do for Jehoshaphat's people, he will surely do for us when we face "prevailing, combined" enemies and forces we feel "we have no might against."

FIRST MONTH, FIRST YEAR

At another desperate time of Judah's history, Hezekiah came to the throne. Darkness was prevailing then as now in the form of the might of Assyria. This and other forces threatened to destroy his people. Part of the northern tribes had already gone into Assyrian captivity. Judah itself was in a state of apostasy. In these challenging circumstances, Hezekiah's first official act as a young king of twenty-five is significant.

"He in the first year of his reign, in the first month, opened the doors of the house of the Lord. . . . And he brought in the priests and the Levites . . . and said unto them . . . Sanctify now yourselves, and sanctify the house of the Lord. . . . For our fathers have . . . turned away their faces from the habitation of the Lord, and turned their backs. Also they have shut up the doors of the porch, and put out the lamps, and have not burned incense nor offered burnt offerings in the holy place unto the God of Israel. . . . My sons, be not now negligent: for the Lord hath chosen you to stand before him, to serve him, and that ye should minister unto him, and burn incense." (2 Chronicles 29:2-11; emphasis added.)

Members of the Church today face great challenges, both temporal and spiritual. Have we, on occasion, also "turned away [our] faces from the habitation of the Lord . . . [and] shut up the doors . . . and put out the lamps." Are we also "negligent"? Often so many pressures demand our time and attention. However, considering the times and the forces arrayed against our families, should we not follow Hezekiah's example and "sanctify the house of the Lord . . . in the first year of the first month?" (Emphasis added.)

ENTER INTO HIS SANCTUARY

The results of Hezekiah's actions are also instructive. After renewing the temple worship, Hezekiah's people returned to the Lord's house to renew their covenants. Hezekiah "wrote letters also to Ephraim and Manasseh [the northern tribes], that they should come to the house of the Lord at Jerusalem."

At this time, the southern tribe of Judah was separated from, and often at war with, the northern ten tribes led by Ephraim. In spite of this, Hezekiah issued his invitation. "So the posts went with the letters from the king and his princes throughout all Israel and Judah, and according to the commandment of the king, saying, Ye children of Israel, turn again unto the Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, and he will return to the remnant of you, that are escaped out of the hand of the kings of Assyria. . . . Now be ye not stiffnecked, as your fathers were, but yield yourselves unto the Lord, and enter into his sanctuary, which he hath sanctified for ever." (2 Chronicles 30:1-9; emphasis added.)

Hezekiah's gracious offer went largely unheeded among the northern tribes. As the "posts passed from city to city through the country of Ephraim and Manasseh even unto Zebulun . . . they laughed them to scorn and mocked them." (2 Chronicles 30:10.) How could the simple act of returning to the service and rites of the temple offer protection against the might of Assyria? In the end, only Hezekiah's kingdom and a few individuals from the northern tribes heeded the call.

There is a sad conclusion to the northern tribes' refusal to return to the sanctuary. "In the fourth year [three years later] of king Hezekiah . . . Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against Samaria [the capital of the northern tribes], and besieged it. And at the end of three years they took it. . . . And the king of Assyria did carry away Israel unto Assyria . . . because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord their God, but transgressed his covenant." (2 Kings 18:9-12.)

This is the beginning of the lost ten tribes. Had they heeded Hezekiah's invitation to return to the Lord's house and there worship Him, the whole history of Israel might have been different.

"ON WHOM DOST THOU TRUST?"

After reducing the northern kingdom of Israel, the Assyrian army also laid siege to Hezekiah in Jerusalem. Full of confidence, the Assyrian emissaries shouted to the defenders on the walls: "What confidence is this wherein thou trustest? Thou sayest, (but they are but vain words,) I have counsel and strength for the war. Now on whom dost thou trust? . . . Ye say unto me, We trust in the Lord our God. . . . Let not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall not be able to deliver you out of his hand: Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the Lord, saying, The Lord will surely deliver us. . . . Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered at all his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?" (2 Kings 18:19-33.)

But the people, renewed by their worship and the example of Hezekiah, "held their peace" and waited for the Lord's deliverance. (2 Kings 18:36.) When Hezekiah heard the words of the Assyrian messenger and knew there was no logical way he could hold out against the might of the Assyrian army, he "went into the House of the Lord" and there offered a deeply touching prayer in behalf of his people. The Lord responded by assuring Hezekiah that the Assyrians would not "shoot an arrow" against the city. That night "the angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand. . . . So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed." (2 Kings 19:1, 32, 35-36.)

We do not now face invading armies, but the forces arrayed against our families are surely no less dangerous. I firmly believe the Lord will be willing to offer the same blessings he offered Hezekiah's people if we also will heed the invitation to "enter into his sanctuary."

A MODERN HEZEKIAH

In light of this powerful Old Testament example, it is interesting to note a similar pattern in the Doctrine and Covenants. In 1841, the Lord instructed Joseph Smith to make a proclamation that would be sent "to all the kings of the world, to the four corners thereof, to the honorable president-elect, and the high-minded governors of the nation in which you live, and to all the nations of the earth scattered abroad. Let it be written in the spirit of meekness and by the power of the Holy Ghost." (D&C 124:3-4.)

What was to be the central theme of this proclamation? Just as in Hezekiah's day, it was an invitation to come to the temple and there find safety from the last days of trial and turmoil. Notice what the Lord says after instructing Joseph Smith to send the proclamation to all nations: "The day of my visitation cometh speedily, in an hour when ye think not of; and where shall be the safety of my people, and refuge for those who shall be left of them? [Remember that Hezekiah's invitation was to the "remnant of you, that are escaped." (2 Chronicles 30:6.)] Awake, O kings of the earth! Come ye, O, come ye, with your gold and your silver, to the help of my people, to the house of the daughters of Zion." This invitation to the kings of the nations was followed by an invitation to all the Saints to come "and build a house to my name, for the Most High to dwell therein." (D&C 124:10-11, 27; emphasis added.)

The invitation was sent. It went largely unheeded by the nations of the world, but the Saints responded and built the Nauvoo Temple and have continued to build temples from that day on. The sobering lesson of Hezekiah's day is being repeated. For the Saints who come to the sanctuary, the Lord's miraculous deliverance from sometimes overwhelming odds and forces can also be expected. Might we, also, not have reason to hope that the enemy will not "shoot an arrow" to strike at the foundations of our families?

THE JACKSON COUNTY LESSON

In the dark days of the Jackson County mobbings, the Saints turned to the Lord for protection and counsel. He gave them one commandment that he promised would cause Zion to "prosper, and spread herself and become very glorious, very great, and very terrible." (D&C 97:18.) What was the commandment? "It is my will that a house should be built unto me in the land of Zion, like unto the pattern which I have given you. Yea, let it be built speedily, by the tithing of my people. Behold, this is the tithing and the sacrifice which I, the Lord, require at their hands, that there may be a house built unto me for the salvation of Zion." (D&C 97:10-12; emphasis added.)

The Saints did not build the temple in Jackson County. The command to build one "speedily" must have sounded to them like a strange demand in light of their situation. Their leaders had been tarred and feathered. Their press had been destroyed and their homes ransacked and burned. Yet the Lord was counseling them to walk into the center of Independence and start laying the foundation of a temple.

I have often wondered what would have happened if all the Saints in Missouri had dropped whatever they were doing, picked up their tools, and marched, en masse, to Independence and started digging foundations. It would have taken tremendous courage, but the history of the Church might have been much different. Let us never under-estimate the protective power of the temple. "Every time a temple is dedicated to the Lord," Spencer W. Kimball said, "the darkness pushes farther back, . . . and light comes into the world." (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, p. 534.) That light is as necessary (and perhaps more necessary) in our day as it was in times past.

CONSIDER YOUR WAYS

After the Babylonian captivity, the remnant of Israel returned to their land and once again faced tremendous opposition and danger. This, too, was a critical time. Israel's small force faced the power of the worldly elements that surrounded them. They were struggling and poor, and though they had returned specifically to rebuild the temple, it remained in ruins. The Lord told the people to "consider [their] ways. . . . He that earneth wages earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes. . . . Ye looked for much, and, lo, it came to little; and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon it. Why? . . . Because of mine house that is waste, and ye run every man unto his own house." The people felt it was not "time" to build the Lord's house, but they seemed to have "time . . . to dwell in [their] cieled [paneled] houses." (Haggai 1:2-9.)

Haggai's message stirred the spirit of the people, "and they came and did work in the house of the Lord of hosts, their God." (Haggai 1:14.) This reordering of priorities immediately brought the Lord's blessings upon them, both spiritually and temporally. It also brought this comforting promise: "Be strong, all ye people . . . and work; for I am with you . . . my spirit remaineth among you: fear ye not. . . . I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come: and I will fill this house with glory . . . and in this place will I give peace." (Haggai 2:4-9; emphasis added.) Their commitment to place the Lord's house first solved their other problems, even their financial ones. Perhaps John A. Widtsoe had this story in mind when he promised the Saints: "Whoever seeks to help those on the other side receives help in return in all the affairs of life. I can think of no better preparation for one's labor on the farm, in the office, wherever it may be, than to spend a few hours in the temple, to partake of its influence and to give oneself unselfishly for the benefit of those who have gone beyond the veil." (Improvement Era, October 1952, p. 719.)

SO MUCH FOR SO LITTLE

I have often asked my students to write a paper on the 109th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, which is the dedicatory prayer for the Kirtland Temple. Their assignment is to identify every blessing in the prayer that comes to the Saints from temple worship. (I suggest this as a wonderful assignment for anyone who wants to gain a deeper appreciation of the temple.) After completing this list, they are to identify every word or phrase that suggests what they must do to receive those blessings. Their papers are wonderful to read, and I have received many insights from them, but one paper in particular struck me. After listing the blessings she had found and how to receive them, one young lady concluded her paper with these words: "I think it is significant and revealing of the Lord's character that we must do so little to be able to receive so much."

I echo and bear testimony to her words. Our efforts in the temple for ourselves, our families, and our ancestors are infinitely small in comparison to the storehouse of blessings the Lord has promised us if we will participate in the "most glorious of all subjects belonging to the everlasting gospel." (D&C 128:17.) For the Lord's protection alone, all our efforts are repaid.

May this realization prompt all of us to sing as did David: "How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord. . . . For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand." (Psalm 84:1-2, 10.) "Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy courts: we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy temple." (Psalm 65:4.)
