S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 11

Much Is Required—Honoring Our Covenants

The Lord tells us that his house is a house of order. It is the covenants of the temple that create the order in his house and also in his eternal kingdom. "Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion. Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name? Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed? And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?" (D&C 132:8-11.)

As we have seen, true temple worship brings a multiplicity of blessings, but they are given conditionally. The Lord states: "Of him unto whom much is given much is required." (D&C 82:3.) Notice that the word is required. Sometimes I find myself misquoting this verse by using the word expected instead of required. But these two words have greatly different meanings. The Lord does not expect our devotion; he requires it.

We do not speak in detail of the covenants of the Lord's house, for these also are sacred. However, Elder James E. Talmage gave a general description of temple covenants in his book The House of the Lord: "The ordinances of the endowment embody certain obligations on the part of the individual, such as covenant and promise to observe the law of strict virtue and chastity, to be charitable, benevolent, tolerant and pure; to devote both talent and material means to the spread of truth and the uplifting of the [human] race; to maintain devotion to the cause of truth; and to seek in every way to contribute to the great preparation that the earth may be made ready to receive her King,—the Lord Jesus Christ. With the taking of each covenant and the assuming of each obligation a promised blessing is pronounced, contingent upon the faithful observance of the conditions." (P. 84.)

ORGANIZED, PREPARED, ESTABLISHED

All who would receive the wonderful rewards of temple service must make these sacred covenants with the Lord. Indeed, our reception of the promised blessings are contingent upon our faithful keeping of temple covenants. In the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple, Joseph Smith prayed, "Assist us, thy people, with thy grace, in calling our solemn assembly, that it may be done to thine honor and to thy divine acceptance; and in a manner that we may be found worthy, in thy sight, to secure a fulfilment of the promises which thou hast made unto us, thy people." (D&C 109:10-11.) We secure these promises by strictly maintaining our covenants.

The covenant relationship formed in the temple is beautifully described by the repeated use of three words in section 109. These three words plainly show that each party to the covenant has a responsibility. In verse 8 the Lord instructs his Saints, "Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing, and establish a house of prayer." (Emphasis added.) We are asked to organize, prepare, and establish ourselves so that temple work can proceed. This is our part of the covenant and includes everything from providing funds for the building of temples to our own individual preparation as determined in a temple recommend interview.

In verses 15 and 24, all three of these words are repeated, only this time as descriptions of what the Lord will do for those who enter his temple and keep their covenants: "Grant, Holy Father, that all those who shall worship in this house may . . . be organized according to thy laws, and be prepared to obtain every needful thing; . . . We ask thee, Holy Father, to establish the people that shall worship, and honorably hold a name and standing in this thy house, to all generations and for eternity." (D&C 109:14-15, 24.) One can readily sense the covenant relationship in these repeated words. If we organize, prepare, and establish his house, the Lord will also, organize, prepare, and establish us "to all generations and for eternity."

DEAD WORKS OR LIVING ORDINANCES?

In the scriptures the Lord speaks of "dead works." He warns us not to trust in them or we will be disappointed. (See Moroni 8:23; D&C 22:2-3.) A dead work is an ordinance devoid of the Spirit. All ordinances, in order to secure the promises, must be performed by proper authority and sealed by the Holy Ghost. This sealing comes when compliance with the covenants has been accomplished.

If we are not careful, we may so much emphasize being endowed or married in the temple that we give the impression that the blessings are assured automatically. When the Lord gave the revelation on temple marriage, he told the Saints they must "abide in [the] covenant" or "abide the law" if they expected their marriages to be truly eternal. (D&C 132:19.) According to the dictionary, abide means to "wait patiently for, to withstand, to persevere, to continue, to endure, to dwell or sojourn, to conform, to comply with, to remain in one place or state." (American Heritage Dictionary.)

All these definitions give meaning to our covenants. We would be foolish to assume that a couple who were married in the temple and then never returned or became unworthy to hold temple recommends would still receive all the promised blessings of the temple ceremony. The possibility for eternal companionship is there, but their work is a "dead" work unless they "abide" in the covenant. If we are not worthy to enter the temple here on earth, surely we deceive ourselves if we think we will be worthy to enter the Lord's eternal kingdom, there to receive all the blessings of the faithful.

NOBODY SEALS AN EMPTY JAR

My wife often cans peaches and pears in the fall. A great deal of work is necessary just to prepare the fruit. Then, once it is prepared, she puts it into jars, places the seals on, twists the lids tightly into place, and sets the jars in boiling water. Then she waits for the seals to set.

She has performed this operation dozens of times with hundreds of jars. In all that time I have never seen her seal an empty jar. Unless the jar is loaded with fruit, a seal is not placed. I doubt if anyone, among the thousands who can fruit every year, has ever sealed an empty jar. There must be something to preserve or the seal has no significance.

The sealing of temple covenants is similar. When we are married at the altars of the temple, the Lord, from one point of view, gives us an empty jar. Then he instructs us to fill it with the wonderful fruits of righteous marriage. As we keep our covenants, returning often to renew them as we work for the dead, the jar begins to fill. As we grow older and our love deepens, we desire to preserve forever all the good we have stored. Our abiding in the covenant allows the Lord to place the seal on our covenant relationship and preserve the fruits of our righteousness for all eternity. This is the same for all temple covenants. Nobody seals an empty jar; neither does the Lord seal empty covenants. First there must be fruit to preserve.

Our attitude toward temple covenants must be serious. We must not enter the temple lightly. One of the greatest sources of sadness I experienced while serving as a bishop was discovering the many couples who had received their endowments, married in the temple, and then become unworthy to return, and who remained so year after year. Often the major obstacle was tithing, and yet how small a percentage of our income is a tenth when compared to all we can receive if we are more faithful? Brigham Young said, "I feel sometimes like lecturing men and women severely, who enter into covenants without realizing the nature of the covenants they make, and who use little or no effort to fulfil them." (Journal of Discourses 3:332.)

George Q. Cannon reiterated Brigham Young's feelings with his own testimony: "When the Prophet Joseph first communicated that the Lord had revealed to him the keys of the endowment, I can remember the great desire there was on every hand to understand something about them. . . . How is it now? There is a complete indifference, it may be said, in relation to it. Young people go there stupid, with no particular desire only to get married, without realizing the character of the obligations that they take upon themselves or the covenants that they make and the promises involved in the taking of these covenants. The result is, hundreds among us go to the house of the Lord and receive these blessings and come away without having any particular impression made upon them." (Gospel Truth 1:228.)

We must do better than that. Where much is given, much is required. As we keep the covenants we have made in the temple, we will receive the wonderful blessings reserved for those who are faithful.
