S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 12

"Be Consequences What They May"

On April 1, 1838, Abraham Lincoln wrote the following letter from Springfield, Illinois, to a friend of his living in Quincy. Since Lincoln felt he had made a fool of himself, he chose April 1 as the most appropriate day to relate his experience: "In the autumn of 1836 . . . a married lady of my acquaintance, and who was a great friend of mine, being about to pay a visit to her father . . . proposed to me, that on her return she would bring a sister of hers with her, upon condition that I would engage to become her brother-in-law with all convenient dispatch. I, of course, accepted the proposal; for you know I could not have done otherwise, had I really been averse to it; but privately between you and me, I was most confoundedly well pleased with the project. I had seen the said sister some three years before, thought her intelligent and agreeable, and saw no good objection to plodding through life hand in hand with her. Time passed on, the lady took her journey, and in due time returned, sister in company sure enough. This stomached me a little; for it appeared to me, that her coming so readily showed that she was a trifle too willing; but on reflection it occurred to me, that she might have been prevailed on by her married sister to come, without anything concerning me ever having been mentioned to her. . . . All this occurred upon my hearing of her arrival in the neighborhood; for, be it remembered, I had not yet seen her, except about three years previous, as before mentioned.

"In a few days we had an interview, and although I had seen her before, she did not look as my imagination had pictured her. I knew she was over-size, but she now appeared a fair match for Falstaff; I knew she was called an 'old maid', and I felt no doubt of the truth of at least half of the appellation; but now, when I beheld her, I could not for my life avoid thinking of my mother; and this, not from withered features, for her skin was too full of fat, to permit its contracting into wrinkles; but from her want of teeth, weather-beaten appearance in general, and from a kind of notion that ran in my head, that nothing could have commenced at the size of infancy, and reached her present bulk in less than thirty five or forty years; and, in short, I was not all pleased with her. But what could I do? I had told her sister that I would take her for better or for worse; and I made a point of honor and conscience in all things, to stick to my word, especially if others had been induced to act on it, which in this case, I doubted not they had, for I was now fairly convinced, that no other man on earth would have her. . . . Well, thought I, I have said it, and, be consequences what they may, it shall not be my fault if I fail to do it. At once I determined to consider her my wife; and this done, all my powers of discovery were put to the rack, in search of perfections in her, which might be fairly set-off against her defects." (Carl Sandburg, Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years and the War Years, p. 59.)

I have wondered every time I read this letter if I would have had Lincoln's integrity had I been in his shoes. I doubt many men would. Most would seek a quick denial through rationalization and excuses. Lincoln, however, was true to his word and asked the woman to marry him. In fact, he asked her several times, but each time he was rejected. He finally gave up and later married Mary Todd, but he remained true to his word throughout his life.

The covenants we make in the temple are surely as important if not more important than the promises we make with one another. How wonderful it would be if each of us could say as did Lincoln, "Well, thought I, I have said it, and be consequences what they may, it shall not be my fault if I fail to do it."

HOLDING YOUR SOUL IN YOUR OWN HANDS

Another example of someone who was unconcerned with consequences is Sir Thomas More. His example is portrayed in one of the greatest movies ever made, Robert Bolt's A Man for All Seasons. It tells the story of Sir Thomas More's eventual death for refusing to take an oath supporting Henry VIII's marriage with Ann Boleyn and his break with the Catholic Church.

In a climactic scene toward the end of the play, More's daughter Margaret is given permission to see her father in prison if she will try to persuade him to take the oath. Their conversation is a powerful lesson on the making of covenants and the taking of oaths:

Margaret: "God more regards the thoughts of the heart than the words of the mouth. Or so you've always told me."

More: "Yes."

Margaret: "Then say the words of the oath and in your heart think otherwise."

More: "What is an oath then but words we say to God? . . . When a man takes an oath, Meg, he's holding his own self in his own hands. Like water. [He cups his hands.] And if he opens his fingers then—he needn't hope to find himself again. Some men aren't capable of this, but I'd be loathe to think your father one of them."

In a very real sense we do what More described when we make sacred covenants in the temple. We hold our eternal destiny in our own hands. Most people don't flagrantly break their temple covenants and fling the water of their souls away. Unworthiness usually comes in more subtle ways. It slips through our fingers through our apathy or our over-involvement in the things of the world.

As has been mentioned, often the payment of tithes and offerings constitutes the commandment so many families do not keep. And of course, if we cannot live this law we will never live the higher laws we bind ourselves to practice during the endowment ceremony.

THE ISSUE WAS SIMPLE

Robert Bolt deeply admired Sir Thomas More. He wrote a lengthy explanation of More as a preface to his play. In his descriptions, we find other truths applicable to our own commitment to sacred oaths made at holy altars: "A man takes an oath only when he wants to commit himself quite exceptionally to the statement, when he wants to make an identity between the truth of it and his own virtue; he offers himself as a guarantee. And it works. There is a special kind of shrug for a perjurer; we feel that the man has no self to commit, no guarantee to offer. . . .

"[More] was asked to retreat from that final area where he located his self. And there this supple, humorous, unassuming and sophisticated person set like metal, was overtaken by an absolutely primitive rigor, and could no more be budged than a cliff. . . .

"For him an oath was something perfectly specific; it was an invitation to God, an invitation God would not refuse, to act as a witness, and to judge. . . . So for More the issue was simple." (A Man for All Seasons, pp. xi-xii; emphasis added.)

So too, for us, must the issue be simple. A single covenant, when rightly perceived, removes hours of future decision-making and fortifies us against future temptation. We may not be perfect in obeying our covenants, but we must make a steady effort to be true. Nobody "lives up to his ideals," Heber J. Grant said, "but if we are striving, if we are working, if we are trying, to the best of our ability, to improve day by day, then we are in the line of our duty. If we are seeking to remedy our own defects, if we are so living that we can ask God for light, for knowledge, for intelligence, and above all for His spirit, that we may overcome our weaknesses, then, I can tell you, we are in the straight and narrow path that leads to life eternal; then we need have no fear." (Conference Report, April 1909, p. 111.) Brigham Young also taught this comforting doctrine: "No matter what the outward appearance is," he said, "if I can know of a truth that the hearts of the people are fully set to do the will of their Father in heaven, though they may falter and do a great many things through the weaknesses of human nature, yet, they will be saved." (Journal of Discourses 5:256.)

"SPEEDILY REPENT"

At all costs, we must not be apathetic to the temple or treat our covenants lightly. If we are now unworthy, we must not let years go by before we return. The Lord knew that some people would fail to maintain their temple worthiness through the temptations and weaknesses of human nature. But we are not so much condemned for our mistakes and sins as we are for our failure to cease doing them. In terms of temple covenants, the condemnation comes for not correcting our faults so that we can return to the temple. Worthiness and the desire to return to the temple are often the best signs we have that our repentance has been complete and is accepted by the Lord. Then we must forgive ourselves, continue with our lives, and remain temple worthy.

Even the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple refers to these things: "When thy people transgress, any of them, they may speedily repent and return unto thee, and find favor in thy sight, and be restored to the blessings which thou hast ordained to be poured out upon those who shall reverence thee in thy house." (D&C 109:21.) The invitation to come to the Lord's house is always extended. "I have set before thee an open door," Jesus said, "and no man can shut it." (Revelation 3:8.) Only our own refusal to enter that door will permanently keep us out of the Lord's kingdom.
