S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 13

Crowning, Inspiring Privileges

In the temple, we make covenants with the Lord, and we are given laws and commandments by which to govern our lives. Unfortunately such words as covenants, laws, and commandments may not carry the most positive connotations in our minds. Sometimes we feel they are restrictive, limiting, authoritative, confining, restraining, or inhibiting. The Lord's attitude is much different. In the Doctrine and Covenants he explains that the "commandments" given to Joseph Smith "inspired" the Prophet. (D&C 20:7.) In section 51 the Lord gave the Saints the "privilege of organizing themselves according to [his] laws." (V. 15; emphasis added.) Later, in section 59, the Lord promises that the obedient will be "crowned with blessings from above, yea, and with commandments not a few." (V. 4; emphasis added.)

Does our attitude toward commandments and laws encompass the words inspiring, privilege, crowned, or blessing? I doubt that many of us have prayed: "Lord, please 'crown' me with commandments and laws." Are we excited to receive "commandments not a few?" When we receive new commandments, are they always "inspiring"? But when rightly viewed, covenants, which always contain binding commitments, are a blessing. It is a privilege to receive them, and they do inspire us to a nobler life.

With this attitude, we find it easier to obey temple covenants. We are not so bothered, for instance, that we cannot wear the latest styles of shorts, dresses, or other clothing because we have made covenants regarding our temple garments. We are more focused on the inspiring,

blessed, crowning privilege it is to wear them reverently that we may receive the specific promises the Lord grants us in return.

"SATISFACTORY GROWTH" IN ALL AREAS

When I was a boy I misbehaved. I seemed to disturb every class I attended. In Primary I was nicknamed the Holy Terror. No teachers wanted me in their classes, and I'm told there was a celebration when I finally graduated. I was not malicious or rebellious; I simply couldn't sit still. I felt restricted and confined, and I always had something I needed to say to my neighbor. I remember being hauled out of Sunday School class by a counselor in the bishopric and deposited in a chair next to my mother in the adult class, which she just happened to be teaching. The class was on parent-child relationships.

In school, things were not much better. I recently found some of my old elementary report cards in the basement. They told a tale I remember all too well. Every report card had a section called "Growth in Character and Citizenship." It was divided into six areas, each of which had a little check box in which the teacher indicated the student's progress. My report cards all looked basically the same: "1. Works Well with Others: Greater Growth Needed. 2. Plays Well with Others: Greater Growth Needed. 3. Shows Self-control: Greater Growth Needed. 4. Completes Work: Greater Growth Needed. 5. Is Thrifty with Time and Materials: Greater Growth Needed. 6. Assumes Responsibility toward School and Safety Rules: Greater Growth Needed."

Often the teacher would write some comments to the student's parents. My comments usually contained this sentence: "Michael needs to practice more self-control." My kindergarten teacher wrote: "Michael must be reminded of our rules quite often, thereby taking up more than his share of individual teacher-time. His attention span is short." Six months later, her final comment before promoting me to the first grade was: "Michael still must be reminded of rules quite often."

Time passed, but I didn't seem to change much. My third-grade teacher wrote: "Mike must learn to be more considerate of others. He is very impatient with written work—if he would relax and work slower, his papers would be much neater." Almost every report had a comment about my poor penmanship, which to this day hasn't improved. Another teacher's final comment was, "Encourage all his work habits." After checking the "Greater Growth Needed" boxes, another teacher wrote: "Mike still interrupts continually in class. I hope he will control this next year."

This continued right up until the eighth grade, when I began to get control of myself and my citizenship grades improved.

My fifth-grade report card stands out from all the others. In the "Growth in Character and Citizenship" section, my teacher, Mr. Burns, had boldly checked every single category in the "Satisfactory Growth" box. It was a perfect report card. In the area for the teacher's comments, Mr. Burns wrote: "Mike is a good boy in every respect. He studies hard, he plays hard—all in all I'm very proud of him. His improvement is in all areas, and I know he is aware of this growth and is trying harder. True, his writing isn't what it could be, but with constant effort and time, Mike will find growth and satisfaction in this area. Keep going, Mike!"

I will never forget Mr. Burns. I loved him. He was a boyhood hero. I would have done anything to please him, and I remember consciously trying to do anything that would win his approval. For Mr. Burns I would even sit still in class and not talk to my neighbor. My love for this teacher enabled me to keep all the rules, control my behavior, try my hardest to write neatly, and show "satisfactory growth" in all areas.

Love is the secret to obedience. It gives us the strength to keep our covenants and to try even harder when we fail. We obey God because we love him. We keep our temple covenants because we love him and know that our diligence in striving to live the kind of life we are taught in his house pleases him. He is our hero, and we want more than anything else to please him so that he can record "Satisfactory Growth" in all areas. Knowing that he is our Father helps the love to flow more purely. No wonder Satan is so eager to destroy the knowledge that every person on earth is a literal son or daughter of God.

"A THOUSAND TIMES MORE FAIR"

Sometimes we obey the rules, commandments, policies, or covenants of the Lord for reasons other than love. We obey out of fear, guilt, or a desire for reward. These attitudes bring obedience but not lasting obedience. In the scriptures, the covenant relationship of the Lord with his people is often compared to that of a bridegroom and his bride. This type of love is sweet; it seeks to please and focus on the beloved. It desires to make eternal covenants of lasting devotion. Love songs all over the world celebrate the eternal, unchanging power of love. Surely our love for the Bridegroom should be the same. In The Merchant of Venice, Shakespeare gives a beautiful description of the power of love. Portia, speaking to her beloved Bassanio, says:

You see me, Lord Bassanio, where I stand,

Such as I am. Though for myself alone

I would not be ambitious in my wish,

To wish myself much better; yet for you

I would be trebled twenty times myself—

A thousand times more fair. . . .

That only to stand high in your account,

I might in virtues, beauties, livings, friends,

Exceed account. But the full sum of me

Is sum of something which, to term in gross,

Is an unlessoned girl, unschooled, unpracticed,

Happy in this, she is not yet so old

But she may learn. Happier than this,

She is not bread so dull but she can learn.

Happiest of all is that her gentle spirit

Commits herself to yours to be directed,

As from her lord, her governor, her king.

Myself and what is mine to you and yours

Is now converted. But now I was the lord

Of this fair mansion, master of my servants,

Queen o'er myself. And even now, but now,

This house, these servants, and this same myself

Are yours, my lord.

(ACT III, SCENE II, LINES 150-173.)

This is the spirit of the temple. We give ourselves and all that we are freely at the altar, as Portia freely and joyfully gave her all to Bassanio. Like Portia, we wish we were a thousand times more righteous, more dedicated, more fit instruments in the Lord's hands. This devotion gives us the ability to keep our temple covenants to each other and to the Lord. It sanctifies the covenants and makes them holy.

In another beautiful scene from classical literature, Dante has Virgil respond to a command from Beatrice with the following words: "Thy command so pleases me that to obey it, were it already done, were slow to me." (The Divine Comedy, canto II, lines 78-80.) Knowing whose commands and laws we bind ourselves to obey, should any of us ever hesitate to respond quickly?

The scriptures present numerous examples of this beautiful attitude toward covenants and commandments from the Lord. Notice the sweetness contained in the following statements of men and women of the past. When the Lord called the boy Samuel, his response was, "Speak, for thy servant heareth." (1 Samuel 3:10.) When Mary was told she would bear the Redeemer of the world, her response to Gabriel showed her trusting love: "Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word." (Luke 1:38.) When an angel asked Adam why he offered sacrifices to the Lord, he replied, "I know not, save the Lord commanded me." (Moses 5:6.) The Lord asked Isaiah, "Whom shall I send and who will go for us?" Isaiah replied, "Here am I; send me." (Isaiah 6:8.) On the road to Damascus, Paul asked, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" (Acts 9:6.) Nephi's wonderful example of obedience is known by all: "I will go and do," he told his father. Then he went, "not knowing beforehand, the things which [he] should do." (1 Nephi 3:7; 4:6.) It should not be surprising that Nephi's last recorded words were "I must obey." (2 Nephi 33:15.) When Jesus said to Peter, "Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets," Peter responded, "Master, we have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net." (Luke 5:4-5.)

All of these examples are but reflections of the great example of Jesus himself. At the age of twelve, while teaching in the temple, he asked his mother: "How is it that ye sought me? Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" (Luke 2:49; emphasis added.) But the ultimate expression of this wonderful attitude was displayed when the Father said: "Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me." (Abraham 3:27.) Later, as he knelt in Gethsemane, he verified his premortal willingness to atone when he said, "If it be possible, let this cup pass from me. Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt." (Matthew 26:39.)

Each of these examples shows an obedience born of love and trust. Most of these people did not always understand the full meaning or need of the commands, but they knew they loved the Lord, and his command was reason enough. Without hesitation they could bind themselves to obey. This is not blind obedience. We do not believe in blind obedience in this church, but we do believe in trust obedience. Experience will soon show that trust obedience always ends in enlightened obedience, as it did with each of the above individuals. As we contemplate the inspiring covenants and commandments of the temple, let us cultivate the attitudes of Portia, Virgil, the great men and women of the scriptures, and, above all, the example of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.
