S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 15

"This Most Glorious of All Subjects"

In the Doctrine and Covenants the temple is called a "house of glory." It is worthy of that title for several reasons. We are assured that the Lord's "presence" is there "continually" and that his "glory may rest down upon [his] people." (D&C 109:12.) We also know that "the glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." (D&C 93:36.) The temple is a place where the Lord's intelligence flows into the Saints, but the temple is a house of glory for another equally significant reason—within its walls the most glorious work of the Restoration is performed.

If we were asked what the most glorious subject belonging to the gospel is, what would we answer? There are so many wonderful, edifying aspects of the gospel that it would be difficult to single out just one as the most glorious. However, the scriptures answer the question for us. They plainly teach that temple work, particularly that performed for the dead, is "this most glorious of all subjects belonging to the everlasting gospel." (D&C 128:17; emphasis added.) What is it about temple work that makes it deserving of such praise? Why is it so glorious? Why does it hold a so high a position in light of all the other wonderful works of the gospel? I will try to answer this by relating how it has become a source of glory in my life and that of my family.

"REMEMBER ME"

When I was young, I read the stories of my Waldensian ancestors, whose beliefs brought upon their heads centuries of persecution. They lived in the Piedmont valleys of the Alps, where they could find a measure of protection from the anger of religious prejudice. There they tried to practice their faith according to the simple truths of the Bible. My third great-grandmother was, at the time, a fourteen-year-old French Waldensian named Pauline Combe, the daughter of Jean Combe. This is her story as it was penned by her daughter, my second great-grandmother Madeleine Malan: "Our ancestors were descendants of the Waldenses. . . . They adhered strictly to the Old and New Testaments. They held that the Holy Scriptures are the only source of faith and religion.

"When our mother Pauline Combe was near fifteen years of age in the spring of the year 1820, she went with her father down into the plains of Piedmont to take charge of a large cocoonery; each had a cot in the large spacious hall where they were tending the silk worms. One day, about a week or so before the season was ended, she had been reading about the life of Christ and his apostles; and the gospel as taught by them.

"At night, after retiring, she lay there pondering upon what she had been reading and wishing that she had been living in those days. The whole room became as light as noonday. She arose in sitting posture and a heavenly influence pervaded the room. She began singing a sacred hymn, when twelve personages dressed in white robes appeared and formed in a semicircle by her cot and joined in the singing, and at its conclusion they and the light departed. When she returned home, and related the vision to her mother, she in turn beside other remarks, read the 17th and 18th verses of the second chapter of Acts.

"Our grandfather Jean Combe was a religious man and went regularly to church hungering for the 'bread of life,' to be spiritually fed, but came away unsatisfied and would sometimes comment on the difference of the teaching of the day to those of the Savior and his apostles.

"When he was on his death bed, our sister Mary was sitting in the room and he said to her 'The old folks may not, but the young will see the day when the gospel shall be restored in its purity and powers; and in that day, Mary, remember me!'" (From the author's copy of the original document.)

Jean Combe, like his fathers before him, died without the saving ordinances of the gospel, without baptism, the gift of the Holy Ghost, the endowment, or being sealed to his eternal family. His fathers missed the great blessings of the priesthood by many years. He missed them by only a few. Shortly after Jean Combe's death, Lorenzo Snow and several other elders came to the shores of Italy. They were directed by the Spirit to the valleys of the Alps, to the village where Pauline's family lived. After hearing the truths of the restored gospel, they were the first family to join the Church in Italy.

Jean's last words have always been to me the call of all my ancestors down through the ages, reaching through the veil, asking to be remembered. If Jean Combe's family and his forebears were your ancestors, would it not be a glorious thing to enter a temple and say, in essence, to them: "Here are my eyes; together we will look upon the beauty of the Lord's house. Here are my ears; let us hear the words of eternal life. Here are my lips; we will make sacred covenants. Here are my hands; together we will receive the gifts of life everlasting. Here are my knees; kneel with me at the altars of salvation, there to become one with all those we both love. I will remember you." Nothing I have ever done is more glorious.

"I AM SATISFIED"

In Lancashire, England, in the 1850s lived a woman named Ann Massey Clegg. She was a widow of delicate health, rearing five children of her own and four of her husband's from a previous marriage. Every morning Ann watched her five-year-old son, Thomas, take his sisters' hands, walk to the cotton mill, and "work a 12 hour day in a dingy, poor ventilated room breathing into his lungs the lint from the cotton." They subsisted on "a little weak tea with a bun or a little cake of oatmeal mush in the bottom of a teacup." Life was bitter and hard. Ann hoped and prayed for better days.

Ann heard the message of the Restoration and joined the Church. Persecution followed. A mob dropped a bomb down her chimney, burning two of her children. Ann knew she had to find a better life for them. Through faith and prayer an opportunity came. A wealthy squire offered to pay the passage of five families to Zion, and Ann's was chosen. In spite of failing health, fearing that another opportunity might never come, she undertook the long journey.

Weeks on the ocean and the overland trip to Nebraska took their toll. She became unable to walk, and her children placed her on a bed in the wagon. Before long she was too weak to lift her head, but she clung to life until she could see her children safe in Zion. When they reached Emigration Canyon, Thomas raised his mother's head so she could view the wonderful sight. She gazed at it in silence and then whispered, "I am satisfied."

Ann never regained her health and died a few weeks later. She died without the blessings of the holy endowment and without the sealing blessings of an eternal family. She was buried in an unmarked grave in City Cemetery. Generations later, grateful descendants placed over her grave a stone monument. It was inscribed, "I am satisfied." (History written by Beatrice Edwards Sorenson.)

Ann Massey Clegg is my wife's great-great-grandmother. If she were your ancestor, would it not be a glorious thing to enter a temple, perform for her the ordinances of eternal life, and say to her, "Here are my eyes; together we will look upon the beauty of the Lord's house. Here are my ears; let us hear the words of eternal life. Here are my lips; we will make sacred covenants. Here are my hands; together we will receive the gifts of life everlasting. Here are my knees; kneel with me at the altars of salvation, there to become one with all those we both love. I will remember you."

"I WOULD LIKE TO COME TOGETHER AGAIN FOR ETERNAL LIFE"

In the early 1600s in the tiny village of Hirzel, Canton Zurich, Switzerland, lived the family of Hans Landis. They owned dairy cows and should have lived simple lives, but this was not their fate. Hans Landis was a Mennonite preacher whose faith was not acceptable to church or state authorities. After years of opposition, hiding, and imprisonment, Hans was beheaded in a public square in Zurich in 1614. The authorities ordered that his wife, Margaretha Hochstrasser, "be taken to the Spital in the death room and bound and only the most necessary care given. No one will be allowed to speak to her or enter the room, in hope she may in this wise be listening and converted." (From the author's copy of an original document.)

The family's property was confiscated and the children scattered. Their son Felix was starved to death in prison. Their daughter Verena died under house arrest. Another son, Hans, named for his father, was sent to prison, where he wrote the following letter that is still preserved in the archives of Zurich: "I send to you my dear wife greetings and all of you in the name of the Lord and Savior. I am letting you know how I am, that I am well and pray by the grace of God the Almighty, he may keep myself and all of you in his truth. I want to let you know that the men have already returned twice since I've been imprisoned here, and they will return to me; therefore, pray to God earnestly for us that he may watch over us and give us the will to speak and be silent when necessary.

"Again, I ask you, dear mother, that you may diligently watch over the children and admonish them to pray and to read and be God fearing, as you well know what we talked about when I was with you. Concerning the children, I exhort you to be very obedient; if the Lord makes me free again I will be able to further show you truly how to carry out his commanded word throughout the land, with your whole will, and within the meaning of Christ's will; nothing else should be heeded than God and the word of His basic commands, and this alone should be truly praised by us.

"Written by myself, Hans Landis, imprisoned in Ottenbach, 1637." (From the author's copy of the original document.)

I do not know what became of the writer of this letter. A little time later he wrote again to his wife: "I don't know whether or not I will be coming to you, I entrust myself to the commands of the loving God, in his shelter and protection truly, amen. . . . I would like to come together again for eternal life, if we diligently live and abide by his will. For this, my children be very desirous and have much love for each other, I ask you truly to do this with your entire will. If you do so, it would bring you a great treasure after this time in eternal life. . . . I resign myself to what the Lord has sent me." (From the author's copy of original manuscript)

Hans Landis's children's names were found on a list of exiles to France not long after the last letter was written. The list indicates that the parents of the children were dead. I assume they died in Switzerland as a result of persecution. Hans Landis, who wrote these letters, is one of my ancestors. Some of his grandchildren finally found peace in William Penn's new state, Pennsylvania. Since the letters are preserved in the Zurich archives, they may never have been sent.

The courage of this family has been an inspiration to me and my children. They were true to the knowledge they possessed but died without the saving ordinances of the gospel. In life they were scattered, but through the ordinances of the Lord's house they have "come together again for eternal life" and "found a great treasure."

If the Landis family were your ancestors, would it not be a glorious thing to enter a temple and say to them: "Here are my eyes; together we will look upon the beauty of the Lord's house. Here are my ears; let us hear the words of eternal life. Here are my lips; we will make sacred covenants. Here are my hands; together we will receive the gifts of life everlasting. Here are my knees; kneel with me at the altars of salvation, there to become one with all those we both love. I will remember you."

We must never forget that we do the work for real people who had joys and sorrows just as we do. They faced the challenges of their lives with courage and dignity. They loved their families and made sacrifices for their God. We do not do the work for names but for lives, and in doing it our souls are bound to them and theirs to ours. That is why it is so glorious.

They are dead to this world but are alive in the world of spirits, alive to God, and alive in our hearts. "The spirits of the just," Joseph Smith taught, "are . . . enveloped in flaming fire, . . . are not far from us, and know and understand our thoughts, feelings, and motions." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 326; emphasis added.) In the temple, where the veil is thinnest, the welding link of love is forged.

President Joseph F. Smith believed that the spirits of the dead were deeply committed and desirous for the welfare of their descendants. He wrote: "I claim that we live in their presence, they see us, they are solicitous for our welfare, they love us now more than ever. . . . They see the temptations and the evils that beset us in life, and the proneness of mortal beings to yield to temptation and to wrong doing; hence their solicitude for us and their love for us and their desire for our well being must be greater than that which we feel for ourselves. . . . If we can see, by the enlightening influence of the Spirit of God and through the words that have been spoken by the holy prophets of God beyond the veil that separates us from the spirit world, surely those who have passed beyond can see more clearly through the veil back here to us than it is possible for us to see to them from our sphere of action. . . . we are not separated from them. . . . We cannot forget them; we do not cease to love them; we always hold them in our hearts, in memory, and thus we are associated and united to them by ties that we cannot break, that we cannot dissolve, or free ourselves from." (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 430-31.)

THOSE IN DARKNESS

Even if our ancestors' lives were not noble and courageous, even if they made less than desirable choices, the work we perform is still meaningful and essential. President Brigham Young told the Saints, "Go and perform the ordinances of the house of God for those who have passed their probation without the Gospel, and for all who will receive any kind of salvation; bring them up to inherit the celestial, terrestrial, and telestial kingdoms." (Discourses of Brigham Young, pp. 624-25; emphasis added.)

In his wonderful vision of the redemption of the dead, now recorded in section 138 of the Doctrine and Covenants, President Joseph F. Smith spoke of those spirits who were in "darkness." These he described as "the wicked, . . . the ungodly and the unrepentant who had defiled themselves while in the flesh . . . the rebellious who rejected the testimonies and the warnings of the ancient prophets . . . and the disobedient." (Vv. 20-29.)

Among these Jesus did not go in person, but he organized his forces and sent them to those "in darkness, even to all the spirits of men." (V. 30; emphasis added.) His forces carried "the message of redemption unto all the dead, unto whom he [Jesus] could not go personally, because of their rebellion and transgression." (V. 37; emphasis added.) The gospel was proclaimed to all who would repent, both "those who had died in their sins, without a knowledge of the truth, or in transgression, having rejected the prophets." (Vv. 31-32; emphasis added.) Both groups "were taught faith in God, repentance from sin, vicarious baptism for the remission of sins, the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, and all other principles of the gospel that were necessary for them to know. . . . And so it was made known among the dead, both small and great, the unrighteous as well as the faithful, that redemption had been wrought through the sacrifice of the Son of God upon the cross." (Vv. 33-35; emphasis added. See also D&C 76:71-74.)

Joseph F. Smith saw that "the faithful elders of this dispensation" continued to preach "the gospel of repentance and redemption through the sacrifice of the Only Begotten Son of God, among those who are in darkness and under the bondage of sin in the great world of the spirits of the dead." (V. 57; emphasis added.) We have already seen that those who are in "darkness" are the "wicked, rebellious, disobedient, unrepentant" souls who "defiled themselves" and "rejected the testimonies and the warnings of the ancient prophets." (Vv. 20-21.)

President Smith saw that "the dead who repent [referring to those in darkness] will be redeemed, through obedience to the ordinances of the house of God, and after they have paid the penalty of their transgressions, and are washed clean, shall receive a reward according to their works, for they are heirs of salvation." (Vv. 58-59; emphasis added. See also D&C 76:88.) Earlier in his life President Smith spoke of these same principles. "Here will come in the principles of baptism for the dead," he said, "and of proxy and heirships, as revealed through the prophet Joseph Smith, that they may receive a salvation and an exaltation, I will not say a fullness of blessing and glory, but a reward according to their merits and the righteousness and mercy of God, even as it will be with you and with me." (Gospel Doctrine, p. 477; emphasis added.)

The Lord has taken the burden of judgment from our shoulders. We do not need to wonder which of our ancestors is in need of temple ordinances. We will perform them for all we find. They all need them—those who dwell in darkness for rebellion as well as the sincere, noble souls who lived up to the best light they had. We must help release them from their "bondage" and "captivity," through "the ordinances of the house of God," that they may receive "a salvation and an exaltation." The rest we will leave with the Lord. He alone can righteously judge and assign eternal rewards. He will deal with all the dead as Mormon told us God would deal with the fallen Nephites: "The Father, yea the Eternal Father of heaven, knoweth your state; and he doeth with you according to his justice and mercy." (Mormon 6:22.)
