S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 16

Elijah Will Come

The altars of the temple are places of offering and sacrifice. There we offer our Father in Heaven our hearts and our lives. There we are taught how to "come unto Christ . . . and offer [our] whole souls as an offering unto him" (Omni 1:26), but we also offer him "the greatest selfless act of Christian service that we can perform in this mortal life," that of work for the dead. (Gordon B. Hinckley, Dedication Address, Taiwan Temple.)

The major work of this dispensation and the whole thrust of the Restoration centers on those offerings. Everything we do in the Church focuses on and moves us toward the altars of the temple. If we do not kneel at those altars for ourselves and our dead and remain true to the covenants and principles we are taught, the work of the Church in our lives has largely been frustrated. We can illustrate this truth by an appeal to the scriptures. There, in the first pages of the Bible, we find two beautifully symbolic images of the temple.

In Genesis 28 is recorded one of the first descriptions of a temple. There was no building, just a hilltop, but the sacred event that took place there provides us with marvelous insight about the importance of the temple.

While traveling to Haran, Jacob had a dream wherein he beheld "a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it. And, behold, the Lord stood above it." (Vv. 12-13; emphasis added.) Here the word ladder is better translated as "stairway." (See The New Strong's

Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible.) Here is one of the finest descriptions of a temple in scripture. A temple is a stairway set up on earth whose top reaches to heaven. It is the meeting place of heaven and earth, a place where the dead and the living communicate with one another and where the Spirit teaches beautiful lessons. It is a place where those who have preceded us in the spirit world descend to us while we ascend to them.

The Lord and Jacob exchanged covenants, just as we do now in our modern temples. As part of his covenant, the Lord promised Jacob: "I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest. . . . I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of." (V. 15.) This promised companionship and protection is a major blessing of faithful temple worship, as discussed earlier.

In return, "Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go . . . then shall the Lord be my God." Part of his vow was a promise to "give the tenth" of all he had to the Lord. (Vv. 20-22.)

When Jacob awoke from his dream, he concluded, "Surely the Lord is in this place; and I knew it not. . . . This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven." (Vv. 16-17; emphasis added.) Above the stairway and through the gate, the Lord stood, waiting to receive Jacob into his kingdom, but first the stairway had to be climbed and the gate passed.

I love these descriptions of the temple. They are beautiful and instructive in their simplicity. The temple is a stairway. We must climb it in order to reach our Father in Heaven. Everything in the Church funnels us toward the stairway and encourages us to climb. The climb will require effort, but even the effort is rewarding. The temple is also a gate. We must pass through it or forever remain outside the kingdom of God. There is simply no other way for the living or the dead to return to and dwell in the presence of God. In this dispensation, the Lord extends the glorious invitation of taking our ancestors by the hand and climbing with them up the stairway and through the gate. For this effort we were chosen and elected. To fulfill this promise the priesthood was restored. From first to last, this was the central thrust of the Restoration.

THE BEGINNING AND END OF THE GOSPEL

The angelic messengers who returned to restore the priesthood keys knew the stairway and gate the children of God had to climb and pass through before they could enjoy eternal life. Each messenger had firmly in mind the culmination to which each key would lead. The Doctrine and Covenants begins and ends with temple work. Elder John A. Widtsoe taught: "Almost the first words of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith, when as a boy he was called to restore the Gospel of Jesus Christ, dealt with [temple work]; and almost the last words spoken by God to the Prophet before the Prophet's death, as far as we can tell, dealt with the same subject." ("Temple Worship," p. 50.)

Section 2 of the Doctrine and Covenants was given early in the Restoration by Moroni, on September 21, 1823. It is the first recorded revelation given in this dispensation and the only statement by Moroni to Joseph Smith given on the night of his first visit that was recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants. Malachi's prophecy that Elijah would come to "plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers" and that "the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers" was also the first prophecy Moroni quoted to Joseph Smith. (V. 2; see Malachi 4:6.) Elder Widtsoe's testimony that "the beginning and the end of the Gospel is written, from one point of view, in Section 2 of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants" further amplifies the importance of this tiny section in the grand unrolling of the Restoration. ("Temple Worship," p. 64.)

PROMISES MADE TO THE FATHERS

The word fathers can be interpreted to mean our own individual fathers or the great patriarchal fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. This second meaning is clarified in section 27, where, speaking of the restoration of priesthood keys, the Lord calls Joseph, Jacob, Isaac, and Abraham "your fathers, by whom the promises remain." (V. 10; emphasis added.) We are involved in promises made to both individual and patriarchal fathers.

INDIVIDUAL FATHERS—HELP FROM BEYOND THE VEIL

In exchange for the gift of life and other blessings, we promised to provide our "fathers" with the ordinances of eternal life. They are counting on that promise and will do all they can to help us fulfill it, as will the Lord. The help may extend even so far as our own conversions. Often when I am on a speaking assignment, I ask all the converts in a congregation to stand. I then ask all who are the only Church member in their family to remain standing. Remarkably, in every case almost all remain standing. People tend to join the Church one or two in a family.

Elder Melvin J. Ballard reflected on this truth and received an answer to explain it. He taught: "Why is it that sometimes only one of a city or household receives the Gospel? It was made known to me that it is because the righteous dead who have received the Gospel in the spirit world are exercising themselves, and in answers to their prayers elders of the Church are sent to the homes of their posterity . . ., and that descendant in the flesh is then privileged to do the work for his dead kindred. I want to say to you that it is with greater intensity that the hearts of the fathers and mothers in the spirit world are turned to their children now in the flesh than that our hearts are turned to them." (Melvin J. Ballard, Crusader for Righteousness, p. 219.)

We often wonder if our ancestors will accept the gospel. Ironically, in many instances, they accepted it before we did. Their prayers and faithfulness have brought the gospel into our lives instead of the other way around. Officiating in the temple for them is a deep expression of our gratitude and helps bind us to them.

If we are in tune, they will also help us as we try to locate the documents that record their names. As Elder Ballard said: "They know where their records are, and . . . the spirit and influence of your dead will guide those who are interested in finding those records. . . . If there is anywhere on the earth anything concerning them, you will find it. . . . If we have done our best and have searched and have discovered all that is available, then the day will come when God will open and part the veil, and the records . . . will be revealed. (Bryant S. Hinckley, Sermons and Missionary Services of Melvin Joseph Ballard, p. 230.)

Recently in general conference, Elder David B. Haight gave an added witness to the truths taught by Elder Ballard: "I believe that when you diligently seek after your ancestors—in faith—needed information will come to you even when no mortal records of their lives are available." (Ensign, May 1993, p. 25; emphasis added.)

"SOME KIND ANGEL"

May I add my own testimony to the willingness of our ancestors to help us keep our individual promises to them. Once in frustration and despair I sat in the Church's Family History Library about to give up a twenty-five-year search for a certain ancestor. The ancestor I sought was known by my grandmother, a fourth-generation member of the Church, who could have called him on the telephone and asked him who his parents were. Now both he and my grandmother were dead, and I felt the sorrow of lost opportunities.

A warning given in the Millennial Star in 1853 was certainly true for our family. It said, "If you neglect the opportunities you now have of securing this information, you will see the time when you will perhaps seek for it, but not be able to find it, until you have so far paid the debt of your neglect, that some kind angel from the spirit world will be justified in bringing to you the necessary intelligence." (Millennial Star, August 6, 1853, p. 522.) As I sat in the library that day, I knew I needed "some kind angel."

"Grandmother," I said in my heart, "you could have found the answer so easily, and now it's too late. Help me, now, to find something, any record at all, that can provide a clue. Help me find him, not only for his sake but also for all the generations that wait behind him."

I decided to make one last effort by searching through a large number of microfilms. The task would have taken me hours. It was a long shot, but the only one I had. On my way to get them, I walked by some books, and my attention was drawn to a set of twenty volumes of Canadian marriages. On a whim, I picked one up and searched it. It contained nothing of interest. I searched a second and a third. Still I found nothing. I thought, "This is fruitless" and decided to stop the search, but I had the fourth volume in my hand already. "I'll search this," I thought, "and then quit."

I opened the pages. There was the marriage of my ancestor, complete with his parents and his wife's parents and their places of birth. Overcome with emotion, I shut the book, hugged it, sat on the floor, and wept. Then I thanked my grandmother, who I know guided me to the only record in the library where critical information on my ancestor could be found.

Within a few months the line was extended nine generations. The story of Hans Landis that I related earlier was a result of that afternoon's discovery in the library. Since that time, more than two thousand names have been submitted for temple work as a result of that experience. I know we will receive help in fulfilling our promises if we allow them to be "planted" and take root in our hearts.

I have sensed from time to time, as I ponder the story of Moroni's visit and read the words he first quoted to Joseph Smith, the joy of my own people behind the veil as the first step that would lead to their salvation was taught to a boy prophet in the upstairs room of a log cabin. We, too, can feel that joy, and the greater joy that will come one day as we meet again with our "fathers," having fulfilled our promises to them.

A blessing that has produced some of the greatest joy and anticipation in my own life is a promise in my patriarchal blessing that says I and my posterity may have the privilege of fulfilling the promises made to our forefathers. Then, after the promises are fulfilled, we may meet with them in the Resurrection with love, fellowship, and great rejoicing together.

PATRIARCHAL FATHERS—ALL THE FAMILIES OF THE EARTH

Our other "fathers" are Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. They were promised that their "seed" would bless "all the families of the earth . . . with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal." (Abraham 2:11.) Over and over in the scriptures we are reminded that the Abrahamic covenant ensured that all the families of all nations would receive blessings through the posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. (See Genesis 12:3; 17:4; 18:18; 22:18; 26:4; 28:14.)

Nephi taught his brothers when this covenant promise would find fulfillment: "Our father hath not spoken of our seed alone, but also of all the house of Israel, pointing to the covenant which should be fulfilled in the latter days; which covenant the Lord made to our father Abraham, saying: In thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed." (1 Nephi 15:18; emphasis added.) This promise is fulfilled when we proclaim the gospel in all nations, but to a much larger extent it is fulfilled when Abraham's seed rise up, go into the temples, and provide the redeeming ordinances of the gospel that bring the "blessings of salvation, even of life eternal" for "all the families of the earth." (Abraham 2:11; emphasis added.) Temple work is essentially done in behalf of families. In the latter days, the need and the desire to provide all the blessings of the gospel for all generations would be planted in the hearts of the children of Abraham. In the temples, that promise would be fulfilled.

That is one reason the declaring of our lineages in our patriarchal blessings is so critically important. These blessings are called "patriarchal" because they are given to us by our stake patriarchs, but they are also called "patriarchal" because in them the promises and responsibilities of the great patriarchs are made manifest in our lives and are pronounced upon our heads.

Each blessing is an individual call to fulfill the promise to Abraham that his seed would bless the families of the earth. From one point of view, the promises made to the fathers are planted in our hearts when a patriarch's hands are laid upon our heads and our lineage is declared.

THE ROLE OF A GATHERING

All these things Moroni knew as he spoke to Joseph Smith in 1823. He knew to what culmination the restoration of the priesthood would lead, and he also knew the role the Book of Mormon would play in the fulfillment of the Abrahamic promises and in the coming work of the temples. The Book of Mormon was the voice of the Good Shepherd, and his sheep would hear his voice in its pages. "The scriptures shall be given," the Lord told Joseph Smith, "even as they are in mine own bosom, to the salvation of mine own elect; for they will hear my voice,

and shall see me, and shall not be asleep, and shall abide the day of my coming." (D&C 35:20-21; emphasis added.) The voice of the Savior in the Book of Mormon would be the key to the "gathering" of the Saints presented to the world by the work of dedicated missionaries. But why gather the Saints?

Joseph Smith taught that there is only one purpose for a gathering—to build temples. "It is for the same purpose that God gathers together His people in the last days," he said, "to build unto the Lord a house to prepare them for the ordinances and endowments, washings and anointings, etc. . . . What was the object of gathering the Jews or the people of God in any age of the world? . . . The main object was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house and the glories of His kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation." (History of the Church 5:423-24.) In the early days of the Church, all were encouraged to gather to a central spot, for there were few members and fewer temples. Now we have many members and many stakes. The nature of the gathering has not changed. We still gather around temples, or we gather so that more temples may be built. One day we hope to have many more temples in many more states and countries.

David, also, testified of this grand purpose of a gathering when he wrote, "O send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead me; let them bring me unto thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles. Then will I go unto the altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy." (Psalm 43:3-4.) The Church sends the light of the gospel into the world and invites all to the Lord's house. Every missionary knows the goal he or she wishes new converts to reach. I always felt a great sense of relief when those I had taught and saw baptized finally reached the temple. I felt they had been gathered into the Lord's secure granary.

Moses bore his witness to the purpose of gathering in a song he wrote after the freeing of Israel from Egypt. He clearly taught that the Lord had "purchased" Israel and brought them into the promised land, and he prayed, "Plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the place, O Lord, which thou hast made for thee to dwell in, in the Sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have established." (Exodus 15:17.)

In the Doctrine and Covenants we learn that the gathering of the Saints and the building of Zion begins at the temple: "The city New Jerusalem shall be built by the gathering of the saints, beginning at this place, even the place of the temple." (D&C 84:4; emphasis added.)

When persecutions in Jackson County forced the Saints to move to other counties, the Lord still emphasized the need to gather in order to build a temple: "The gathering together upon the land of Zion, and upon her stakes," the Lord told the Saints as they first began to build up Far West, "may be for a defense and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath. . . . Therefore, I command you to build a house unto me, for the gathering together of my saints that they may worship me." (D&C 115:6-8; emphasis added.) Not surprisingly, everywhere the early Saints traveled, whether to Ohio, Missouri, Illinois, or Utah, one of the first things they did was to dedicate a spot for the Lord's house. It was the standard around which they would gather.
