S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 17

An Acceptable Offering

Moroni promised Joseph Smith that the priesthood would be "revealed." This meant at least two things: (1) Its power and authority would be restored to the earth, and (2) its purpose would be made known to all who bore it faithfully. It is the second of these two purposes that especially bears on our present topic.

Not long after Moroni's promise, John the Baptist returned, bringing the first restoration of priesthood powers. With his mind centered on the temple, John the Baptist laid his hands on Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, promising that the priesthood would "never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness." (D&C 13:1; emphasis added.) John was quoting Malachi, the same prophet Moroni first quoted to Joseph Smith in 1823.

In Malachi, the prophecy reads a little differently. There "until" is replaced with "that": "He shall purify the Sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness." (Malachi 3:3; emphasis added.) That same reading is given in Doctrine and Covenants 128:24 and also in Oliver Cowdery's description of the coming of John the Baptist in the footnote on page 59 of the Pearl of Great Price. Oliver recorded that John the Baptist promised, "This priesthood and authority . . . shall remain upon earth, that the Sons of Levi may yet offer an offering unto the Lord in righteousness."

Both words are important and true. We need not decide if one is more correct than the other. The priesthood was restored "that" the offering could be made. In other words, without it the offering could not be made. It was also restored "until" the offering was made. In other words, the priesthood would never be taken from the earth. That was a tremendous promise! As Moroni promised, the priesthood was being revealed by being restored, and its purpose was also being revealed—an offering had to be made. Obviously the offering is so important that no opposition will stop it. That is by the firm decree of the Lord himself. We also learn that the priesthood bearers must be "purged and purified" or made clean in order to make the offering.

Who are the sons of Levi? What offering will they make? Why is that offering so critical that the priesthood will not be taken from the earth? Why is it so important that the priesthood itself was restored to allow the offering to be accomplished? What do purging and purifying have to do with the offering? Let us try to answer these questions by an appeal to the scriptures.

THE SONS OF LEVI

In biblical times the sons of Levi were "appointed unto all manner of service of the tabernacle of the house of God." (1 Chronicles 6:48.) They "set forward the work of the house of the Lord." (1 Chronicles 23:4.)

Their "office was to wait on the sons of Aaron for the service of the house of the Lord, in the courts, and in the chambers, and in the purifying of all holy things." They kept "the charge of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the charge of the holy place." (1 Chronicles 23:1, 28, 32.) In other words, the sons of Levi were essentially the ancient temple ordinance workers.

As the Restoration proceeded, more information was revealed and more keys were restored concerning the offering spoken of by John the Baptist. On September 22 and 23, 1832, the anniversary of Moroni's visit, a great revelation was given on the priesthood. In this revelation the words of Malachi's and John the Baptist's prophecies were repeated, but with different and added words that amplified and gave further clarification about the necessary offering: "The sons of Moses

and also the sons of Aaron shall offer an acceptable offering and sacrifice in the house of the Lord." (D&C 84:31; emphasis added.)

Sons of Moses hold the Melchizedek priesthood; sons of Aaron hold the Aaronic. Moses and Aaron were both from the tribe of Levi. John the Baptist's promise refers to both priesthoods. We further learn that the offering will be made in "the house of the Lord." That helps explain why the sons of Levi must be purged and purified. One must be clean and worthy both to enter the temple and also to exercise priesthood authority.

It is not surprising that an "offering and sacrifice" should be accomplished in the temple. Offerings and sacrifices were done anciently at altars, and the altars of the temple stand at the center of all we do in the house of the Lord.

The Lord adds the word acceptable to the offering. When it is made, it will be made in such a manner that the Lord can receive it. The word becomes critically important later in understanding the exact nature of the offering.

KEYS AND TEMPLES

The progress of the Restoration continued. The Kirtland Temple was built, and important keys were there restored. The major themes of the priesthood were there emphasized by angelic messengers. "Moses appeared . . . and committed . . . the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth." The promise of Abraham was reiterated as "Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed." Elijah then returned to complete the necessary authority to "turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers." (D&C 110:11, 12, 15; emphasis added.) The gathering, the Abrahamic covenant, and the turning of hearts are all inseparably connected with temples. The proper authority was now in place, and the offering could now be made.

The Saints moved on to Nauvoo and once again were given the command to build a temple. They had learned in Missouri the importance of responding to that command. Their failure to do so was a major factor in their expulsion from Jackson County. (See D&C 97; 101:43-54.) They had learned in Kirtland that when the Lord gave a command to build a temple and the Saints did not immediately respond, they had "sinned a very grievous sin," which the Lord compared to "walking in darkness at noon-day." (D&C 95:6.)

Now in Nauvoo the Lord revealed the redeeming work for the dead and pressed upon the Saints the necessity of completing a temple in order to begin this great work in a place sacred enough for its importance. With the command to build his house, the Lord added a sobering warning: "I command you, all ye my saints, to build a house unto me; and I grant unto you a sufficient time to build a house unto me; . . . and if you do not these things at the end of the appointment ye shall be rejected as a church, with your dead, saith the Lord your God." (D&C 124:31-32.)

Notwithstanding all the other works of the Church and the priesthood, the failure to construct a temple (where the Lord could "restore again . . . the fulness of the priesthood" [D&C 124:28] and where the offering could be made) would result in the rejection of the Church. In the minutes of the October 1841 conference, the Lord also instructed the Saints not to hold another conference until it could be held in the temple. Apparently, the Lord felt there was no need for further instructions until the most critical one of all was commenced. (History of the Church 4:426.)

A BOOK TO BE LAID ON THE ALTAR

The groundwork was now laid for the critical offering to be made, and it was looked forward to by all angelic messengers who had returned to earth to restore priesthood keys and authorities. However, Satan was not idle. Joseph Smith was in hiding. Knowing the Lord's concern that the work not be stopped for any reason, Joseph gave instructions to the Saints through letters.

In a letter written September 1, 1842, Joseph gave the Saints the Lord's encouragement: "Thus saith the Lord: Let the work of my temple and all the works which I have appointed unto you, be continued on and not cease; and let your diligence, and your perseverance, and patience, and your works be redoubled." (D&C 127:4.)

Five days later, on September 6, 1842, in a letter to the Church, Joseph Smith described the "acceptable offering." Quoting Malachi's prophecy once again concerning the "sons of Levi," Joseph then added this instruction: "Let us, therefore, as a church and a people and as Latter-day Saints, offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness; and let us present in his holy temple, when it is finished, a book containing the records of our dead, which shall be worthy of all acceptation." (D&C 128:24; emphasis added.)

At least part of the offering Malachi, John the Baptist, and other prophets had in view was a book containing the completed ordinance work for all the dead. It will take the Millennium to achieve that culmination and make it "worthy of all acceptation," for how can the Lord accept it until all of his children who will receive salvation and eternal life have been provided with the opportunity?

As with many prophecies, the offering spoken of has other fulfillments, but it is significant that the one that Lord chose to emphasize in the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants is that of the work for the dead. Without that offering, the whole earth would be wasted at the Lord's coming.

How appropriate that the offering we are to place on the altars of the temple is a book. It is a fair exchange for the wonderful book our Father in Heaven has placed on those same altars as his offering and gift to us.

In summary, Moroni first quoted the Malachi prophecy and promised that the priesthood would be revealed. John the Baptist next came to begin its revelation and added that the priesthood would remain on the earth until the sons of Levi made an offering in righteousness to the Lord. In section 84, the sons of Levi were identified as all priesthood holders, and it was revealed that the offering would be made in the temple. Finally in Nauvoo, Joseph Smith's letter now recorded as Doctrine and Covenants 128 invited all the Saints to participate in the offering, and the offering was identified. It would be a book containing all the records of ordinance work for the dead. Since that time, tremendous effort and resources have been expended to make the offering "acceptable" to the Lord by completing it.

MANY MODERN INVENTIONS

The Lord is as anxious as our ancestors to help us make our offering and to fulfill the promises. He will help us in many ways. Some we have already discussed, but one of them is unique, enjoyed by all of us and yet comprehended by few—that of modern inventions. What would our lives be like without cars, microwaves, photography, dishwashers, clothes dryers, or computers? Virtually every one of us is grateful for these wonderful conveniences and labor-saving inventions. Their coming forth in such rapid succession in the latter days was not an accident and was not accomplished without the inspiration and direction of the Lord.

Archibald F. Bennett, a prominent genealogist, said, "Sister Susa Young Gates . . . once asked her father [Brigham Young] how it would ever be possible to accomplish the great amount of temple work that must be done, if all are given a full opportunity for exaltation. He told her there would be many inventors of labor-saving devices, so that our daily duties could be performed in a short time, leaving us more and more time for temple work. The inventions have come, and are still coming, but many simply divert the time gained to other channels, and not for the purpose intended by the Lord." (Improvement Era, October 1952, p. 720.)

If "the veil were lifted off the face of the Latter-day Saints," Wilford Woodruff taught, and they "could see and know the things of God as they do who are laboring for the salvation of the human family who are in the spirit world . . ., this whole people, with very few, if any, exceptions, would lose all interest in the riches of the world, and instead thereof their whole desires and labors would be directed to redeem their dead." (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, p. 152.) We need to learn to use all the wonderful advances the Lord has inspired in these last days for their truer purposes, not just in our occupations or the earning of a living. Then will we make an acceptable offering in the temples of the Lord.
