S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 18

Promises for the Children

Usually when we read Malachi's prophecy of the return of Elijah, we think of ourselves as the children whose hearts will be turned to our ancestors. But we are also fathers and mothers with children and grandchildren. Does not the temple also turn our hearts to them? Our commitment to the temple and our temple sealings bring blessings upon our posterity. We want the wonderful promises and blessings of the temple to be planted in the hearts of our children. These promises have to do with Godhood and eternal increase. Or, as it was explained to Abraham: "If thou canst count the number of sands, so shall be the number of thy seeds." (Abraham 3:14.)

Joseph F. Smith referred to blessings for the children in his great vision on the redemption of the dead: "The Prophet Elijah was to plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to their fathers, foreshadowing the great work to be done in the temples of the Lord in the dispensation of the fulness of times, for the redemption of the dead, and the sealing of the children to their parents." (D&C 138:47-48; emphasis added.) Notice that both our ancestors and our children are included in Elijah's mission.

Elias's words to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple also emphasized the blessings upon our children as well as our ancestors. He said "that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed." (D&C 110:12.) These blessings have much to do with our marriages in the temple and with the powers and promises that flow to our children because they are "born in the covenant" or are sealed to us.

THE PROMISES OF ETERNAL MARRIAGE

It is appropriate that the pinnacle ordinance of the Restoration, that of temple marriage, was recorded in section 132, one of the last recorded revelations of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Elder Widtsoe's statement quoted earlier indicated that "almost the last words spoken by God to the prophet dealt with the same subject [Elijah's promised return]." In that revelation the final and fullest meaning of "the promises made unto the fathers" is comprehended.

In this revelation, the Lord calls eternal marriage "the law of my Holy Priesthood" and then explains its relationship to Abraham's promises: "Abraham received promises concerning his seed, and of the fruit of his loins—from whose loins ye are, . . . which were to continue so long as they were in the world; and as touching Abraham and his seed, out of the world they should continue; both in the world and out of the world should they continue as innumerable as the stars; or, if ye were to count the sand upon the seashore ye could not number them.

"This promise is yours also, because ye are of Abraham, and the promise was made unto Abraham; and by this law [eternal marriage or the "law of my Holy Priesthood"] is the continuation of the works of my Father, wherein he glorifieth himself.

"Go ye, therefore, and do the works of Abraham; enter ye into my law and ye shall be saved. But if ye enter not into my law ye cannot receive the promise of my Father, which he made unto Abraham." (D&C 132:28-33; emphasis added.)

The promise we can plant in the hearts of our children is the promise of Godhood through the sanctifying ordinances of the temple, particularly that of eternal marriage. Our children's hearts can "turn" to those promises and have faith in their reality. We can teach them to "do the works of Abraham" that they might receive the promise of eternal increase or Godhood that was made to Abraham. Their "seed" will also be as numberless as the stars of heaven or the sands of the seashore.

In our chapels we ordain and set apart people to positions of authority and leadership. We can make a man a stake president or a bishop, but only in the temple can we make eternal families, which leads to Godhood. Our children will not all be bishops, presidents of stakes, or leaders in the auxiliaries, but they can all be Gods, continuing the works of the Father, glorifying themselves as they glorify him. Brigham Young tried to help us catch the power and wonder of this doctrine when he said: "Mankind are organized of element designed to endure to all eternity; it never had a beginning and never can have an end. . . . It is brought together, organized, and capacitated to receive knowledge and intelligence, to be enthroned in glory, to be made angels, Gods—beings who will hold control over the elements, and have power by their word to command the creation and redemption of worlds, or to extinguish suns by their breath, and disorganize worlds, hurling them back into their chaotic state. This is what you and I are created for." (Journal of Discourses 3:356.)

What greater or more ennobling promise could be planted in the heart of a child? What greater aspiration, goal, or dignity could you teach a child as a guide to life than the promise that he or she could become like our Father in Heaven? If this promise is planted in our children's hearts, we have given them a powerful source of strength to resist the temptations of Satan and the vain things of the world. They will want to be prepared to enter the temple and secure these blessings for themselves and then secure them for their ancestors.

John the Beloved knew the power of these ideas and used them to encourage the ancient Saints: "Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God: therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure." (1 John 3:1-3; emphasis added.)

THE BURDEN OF THE SCRIPTURES

Now we can understand why Joseph Smith would say: "This doctrine presents in a clear light the wisdom and mercy of God in preparing an ordinance for the salvation of the dead. . . . This doctrine was the burden of the scriptures. Those Saints who neglect it in behalf of their deceased relatives, do it at the peril of their own salvation." (History of the Church 4:426; emphasis added.) A careful study of the revelations and the history of the Church will show that "the main concern of the Prophet Joseph Smith in the restoration of the gospel in these latter days was the founding, building, and completion of temples." ("Temple Worship," p. 53.)

We can also comprehend why Brigham Young would say: "We are called, as it has been told you, to redeem the nations of the earth. The fathers cannot be made perfect without us; we cannot be made perfect without the fathers. There must be this chain in the holy Priesthood; it must be welded together from the latest generation that lives on the earth back to Father Adam, to bring back all that can be saved and placed where they can receive salvation and a glory in some kingdom. This Priesthood has to do it; this Priesthood is for this purpose." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 623; emphasis added.) Scriptures. Revelation. Restoration. Priesthood. Covenant. These great key words of the latter days are more closely interwoven with temples than any other gospel subject. Is it not equally important and critical for our own salvation that we plant these sacred temple promises in the hearts of our children?
