S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 19

The Worth of Souls

Early in the Restoration, the Lord told us to "remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God." (D&C 18:10.) Nothing testifies more to the truth of that pronouncement than our work in the temples for both the living and the dead. When Brigham Young thought of the worth of souls as shown by the Lord's plan for the redemption of the dead, he wished for "a voice like ten thousand earthquakes, that all the world might hear and know the loving kindness of the Lord." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 626.) As we participate in this work, we too come to understand the depth of the Lord's concern and share his compassion for each individual soul.

GOD HAS NOT FORGOTTEN THEM

While preparing for a tour of Church history and American history sites in the East, our family learned all we could about our American ancestors. We would be visiting areas they came from and wanted the experience to be as positive as it could be. We were going to visit Virginia, and since both my wife and I have family roots there, we spent considerable time trying to learn all the details of these ancestors' lives.

When we found their wills, we discovered that many of them had owned slaves. Most of their wills contained sentences like this: "I give my Negro boy Pompey to my son John and his heirs forever." That phrase struck us deeply, and we felt a yearning through the Spirit to do something for these former slaves. We could not free them from a past earthly bondage, but we felt a compelling desire to free them from a spiritual one.

We allowed our children to help us prepare their names for temple submission, promising that they could be baptized and confirmed for these people when the names were cleared. When we went to the temple to be baptized for them, a wonderful temple worker taught my children something I shall never forget. I believe his words were inspired, for they contained a wisdom and beauty that could come only from a higher source. The experience was especially enlightening because he did not know for whom we were being baptized.

"Many of these people for whom you will be baptized," he said, "lived hard and bitter lives. I am sure that many died thinking God had forgotten them. But you will show them today that he has not forgotten them, that he never forgets a single child. For the first time in many, many years, their names will be spoken again, here in the Lord's house, and they will know of his eternal love for them. And you will show them, also, your own love for them." I have often reflected on his words and thought of all the ordinances that would be completed for Pompey, Lucy, Sal, Mingo, Sookey, Old Tom, and all the other slaves before the work was "acceptable" to the Lord. Their names would be spoken many, many times in their Father's house as each critical ordinance was performed. Hours of ordinance work would be accomplished for each one. They would know of their worth in God's eyes and in their brothers' and sisters' sight.

"I AM WITH MY PEOPLE"

My wife and I were able to perform the endowment for many of these dear black people. With one I felt particularly close. I sensed his eagerness and gratitude through each stage of the endowment. When we entered the celestial room, I felt him whisper in my soul, "Now, finally, I am with my people!"

I knew what he meant. There are no races or nationalities in the temple. There are only the Lord's people, all children of the same Father, all brothers and sisters of the same Christ and of each other, all of tremendous worth to their Father in Heaven. This understanding makes our offering so much more "acceptable." How wonderful it is to hear Samoan brothers speak the names of German immigrants, or Cambodian sisters trying to pronounce Finnish names. "If there is any work in all the world that demonstrates the universality of God's love," taught President Gordon B. Hinckley, "it is the selfless work that goes on in these sacred houses." (Conference Report, October 1985, pp. 72-73.)

SAVIORS ON MOUNT ZION

The baptismal font rests securely on the strong backs of twelve oxen. They represent the tribes of Israel, and we belong to those tribes. It is totally appropriate that the font should be so situated. The saving ordinances for the world rest on backs made strong by the blessings of the Restoration. That weight will not be removed until every child of God is found. With our heads directed to the four points of the compass, we desire and invite all to receive the ordinances that open the sanctifying power of the Atonement.

My friend's five-year-old son stopped him and his wife as they were going out the door to attend the temple one evening. "Where are you going?" he asked them. "To the temple," they replied. "Well, when you get there, you tell my good friend Jesus hi!" he said. "I don't think we'll see him there, son," his mother replied. "Oh, I think you will see him," he answered, "if you look hard for him."

We have been promised that in the temple, if we are "pure in heart," we "shall see God." (D&C 97:16.) There are many ways of seeing, and some of the most profound do not require our natural eyes. Can we see or understand Jesus any more clearly than when we feel the weight of our brothers' and sisters' salvation, their eternal worth, and share in Jesus' great vicarious work, thus becoming "saviours . . . on mount Zion?" (Obadiah 1:21.) "We have a work to do," Brigham Young said, "just as important in its sphere as the Savior's work was in its sphere. Our fathers cannot be made perfect without us. . . . They have done their work and now sleep. We are now called upon to do ours." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 623.) In one sense, when we are acting as "saviours on mount Zion," we see with the eyes of the Savior. We see so much more clearly how he viewed all his Father's children, and in that vision we see Jesus more completely.

THE WEIGHT OF GLORY

One of the greatest insights C. S. Lewis received from his study of the scriptures was the conviction that our destiny is to become like God, thus testifying of our tremendous value. When we take a name through the various ordinances, it would be wonderful if we could always be aware of the worth of that name from the eternal point of view.

Lewis described the worth of souls with these words: "The load, or weight, or burden of my neighbor's glory should be laid daily on my back, a load so heavy that only humility can carry it, and the backs of the proud will be broken. It is a serious thing to live in a society of possible gods and goddesses, to remember that the dullest and most uninteresting person you can talk to may one day be a creature which, if you saw it now, you would be strongly tempted to worship. . . . It is in light of these overwhelming possibilities, it is with the awe and circumspection proper to them, that we should conduct all our dealings with one another, all friendships, all loves, all play, all politics. There are no ordinary people. You have never talked to a mere mortal. Nations, cultures, arts, civilizations—these are mortal, and their life is to ours as the life of a gnat. But it is immortals whom we joke with, work with, marry, snub, and exploit. . . . Next to the Blessed Sacrament itself, your neighbor is the holiest object presented to your senses." (From "The Weight of Glory," a sermon given at the Church of St. Mary the Virgin, Oxford.)

If a soul was worth the atoning sacrifice of the Savior, as section 18 teaches us, if it is worth the "whole world" as Jesus taught (Matthew 16:26-29), then surely it is worth hours of our time searching the records for the information necessary to submit the individual names for saving temple ordinances. And if we "labor all [our] days . . . and bring save it be one soul unto [Jesus] how great shall be [our] joy with him in the Kingdom of [our] Father! And now if [our] joy will be great with one soul, . . . how great will be [our] joy if [we] bring many souls." (D&C 18:15-16.)
