S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 20

"A Great and Marvelous Work"

Many times in the early revelations of this dispensation, the Lord introduced his instructions with his own description of the coming work. "A great and marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of men," he said. (D&C 6:1.) He then invited us to thrust in our sickles and reap the whitened fields. Although his words are true of all the works of the kingdom and are usually applied to missionary work, they are especially true of our labors in the temple.

Surely the work is great, especially considering the billions of our Father's children who still await the saving ordinances. But the work is also marvelous. Could there possibly be more whitened fields ready to be harvested than among those who live beyond the veil? We know through the teachings of modern prophets that the work there is different than it is here. Lorenzo Snow assures us, "When the gospel is preached to the spirits in prison, the success attending that preaching will be far greater than that attending the preaching of our elders in this life. I believe there will be very few indeed of those spirits who will not gladly receive the gospel when it is carried to them. The circumstances there will be a thousand times more favorable." (Millennial Star, October 6, 1893, p. 718.) I love the Lord's attitude toward this harvest. We need to partake of this spirit as we help our Savior in the work. "If ye have desires to serve God," he states, "ye are called to the work." (D&C 4:3; emphasis added.) In other words, the work is so marvelous that the Lord is going to give us the privilege of participating in it with him, but only if we desire to. He does not twist arms or preach duty or try to instill obedience through guilt. He simply tells us that the work itself will be its own reward. In fact, it will be marvelous.

The work is so marvelous that anyone who "thrusteth in his sickle with his might" will reap an eternal and joyful blessing. (D&C 4:4.) Far too often we stress the "greatness" of the work, forgetting its "marvelous" nature. But the Lord himself noted the "marvelous" aspect of the coming work. (See D&C 4:1.) It would be difficult to find anyone who has spent much time in temple work who did not think it was marvelous. May I illustrate with a personal example how I came to understand in a small way how marvelous the work really is?

NAMES WRITTEN IN A BOOK

A few years ago while searching for my Danish ancestors, I was deeply touched as I read the following entries in the Torup parish register. They told the story of Jorgen Larsen and Magrethe Hansdatter, Danish peasants, a story of sorrow and struggle. However, their trials provided me with one of the greatest lessons of my life. Here are the parish church book entries that unfold their lives.

Jorgen Larsen and Magrethe Hansdatter gave birth to a son named Lars, after his paternal grandfather, on November 17, 1776. The child died two weeks later on December 2, 1776. Jorgen and Magrethe gave birth to another son named Lars on May 1, 1778. He died within three weeks, on May 21, 1778. They gave birth to a third son, Hans, named after his maternal grandfather, on August 15, 1779. He died two weeks later, August 29, 1779. On August 20, 1780, Magrethe gave birth to a daughter named Magrethe. This daughter lived seven days and then died on August 27, 1780. A fourth son, Lars, was born October 14, 1781. He died also, on November 18, 1781, after living only a month. A daughter named Karen was born September 7, 1783. She died one week later, on September 14, 1783.

I cannot express the emotions that went through my heart as I followed this account through the pages of the old church book. Finally, on September 5, 1784, Jorgen and Magrethe gave birth to a daughter named Maren, who lived to maturity, and then a son named,

appropriately enough, Lars, after his paternal grandfather, on May 26, 1787. This last son was my fourth great-grandfather.

My wife and I went to the Jordan River Temple to seal this family and others as eternal units. The Lord promises us that on occasion we "shall mount up in the imagination of [our] thoughts as upon eagles' wings." (D&C 124:99.) In other words, occasionally he will show us sacred and beautiful truths in the chambers of our minds by touching our imagination. This was one of those occasions. I seemed to see my dear Danish people, all the children gathered around their parents. They were all dressed in white and were rejoicing and embracing each other as the sealings took place. Suddenly, they turned in unison, looking above them at a being I could not see, but I knew who it was by their expressions of gratitude.

"We thank thee, Father," they said, "for allowing us to be born at a time and in a place where our names could be written in a church book, so that our descendant could find our names and bring us here, to thy house, to be cleansed and eternally bound as families. We need wait no longer. Life is fulfilled. And we thank thee that our names were written in a book." For temple blessings alone, they dismissed all the pain and struggle of their lives. In spite of their hardships, life was fulfilled by the simple recording of names in a Lutheran church book. Perhaps Paul had these blessings in mind when he told the Roman Saints: "I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us." (Romans 8:18.)

Turning to me with eyes of wonder, my ancestors seemed to say: "And you, our descendant, you are allowed to kneel at an altar in the Lord's house. You have lived your whole life with the assurance of eternal family. You may sit at the feet of living prophets and read words of scripture we never dreamed existed. How full of gratitude your heart must be to our Father in Heaven for all his goodness toward you. For us, it was enough just to have our names written in a church book."

Truly angels descend the Lord's stairway, edifying, instructing, and humbling us as we ascend that same stairway to our eternal home and reunion with them. I can think of no people who have ever lived or who now live that have more reason to rejoice than the Latter-day Saints, for they have had committed to their trust a work that is marvelous in its nature and sanctifying in its performance.
