S. Michael Wilcox, House of Glory: Finding Personal Meaning in the Temple ( 1995)

CHAPTER 21

The River Rises

I would like to conclude the thoughts I have tried to share on the temple with a testimony. No matter what we read about the temple, our experience there will always be personal. Into each of our lives it will bring unique and beautiful blessings. That is part of its power—it meets our individual needs so perfectly. As its fruits become sweeter in our lives, we feel deep gratitude and realize more fully why the Lord would call the temple "a place of thanksgiving for all saints." (D&C 97:13.) Significantly, the first word of the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple (the first temple of this dispensation) is the word thanks. What more appropriate word could we commence with as a temple is given to the Lord? What wonderful scriptural irony it is that we say "thank you" as we give to God something that will bless us infinitely more than it will bless him.

In quiet moments of reflection, we return often to the temple to express our gratitude. More and more we come to the temple not only for our needs, seeking guidance or comfort, but just to be near the Lord's Spirit and to say, "Thank you." The more we see the temple as a house of learning, a house of refuge, a house of order, and a house of glory, the more we understand why it is also a house of thanksgiving.

In one of the loveliest of psalms, David expressed his love for the Lord because He had "dealt bountifully with" him. Then he asked, "What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?" He then answered his own question: "I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in the presence of all his people, in the courts of the Lord's house. . . . Praise ye the Lord." (Psalm 116:7, 12, 17-19; emphasis added.) Temple worship is a beautiful way to thank the Lord for having "dealt bountifully with" us.

I have come to love the temple very much. If someone had told me years ago, when I left the temple after my own endowments, that temple worship would become a central love of my life, I simply would not have believed it was possible. Yet, through the years, I have felt the waters of Ezekiel's river rise continually in my life. I do not know how deeply I have waded into the river. Perhaps I am not even to the knees. But I have felt its refreshing sweetness enough to know that I never want to leave it. The more the river rises, the more grateful I feel to be near enough to wade in it frequently.

I am always thrilled to hear the announcement that another temple will be constructed somewhere in the world. How wonderful that other members will now have easier access to the Lord's house, feel the waters rise in their own lives, and receive their own unique blessings! I believe that the continual building of temples will become more and more critical as the gathering forces of evil begin to prevail in the world. The temples will become a necessity in our lives, and we will feel more and more grateful to enter them frequently.

I would like, by way of testimony, to conclude with three great rewards the temple has brought to my family. I share them as an expression of thanksgiving to the Lord for the goodness that has flowed into my life because of his house. They involve both the temple's healing and its life-giving powers. I hope they will say in the best way possible why I love the Lord's house so deeply.

TURNING THE HEARTS OF THE CHILDREN

When I was just a baby, my parents separated. Not too long after, they divorced. I was raised by my mother, who taught me to love the gospel of Jesus Christ, to search the scriptures, and to trust my Father in Heaven. I rarely saw my father while I grew up. Once a year, while visiting my grandparents, my father would take my sisters and me to Lagoon. That was my only contact with him for the first eighteen years of my life. There was nothing in it upon which one could build a relationship.

My father was simply a person who took me to an amusement park once a year. I had no feelings for him, either negative or positive.

When I was eighteen I left California and went to Brigham Young University to attend school. I was deeply interested in genealogy. I enjoyed school, but what I really wanted to do was go to Salt Lake City and spend all day in the Genealogy Library. On the weekends I would hitchhike to Salt Lake City so I could look for my ancestors, but I had to return each night to Provo.

My father lived in Salt Lake City and had a pull-out bed in the couch in his den. I finally called him and asked if I could sleep at his house on Friday and Saturday nights so I could spend more time in the library. Not only did he consent, but he also offered to pick me up in Provo, take me back and forth from the library to his house, and return me to BYU when I was finished.

I loved the weekends and looked forward to them all week long. I tried to get all my homework done so I would have the full weekend to spend in Salt Lake City. I never could have foreseen what those weekend trips would eventually lead to. At night I would talk with my father and show him what I had found. I learned to like him, and then I learned to love him. My heart was turning. The first father that Elijah's spirit caused me to turn to was not some distant ancestor I would meet someday in the resurrection. It was my own father.

Time passed, and I shared many more memories with my father. A desire was born in my heart to help him return to full activity in the Church. Years passed, and progress was sometimes slow and discouraging, but the day finally came when I received a call from my father and heard him say: "Do you know what I am holding in my hand? It is a temple recommend. I am worthy to return to the Lord's house. It's been over thirty years. Would you come to Salt Lake City and go with me?" What a sweet experience awaited my sister and me as we entered the Jordan River Temple with our father.

Since that day, my father has been to the temple many times. I have continued to do research on our ancestors. I submit their names for temple ordinances, and my father is in the temple every week performing the work for them. I do not doubt the power of Malachi's promise. The spirit of Elijah can reach through centuries of time and bind our hearts to fathers whose names we read on old gothic manuscripts, but it can also reach through the pain of divorce and bind the heart of a son to his father and a father to his son. That is one of the great rewards I have received because Elijah came to fulfill Malachi's promise.

WHAT SHALL THY WAGES BE?

When I was a boy, I fell onto the cement and cracked the upper ridge of my mouth. We were unaware of this until many years later when an X-ray revealed the damage. By then it was too late to save the front teeth. While a teenager, I had several operations. My front teeth were removed, and braces were attached to correct the damage. During years of corrective brace work, I lived with a toothless smile. These were my high school years.

I learned to talk without ever showing my teeth. I don't recall this as a great hardship, but it did result in a complete lack of confidence socially. I never dated, and I had very little to do with girls. I recall entering the mission field with a great sense of relief that I would have two whole years without needing to worry about social contacts or dating.

I reached maturity believing I could not and would not marry a wonderful woman. I accepted this knowledge as a part of life and was resigned to settle down with a wife who was less than what I wanted. Yet I had dreams. I had formed a portrait of a perfect wife down to the tiniest details—her talents, her personality, her life's commitments, what she would look like, even to the color of her hair and eyes. It was a dream I did not believe could ever come true.

The scriptures teach that the Lord honors his sons by giving them wonderful wives. (Proverbs 19:14.) If that is true, then surely no man was ever honored more than I. Laura Chipman came into my life possessing every detail of my portrait, even to the color of her hair and eyes.

Perhaps you can understand, then, how I felt as I knelt in the Alberta Temple, heard the wonderful words of promise and fulfillment that were spoken there, and knew that this unity and love, which I had never believed would come into my life, would now never leave it if I would remain true to my covenants.

As she placed her hand in mine while we knelt at the altar, such a warmth of spirit and light and beauty rolled over and around and through me that ever since that time, whenever I hear the word glory, I think of that moment. At the altars of the temple, the Lord opens a window of heaven just a crack to let celestial light strike our souls as a taste of what can be ours forever if we are true to our covenants. I had never before nor have I ever since felt such an elation of pure joy.

A thought by Arthur Henry King has meant much to me since I read it years ago. He said: "I was born extremely poor, but I had no ambitions; and I was surprised every time something good happened to me. And I continue to be so. What one doesn't expect may prove to be a source of gratitude, and gratitude is a fundamental gospel attitude. It is what we have to feel; we have to give it back to the Lord in all things." (The Abundance of the Heart, p. 78.)

I never expected to have a strong relationship with my father, nor did I expect the sweetness of a wonderful companion, but the Lord's house not only brought these things into my life but also assures me that they can be eternal. What other feeling could be more appropriate than gratitude? When I first went to the temple, I did not expect it to provide such fulfillment and joy. I doubt that many of us can comprehend at first what the temple really can do for us. Perhaps that is why our hearts swell wider and wider with gratitude as the blessings flow and our lives become richer and richer.

I love the story of Jacob and Rachel in the Old Testament. I think it is the most profoundly beautiful love story in literature, yet it covers only a few verses. "Because thou art my brother," Laban asked Jacob, "shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? Tell me, what shall thy wages be?"

And Jacob answered, "I will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter." The seven years turned into fourteen, but we are told the years "seemed unto him but a few days, for the love he had to her." (Genesis 29:15-20.)

I can picture a similar scene in my own life sometime in the future. My Father in Heaven will ask me a question much like the one Laban asked Jacob: "Because thou art my son, shouldest thou, therefore, serve me for nought? Tell me, What shall thy wages be?"

I know what answer I will give him. I will not ask for a mansion in heaven, but I will ask for an even greater reward. Yet I know it is one he desires to grant me. "I will serve thee all my life," I will answer, "for the eternal companionship of thy daughter Laura. Please seal my marriage with thy Holy Spirit of Promise. Preserve the fruit, Father, we have gathered in our lives together." What greater reward could one ask than that?

Wilford Woodruff understood this truth, for he loved his wife dearly. "Bless your souls," he said, "if you lived here in the flesh a thousand years, as long as Father Adam, and lived and labored all your life in poverty, and when you got through, if, by your acts, you could secure your wives and children in the morning of the first resurrection, to dwell with you in the presence of God, that one thing would amply pay you for the labors of a thousand years." (Journal of Discourses 21:284.)

THEY KEPT COMING AND COMING

I took my twelve-year-old son to the temple one afternoon to perform baptisms for a number of his ancestors. He had gone with me a number of times to the Family History Library and had, on his own, found some of his ancestors. This was not the first time we had gone together to the temple to be baptized for the dead, but it turned out to be one of the most special. There was a beautiful, calm spirit in the temple that afternoon. We performed the baptisms and then the confirmations. After he was confirmed for his ancestors, he told me of a special experience he had received during the confirmations. It said so much about the wonder of the temple and the gratitude it engenders.

He said: "When the workers laid their hands on my head, I saw a picture in my mind. I saw you, Dad, standing alone. Then Mother came and stood by you and took your hand. Then Kirsten, Megan, Ben, Mckay, and I came, and we stood with you. I saw Grandma and Grandpa come next and join us. Then people began to come from many different directions. I did not know who they were, but they came and stood with us and took our hands. They kept coming and coming until I could not see the end of them."

What sweeter moment could a father share with his son than I shared with mine that afternoon in the temple of our God? What gratitude it continues to create in my heart as I reflect on it. One day my son will know who all the people were, and the experience described by Enoch will be his also: "Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other." (Moses 7:63.) The essence of the temple is contained in that verse. May the experience it describes be the reward of all who truly love the Lord's house.

SHOUT FOR JOY

As I reflect on all the joy the temple has brought into my life and the strength it gives every member of the Church, it is not difficult to understand why we shout for joy when a temple is dedicated. That holy, solemn occasion is such a fitting celebration of the happiness that the newly dedicated temple will bring to all who pass through its door.

I have been privileged to participate in the dedication of three temples. Each one was a sacred occasion I shall always remember and treasure. Only on the most holy occasions of real joy do we shout because our happiness is so full we must let it out in praise to our Father and his Son. The scriptures speak of only a few such occasions. Job taught that "the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy" when the earth was created. (Job 38:7; emphasis added.) Joseph Smith quoted Job's shout of joy in his great hymn of the Restoration spoken of in an earlier chapter. (See D&C 128:23.)

When Jesus triumphantly entered Jerusalem to accomplish his great redeeming sacrifice for the salvation of the world, the streets were lined with people who "began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice." (Luke 19:37.) "Hosanna!" they cried. "Blessed is the King of Israel that cometh in the name of the Lord." (John 12:13.) Zechariah described this triumphant promise of the coming Atonement with these words: "Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout O daughter of Jerusalem: behold thy King cometh unto thee." (Zechariah 9:9; emphasis added.)

Paul informed the Thessalonians that when the Savior returned to the earth, he would "descend from heaven with a shout . . . and the dead in Christ shall rise." (1 Thessalonians 4:16; emphasis added.) All of these moments are deeply significant in the salvation of humanity. The Creation, the coming Atonement, and the Resurrection are all occasions for shouting "hosanna to God and the Lamb!" It is not coincidental that the dedication of the Lord's house is also accompanied by a shout of rejoicing, for it too is essential in the salvation of our Father's children. May that shout echo again and again in every land, among every people, and sound in every ear.
