The Christmas season is a time to ponder on the Savior’s humble birth and miraculous life. As you think about the angels who ministered to the shepherds and announced Christ’s birth, you may be inspired to also share “good tidings of great joy” (Luke 2:10). Elder Ulisses Soares of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles said, “As we approach Christmas, I wonder if we could become more like the angelic host by visiting modern shepherds to provide the good news of Christ, peace and comfort.”

Paul echoed the Savior when he said, “It is more blessed to give than to receive” (Acts 20:35). As you read these 10 stories of Christlike charity and service, you might think of ways you can be an angel in the lives of those in your family and community. To find more ways to serve and learn about the Church’s Light the World campaign, visit lighttheworld.org.

When the author’s son learns about a family struggling with the death of their mother, he jumps into action to gather donated gifts and money for the children.

Age is no limitation for these teenagers all over the world who found unique ways to serve their communities.

Two sisters are inspired to sell painted signs encouraging people to “be kind” and donate the profits to charity.

A woman is reminded of the Savior’s ability to redeem us when she gifts her sister-in-law a homemade Christmas tree skirt and receives a beautiful tree skirt in return.

A young man from Venezuela sets aside his own worries about university classes when he is presented with the opportunity to serve a classmate.

A woman from Finland connects with her elderly neighbor and soothes her loneliness by bringing her a loaf of bread.

A missionary serving in the Philippines experiences Christmas in a new way as he trades a Christmas party for fishing for a family’s dinner.

When a woman feels overwhelmed by responsibilities, a neighbor delivers a perfectly timed loaf of bread.

A woman learns how service connects people and changes ministering from an obligation to an opportunity.

A young boy learns about the joy of service as he helps at the bishops’ storehouse with his mother.
