It is a privilege to share my thoughts from my scripture study surrounding the birth of Jesus Christ, particularly on the core doctrinal theme, Jesus Christ was born to be my Savior and bring me hope. My study has focused primarily on the Book of Moroni, chapters1 through 10.

The birth of Jesus Christ holds profound significance for Christians and for everyone worldwide. When the angel announced His birth to the shepherds, his message was clear: “For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord” (Luke 2:11).

His announcement proclaimed that the Savior was coming to earth as our rescuer. Prophets throughout the ages knew of the birth of Jesus Christ through prophecies and revelation. They waited upon the Lord and testified with courage and power of His coming. To his brethren the Lamanites, Moroni wrote that four hundred and twenty years had passed since the sign was given of the coming of Christ. (See Moroni 10:1.)

Moroni further encourages readers to remember, “How merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts” (Moroni 10:3).

As a child, I didn’t have to wait for 600 years or watch for a sign to learn about the birth of the Savior like the faithful Nephites who believed in the words of the prophets. I first learned about the birth of the Savior through my parents who were members of another faith and strongly believed that nature itself, including the bright stars, testify that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Reflecting on the stars that appeared in the sky as a sign of the Savior’s birth reminds me today that what Alma taught is true, “The earth, and all things that are upon the face of it . . . witness that there is a Supreme Creator” (Alma 30:44).

Indeed, nature itself testifies of the Savior’s divine birth, which brought me hope and joy.

Meanwhile, I learned about nature announcing His birth in the old world, as well as the western hemisphere. It was easy for me to understand the significance of His birth as everyone in my locality, irrespective of their religious leanings, joined in the festivities to celebrate His birth. I watched my parents share food as gifts, help others accomplish their work, and welcome extended family members, friends, and holiday makers from boarding schools, etc.

My favorite part of the holiday festivities was the new clothing that parents gave to their children to wear during Christmastime. I always looked forward to wearing my new clothes and joining my friends to go around the community visiting every home and receiving gifts. Remembering the birth of our Savior gave us opportunities to celebrate His love and to share it with our family members and others.

Mormon had the following to say about the birth of Jesus Christ:

“And God also declared unto prophets, by his own mouth, that Christ should come.

“And behold, there were divers ways that he did manifest things unto the children of men, which were good; and all things which are good cometh of Christ; otherwise men were fallen, and there could no good thing come unto them.

 Wherefore, by the ministering of angels, and by every word which proceeded forth out of the mouth of God, men began to exercise faith in Christ; and thus by faith, they did lay hold upon every good thing; and thus it was until the coming of Christ” (Moroni 7:23–25).

When I hear about Him, what comes to mind are the words ‘Savior’ and ‘Prince of Peace’. These words describe attributes that bring hope, courage, grace, forgiveness, and pure love into my life and to the lives of everyone.

Mormon gave wise counsel on how we can retain hope and His blessing.

“And now, my beloved son, notwithstanding their hardness, let us labor diligently; for if we should cease to labor, we should be brought under condemnation; for we have a labor to perform whilst in this tabernacle of clay, that we may conquer the enemy of all righteousness, and rest our souls in the kingdom of God” (Moroni 9:6).

These words encourage trust in God, perseverance during difficult times, and emphasize the need to work diligently even when surrounded by evil.

Mormon’s message is a reminder to me and to every reader, “But behold, that which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually; wherefore, everything which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve him, is inspired of God” (Moroni 7:13).

I am reminded that King Benjamin’s powerful message remains in force, “And behold, I tell you these things that ye may learn wisdom; that ye may learn that when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God” (Mosiah 2:17).

A powerful and hopeful promise is that: “they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him, and keep his commandments which he hath given them, that they may always have his Spirit to be with them, Amen” (Moroni 4:3).

Learning from the life of Jesus Christ and His example, I have come to embrace love, compassion and humility.

My testimony about Him working under the direction of His Father, my conviction about our Heavenly Father’s plan, and the invitation to follow Him remain the fundamental guiding truths in my heart.
