Neal A. Maxwell, But for a Small Moment ( 1986)

Introduction

The lonely, limestone Missouri jailhouse (twenty by twenty-two feet) was more a dungeon than a cell. Ironically, because of its location in that city it was known as the Liberty Jail. [^1] Herein, during his incarceration (December 1, 1838, through April 6, 1839) as a result of betrayals and distortions by some "friends" as well as enemies, the Prophet Joseph Smith received some of the most rich and remarkable revelations ever given to any prophet. The double walls, four feet thick, kept Joseph and his companions in, but they could not keep the Spirit and revelation out. Though Joseph's physical vision suffered from incessant gloom, the "choice seer" had that vision which mattered most.

Because of its spiritual significance, Elder B. H. Roberts called this forbidding place the "prison-Temple." (Comprehensive History, 1:521.)

The nearly windowless prison-temple becomes a unique window itself through which to view Joseph and the processes of revelation and soul stretching evident during this particular period of the Restoration. Herein we see Joseph testifying while suffering, learning while teaching, giving direction to the work while he was being tutored, giving blessings while being cursed, and proclaiming the United States Constitution to be "a glorious standard" even while being grossly deprived of his own constitutional rights.

The scene, therefore, is not one of an isolated prophet insulated in a calm, scholastic or monastic setting. Rather we see a prophet removed from but still very much involved in the fray. Though Joseph had been betrayed, jailed, and defamed, the Lord's work went on through him in the midst of "all these things."

For Joseph it was a time not only for receiving additional revelation but also for contemplating what he had already received. Hence the relevance of chapters 2 through 5 of this work. Moreover, throughout this volume the interplay of various scriptures, revelations, and blessings will be shown. All demonstrate evidence of God's guiding and correlating hand.

Significantly, through the "window" that was Liberty Jail we see Joseph growing spiritually and being prepared for the rushed moments in another and final jail—Carthage. [^2]

In Liberty, Joseph had time to ponder, albeit in grim conditions. Jailed Joseph's introspections doubtless prepared him to receive therein the great revelations now known as sections 121 and 1 22 of the Doctrine and Covenants. Section 123 was set forth by Joseph during the same period of incarceration. Portions of these revelations and Joseph's own communications and reflections during his imprisonment illuminate for us, in ways probably unique in all of scripture, the challenges associated with deepening one's discipleship.

We might note too that, while the Prophet's time in the prison-temple separated him physically from his people, it also yielded a recognition of his need to improve communications with Church members. He noted with resolve that the devil had hampered and distressed him "from the beginning to keep me from explaining myself to them and I never have had opportunity to give them the plan that God has revealed to me" (Writings, p. 387). After the Missouri incarceration Joseph appeared to be more assertive and directive and declarative than before, to be even more of a shepherd and a spokesman. Though he was told in jail that "thy years shall not be numbered less" (D&C 122:9), Joseph nevertheless knew that he did not have an abundance of years left to him.

If at this and at other times in the Prophet's life one sees in a developing Joseph some impulsiveness in support of a transcendent cause, this merely tends to bring to mind the instance of anxious and protective Peter's cutting off the ear of the high priest's servant (John 18:10, 26).

If Joseph had a contempt for certain civil, political, and military leaders who abused and vexed him, one recalls too how Peter and others also at the direction of civil and religious authorities were unjustly reproved, beaten, and commanded not to speak again of Jesus, but who, when freed, likewise promptly resumed their ministries and "ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ" (Acts 5:40-42).

If the Prophet Joseph had stern words for his persecutors and spoke of the apostate conditions which necessitated his heavenly call, he was also like another martyr, Stephen. Both men saw "two beings, "Jesus being "on the right hand of God," and both were slain for their reproving testimonies (see Acts 7:51-60). In fact, the experiences in the prison-temple only underscored, for Joseph, his colleagueship with earlier prophets and martyrs.

In all of this, as Elder B. H. Roberts wrote, Joseph, at times, "loosened the flood tide of his over-wrought emotions, and in them the greatness of his soul is often revealed" (Comprehensive History, 1:523). Today's Church members are used to seeing as prophets older men who are well established and experienced by many years of high leadership positions. Liberty Jail featured a thirty-three-year-old Prophet whose expressions about his frustrations reflected his years. The soul stretching was not accomplished without pain and the signs of such pain.

The window that is Liberty Jail frames a great teaching episode as if it were frozen in time and space for us to see and to study. But this window is not only for pondering the past: it is a window also for derivatively and instructively viewing oneself and the Church. Those who so do will encounter abundant lessons for today and tomorrow.

At several times in the brief history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, its enemies probably felt that it had been successfully disposed of; and superficial indicators encouraged such a mistaken view. Clearly, one such time occurred in the 1838-1839 period in Missouri. Twelve thousand Church members were then driven from Missouri to an area centering on Quincy, Illinois. A few were slain, [^3] and their Prophet was jailed. Nevertheless, from the prison-temple Joseph the seer wrote, "Zion shall yet live though she seemeth to be dead" (Writings, p. 382). Joseph's trust in God's unfolding purposes in the midst of such adversity was grounded on revelation concerning the plan of salvation and the unique doctrine of the premortal existence of man. Hence chapters 4 and 5 of this work.

It was precisely during this express time of peril that the Lord spoke reassuring and informing words to the imprisoned Joseph Smith concerning the rolling on of the latter-day work and promised a continued flow of revealed knowledge: "How long can rolling waters remain impure? What power shall stay the heavens? As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints." (D&C 121:33.)

The mighty Missouri could not, in fact, be turned upstream. Neither would the Lord's work be altered from its "decreed course," just as the words Joseph translated ten years earlier assured: "For the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all his promises shall be fulfilled" (Mormon 8:22).

In Moses' day the Lord let his doctrine "drop as the rain" (Deuteronomy 32:2). In Eli's day "there was no open vision," and the paucity of revelation caused the "word of the Lord" to be "precious" (1 Samuel 3:1). In Joseph Smith's time, heavenly knowledge would be "poured" upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints in a cascade of "plain and precious" truths. The persecution in Missouri thus not only failed to destroy the kingdom; it induced further revelation and determination, which was followed by further consolidation in Nauvoo, which in turn was followed by the establishment of the Church in Western America and its enlarged and successful colonization there. In the progress of the Lord's work the crossing of phase lines can be painful but necessary.

The members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who experience mocking of temple rituals, ridicule of the Book of Mormon, and attempted belittling of the Prophet Joseph Smith can learn from the prison-temple how adversity has its uses. Though it is regrettable that such should come, efforts to weaken the Church will, ironically, only end up by strengthening faithful members and heightening their appreciation for temples, scriptures, and prophets.

In the progress now being made along the "decreed course" of the Church, prophecies are meanwhile being fulfilled. Among the decreed outcomes (underscored by the determined "shalls" of divine communication) are several which emanated from the prison-temple.

First, "A seer shall the Lord my God raise up. . .," said ancient Joseph (2 Nephi 3:6; italics added).

Second, "other books" (1 Nephi 13:39, 40) with pages and pages of scripture, as promised, have come forth and "shall establish the truth" of the Bible. These other books came almost exclusively through the Prophet Joseph, to be conjoined with the Holy Bible. Now, as never before—now all these scriptures "shall grow together" (2 Nephi 3:12; italics added).

Third, as enemies try to destroy the work of Joseph they have been and "shall be confounded" (2 Nephi 3:14; italics added). (See chapter 3.)

Fourth, as Joseph was assured in Liberty Jail, "thy people shall never be turned against thee by the testimony of traitors" (D&C 122:3; italics added).

Fifth, as promised the Prophet-prisoner so stunningly and accurately in that obscure frontier jail, "The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name" (D&C 122:1; italics added).

It is hoped that earnest readers will come away from looking through this witnessing "window" not only with greater appreciation for imperfect but improving Joseph as a "choice seer" (chapter 2) but also with a greater determination to meet the demands of their own discipleship in our time and amid our own vexations.

Though on the scale of global significance our tutoring experiences are smaller than the Prophet's, the insights, principles, and doctrines discussed herein apply to all of us. As our individual premortal [^4] preparation is linked to our mortal refining, we too are told to "endure it well."

Furthermore, the same converging and consolidating of doctrines and experience manifest by Joseph in jail need to occur in each of us. Our own mix, too, of mortality and adversity "shall be but for a small moment"—but what an important moment!

May we use that moment well.
