Neal A. Maxwell, But for a Small Moment ( 1986)

Chapter 1

"Thine Adversity. . . Shall Be But a Small Moment"

For the Prophet Joseph Smith, the experience in Liberty Jail was a time not only of suffering but also of reflecting which led to a further consolidating and integrating of his thinking. This converging process involved what he had previously learned as well as what he was then learning. Incarcerated Joseph wrote that "the things of God are of deep import and time and experience and careful and ponderous and solemn thoughts can only find them out" (Writings, p. 396). Joseph's Spirit—aided learning involved what Paul had likewise called "the deep things of God" (1 Corinthians 2:10).

The whole experience in Liberty Jail, as Joseph indicated, was such that without it he could not possibly have understood certain dimensions of suffering. It was just as promised in an 1834 blessing given him by his father: [^1] "Thy heart shall meditate great wisdom and comprehend the deep things of God" (Father's Blessing, 1834). In the prison-temple Joseph was being shown even more deeply "things as they really are, and... things as they really will be" (Jacob 4:13), words he had translated nearly a decade before.

The peculiar "vantage point" even prompted Joseph to view with some objectivity the refiner's fire, not only as it affected him but as it affected his people as well: from the prison-temple, in his epistle to the Church, he observed that "God hath said that he would have a tried people" (Writings, p. 395).

This reference in the March 1839 epistle about the Lord's developing a "tried people," purged as gold in a crucible, found later confirmation in a revelation given to President Brigham Young in January 1847 at Winter Quarters: "My people must be tried in all things, that they may be prepared to receive the glory that I have for them, even the glory of Zion; and he that will not bear chastisement is not worthy of my kingdom" (D&C 136:31).

Joseph's words from jail and the latter words, given after the exodus from the City of Joseph, reflect another tutorial reality as translated by Joseph Smith years before: "Nevertheless the Lord seeth fit to chasten his people; yea, he trieth their patience and their faith" (Mosiah 23:21).

Through all that comprised the experience in the prison-temple, Joseph remained confident that the work would roll on, because "God is . . . our shield, . . . it was by his voice that we were called to a dispensation of his gospel in the beginning of the fulness of times. It was by him we received the Book of Mormon." (Writings, pp. 398-99.) [^2]

As the hectic earlier years gave way to enforced confinement in Liberty Jail, there was time to reflect deeply. Peter's words come to mind which suggest that God would, "after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you" (1 Peter 5: 10).

Imprisoned Joseph, in fact, noted that certain remedies are to be acquired only by "time and experience." Doubtless this realization and the Prophet's consciousness that he was being tutored underwrote his vow: "We are determined to endure tribulation as good soldiers unto the end" (Writings, p. 399). Understandably, he shared the feelings of Paul—"Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?" (Romans 8:35)—when he wrote, "Nothing therefore can separate us from the love of God" (Writings, p. 390). Besides, the perils through which Joseph was called to pass "seem but a small thing to me" (D&C 127:2).

In the midst of his adversity, there came one of the most sublime and significant revelations ever received by Joseph or any other prophet—that now numbered sections 121 and 1 22 of the Doctrine and Covenants. These revelations are so invested with rich truths that any focusing on one portion is apt, even unintentionally, to neglect another.

The doctrine of man's premortal existence—"things as they really were"—was further ripened in Joseph while he was in the prison-temple, and he was made ready for further public expression about it. (See chapters 4 and 5 of this book.)

It is not surprising that the Lord, whose plans Joseph was carrying out, would reassure him that he would not be taken before his time [^3] (see D&C 122:9). All men have a time appointed when we will stand before the judgment bar of God. It is the author's opinion that each of us mortals has a time frame appointed within which we are permitted to do our work in this world (see Alma 12:27; D&C 42:48; 121:25). "Revelations" and "things" occur in their times (see D&C 59:4; 64:32); so also with people.

Furthermore, there had been revealed to Joseph seven years earlier the future of those not valiant in the testimony of Jesus (see D&C 76:79). That revelation can be juxtaposed to what the Prophet was told while in the jail: "endure it well, "for glorious promises were given to those "who have endured valiantly for the gospel of Jesus Christ" (D&C 121:29). Even if otherwise "honorable," those who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus cannot be crowned in the celestial kingdom. A "good soldier" is "valiant" to the end.

The tutoring but sobering summation "all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good" (D&C 122:7) [^4] is most assuredly the major development theme which emerges from the prison-temple. This tutorial theme received even further application in the deepened understanding which came to the incarcerated Joseph: the Lord revealed to him the substance and style—in essence "what manner of men" (3 Nephi 27:27)—he desires those who hold his holy priesthood to be. (See D&C 121:34-46.)

This transcendent revelation, so profound as to constitute a towering witness to Joseph Smith's prophetic powers, is in effect an amplification of a terse verse in the New Testament, "For many are called, but few are chosen" (Matthew 22:14):

Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen?

Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson—

That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness.

That they may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man.

Behold, ere he is aware, he is left unto himself, to Kick against the pricks, to persecute the saints, and to fight against God.

We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion.

Hence many are called, but few are chosen. (D&C 121:34-40.)

Thus at the very time he was suffering telestial abuse and oppression from secular authorities ranging from judges to jailers, Joseph was instructed on the completely opposite manner, the celestial way, in which the Lord's priesthood leaders are to lead!

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned;

By kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile—

Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy. (D&C 121:41-43.)

Obviously this supernal spiritual style of leadership as thus set forth could not be sustained for long by anyone who was casual in his commitment or who was not making significant spiritual strides in developing the attributes of Jesus. This leadership style and attitude here made specific to priesthood bearers matched the attributes and qualities of a true Saint noted in precious lines translated by Joseph Smith a decade before: "and becometh a saint . . . and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father" (Mosiah 3:19).

The rigorousness of such requirements is clear, but it is matched by the richness of the Lord's promise:

Let thy bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

The Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto thee forever and ever. (D&C 121:45, 46.)

Though he was in an obscure and dismal dungeon, for Joseph the pointed tutoring and rich revealing continued—accompanied by striking promises of much more revelation to come to the Lord's prophets and people, revelation about "things as they really will be," for there would be A time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld, whether there be one God or many gods, they shall be manifest. . . According to that which was ordained in the midst of the Council of the Eternal God of all other gods before this world was, that should be reserved unto the finishing and the end thereof, when every man shall enter into his eternal presence and into his immortal rest. (D&C 121:28, 32.)

Separated from them though he was, Joseph was further assured that the people of the Church "shall never be turned against [him] by the testimony of traitors" (D&C 122:3). It is a comfort that this promise is as valid today as when it was given in March of 1839. Such defectors and other detractors caused trouble then (see D&C 122:4) as they do now. Nevertheless such troubles and afflictions, comparatively speaking, will be "but for a small moment" (D&C 122:4; see also 2 Corinthians 4:17).

Joseph, "called to pass through tribulation," would thereby come to understand "according to the flesh" (see Alma 7:11-12), what it was like to be "cast into the pit" (D&C 122:5, 7). This expression was reminiscent of another Joseph, the son of Jacob: "And they took him, and cast him into a pit: and the pit was empty, there was no water in it" (Genesis 37:24).

Significantly, ancient Joseph prophesied that Joseph Smith, Jr., "shall be like unto me" (2 Nephi 3:15). (See chapter 6 for comparisons.)

The four-word preamble to the Lord's summational lines given to the Prophet Joseph in jail concerning the development of discipleship is affectingly tender: "Know thou, my son" (D&C 122:7). However, a solemn array of difficulties the Prophet had already undergone (D&C 122:5-7) as representative of others that might still be required of him, preceded those reassuring lines. Nevertheless, "all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good," providing Joseph "endured it well" and "valiantly."

This great revelation closed by noting that Jesus had "descended below" all things. Joseph was certainly not greater than he, so Joseph was to be Job-like and "hold on thy way." (D&C 122:8-9.)

What a pointed and powerful reminder about Jesus' being our model! Once more, later revelation was affirming earlier directive words Joseph had translated ten years before, when perhaps he had not fully realized their developmental implications.

Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect (3 Nephi 12:48).

Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to he? Verily I say unto you, even as I am. (3 Nephi 27:27.)

Yes, Liberty Jail was an awful dungeon, but it was also a truly tutoring temple.

Section 123, also written from prison, shows the converging of Joseph's memories and experiences. For instance, he employed an analogy used by James about how a small helm can benefit a large ship (D&C 123:16; see also James 3:4).

In this section the Prophet, writing to the Saints, urged a cataloging of the injustices they had experienced in the Missouri persecutions [^5] and noted what an iniquitous world it was. (See verse 7.) Nevertheless, Joseph was so committed to his calling that he and others were willing to wear out their lives. Why? Because, wrote this truth-telling prophet, we have "an imperative duty" to those on the earth "who are only kept from the truth because they know not where to find it" (verses 11-13).

In the timing and wisdom of the Lord, the schooling revelations of March 1839 were given when the Prophet was fully ready to receive them. They were not given just after the First Vision, or even a decade earlier during Joseph's remarkable translation of the Book of Mormon. Schooling has its seasons, even for prophets.

Just as rugged but remote mountains in the Sinai were the scene of very significant preparational moments in the life of Moses, so a rock-hewn jail in Missouri was the obscure, unlikely site of marvelous nurturing revelations from God to a modern prophet and his people. Joseph's time "in this solitary place" (Writings, p. 375) provided such a useful interval.

In a December 16, 1838, letter to the Saints, Joseph wrote, "Do not think that our hearts faint as though some strange thing had happened unto us" (Writings, p. 375). In this we see the deepening and further developing of his own discipleship as he obviously drew upon Peter's words: "Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you" (1 Peter 4:12).

Likewise Joseph cited the words of Isaiah (see Isaiah 29:21) and Nephi (see 2 Nephi 27:32)," Men have laid snares for us, we have spoken words and men have made us offenders"; the analogy of "Job's comforters" (see Job 16:2); and John's lament (see Revelation 6:9) about what can happen in consequence of one's bearing the testimony of Jesus Christ (Writings, pp. 376-77).

The Prophet may have recalled Judas, too, for he observed that "Mormon dissenters" were being used "against us, because such misguided souls were "thinking thereby to gain the friendship of the world." Ironically, those of the world who used such dissenters would end up, said Joseph to the Church in this epistle, hating "them worse than they do us because they find them to be base traitors and sycophants" (Writings, p. 379). This was a foreshadowing of verses to be received several months later: "those that shall lift up the heel against mine anointed [saying] they have sinned when they have not sinned... and those who swear falsely against my servants . . . , they themselves shall be despised by those that flattered them" (D&C 121: 16, 18, 20). Judas knew what it was to be used and then despised (see Matthew 27:3-5).

In a March 15, 1839, letter sent from jail Joseph made significant linkage with his prophet-predecessors: "[but trials] will only give us that knowledge to understand the minds of the Ancients. For my part," wrote Joseph, "I think I never could have felt as I now do if I had not suffered the wrongs that I have suffered." (Writings, p. 387.) It is a rare person who can appreciate such lessons while the lessons are in process; it takes special perspective.

Joseph's mind even contemplated comparatively ancient Abraham. In his epistle to the Church at Quincy, the Prophet expressed the thought that Abraham and the ancients would "not have whereof to boast over us in the day of judgment as being called to pass through heavier afflictions." [^6] These modern disciples could now "hold an even weight in the balances with them." (Writings, p. 395.)

Joseph's sufferings, however, were too real to be mere philosophical calisthenics. Near the end of his confinement he wrote to Emma, "my nerve trembles from long confinement but if you feel as I do you don't care for the imperfections of my writings" (Writings, p. 409).

Joseph's experiences were anything but abstract. "We are kept under a strong guard, night and day, in a prison of double walls and doors... ; our food is scant, uniform, and coarse; we have not the privilege of cooking for ourselves, we have been compelled to sleep on the floor with straw, and not blankets sufficient to keep us warm; and when we have a fire, we are obliged to have almost a constant smoke" (Writings, pp. 417-18).

Recantation by Joseph would have meant liberation. Yet Joseph and the others would not deny their religion simply because of oppression: "We have never dissembled, nor will we for the sake of our lives" (Writings, p. 376). "But if we will deny our religion, we can be liberated" (Writings, p. 418). Instead, they would "hold on until death" because "God is true... the Constitution of the United States is [true], . . . the Bible is true, . . . the Book of Mormon is true [and] the Book of Covenants...; Christ is true [and his] ministering angels" (Writings, p. 407). By the time of his imprisonment, Joseph had had significant personal experiences concerning the specifics of which he so testified. Still, he and the others found themselves "wearing away very fast" (Writings, p. 419).

A day or two before his release, in a poignant letter written at sunset (April 4, 1839), Joseph looked through the bars "of this lonesome prison" with his full emotions "known only to God." He wrote that his contemplations defied description by pen or tongue. How could he describe his feelings to others "who never experienced what we experience"? (Writings, p. 425.) The necessary role of such experience had, after all, been cited by Joseph's divine mentor just a few days before (see D&C 122:7).

In this his last letter to Emma from Liberty Jail, he said he wished to act upon the "principle of generosity." His generosity amid adversity would not have been fully possible without the relevant experiences or Joseph's capacity to "hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not"(Proverbs 8:33).

Thus, just as Jesus grew in wisdom and in stature and in favor with God and man (Luke 1:80; 2:40, 52; see also 1 Samuel 2:26), so did Joseph Smith, this development being enhanced by the suffering in Liberty Jail. Jesus' obedience was perfected by his suffering (Hebrews 5:8-9). For Joseph Smith, suffering increased his obedience.

The struggle is intense along the pathway to perfection, yet it is a trek necessitated by Jesus' having asked us to become "even as I am" (3 Nephi 27:27). Through the Prophet Joseph Smith, either by translation or revelation, great insights came concerning this deepening of one's discipleship.

The Holy Bible, with its apostolic witness, reflects some of these same illuminating insights about the exacting requirements involved in the development of discipleship. From biblical statements it is clear that, while perfection is a very distant goal, it is not an unthinkable goal. Moreover, customized challenges are required:

Jesus said unto him, If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and follow me (Matthew 19:21).

The disciple is not above his master: but every one that is perfect shall be as his master (Luke 6:40).

And that which fell among thorns are they, which, when they have heard, go forth, and are choked with cares and riches and pleasures of this life, and bring no fruit to perfection (Luke 8:14).

For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ (Ephesians 4:12).

Night and day praying exceedingly that we might see your face, and might perfect that which is lacking in your faith (1 Thessalonians 3:10).

Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness (2 Peter 3:11).

Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution (2 Timothy 3:12).

Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God commit the keeping of their souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator (1 Peter 4:19).

Among the remarkable latter-day scriptures further illuminating this heartland of serious discipleship are these, all of which came through Joseph by revelation or translation, including two during his incarceration:

Nevertheless the Lord seeth fit to chasten his people; yea, he trieth their patience and their faith (Mosiah 23:21).

Ye are not able to abide the presence of God now, neither the ministering of angels; wherefore, continue in patience until ye are perfected (D&C 67:13).

And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them. (Ether 12:27.)

. . . and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father (Mosiah 3:19).

And out of weakness he shall be made strong, in that day when my work shall commence among all my people, unto the restoring thee, O house of Israel, saith the lord (2 Nephi 3:13).

My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment (D&C 121:7).

And if thou shouldst be cast into the pit, or into the hands of murderers, and the sentence of death passed upon thee; if thou be cast into the deep, if the billowing surge conspire against thee; if fierce winds become thine enemy; if the heavens gather blackness, and all the elements combine to hedge up the way; and above all, if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good (D&C 122:7).

The abundance and relevance of these and other doctrines which flowed through Joseph constitute major reasons why our Lord foretellingly told him, "The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name" (D&C 122:1). So far as we know, much more scripture flowed through the Prophet Joseph than through any other mortal in history, giving ample reason for such inquiry.

In choosing Joseph Smith, the Lord clearly chose one who by the world's standards was formally unlearned and uneducated. He was certainly not sought out initially by others. In so choosing him, the Lord illustrated how much could be done through him, giving us one of the most remarkable selection and utilization lessons in human history.

There was another factor at work in the soul stretching of the Prophet in the Missouri dungeon. Earlier, Joseph had Oliver Cowdery and Sidney Rigdon to be not only his aides-de-camp but also in a measure as his spokesmen. Alter the Liberty Jail experience, however, Joseph was clearly his own spokesman. From that time forward, we begin to receive Joseph's stretching sermons, involving some of the gospel's most powerful doctrines.

Considering Joseph's task-filled and burdening prophetic role, it is little wonder that the Lord told ancient Joseph that his busy namesake, the latter-day seer, would be asked to "do none other work" (2 Nephi 3:8).

Of this latter-day seer it is recorded, "out of weakness he shall be made strong"(2 Nephi 3:13). Father Smith promised his son that one day he would "stand before the Lord, having produced a hundred-fold" (Father's Blessing, 1834). The foregoing words are worth pondering as the effects of the work done by Joseph burgeon across the planet.

Individuals and settings of obscurity are not unusual to the Lord's purposes. Meridian-day Christianity was initiated on a very small geographical scale and with comparatively few people. The larger, busy world paid little heed to it. Likewise with the Book of Mormon peoples. Whether located in Meso-America or elsewhere, they were one people among many peoples on this planet and perhaps even on the western hemisphere. Lack of knowledge of and communication with others was the factor here.

It was thus also, geographically and numerically, on America's western frontier. Palmyra was not Paris, and Nauvoo was not New York. Nevertheless, Liberty Jail doubtless resembled other jails and other dungeons which have held other prophets. But in the years ahead, as "the ends of the earth shall inquire after [Joseph's] name," Liberty Jail will loom ever larger in the spiritual history of mankind.

Significantly, Joseph was finally released from Liberty Jail, with a subsequent escape en route, on April 6, 1839—both the Savior's and his church's birthday (D&C 20:1). Though Joseph would have been unaware of it, it was also Passover time, often the celebration of the occasion when ancient Israel was spared from the angel of death and released from bondage! [^7]
