Neal A. Maxwell, But for a Small Moment ( 1986)

Chapter 2

"A Choice Seer"

Ancient Joseph saw the latter-day Joseph in vision and prophetically described him as "a choice seer" (2 Nephi 3:6-7).

We have already noted the Prophet's immense revelatory output. Even prior to Liberty Jail, through inspired translation and direct revelation he had indeed served as an unusually productive seer, probably bringing forth more scripture than any single prophet in history. Being "choice" thus denoted, among other things, being favored as a human conduit for a flood of truth.

Following this initial torrent of truth, imprisoned Joseph bore fervent testimony of those revelations and translations, particularly of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon: "it was by [God] we received the Book of Mormon"; likewise "the Book of Covenants" (Writings, pp. 399, 407).

These two volumes, which came through this "choice seer,"' are of course among the "other books" of restorative scripture which were prophesied to come forth in the latter days (1 Nephi 13:39-40), while other revelations (including sections 121 and 122 of the Doctrine and Covenants, given in Liberty Jail) would be later added to the storehouse of scripture given through the modern seer. Much of the laying of the scriptural foundation had been already accomplished by Joseph prior to his confinement in Missouri. Only 9 of the total of 133 sections of scripture given through Joseph came in the final period between Liberty and Carthage jails.

To appreciate fully what occurred in Liberty Jail and subsequently as it affected the Prophet Joseph, it is therefore necessary to assess and ponder anew what had come through this "choice seer" before the Missouri experience. Only then can one fully savor the significance of the revelations given in March of 1839 and the further spiritual preparations which the Prophet underwent in the months of his confinement in the prison-temple.

While imperfect record-keeping may account for some of Joseph's apparent lack of earlier stress upon the Book of Mormon, comparatively speaking, the Liberty Jail period marked something of a turning point. From the jail Joseph declared the truthfulness of the Book and testified that it had come from God. Perhaps in his ponderings in prison he sensed as never before the converging as well as convincing powers of these "other books." Alter as well as during the inhumane incarceration, Joseph repeatedly spoke of the Book of Mormon. In November 1841 he described the book as the "keystone" of our religion (History of the Church, 4:461). He also urged the Book of Mormon as the "means of doing much good" [^1] (Words, p. 31).

In the times ahead those who have faith in the Lord's "key of knowledge," "the fulness of the scriptures" (Luke 11:53, JST) will come to even greater appreciation of what a "choice seer" Joseph was. Appreciation of and scholarship concerning these seer-borne scriptures will grow as never before.

An angel told Nephi nearly 2,500 years ago that "other books" of scripture would come forth in the last dispensation, through "a choice seer, "to "establish [^2] the truth of" the blessed Bible (1 Nephi 13:39-40; 2 Nephi 3:7, 11). Concerning all these books, Joseph testified more than once from Liberty Jail.

The other books of scripture which came through Joseph will yet end up—in additional ways—establishing the truth of the Holy Bible. How fitting, since it was a verse on the precious pages of that book (James 1:5) in which Joseph found the spiritual stimulus to go to the Sacred Grove in 1820!

Yet, sad to say, these reaffirming and clarifying "other books" of scripture—laden with plain and precious truths—have been, are, and will be denigrated by many, drawing the scorner's sting. Moreover, fascination with the environment in which the Book of Mormon came forth has caused some to neglect its content. Likewise, the humanness of those associated with its emergence has caused neglect of the divine-ness of its message.

This coming forth of other books of scripture was, in fact, miraculously accomplished—by both translation and revelation—through a "choice seer," the Prophet Joseph Smith. Even so, the richness of the Book of Mormon, for instance, has been missed by critics and casual Church members alike. They fail to see that both the intricacy and the simplicity of the book are beyond the capacity of any mortal being to produce, including Joseph Smith. What came through Joseph was beyond him and stretched him!

Joseph was instead that rarity in human history, a translating seer: "And you have a gift to translate the plates; and this is the first gift that I bestowed upon you; and I have commanded that you should pretend to no other gift until my purpose is fulfilled in this; for I will grant unto you no other gift until it is finished . . . But this generation shall have my word through you." (D&C 5:4, 10.)

Anciently it was understood how rarely this high "gift from God" is given:

Now Ammon said unto him: I can assuredly tell thee, O king, of a man that can translate the records; for he has wherewith that he can look, and translate all records that are of ancient date; and it is a gift from God. And the things are called interpreters, and no man can look in them except he be commanded, lest he should look for that he ought not and he should perish. And whosoever is commanded to look in them, the same is called seer. ...

Thus God has provided a means that man, through faith, might work mighty miracles; therefore he becometh a great benefit to his fellow beings. (Mosiah 8:13, 18.)

In the aggregate, these fruits of Joseph's labors constitute a massive contribution, one reason why those who try to destroy the work of this seer are both confounded and diverted (see 2 Nephi 3:14).

Furthermore these "other books," particularly the Book of Mormon, "make known... plain and precious" truths some of which do not appear as fully in the Bible. Some truths were, long ago, "kept back" from the later translation process through which we received the Holy Bible. (See 1 Nephi 13:32, 34, 40.) As Robert Matthews has said, it is more a deficiency of transmission than of translation. Whatever the earlier deficiencies, through the Restoration these precious truths would be "had again" among as many "as shall believe" (Moses 1:41).

The return of such truths to the earth features simplicity. The faithful Book of Mormon peoples' straightforward "cry from the dust. . . after many generations. . . shall go, even according to the simpleness of their words. Because of their faith their words shall proceed forth. . . unto. . . the fruit of thy loins; and the weakness of their words will I make strong in their [posterity's] faith, unto the remembering of my covenant . . ." (2 Nephi 3:20-21; italics added).

The recognition of the Book of Mormon by Lehi's posterity is even aided by the "simpleness" and "weakness" of its language. The Lord's sheep know his voice (see John 10:16, 27). The resonance is real.

These "other books" provide afresh a much-needed witness that Jesus is the Christ, that the resurrection which was brought about through his atonement is a reality, and that a loving Father God has a plan of salvation for all mortals. These are transcendent truth—crucial, not incidental.

Another way to measure the revelatory flow through the "choice seer, "the Prophet Joseph Smith, is to select a particular topic, such as the one to follow, and compare what came through him (left-hand column) with other precious words from the remarkable Apostles John and Paul (right-hand column). What follows pertains to a dimension of the Second Coming and certain of its accompanying events.

And there shall be silence And the heaven departed in heaven for the space of half as a scroll when it is an hour; and immediately after rolled together; and every shall the curtain of heaven be mountain and island were unfolded, as a scroll is moved out of their places unfolded after it is rolled up, (Revelation 6:14). and the face of the Lord shall be unveiled;

And the saints that are upon For what is our hope, the earth, who are alive, shall or joy, or crown of be quickened and be caught up rejoicing? Are not even ye to meet him. in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? (1 Thessalonians 2:19.)

And they who have slept in For the Lord himself their graves shall come forth, shall descend from heaven for their graves shall be opened; with a shout, with the and they also shall be caught up voice of the archangel, and to meet him in the midst of the with the trump of God; and pillar of heaven— the dead in Christ shall rise first:

They are Christ's, the Then we which are alive firstfruits, they who shall and remain shall be caught descend with him first, and up together with them in the they who are on the earth and clouds, to meet the Lord in in their graves, who are the air: and so shall we first caught up to meet him; ever be with the Lord. (1 and all this by the voice of Thessalonians 4:16-17.) the sounding of the trump of the angel of God.

And after this another But every man in his angel shall sound, which is own order: Christ the the second trump; and then firstfruits; afterward they cometh the redemption of those that are Christ's at his who are Christ's at his coming; coming (1 Corinthians who have received their part 15:23.) in that prison which is prepared for them, that they might receive the gospel, and be judged according to men in the flesh.

And again, another trump shall sound, which is the third trump; and then come the spirits of men who are to be judged, and are found under condemnation;

And these are the rest And the sea gave up the of the dead; and they live dead which were in it; and not again until the thousand death and hell delivered up years are ended, neither again, the dead which were in them: until the end of the earth. and they were judged every man according to their works (Revelation 20:13.)

And another trump shall sound, But the rest of the which is the fourth trump, saying: dead lived not again until There are found among those who the thousand years were are to remain until that great finished. This is the and last day, even the end, who first resurrection. shall remain filthy still. (Revelation 20:5.)

And another trump shall sound, And I saw another which is the fifth trump, which angel fly in the midst of is the fifth angel who committeth heaven, having the ever- the everlasting gospel- flying lasting gospel to preach through the midst of heaven, unto unto them that dwell on all nations, kindreds, tongues, the earth, and to every and people; nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people (Revelation 14:6.)

And this shall be the sound of his trump, saying to all people, both in heaven and in earth, and that are under the earth—for every ear shall hear it, and every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess, while they hear the sound of the trump, saying: Fear God, and give glory to him who sitteth upon the throne, forever and ever; for the hour of his judgment is come. (D&C 88:95-104.)

Incidentally, while the revelation in the left column (now section 88) was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith on December 27, 1832, the recorded examples of his public utterances about these particular things appear mostly in the post-Liberty Jail period.

The revelatory outpouring from the "choice seer" also had lasting impact on Joseph's true friends and followers. Hugh Nibley observed: "Before he met Joseph Smith, Brigham recalls, 'the secret feeling of my heart was that I would be willing to crawl around the earth on my hands and knees, to see such a man as was Peter, Jeremiah, Moses, or any man that could tell me anything about God and heaven. ... When I saw Joseph Smith, he took heaven figuratively speaking, and brought it down to earth; and he took the earth, brought it up, and opened up, in plainness and simplicity, the things of God; and that is the beauty of his mission" (Timely and Timeless, p. 234).

While he was not easily impressed by anyone, President Young's regard for Joseph was deep and it never left him. Of his pupil-prophet relationship with Joseph he said, "An angel never watched him closer than I did, and that is what has given me the knowledge I have today. I treasure it up, and ask the Father in the name of Jesus, to help my memory when information is wanted" (Brigham Young Papers, October 8, 1866, sermon).

On another occasion, Brigham Young said, "I feel like shouting 'Hallelujah!' all the time when I think that I ever knew Joseph Smith, the Prophet" (Journal of Discourses 3:51). Significantly, Brigham Young's last mortal words were, "Joseph, Joseph, Joseph."

Sequentially, Brigham Young encountered the Book of Mormon first, then its translator.

The Book of Mormon's emergence was remarkable, as Isaiah's imagery foretold: "And thou shalt be brought down, and shalt speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall be, as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust" (Isaiah 29:4).

What actually happened was consistent with the Lord's declared intentions:

And for this very purpose are these plates preserved, which contain these records—that the promises of the Lord might be fulfilled, which he made to his people;

And that the Lamanites might come to the knowledge of their fathers, and that they might know the promises of the lord, and that they may believe the gospel and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ, and be glorified through faith in his name, and that through their repentance they might be saved. Amen. (D&C 3:19-20)

Truly, all these additional books of holy scripture have come to us in a unique way. For instance, the contents of the Book of Mormon have been supplied by about two dozen prophet-leaders; the editing was done, primarily, by three prophet-historians; and the final translation was performed by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph Smith had the unusual gift of translation given to only a select few prophets (see Mosiah 8:12-18; 28:11-16; D&C 1:29).

Beneficial and wonderful as the Holy Bible is, it did not encompass the same consistent pattern of emergence as the Book of Mormon, with prophets at every stage—writing, selecting, editing, and translating.

There are even special portions of the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price which represent, as it were, "implants" of whole blocks of precious truth which can transport us outside and beyond the brief and tiny place we presently occupy in time and space. As Richard L. Bushman has written, "In some passages the Book of Mormon and the Book of Moses appear to come from another world entirely" (Bushman, p. 77).

Ironically, there has often been more discussion as to the "origins" of these scriptures than about the precious truths they contain.

Though published for decades, some of these truths still have not received our full appreciation. Perhaps similar neglect was a part of the reason for the condemnation the Church received from the Lord in 1832 because, among other things, the Book of Mormon had been treated "lightly" (see D&C 84:54, 57).

For some Church members the Book of Mormon remains unread. Others use it occasionally as if it were merely a handy book of quotations. Still others accept and read it but do not really explore and ponder it. The book is to be feasted upon, not nibbled (see 2 Nephi 31:20). Apparently Church members were similarly spread out on the spectrum of utilization and appreciation in Joseph's day—hence his testimony from jail as to the Book of Mormon, his "keystone" statement, and the instructive episode in Philadelphia are even more understandable.

Quite understandably too, among early Church members the use of the Bible was much greater than the use of the Book of Mormon. Even Joseph, who had been schooled in the Bible, had scarcely had time to translate and begin to assimilate the Book of Mormon, let alone to articulate extensively regarding the gems in that book of whose truthfulness he testified. The unfolding process by which these scriptures "shall grow together" (2 Nephi 3:12) was, therefore, a gradual development to be accelerated in the second century of the Restoration, such as with the new editions of the scriptures published in 1979 and 1981.

In any event, for centuries the Lord oversaw the painstaking work of prophets engraving, as they did, upon the plates which would be the basis of the Book of Mormon. He could scarcely be true to those diligent men, whom he loved and called, had he ignored the modern Church's casualness about the Book of Mormon. After all, merely holding or reading a menu is not the same thing as eating a fine meal.

Regarding the incredible "implants" which appear in these "other books," one searches in vain for ways to analogize adequately. These are like nuggets found far from the original mine, or like Mount Everest towering above sister peaks. If the transcendent theology in these books were today's high technology, it would suddenly appear, free standing, with only a few loose wires indicating previous connections.

Examples of such Everests would include chapter 3 of Abraham, chapter 1 of Moses, the third and fourth books of Nephi, and of course such verses as D&C 76:24; 107:53-57 and 121:26-32, from Liberty Jail. There are many others. These special portions sometimes stand amid a penumbra of other well-loved, less spectacular chapters and verses of scripture.

There are biblical instances of this sudden richness, too. The record of the wondrous events—full of import—atop the Mount of Transfiguration are one example; more was given there than most Bible readers explore or properly appreciate.

And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart,

And was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.

And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him.

Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.

While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their face, and were sore afraid.

And Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid.

And when they had lifted up their eyes, they saw no man, save Jesus only. (Matthew 17:1-8; see also Mark 9:2-10; Luke 9:28-36; and 2 Peter 1:16-18.)

The portent and implications of that regal rendezvous are stunning! Much that was of enormous significance took place then pertaining to the holding of priesthood keys, God's honoring those responsible for dispensational dominions and keys, and the manner in which God tutors and develops his serious disciples (see Teachings, p. 158). Such biblical richness, however, often goes unexplored and unattended.

Perhaps too we are given more than we can now fully assess in some biblical verses thus "implanted," such as those that occur after an incident that prompted legalistic concern as to whether Jesus had violated the Sabbath day, and amid questioning by Pharisees.

Then answered Jesus and said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise (John 5:19).

Then said Jesus unto them, When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me, I speak these things (John 8:28).

When God so provides precious verses he does not do so randomly but for "a wise purpose" (see 1 Nephi 9:5; Words of Mormon 1:7; Alma 37:2, 12, 14, 18).

Through the "choice seer" and as nowhere else in holy writ, we are told what God's work and motivation are: "For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). All the things he does fit into this framework and honor his intent: "He doeth not anything save it be for the benefit of the world; for he loveth the world" (2 Nephi 26:24).

Another such striking example of preeminent verses which came to us through the "choice seer" is King Benjamin's valedictory sermon (about 124 B.C.—Mosiah 2-5). Several centuries after the address, a delighted Mormon discovered this sermon among many other assembled writings. The address is one of the most remarkable sermons on record, and without Joseph Smith's translation it would be lost to us.

Believe in God; believe that he is, and that he created all things, both in heaven and in earth; believe that he has all wisdom, and all power, both in heaven and in earth; believe that man doth not comprehend all the things which the Lord can comprehend (Mosiah 4:9).

Certain contextual verses on either side of the sermon are useful but not as supernal.

A loving, planning, shepherding God uses his prophets to feed his people. At times he provides especially rich nourishment, causing us to cast our gaze to people and places far beyond the moment at hand:

And verily I say unto you, that ye are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd (3 Nephi 15:21).

And verily, verily, I say unto you that I have other sheep, which are not of this land, neither of the land of Jerusalem, neither in any parts of that land round about whither I have been to minister.

For they of whom I speak are they who have not as yet heard my voice; neither have I at any time manifested myself unto them.

But I have received a commandment of the Father that I shall go unto them, and that they shall hear my voice, and shall be numbered among my sheep, that there may be one fold and one shepherd; therefore I go to show myself unto them. (3 Nephi 16:1-3.)

That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God (D&C 76:24).

The Lord even gives exclusive assignments to some prophets to bring forth certain special portions of his word. Once it was John's turn, not Nephi's:

Wherefore, the things which he shall write are just and true; and behold they are written in the book which thou beheld proceeding out of the mouth of the Jew; and at the time they proceeded out of the mouth of the Jew, or, at the time the book proceeded out of the mouth of the Jew, the things which were written were plain and pure, and most precious and easy to the understanding of all men. ...

But the things which thou shalt see hereafter thou shalt not write; for the Lord God hath ordained the apostle of the Lamb of God that he should write them. (1 Nephi 14:23, 25.)

More than most of us have realized, God even honors certain calendric commitments, certain ancient festivals, and certain symbols which likewise transcend time and space. [^3]

This should not surprise us.

The resurrected Jesus told the Apostles who had "caught nothing" to cast their empty nets on the right side of the boat, knowing the location of a school of fish at that instant in the sea of Tiberius (John 21:6). The same Lord likewise knows when, where, and how to bring forth fresh spiritual food upon which his followers need to feast (see 2 Nephi 31:20).

Some doctrines among the smorgasbord of scriptures bring to us especially rich and nutritious portions. A great many of these have come in their fulness through Joseph Smith, "a choice seer," and when thoughtfully examined they prove to be "convincing," just as was foreseen (2 Nephi 3:11).

There is thus no democracy of salvational or developmental worth in the words of scripture. In the hierarchy of truth, the truths which came through Joseph are well represented at the apex, including the powerful verities revealed in Liberty Jail.

By way of further example, the worth of the first verse below is greater than the verse of Moroni's which follows, with its lineage history involving five generations.

And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them. (Ether 12:27.)

And he begat Heth, and Heth lived in captivity all his days. And Heth begat Aaron, and Aaron dwelt in captivity all his days; and he begat Amnigaddah, and Amnigaddah also dwelt in captivity all his days; and he begat Coriantum, and Coriantum dwelt in captivity all his days; and he begat Com. (Ether 10:31.)

The "choice seer" translated both verses.

Sometimes Joseph appears to have been fully aware of receiving or processing "a precious morsel," yet perhaps at other times he was not. Of his receipt in June 1830 of the revelation which became the first chapter of Moses, Joseph wrote, "Amid all the trials and tribulations we had to wade through, the Lord, who well knew our infantile and delicate situation, vouchsafed for us a supply of strength, ... of which the following was a precious morsel" (as quoted in The Restoration of Plain and Precious Things, p. 27).

One day, for instance, we will comprehend more fully the reasons and the "wise purpose for the lengthy fifth chapter of Jacob, with its extensive analogies as to the tame and wild olive trees. Moreover, we will see why there is such abundant use of material from the prophet Zenos. But for now, we must be patient with the unevenness.

The Lord's overseeing of his prophets as recorders and editors, however, has not been uneven, episodic, or random.

Though some verses are not swollen with salvational significance, even the least provide a feeling for the history, the life, and the times of our ancient counterparts. Hence there is in the Book of Mormon a mixture of inspiration as well as seemingly routine succession (Omni 1:3). Even the seeming humdrum of succession and terse lineage history has its divine uses. Ever present among what came to us through the "choice seer" are evidences of the consuming cares of the then world and of the pathos of the past as some became too concerned with the praise as well as the ways of the world.

Some Book of Mormon prophets had "nothing special to report" or faced disincentives to add further to metallic plates which seemed already full or nearly so. Present, too, was the operating assumption that what was to be transmitted was safely engraved on the larger plates which are yet to come forth:

And as these plates are small, and as these things are written for the intent of the benefit of our brethren the Lamanites, wherefore, it must needs be that I write a little; but I shall not write the things of my prophesying, nor of my revelations. For what could I write more than my fathers have written? For have not they revealed the plan of salvation? I say unto you, Yea; and this sufficeth me. (Jarom 1:2.)

Now I, Chemish, write what few things I write, in the same book with my brother; for behold, I saw the last which he wrote, that he wrote it with his own hand; and he wrote it in the day that he delivered them unto me. And after this manner we keep the records, for it is according to the commandments of our fathers. And I make an end.

Behold, I, Abinadom, am the son of Chemish....

And behold, the record of this people is engraven upon plates which is had by the kings, according to the generations; and I know of no revelation save that which has been written, neither prophecy; wherefore, that which is sufficient is written. And I make an end. (Omni 1:9-11.)

In Liberty Jail Joseph used fellow prisoners as scribes, and he did not withhold the "precious morsels" received there.

For many of the people in Book of Mormon times the secular drama must have seemed like a succession of "princes come, princes go, an hour of pomp, an hour of show." There were those then, too, who "lived without God in the world," refusing to be impressed with the divine purposes of life. For such in our time Mother Teresa of Avila has said it well, since, for these, "life is no more than a night in a second-class hotel" (as quoted in "The Great Liberal Death Wish," Imprimis, May 1979, Hillsdale College, Michigan).

An abundance, therefore, is present in the "other books" of scripture which have come through the "choice seer." Highly capsulized in the case of the less essential, and highly pointed in the case of the salvational truths, this material is all highly prized by the serious disciple.

All of it was brought forth through a "choice seer" by the power and the love of God. But we must not be diverted from the "what" and "why" of its substance by unproductive stirrings over the yet-to-be-fully-revealed "how" of its coming forth. As to the details of the process he used, Joseph said that it was not intended for the world to know all the particulars [^4] (see History of the Church 1:220).

The Book of Mormon possesses a special "convincing" power, whether for Jews, for Gentiles, or for the seed of Lehi. Obviously, this "convincing" power, borne by the witnessing Spirit of God, provides assurances in the most demonstrative and persuasive ways. How precious, indeed, these "other books" really are! With their lode of truth and simple but deep doctrine at their cores, they indeed carry their own witness of their authenticity and also provide "convincing" power in support of the Bible (see 2 Nephi 3:11).

Some other attesting and interesting insights are emerging which are less at the core of these "other books" and more in the supporting penumbra. For the thoughtful believer, these will further enhance appreciation for these scriptures, particularly the priceless Book of Mormon. But with reference to this mortal existence, belief in the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon will not be removed entirely from the realm of faith. Though various supporting evidences will continue to emerge that further attest to the prophetic mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith and to what a rich, remarkable, and resplendent record the Book of Mormon is, convictions concerning its core message will still require faith and study.

Believers will be patient during such further unfolding. They will note that all the scriptures remain, for now, in the realm of faith, including the Bible. One can establish the authenticity and historicity of a Pauline epistle, for example, and still refuse to accept the validity of its witness of Christ or to heed its teachings regarding the reality of the resurrection. Hence we can be assured that enough plausible, supporting data and external evidence will come forth to prevent scoffers from having a field day with the scriptures, but not enough to remove the requirement of faith.

This has implications for the faithful who wish to obtain more of the word of the Lord. Their doing so will in no way depend upon supporting evidence man may discover. It will depend in large measure upon their full acceptance of and serious application to that which has already been given. This is a declared and deliberate test of faith: "And when they shall have received this, which is expedient that they should have first, to try their faith, and if it shall so be that they shall believe these things then shall the greater things be made manifest unto them. . . . Behold, I was about to write them, all which were engraven upon the plates of Nephi, but the Lord forbade it, saying: I will try the faith of my people." (3 Nephi 26:9, 11.)

Writers and editors of the Book of Mormon repeatedly stressed their selectivity in both their recording and their choosing—under the inspiration of heaven—what was to be finally included in that superb volume. This assured that, with the restoration of "plain and precious things, "those who "despise" plainness would be without excuse. Like certain earlier counterparts, they would be delivered over to stumbling of their own making (see Jacob 4:14-15).

Naturally, some would like to have even more contextual material about the life, times, and culture of the peoples in the Book of Mormon. In fact, though, there is much more already given in the book than most of us have been able to assimilate and appreciate thus far. Nevertheless, such supportive but ancillary data are not the purpose for which the book has been brought forward. This reality is stated very early in the book itself: "Wherefore, the things which are pleasing unto the world I do not write, but the things which are pleasing unto God and unto those who are not of the world" (1 Nephi 6:5).

No wonder these scriptures fail to please or to impress the world. There are those who prefer details on ancient agriculture to the "bread of life," who prefer information on the rising of dynasties to insights on the rising of Jesus from the tomb. Perhaps this is so because the former type of data is very interesting without being very demanding. The second type demands both faith and, thereafter, a certain behavior.

The Book of Mormon contains disclosing candor concerning author anxiety about selectivity: "Nevertheless, I do not write anything upon plates save it be that I think it be sacred. And now, if I do err, even did they err of old; not that I would excuse myself because of other men, but because of the weakness which is in me, according to the flesh, I would excuse myself." (1 Nephi 19:6.)

Nephi later added another caveat: "And I engraved that which is pleasing unto God. And if my people are pleased with the things of God they will be pleased with mine engravings which are upon these plates." (2 Nephi 5:32.) Thus the procedure by which the book emerged, concerning which Joseph testified from jail, was anything but random and its message is anything but casual: "And now I, Moroni, have written the words which were commanded me, according to my memory; and I have told you the things which I have sealed up; therefore touch them not in order that ye may translate; for that thing is forbidden you, except by and by it shall be wisdom in God" (Ether 5:1).

In any case, the other Nephite records, still sealed, remain unbequeathed and untranslated. The translated, small plates of Nephi contained the religious rather than the secular history. The sealed portion yet to come forth will be very valuable. (3 Nephi 26:10-11.) In fact, this sweeping portion will contain "a revelation from God, from the beginning of the world to the ending thereof" (2 Nephi 27:7, 10-11). Such a cumulative record yet to be revealed is something to be awaited with "anxious expectation" in that "time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld," as the Prophet Joseph was promised in the prison-temple (D&C 121:27-28).

The larger plates of Nephi appear focused on "the more particular part of the history" of the Lord's people. Better a few more verses concerning the reality of the resurrection than a few more concerning kingly succession. Therefore, as in John's gospel (see John 21:25; 20:30-31), we do not have a "hundredth part of the proceedings of this people," but we have the things of most worth (Jacob 3:13).

The chief editor, Mormon, who worked and searched his way through much amassed material, was especially pleased with the many references to Christ included in the small plates of Nephi. The deep, anticipatory Christology (fifth and sixth centuries B.C.) fascinated Mormon (in the fourth century of the Christian era) nearly a thousand years later! Mormon added his editorial comment about the Messianic richness particularly of Nephi's and Jacob's teachings: "The things which are upon these plates pleasing me, because of the prophecies of the coming of Christ... "(Words of Mormon 1:4).

Mormon expressed the hope that his son, Moroni, would have a later opportunity not to expand further on the endless military campaigns but to "write somewhat" more "concerning Christ" (Words of Mormon 1:2). Alas, a lonely Moroni instead found himself in this circumstance: "Behold, my father hath made this record, and he hath written the intent thereof. And behold, I would write it also if I had room upon the plates, but I have not; and ore I have none, for I am alone. My father hath been slain in battle, and all my kinsfolk, and I have not friends nor whither to go; and how long the Lord will suffer that I may live I know not. "(Mormon 8:5.)

All this and so much more preceded the gifted translation by a "choice seer.

Little wonder that, whether in Liberty Jail or Philadelphia, Joseph Smith wanted the world to know "the Book of Mormon is true." Sad to say, what Joseph so remarkably translated is, by some, even now taken "lightly." We can scarcely regard Joseph Smith as a "choice seer" if we do not savor the choice scripture which came through him. In contrast, when ancient Joseph saw in vision the scattering and driving of his posterity, he "wept"; however, when he saw Joseph Smith, Jr., the means by which his descendants would be "brought back to the true fold," his "heart rejoiced and his soul was satisfied." (Father's Blessing, 1834.)

It now remains for Church members to partake more fully of these "other books" than we have done in the past. As we do so, our hearts will "rejoice," and our souls too will be "satisfied."

On March 20, 1839, in Liberty Jail, Joseph received the revelation now known as section 121. The same day he wrote to the members of the Church, bearing testimony that "the Book of Mormon is true. . . the Book of Covenants is true" (Writings, p. 407). Doubtless Joseph was then very anxious that, even as further revelation flowed from the Lord, Church members appreciate what had already been given through him.
