Neal A. Maxwell, But for a Small Moment ( 1986)

Chapter 3

"Shall Grow Together"

As already noted, the prison-temple provided time for the Prophet Joseph to express himself in ways which reflected the converging of his learning and the growing together of his insights and experiences. His communications from Liberty Jail included not only his testimony as to the "other books" of scripture but also reflected his capacity to see the relevance of numerous biblical passages (see chapter 1). However, Joseph's busy ministry did not provide him with the time and opportunities to effect a full, articulate convergence of the Bible with all the scripture which had come through him as a "choice seer."

Without Joseph's revelatory role the promise that the writings of ancient prophets on different hemispheres "shall grow together" (2 Nephi 3:12) simply could not have been fulfilled. Granted, the converging process was to come to a more full fruition after Joseph's day. But Joseph, the "choice seer," translated the Book of Mormon, received other revelations, testified as to the truthfulness of these scriptures, and sealed his testimony with his martyr's blood. For us in the modern Church it is imperative more than ever before that these various books become one in our hands, hearts, and heads.

It is clear that Joseph Smith's testimony about the truthfulness of the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the Doctrine and Covenants, given in his extremity of the Liberty Jail experience, reflected not only his awareness of the shared purposes of these books and their converging relevance but also his sense of urgency about that culminating unity.

Given the divine design of the "other books," believers in and students of them regard the correlative relationships between ancient and modern scriptures as unsurprising. They are the expected latticework of the Lord, and the multiple interweavings and abundant cross-supports among them are part of a natural pattern for scriptures that were to converge doctrinally and "grow together."

These correlated interweavings should give pause even to near-believers. Of course, for those for whom any explanation of the origins of latter-day scripture will do except the real one, there is no remedy.

And in fine, wo unto all those who tremble, and are angry because of the truth of God! For behold, he that is built upon the rock receiveth it with gladness; and he that is built upon a sandy foundation trembleth lest he shall fall.

Wo be unto him that shall say: We have received the word of God, and we need no more of the word of God, for we have enough! (2 Nephi 28:28-29.)

Some are genuinely and understandably interested in the facts and processes of the Restoration. Disbelievers, however, are intensely anxious to try to establish any alternative that disputes the divinity in the process. For them it is really not that any explanation but one will do—for them, one explanation definitely will not do!

This preoccupation with process ignores the emerging substance of the Restoration. For instance, after all the flurry about accompanying history, there stands the Book of Mormon, waiting to be reckoned with. Perhaps anxiety over the neglect accorded the book prompted the Prophet's testimony from Liberty Jail. Ever to be remembered is the fact that while the Book of Mormon was translated by Joseph, it was not his book. It was from God, said Joseph, that "we received the Book of Mormon" (Writings, p. 399). Twice in the same epistle he urged his testimony of the Book of Mormon upon Church members.

In majestic simplicity the Lord declared his correlated pattern of witnessing communication: "I speak the same words unto one nation like unto another. And when the two nations shall run together the testimony of the two nations shall run together also. "(2 Nephi 29:8.) Thus the words of Ezekiel are correlated fully with the words of Nephi regarding the oneness of purpose of these modern and ancient records (see Ezekiel 37:19; 1 Nephi 13:40-41).

Notwithstanding modern printing and binding formats of our standard works, then, the growing together has reference not to paper and pages but to the key doctrines in all the books of scripture. For example, the following scriptures concerning the nature of petitionary prayer, when clustered together, provide so much more critically needed candlepower than when considered apart:

And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive (Matthew 21:22).

Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts (James 4:3).

Yea, I know that God will give liberally to him that asketh. Yea, my God will give me, if I ask not amiss. (2 Nephi 4:35.)

And whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is right, believing that ye shall receive, behold it shall be given unto you (3 Nephi 18:20).

And now, if God, who has created you, on whom you are dependent for your lives and for all that ye have and are, doth grant unto you whatsoever ye ask that is right, in faith, believing that ye shall receive, O then, how ye ought to impart of the substance that ye have one to another (Mosiah 4:21).

Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered (Romans 8:26).

He that asketh in the Spirit asketh according to the will of God; wherefore it is done even as he asketh (D&C 46:30).

Prayer is petitioning, but it also involves tutoring. Imprisoned Joseph pleaded with God, "Let thine anger be kindled against our enemies" (D&C 121:5). But God counseled patience and said, in effect, "not yet"; he had "in reserve a swift judgment in the season thereof" (see D&C 121:12, 15, 24).

Such spiritual truths, so many of which have come to us through "a choice seer," are especially impressive in their elaboration and correlation. The coaching of the Prophet Joseph by a loving Lord is nowhere more tender than that which we witness in the prison-temple.

Yet we must not neglect to observe that so much of the seer's work was accomplished at the front end of the Restoration, including the laying down of many doctrines through revelation and translation. The doctrinal density of the Book of Mormon, for instance, clearly overshadows the portion devoted to history or to such details as the description of Nephite weights and measures (see Alma 11:3-19).

The book's structure, then, obviously and intentionally is secondary to its substance, and its historical plot to its principles. The Book of Mormon's innumerable insights in matters spiritual and its rich and resplendent doctrinal declarations constitute their own witness.

Clearly, this book came through a "choice seer"—Joseph Smith—but not from that seer. Some, desperate for an alternative explanation, almost seem to suppose Joseph was getting help from some theological mail-order supply house.

To the human mind it is amazing that such rich revelations and translations should come through an untrained individual such as Joseph was. The reason, of course, is that, though Joseph did not spell perfectly, he came to know the grammar of the gospel, because he was God's apt pupil.

The following scriptures tell us something about "why" God has usually determined to rely upon those of lower worldly estate, such as Joseph Smith, to do his work, upon the very type of individual whom establishments can imprison in Rome or Missouri.

For ye see... how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called:

But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; ... the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty. (1 Corinthians 1:26-27.)

Wherefore, I the Lord,... called upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake unto him from heaven, and gave him commandments;...

The weak things of the world shall come forth and breakdown the mighty and strong ones, ...

That the fulness of my gospel might be proclaimed by the weak and the simple unto the ends of the world, ...

Behold,... these commandments... were given unto my servants in their weakness. (D&C 1:17, 19, 23, 24.)

And I have sent forth the fulness of my gospel by... Joseph; and in weakness have I blessed him (D&C 35:17).

Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph Smith, ... for unto this end have I raised you up, that I might show forth my wisdom through the weak things of the earth (D&C 124:1).

Joseph's "weaknesses" included what the world would call inadequacies—in literary and grammatical skills, for example. But the Book of Mormon itself propounds the encouraging doctrine that for those who humble themselves before God, he will make their weaknesses strengths (see 2 Nephi 3:13; Ether 12:27, 37). Nowhere is this transformation better exemplified than in the translation of the Book of Mormon, in which, because of Joseph's weakness," both the process and the substance were directed of the Savior. Some of Nephi's concluding words reflect the appropriateness of this direction:

And now, my beloved brethren, and also Jew, and all ye ends of the earth, hearken unto these words and believe in Christ; and if ye believe not in these words believe in Christ. And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ, and he hath given them unto me. (2 Nephi 33:10.)

The book's witnessing words will even figure, quite confrontationally, in the drama of the final and just judgment: "And if they are not the words of Christ, judge ye—for Christ will show unto you, with power and great glory, that they are his words, at the last day; and you and I shall stand face to face before his bar; and ye shall know that I have been commanded of him to write these things, notwithstanding my weakness" (2 Nephi 33:11).

Joseph Smith, who received so many such words, had this to say about the persuasive power of the words of Jesus: "Every word that proceedeth from the mouth of Jehovah has such an influence over the human mind—the logical mind—that it is convincing without other testimony. Faith cometh by hearing." (Words, p. 237.)

The growing together of scriptures is not new, of course. Did not the New Testament Jesus declare, in yet another powerful example of convergence, that the "Old Testament scriptures testified of him? "Search the scriptures; . . . and they are they which testify of me" (John 5:39).

Jesus similarly invoked the reminding power of symbolism as he sought to stir his disbelieving audiences in this same regard: "And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up: that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life." (John 3:14-15. See also Numbers 21:5-9; Helaman 8:14-15.)

With such splendid ties between Moses and Jesus, should the "cast" on the Mount of Transfiguration be any surprise? "And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him" (Matthew 17:3).

Given the importance of such longitudinal ties, it should not surprise us that the foretelling role of the law of Moses is made more clear in the plain and precious Book of Mormon:

Yet the Lord God saw that his people were a stiffnecked people, and he appointed unto them a law, even the law of Moses.

And many signs, and wonders, and types, and shadows showed he unto them, concerning his coming; and also holy prophets spake unto them concerning his coming; and yet they hardened their hearts, and understood not that the law of Moses availeth nothing except it were through the atonement of his blood. (Mosiah 3:14-15.)

What came later through Joseph Smith, came earlier through John:

For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me (John 5:46).

And now, Moses, my son, I will speak unto thee concerning this earth upon which thou standest; and thou shalt write the things which I shall speak.

And in a day when the children of men shall esteem my words as naught and take many of them from the book which thou shalt write, behold, I will raise up another like unto thee; and they shall be had again among the children of men—among as many as shall believe. (Moses 1:40-41.)

In fact, even the timing of the Book of Mormon's latter-day emergence reflected divine design; it came in response to the growing human need for reassuring and witnessing words regarding the Savior. It came for an age when far too many are disturbed about the historicity of Christ. The sparse mentionings of Jesus in secular history are spectacularly offset by the flood of scriptural witness of him that came through the latter-day seer in a unique process.

Moroni, so much of whose life was involved with the preparation, preservation, and coming forth of the Book of Mormon, declared that the whole process of the book's coming forth "shall be done by the power of God" (Mormon 8:16). He reiterated this theme in the line now published in what is probably his contribution to the title page: ". . . to come forth in. . . the interpretation thereof by the gift and power of God."

Whatever the combination of individual prophets—Enoch, Moses, Isaiah, Nephi, Alma, Paul, Moroni, or Joseph—the links between them and the growing together of the scriptures they produced are clear. Each separate strand of prophetic utterance, though interwoven into a pattern of divine design, can be followed back to a single Source, a loving, redemptive Father whose central and grand declared purpose is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man (see Moses 1:39). Hence, the Lord "formed the earth and made it. . . to be inhabited" (Isaiah 45:18). As told to Joseph in jail, such plans were made anciently in the grand "Council of the Eternal God" before this world was (D&C 121:30-32).

The testifying and integrating role of the "other books," as they "grow together," should not be underestimated. The convergence, however, is not merely to demonstrate correlative cleverness but to provide saving truths, such as that Jesus of Nazareth is the very Christ, whose redemptive atonement is at the center of the Father's plan for mankind.

Though other names (Messiah, Son of God, the Lamb, etc.) are used, from the outset, the Book of Mormon, through Jacob, foretells of Christ, by name, commencing with 2 Nephi 10:3 (even the name of His mother, Mary), well before his birth (see also Mosiah 3:8; Alma 7:10).

The Book of Mormon emphatically declares that the law of Moses was purposefully to point the Jewish people and the world to the birth and coming of the Messiah, Jesus. The Old Testament as we have received it is silent with regard to the specific name of the Savior to come; however, it lists many of his special and sacred titles and sets forth numerous prophecies pertaining to his birth, mortal ministry, crucifixion, and atonement. Moreover, despite the lack of this information in our Old Testament as we have received it, the Book of Mormon prophet Jacob, writing in the fifth or sixth century B.C., stated that "none of the [earlier] prophets have written, nor prophesied, save they have spoken concerning this Christ" (Jacob 7:11).

Also, when the Old Testament uses the term anointed to refer to "the Anointed One, "the Greek translation would be Christos (see footnote for 1 Samuel 2:10, LDS edition of the King James version of the Bible).

Perhaps some biblical scriptures regarding the Savior were editorially subdued. For instance, one wonders whether Zechariah received authority from the Lord to say only these next words regarding a special moment associated with Jesus' second coming: "And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends." (Zechariah 13:6.)

Or did Zechariah say more which, alas, ended up being among the untransmitted "plain and precious things" "held back"? Either way, latter-day scriptural references are strikingly clear concerning this event:

And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?

Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God.

And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king. (D&C 45:51-53.)

Jesus' declarations as to his remarkable premortal role and his feelings carried over as the Jehovah of the Old Testament were clearly given during his mortal ministry:

Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am (John 8:58).

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! (Matthew 23:37.)

Paul was not confused about whom Moses chose: "By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward" (Hebrews 11:24-26).

Now, in a time when scrolls have been found in Qumran, writings at Nag Hammadi, and tablets at Ebla, we must at least consider the probability that other ancient but lost documents and lost scriptures may contain further striking and Christ-centered things. Among those writings lost are the writings of Samuel, the seer; Nathan; the Acts of Solomon; Shemaiah; Ahijah; Iddo; Jehu; and Enoch. Joshua mentions the book of Jasher (Joshua 10:13). To these must be added whatever else was "kept back" from ever reaching the dedicated translators of the Bible (see 1 Nephi 13:32, 34, 40).

In turn, the Book of Mormon alerts us to the book of Zenos (Jacob 5) and still other missing books: "And behold, also Zenock, and also Ezias, and also Isaiah, and Jeremiah, (Jeremiah being that same prophet who testified of the destruction of Jerusalem) and now we know that Jerusalem was destroyed according to the words of Jeremiah. O then why not the Son of God come, according to his prophecy?" (Helaman 8:20.)

Would these "books," if found, contain some of the precious references to Jesus, even by name? We do not now know. We know, however, that there are more records than we now possess: "And a book of remembrance was kept, in the which was recorded, in the language of Adam, for it was given unto as many as called upon God to write by the spirit of inspiration" (Moses 6:5).

The absence of scriptural records which have been lost does make a difference. By way of example, Matthew mentions a prophecy we do not now have about Jesus' being known as a Nazarene.

And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene (Matthew 2:23).

While the scriptures make clear that Jesus was to be born in Bethlehem (Micah 5:2), he was also to be a Nazarene in view of the place where he would grow up. This particular misunderstanding proved to be a genuine stumbling point for some, especially the Jewish scribes and the illuminati of the time: "Others said, This is the Christ. But some said, Shall Christ come out of Galilee? Hath not the scripture said, That Christ cometh of the seed of David, and out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was?" (John 7:41-42.)

We also know that some things are omitted from scripture as a function of sheer voluminosity:

And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen. (John 21:25.)

And there had many things transpired which, in the eyes of some, would be great and marvelous; nevertheless, they cannot all be written in this book; yea, this book cannot contain even a hundredth part of what was done among so many people in the space of twenty and five years (3 Nephi 5:8).

Other omissions occur for other causes. The Lord may have withheld certain specifics from certain people as an act of mercy, so far as their accountability is concerned.

Could there also have been a deliberate, divine withholding in this matter of the mortal name of the Messiah? Purposeful withholding has occurred before.

And when they shall have received this, which is expedient that they should have first, to try their faith, and if it shall so be that they shall believe these things then shall the greater things be made manifest unto them....

Behold, I was about to write them, all which were engraven upon the plates of Nephi, but the lord forbade it, saying: I will try the faith of my people. ...

Behold, it came to pass on the morrow that the multitude gathered themselves together, and they both saw and heard these children; yea, even babes did open their mouths and utter marvelous things; and the things which they did utter were forbidden that there should not any man write them. (3 Nephi 26:9, 11, 16; italics added.)

Whatever the cause for the Old Testament's silence regarding Christ's name, we have clear and early references in the Book of Mormon on that matter. As the following selections illustrate, the earliest occurred between 559 and 545 B.C., after the Nephites had reached the western hemisphere:

Behold, my soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth of the coming of Christ; for, for this end hath the law of Moses been given; and all things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of him (2 Nephi 11:4).

And, notwithstanding we believe in Christ, we keep the law of Moses, and look forward with steadfastness unto Christ, until the law shall be fulfilled (2 Nephi 25:24).

And we talk of Christ, we rejoice in Christ, we preach of Christ, we prophesy of Christ, and we write according to our prophecies, that our children may know to what source they may look for a remission of their sins (2 Nephi 25:26).

For, for this intent have we written these things, that they may know that we knew of Christ, and we had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming; and not only we ourselves had a hope of his glory, but also all the holy prophets which were before us.

Behold, they believed in Christ and worshiped the Father in his name, and also we worship the Father in his name. And for this intent we keep the law of Moses, it pointing our souls to him; and for this cause it is sanctified unto us for righteousness, even as it was accounted unto Abraham in the wilderness to be obedient unto the commands of God in offering up his son Isaac, which is a similitude of God and his Only Begotten Son. (Jacob 4:4-5.)

In the book of Moses, which probably was written 3,500 years ago and contains revealed information covering the period from Adam to Noah, the special name is given several times.

Whether pertaining to the law of Moses or to God's creations, clearly this is a witnessing world for all who have eyes to see.

And behold, this is the whole meaning of the law, every whit pointing to that great and last sacrifice; and that great and last sacrifice will be the Son of God, yea, infinite and eternal (Alma 34:14).

Behold, my soul delighteth in proving unto my people the truth of the coming of Christ; for, for this end hath the law of Moses been given; and all things which have been given of God from the beginning of the world, unto man, are the typifying of him (2 Nephi 11:4).

And behold, all things have their likeness, and all things are created and made to bear record of me, both things which are temporal, and things which are spiritual; things which are in the heavens above, and things which are on the earth, and things which are in the earth, and things which are under the earth, both above and beneath: all things bear record of me (Moses 6:63).

These and numerous other converging references affirm that the law of Moses was intended to point mortals to Jesus Christ. In fact, as scholars are now exploring, the keeping of the law of Moses by groups included in the accounts of the Book of Mormon will yet prove to be another evidence of that book's divine origins and coming forth. Thus many things are growing together.

Verses and words we might previously have passed over lightly and uncomprehendingly are now coming to be appreciated as laden with significance. One example is 2 Nephi 11:4, quoted above. This and a statement in Alma underscore the understated Mosaic and pre-exilic roots of the Book of Mormon.

Yea, and the people did observe to keep the commandments of the Lord; and they were strict in observing the ordinances of God, according to the law of Moses; for they were taught to keep the law of Moses until it should be fulfilled (Alma 30:3).

Most of us have sped by such verses without realizing their implications. In the timing of the Lord, the need is now arriving for us to see more clearly the significance and implications of such verses. Filled with faith and scholarship, some—such as Jack Welch and his colleagues at Brigham Young University—are bringing afresh such possibilities to our attention, as have Hugh Nibley and others earlier on.

Inattentiveness to spiritual things is not confined to our time. So many who were "looking beyond the mark" missed all the indicators of Jesus' mortal Messiahship, including the foretelling law of Moses:

But behold, the Jews were a stiffnecked people; and they despised the words of plainness, and killed the prophets, and sought for things that they could not understand. Wherefore, because of their blindness, which blindness came by looking beyond the mark, they must needs fall; for God hath taken away his plainness from them, and delivered unto them many things which they cannot understand, because they desired it. And because they desired it God hath done it, that they may stumble. (Jacob 4:14.)

The Old Testament prophecies pertaining to the coming, atoning, and crucifying of a redeeming Messiah are both glorious and numerous. The following sampling may suffice. But observe that, at the time, the ability to discern the significance of these scriptures would have required a mind attuned and eyes willing to see.

I shall see him, but not now: I shall behold him, but not nigh: there shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Sceptre shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Sheth (Numbers 24:17).

The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken (Deuteronomy 18:15).

I will declare the decree: the lord hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee (Psalm 2:7).

My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring? (Psalm 22:1.)

For dogs have compassed me: the assembly of the wicked have inclosed me: they pierced my hands and my feet (Psalm 22:16).

He keepeth all his bones: not one of them is broken (Psalm 34:20).

They gave me also gall for my meat; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink (Psalm 69:21).

The lord hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek (Psalm 110:4).

Jesus, in his mortal Messiahship, even cited certain of these foretelling verses, but to little avail for the hard-hearted and hardheaded:

The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner (Psalm 118:22).

Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner: this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes? (Matthew 21:42.)

And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up:

That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life. (John 3:14-15.) (See also 2 Nephi 25:20; Numbers 21:5-9.)

A synonym of the Savior was foretold in one verse: "Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel" (Isaiah 7:14).

Were Old Testament prophets restrained from being more specific with regard to Jesus, his name, and his role? Or were they more specific than surviving records now indicate? Or was the writing of such specifics reserved for those other than Old Testament prophets? Has something been lost in the transmittal? Has something been lost in biblical translation?

While Jesus declared that the scriptures "testify" of him (John 5:39), he neither expected nor received much coverage in secular history. Therefore it is no surprise for studious Christians to learn that secular history is nearly silent about the ministry of Jesus. Three writers only, so far as we know, each born after Jesus' death, touched slightly upon the historicity of Christ. Tacitus (about A.D. 55-117), the greatest Roman historian, wrote only this of Jesus: "Christus... had undergone the death penalty in the reign of Tiberius, by sentence of the procurator Pontius Pilatus" (Annals of Tacitus, Book XV, p. 283).

Suetonius (about A.D. 70-140), a Roman who wrote about the lives of the Caesars, called Jesus "Chrestus" and provided a sentence linking Chrestus to civil disturbance; yet even this may contain a possible chronological error (Suetonius, Lives of the Caesars, Book V, pp. 52, 53).

Josephus (about A.D. 37-95), in his Antiquities, wrote briefly of the founder of Christianity, but possible interpolations and omissions cloud his meager lines. He also wrote briefly of the murder of "a good man, "John the Baptist, because of Herod's political alarm, and also of James, described as the "brother of one said to be Christ."

How little we would know about Jesus if we relied solely on secular history without the blessed Holy Bible!

Who was the Pharaoh of the Exodus, for instance? Perhaps Ramses II, but available secular history oddly does not record the miraculous exodus of a large number of Hebrew slaves defying and leaving their Egyptian masters.

To Jesus' comment about a prophet's having no honor in his own country and in his own household (see Matthew 13:57) might therefore be added "in his own time."

But when He comes again...

Meanwhile, having additional witnesses of Jesus' Saviorhood is vital. So is having additional witnesses to the Father's plan of salvation, especially since all that divinity does is, in fact, focused "for the benefit of the world" (2 Nephi 26:24). Has not the Psalmist said, "We are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand"? (Psalm 95:7.) God has no distracting hobbies. One's eye is to be single to his glory—and his glory, happily, is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

Moreover, embedded in the world around us, as well as in God's word, are so many things which point to Christ (see, for example, 2 Nephi 11:4, quoted earlier in this chapter). In fact, it is a witnessing universe. For those who have eyes to see, all things bear record of [Christ]" (Moses 6:63).

But Alma said unto him: Thou hast had signs enough; will ye tempt your God? Will ye say, Show unto me a sign, when ye have the testimony of all these thy brethren, and also all the holy prophets? The scriptures are laid before thee, yea, and all things denote there is a God; yea, even the earth, and all things that are upon the face of it, yea, and its motion, yea, and also all the planets which move in their regular form do witness that there is a Supreme Creator. (Alma 30:44.)

How essential for faith in our time is the growing together of all witnessing scriptures! How understandable the urgency of Joseph's testimony in Liberty Jail concerning the significance of all the scriptures! For Joseph to verify from jail the truth of Jesus' existence was not casual or superficial testimony, since Joseph had been an "eyewitness" of Jesus on more than one special occasion before the days in Liberty Jail.

The faithful who, through these "other books," possess such a treasure trove of truth—almost all of which came through the Prophet Joseph—have a basic challenge. Our challenge is not simply to shelve them but to delve into them, not alone to possess them, but to witness of them! A fundamental challenge was well described by Austin Farrer, who wrote of the need for articulate Christians: "Though argument does not create conviction, lack of it destroys belief. What seems to be proved may not be embraced; but what no one shows the ability to defend is quickly abandoned. Rational argument does not create belief, but it maintains a climate in which belief may flourish." (Austin Farrer, Light on C. S. Lewis, Jocelyn Gibb, ed. [New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, Inc., 1966], p. 26.)

We can and should be articulate believers. We can and should so proclaim, testify, and teach, readily and humbly, concerning these added books of scripture. Meanwhile, at the same time, we should honor and use the Holy Bible. Joseph Smith did both; apparently it never occurred to him to do otherwise.

It is not amiss, either, to observe how the growing together of scriptures facilitates another kind of growing, for the revelations received in Liberty Jail are perhaps as explanatory and deliberately tutorial as any ever received and recorded!

Out of this growing together there is developing among faithful Latter-day Saint scholars and other Church members an increased appreciation as to how rich these "other books" are—beyond the capacity of Joseph Smith or anyone else unaided by the Lord to produce.

The remarkable process of translation occurred through a bright but largely unschooled young man. Unlettered Joseph, for instance, reportedly didn't know there was a wall around Jerusalem until he encountered and puzzled over that reality in the early work of translating from the plates. Emma verified for Joseph the fact that there was a wall around Jerusalem. (History of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, 4:44.)

When, for a brief period, Emma was his scribe, Joseph would "dictate" to her. When they were interrupted for one reason or another and resumed translating, Joseph "would begin at once where he had left off, without either seeing the manuscript or having any portion of it read to him" ("Last Testimony," The Saints' Advocate, October 1879, p. 52). In contrast, those of us who dictate often will usually ask our secretaries, after interruptions, "Now, where was I?"

Parley P. Pratt was present in May 1831 when Joseph Smith received the revelation that is now section 50 of the Doctrine and Covenants. He recorded:

Alter we had joined in prayer in [Joseph Smith's] translating room, he dictated in our presence the following revelation:—(Each sentence was uttered slowly and very distinctly, and with a pause between each, sufficiently long for it to be recorded, by an ordinary writer, in long hand.)

This was the manner in which all his written revelations were dictated and written. There was never any hesitation, reviewing, or reading back, in order to keep the run of the subject; neither did any of these communications undergo revisions, interlinings, or corrections. As he dictated them so they stood, so far as I have witnessed; and I was present to witness the dictation of several communications of several pages each. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt [Deseret Book Co., 1972], p. 62.)

The processes of revelation and translation varied. Though not described with clinical detail and consistency, they were constant in reflecting the gifts and the power of God. Whether in Joseph's translating from ancient records, or in his receiving and recording certain direct revelations, or in his rewording portions of the Bible under inspiration, the lord clearly oversaw the vital process.

Concerning the process of translation or receiving revelation, then, would the world accept such a process, even if all the facts were known, while rejecting its result?

So it was that the remarkable work of translating the Book of Mormon was accomplished, as Joseph Smith said: "Through the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated the record by the gift and power of God" (Times and Seasons, vol. 3 [1842], p. 707).

What the "choice seer" translated is laden with significance. The work of several years by anthropologist John Sorenson of BYU and others in demonstrating more about possible "host" circumstances in ancient Meso-America is interesting. What is there described as plausible may not prove finally persuasive, but it creates a climate in which the interest can be quickened, as the portrait of a special people emerges in more striking color and intriguing detail.

Much of such scholarly research has occurred only in recent years. Such materials were simply not available in Joseph Smith's time, even had he been able to use them. Instead, Joseph, by his translating, was removing' major stumbling blocks strewn in the path of those who would believe.

Clearly Jesus Christ, whom Joseph saw more than once, was a stumbling block to Jewish people at the time of his mortal ministry (see Jacob 4:14). The sequence in human history was set forth clearly by the prophet Nephi.

And behold it shall come to pass that after the Messiah hath risen from the dead, and hath manifested himself unto his people, unto as many as will believe on his name, behold, Jerusalem shall be destroyed again; for wo unto them that fight against God and the people of his church.

Wherefore, the Jews shall be scattered among all nations; yea, and also Babylon shall be destroyed; wherefore, the Jews shall be scattered by other nations.

And after they have been scattered, and the Lord God hath scourged them by other nations for the space of many generations, yea, even down from generation to generation until they shall be persuaded to believe in Christ, the Son of God, and the atonement, which is infinite for all mankind—and when that day shall come that they shall believe in Christ, and worship the Father in his name, with pure hearts and clean hands, and look not forward any more for another Messiah, then, at that time, the day will come that it must needs be expedient that they should believe these things. (2 Nephi 25:14-16.)

"These things" refers, of course, to the word of God that was to come forth in the "other books" of scripture, especially the Book of Mormon. Obviously, this pattern of unnecessary "stumbling" is a matter of great historical significance.

Paul observed the difficulties he had in preaching Christ crucified: "But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumblingblock, and unto the Greeks foolishness" (1 Corinthians 1:23).

Paul also noted in that connection a former prophecy that Jesus would be a stumbling block: "Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law. For they stumbled at that stumblingstone; as it is written, Behold, I lay in Sion a stumblingstone and rock of offence: and whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed." (Romans 9:32-33.)

Perhaps, as Paul said, "because they sought it not by faith," Jesus was an obstacle over which many then could not climb. It is little different in our secular age.

In any event, centuries before the birth of Jesus as the Mortal Messiah he spoke to Nephi by an angel and said of the Gentiles that in the last days he would "manifest himself unto them in word. . . unto the taking away of their stumbling blocks" (1 Nephi 14:1; italics added). The manifestation "in word" obviously includes the "other books" of scripture, particularly the Book of Mormon. As Moses recorded, the truth is only "had again. . . among as many as shall believe" (Moses 1:41). For them, these other scriptures end the need for "an exceedingly great number [to] stumble (1 Nephi 13:29).

The Lord, who knows human nature perfectly, was well aware that there would be many religious people who would be heavily invested in the status quo; it would be difficult for them to regard his latter-day word without stumbling (see 2 Nephi 26:20).

Peter also spoke of those who "stumble at the word" referring, of course, to the word of God (1 Peter 2:8; italics added). Stumbling can occur because of one's not having the many "plain and precious things." Alas for some, however, the stumbling can occur at the very notion of having "other books" of scripture: "A Bible, we have got a Bible, and we need no more Bible." Says the Lord to such provincial mortals, "Know ye not that there are more nations than one?... know ye not that the testimony of two nations is a witness unto you?" (2 Nephi 29:6, 8.)

Those who criticize the "other books" of scripture must bear in mind that at least one cause of their stumbling was foreseen also and was worried over by contributing prophets: "Thou hast also made our words powerful and great, even that we cannot Write them; wherefore, when we write we behold our weakness, and stumble because of the placing of our words; and I fear lest the Gentiles shall mock at our words" (Ether 12:25).

Some "despise" plainness and prefer complexity (see Jacob 4:14). Whatever the reason, those who treat the revelations of God lightly will not be able to stand when "the storms descend, and the winds blow, and the rains descend, and beat upon their house" (see D&C 90:5).

In a stormy season, we should thus approach the Book of Mormon and the "other books" as never before, reverently, prayerfully, and by studying them out in our minds. Such stretching and pondering involve much more than passively noting. Seeing relationships between various verses of scripture requires pondering, integrating, and appreciating. Just as Joseph did in Liberty Jail regarding many matters, when we break outside the tiny conceptual frameworks within which we have usually read the book, this will prepare us to be introduced by the Spirit to precious things which, to borrow the words of Moses, we "never had supposed" (Moses 1:10).

The fundamental reason why the Book of Mormon was written is the same motivation which caused John to write: "But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name" (John 20:31).

In the case of the Book of Mormon, what came forth was for establishing the truth of John's words, among others, for the "convincing" and persuading of the people that Jesus Christ lived and yet lives, as these samples testify (italics are added in each case):

... I beheld other books, which came forth by the power of the lamb, from the Gentiles unto them, unto the convincing of the Gentiles and the remnant of the seed of my brethren, and also the Jews. . . that the records of the prophets and of the twelve apostles of the Lamb are true (1 Nephi 13:39).

But a seer will I raise up out of the fruit of thy loins; and unto him will I give power to bring forth my word unto the seed of thy loins—and not to the bringing forth my word only, saith the Lord, but to the convincing them of my word, which shall have already gone forth among them (2 Nephi 3:11).

... And also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations (Title Page of the Book of Mormon).

Wherefore, he shall bring forth his words unto them, which words shall judge them at the last day, for they shall be given them for the purpose of convincing them of the true Messiah, who was rejected by them; and unto the convincing of them that they need not look forward any more for a Messiah to come (2 Nephi 25:18).

And as I spake concerning the convincing of the Jews, that Jesus is the very Christ, it must needs be that the Gentiles be convinced also that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God (2 Nephi 26:12).

And behold, they shall go unto the unbelieving of the Jews; and for this intent shall they go—that they may be persuaded that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God; that the Father may bring about, through his most Beloved, his great and eternal purpose, in restoring the Jews, or all the house of Israel, to the land of their inheritance, which the lord their God hath given them, unto the fulfilling of his covenant;

And also that the seed of this people may more fully believe his gospel, which shall go forth unto them from the Gentiles; for this people shall be scattered, and shall become a dark, a filthy, and a loathsome people, beyond the description of that which ever hath been amongst us, yea, even that which hath been among the Lamanites, and this because of their unbelief and idolatry. (Mormon 5:14-15.)

Thus the coming forth of this book carries with it powerful proof that Jesus Christ lived and yet lives. He was and is the Only Begotten Son of the Father. He is our resurrected Lord and Savior.

We should not underestimate the need for such persuading and convincing power in a world in which so many are ambivalent. Nathaniel Hawthorne said of one such friend: "It is strange how he persists... in wandering to and fro ... he can neither believe, nor be comfortable in his unbelief. "(Nathaniel Hawthorne, 20 Nov. 1856, in English Notebooks, ed. Randall Stewart [New York: MLA], pp. 432-33.)

When all of these restored truths are combined—Jesus is the Christ, the doctrine of the premortal life, the reality of a loving Father in Heaven's plan of salvation, the reality of the resurrection—this gives those who believe them a precious perspective and purpose, "proving to the world that the holy scriptures are true, and that God does inspire men and call them to his holy work in this age and generation, as well as in generations of old" (D&C 20:11).

Fundamental to a man's understanding about his identity and purpose upon this planet is to know that God has a plan of salvation also called a plan of happiness, a plan of mercy, etc. [^1] (Alma 24:14; 42:8; 42:15). Yet there are no references to "a plan" of salvation as such in the Old or the New Testament, though there are implied and oblique references. Consider the conveying simplicity of the word plan.

There are multiple references to the plan of salvation in the latter-day "other books" of modern scripture, as these extracted lines demonstrate:

For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection (2 Nephi 9:6).

Now, if it had not been for the plan of redemption, which was laid from the foundation of the world (Alma 12:25).

But God did call on men, in the name of his Son, (this being the plan of redemption which was laid) (Alma 12:33).

And Aaron did expound... the plan of redemption, which was prepared from the foundation of the world (Alma 22:13).

For according to the great plan of the Eternal God there must be an atonement made (Alma 34:9).

For behold, if Adam had put forth his hand immediately, and partaken of the tree of life, . . . the great plan of salvation would have been frustrated (Alma 42:5).

... for that would destroy the great plan of happiness (Alma 42:8).

And now, the plan of mercy could not be brought about except an atonement should be made (Alma 42:15).

And now, behold, I say unto you: This is the plan of salvation unto all men (Moses 6:62).

And the Gods saw that they would be obeyed, and that their plan was good (Abraham 4:21).

These constitute a stunning supply of plain truths about God's plan and cardinal concepts which truly "grow together" concerning man's purposes on this planet. They "establish" the words of Isaiah: "For thus saith the lord that created the heavens; God himself that formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited" (Isaiah 45:18).

We do, of course, receive vital biblical information concerning the importance of the atoning Christ and eternal life.

Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved (Acts 4: 12).

For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive (1 Corinthians 15:22).

In hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, promised before the world began (Titus 1:2).

And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him (Hebrews 5:9).

Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you (1 Peter 1:20).

For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit (1 Peter 4:6).

Important and helpful as these scriptures are, however, they do not give us a fulness concerning God's plan of salvation, such as was revealed to the Prophet Joseph—including his revelations in the jail—concerning plans laid in the Grand Council of the Eternal God before this world was.

One has only to ponder what a striking difference the gospel fulness would make for so many mortals who now view themselves and this life so existentially and provincially. How glorious if these individuals were willing to understand that (1) God has a plan of salvation of which this second estate—or mortality—is a key part; (2) "men are that they might have joy;" (3) we are truly accountable for our thoughts, words, and deeds while here; (4) the resurrection is a reality; and (5) a loving Father is seeing us through this mortal schooling as our Schoolmaster.

Such knowledge and understanding would not put an end to human imperfection but it would put an end to ultimate uncertainty on the pathway to salvation, making possible tremendous shifts in attitudes and behavior for immense numbers of people on this planet.

Lacking these "plain and precious" truths, however, life seems to be a puzzle for many, lacking in meaning and comprehensibility.

The "light of Christ," which to some degree lights all mortals, often causes an intrinsic and positive response when gospel doctrine is taught (see D&C 84:46; John 1:9).

Those who wish to become true disciples and true believers can ensure that they do not become "wearied and faint in [their] minds" (Hebrews 12:3), if they will feast upon Jesus' doctrines in their fulness and thus comprehend how God's redemptive plan exists and persists. Oh, the emancipation there is in revelation!

All of these things, of course, are a witness to divine design but also to the loving intent which motivated laboring and bequeathing ancestors and prophets. These prophet-predecessors truly cared about communicating with us in our time.

Now in this thing we do rejoice; and we labor diligently to engraven these words upon plates, hoping that our beloved brethren and our children will receive them with thankful hearts, and look upon them that they may learn with joy and not with sorrow, neither with contempt, concerning their first parents (Jacob 4:3).

For behold, this [the Book of Mormon] is written for the intent that ye may believe that [the Bible]; and if ye believe that ye will believe this also; and if ye believe this ye will know concerning your fathers, and also the marvelous works which were wrought by the power of God among them (Mormon 7:9).

Actual revelation concerning us and our time permitted the comments of these ancient prophets to be made with relevant awareness of our needs and challenging circumstances. In the words of Moroni: "Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing" (Mormon 8:35).

Again, the caution must be given that the most important witness of the authenticity of the Book of Mormon is the witness of the Spirit. Lehi's report of his ancestor Joseph's prophecies and the inspired foresight of Book of Mormon prophets, to the effect that these various books of scripture would "grow together" (2 Nephi 3:12), signified a many-sided development. This growing together would no doubt embrace the efforts of the Latter-day Saint scholars in uncovering and integrating external evidences—after all, "to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God" (2 Nephi 9:29). But much more significant would be the vast amount of internal evidence and witness that would increasingly surrender its treasures to the eager mind and heart, especially as these faculties would become trained in spiritual perceptions and thus would tap into the teaching resources of the Spirit. Such a combination would provide an enlarged foundation upon which all believers could place even greater reliance, with greater utilization of the truths in these books: "That every man might speak in the name of God the lord, even the Savior of the world" (D&C 1:20). False doctrines would also be confounded. Contentions would be put down. Peace would finally be established "among the fruit of [Joseph's] loins" (1 Nephi 3:12), as the various descendants of Israel acquired a knowledge of their fathers and of the Lord's covenants.

Another promise was given in that same chapter. Though he translated the words, Joseph may not at that time have realized their full implications. The promise was and is that those who would try to destroy the work of the latter-day seer "shall be confounded" (2 Nephi 3:14). One of the ways in which this promise continues to be kept, of course, is the absence of successful, substantive challenge to the massive, complex translations and revelations which came through Joseph Smith.

As one begins to appreciate further the Book of Mormon, both as a historical record and as a witnessing, religious volume, another parallel out of human history comes to mind. In the book, earnest prophets who witnessed social deterioration, including terrible slaughters, were moved upon to make a record of those things.

But behold, the land was filled with robbers and with Lamanites; and notwithstanding the great destruction which hung over my people, they did not repent of their evil doings; therefore there was blood and carnage spread throughout all the face of the land, both on the part of the Nephites and also on the part of the Lamanites; and it was one complete revolution throughout all the face of the land (Mormon 2:8).

And it came to pass that my sorrow did return unto me again, and I saw that the day of grace was passed with them, both temporally and spiritually; for I saw thousands of them hewn down in open rebellion against their God, and heaped up as dung upon the face of the land. And thus three hundred and forty and four years had passed away. (Mormon 2:15.)

For Mormon, seeing thousands of bodies "heaped up as dung upon the face of the land" must have produced profound emotions within him, not unlike those a British journalist experienced when he went to the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp at the end of World War II, the opening lines of whose dispatch were, "It is my duty to describe something beyond the imagination of mankind" (Time Magazine, April 29, 1985, p. 133, International Edition).

Again, the words of Mormon: "And it is impossible for the tongue to describe, or for man to write a perfect description of the horrible scene of the blood and carnage which was among the people, both of the Nephites and of the Lamanites; and every heart was hardened, so that they delighted in the shedding of blood continually" (Mormon 4:11).

The anticipating, foreknowing, integrating pattern of God's bringing things forward—at the moment in time when they are most needed—is surely to be seen regarding the convergence and relevance of the Bible and these "other books." Hence our faith in the Lord must include not only faith that he exists but also faith in his timing as his purposes unfold.

Perhaps our previous failure to notice some of these things can be partly attributed to the way in which the Book of Mormon deliberately understates certain things. When these are discovered, it will be by the meek who have eyes to see. It should not surprise us, therefore, as the climate of criticism intensifies concerning the Church, the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Book of Mormon, temples, and so on, that the Lord will focus our attention and deepen our appreciation in order to preserve a climate in which his work will go forward even more rapidly among those who are honest in heart.

Things "shall grow together." Believers will be astounded. Those who seek to tear down the Lord's work will be frustrated. (See 2 Nephi 3:14.) It all commenced, however, as the "choice seer" was in the presence of Heavenly Beings who "called" him and others "to a dispensation of [the] gospel in the beginning of the fullness of times, "just as Joseph declared from Liberty Jail (Writings, p. 399).

Given all that was accomplished earlier, it is no wonder that the Lord profitably used even the period of Joseph's confinement. In our day too the Lord will likewise use the attacks on his latter-day seer to push Joseph's work and name even further out to the ends of the earth.
