Neal A. Maxwell, But for a Small Moment ( 1986)

Chapter 4

"Called and Prepared from the Foundation of the World"

One unique and powerful doctrine earlier restored through Joseph the Seer was amplified by revelations received in the prison-temple. It provides a special and obvious example of how lost truths can actually become a deprivation and a diversion that constitute a stumbling block (1 Nephi 13:40; 14:1). This doctrine is the truth about the premortal existence of men and women—existence as individual personalities and entities. The general absence of this deep doctrine and this precious perspective has had a profound and inevitable effect upon the way in which many mortals view this life. Indeed, the loss of this doctrine in its plainness and fulness has been a subtle stumbling block to many without their even sensing it.

Clearly the doctrine of premortal existence of individuals is a key to understanding the Lord's plan of salvation. Much of the human despair about the meaning of life and the perplexities of the mortal condition stems from being unaware or unbelieving of the reality of this precious doctrine.

For many years now—in literature, film, and music—we have witnessed increasing expressions of a profound sense of existential despair, a hopelessness seemingly beyond hope. Granted, the human scene also includes many individuals who go happily about life's labors untouched by these feelings, drawing upon "the light of Christ" which, to a degree, lights every individual (see D&C 84:46; Moroni 7:16; John 1:9). Thus some individuals have intrinsic intimations which sustain them. Even so, the holocausts and wars have taken their terrible toll of hope among twentieth-century man. Said one eminent scientist: "The most poignant problem of modern life is probably man's feeling that life has lost its significance . . . [A] view. . . no longer limited to the philosophical or literary avant garde. It is spreading to all social and economic groups and affects all manifestations of life" (Rene Dubos, So Human an Animal [New York: Scribners, 1968], pp. 14-15).

One need not question, either, the reluctance or sincerity with which some despairing individuals have come to such wrong conclusions. In fact, one feels compassion.

One recent television drama, its closing scene in a cemetery, conveyed well this confusion and purposelessness as a character lamented poignantly: "Are all men's lives... broken, tumultuous, agonized and unromantic, punctuated by screams, imbecilities, agonies and death? Who knows?... I don't know. ... Why can't people have what they want? The things were all there to content everybody, yet everybody got the wrong thing. I don't know. It's beyond me. It's all darkness." (PBS production of The Good Soldier, dramatization of the novel by Ford Madox Ford.)

But such poignancy is not a guarantee of accuracy.

Alas, however, in human affairs such erroneous and unchallenged assertions sometimes assume an undeserved aura of reality, as with absorbed children in a tree house pretending they are brave and alone. While the restored gospel's reassuring response to this hopelessness may not create conviction in all disbelievers, it has helped and will help many as well as bolstering believers against the silent erosion of their convictions.

Let us, therefore, place several such lamentations beside the revelations of God, so many of which came through the "choice seer," Joseph Smith. Let us place the expressions of despair beside the divine annunciations of hope; the fears of extinction alongside the reassurances of the resurrection; the expressions of provincialism beside the universalism of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Then we shall see how myopic some mortals are. No wonder some lament that man spends his entire life trying to prove to himself that his existence is not absurd!

The lamentations: Man lives in "an unsponsored universe," a universe "without a master," which "cares nothing for [man's] hopes and fears," an "empire of chance" in which man falls victim to "the trampling march of unconscious power." (Bertrand Russell, "A Free Man's Worship," in Mysticism and Logic and Other Essays [London: George Allen and Unwin, Ltd., 1950], p. 57.)

The revelations:

God himself that formed the earth... created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited (Isaiah 45:18).

For he is our God; and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand (Psalm 95:7).

Behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man (Moses 1:39).

Men are, that they might have joy (2 Nephi 2:25).

But the very hairs of your head are all numbered (Matthew 10:29-30).

But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you. For behold, there are many worlds that have passed away by the word of my power. And there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they unto man; but all things are numbered unto me, for they are mine and I know them. (Moses 1:35.)

The fears: Mankind is "destined to extinction. . . . There is nothing we can do." "We have no personal life beyond the grave. There is no God. Fate knows no wrath nor ruth [compassion]." (James Thompson, The City of Dreadful Night and Other Poems [London: Bertram Dobell, 1899], pp. 29-30, 35-36.)

The reassurances:

And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose,

And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many. (Matthew 27:52-53; see also 3 Nephi 23:9-11.)

O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? (1 Corinthians 15:55.)

O how great the plan of our God! (2 Nephi 9:13.)

For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God. (D&C 76:23-24.)

The reality of premortality is thus a curative for the wonderings, puzzlings, and yearnings expressed in music, poetry, and literature, such as the following:

Everything in our life happens as though we entered upon it with a load of obligations contracted in a previous existence . . . obligations whose sanction is not of this present life, [which] seem to belong to a different world, founded on kindness, scruples, sacrifice, a world entirely different from this one, a world whence we emerge to be born on this earth, before returning thither." (Marcel Proust, La Prisonniere, as quoted in Homo Viator, by Gabriel Marcel [New York: Harper and Row, 1963], p. 8.)

Some who despair, as Peter said, "willingly are ignorant" (2 Peter 3:5). Others, as Nephi pointed out, "will not search . . . nor understand great knowledge" (2 Nephi 32:7). For some, a pessimistic philosophy is actually "pleasing unto the carnal mind" (Alma 30:53). Happily, still others, no doubt fired by that in which they do not believe—the light of Christ which lights every soul—live decent lives anyway.

Alas, behavioral permissiveness flourishes amid a sense of hopelessness. If human appetites are mistakenly viewed as the only authentic reality, and "now" as the only moment that matters, why should one checkrein any impulse or defer any gratification? Hence individual accountability and belief in individual immortality are intertwined.

There are biblical references to the doctrine of premortal existence. But these are not so numerous as to preclude some Christians from ignoring them or still others from attempting to explain them away. Just how many prophetic utterances concerning these doctrines were mislaid, "held back" or "taken away" from the early records from which we later received the precious Holy Bible, we know not.

When biblical scriptures bear directly upon this vitally important doctrine, sometimes it is by citing, here and there, a premortal existence wherein there were differences as between the forces of evil and those of righteousness. Satan led the forces of evil.

And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven (Luke 1:18).

And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels (Revelation 12:7; see JST Revelation 12:6-8).

And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day (Jude 1:6).

The "other books" of scripture (1 Nephi 13:39-40), however, give plain as well as precious confirmation and elaboration. They offer these more clear-cut references:

Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the lord God, had given him, and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten, I caused that he should be cast down (Moses 4:3).

And it came to pass that Adam, being tempted of the devil—for, behold, the devil was before Adam, for he rebelled against me, saying, Give me thine honor, which is my power; and also a third part of the hosts of heaven turned he away from me because of their agency (D&C 29:36).

And this we saw also, and bear record, that an angel of God who was in authority in the presence of God, who rebelled against the Only Begotten Son whom the Father loved and who was in the bosom of the Father, was thrust down from the presence of God and the Son (D&C 76:25).

And I, Lehi, according to the things which I have read, must needs suppose that an angel of God, according to that which is written, had fallen from heaven; wherefore, he became a devil, having sought that which was evil before God.

And because he had fallen from heaven, and had become miserable forever, he sought also the misery of all mankind. Wherefore, he said unto Eve, yea, even that old serpent, who is the devil, who is the father of all lies, wherefore he said: Partake of the forbidden fruit, and ye shall not die, but ye shall be as God, knowing good and evil. (2 Nephi 2:17-18.)

One biblical reference to the premortal existence of man appears in this instructive episode: "And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?" (John 9:2.)

Significantly, Jesus did not rebuke the disciples for advancing "either/or" premises, but said, "Neither." "Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in him" (John 9:3).

Since teachings about premortal existence were abroad in the land" in Jesus' day, [^1] he could have very easily corrected the assumptions the questioning disciples had. Rather, he indicated that the blindness was neither the result of the man's sinning before he was born nor of his parents' sinning; rather, the works of God were made manifest in the blind man, and not simply to provide an object lesson in healing.

All the biblical scriptures are seen with fresher, clearer vision when placed in the light of the "other books" of scripture wherein these truths about man's continuum of existence are stated—but more clearly and plainly:

Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born. (Abraham 3:22-23.) (See Psalm 82:1—New English Bible, The Jerusalem Bible, and the Anchor Bible Series.)

But behold, the resurrection of Christ redeemeth mankind, yea, even all mankind, and bringeth them back into the presence of the Lord (Helaman 14:17).

And that it might be filled with the measure of man, according to his creation before the world was made (D&C 49:17).

Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be. (D&C 93:29.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith, and my father, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and other choice 75 spirits who were reserved to come forth in the fulness of times to take part in laying the foundations of the great latter-day work, . . .

I observed that they were also among the noble and great ones who were chosen in the beginning to be rulers in the Church of God.

Even before they were born, they, with many others, received their first lessons in the world of spirits and were prepared to come forth in the due time of the lord to labor in his vineyard for the salvation of the souls of men. (D&C 138:53, 55-56.)

Many other references in the "other books" of scripture "grow together," and thus speak more plainly and powerfully of God's plan of salvation (see previous chapter) and of man's purposeful coming here to be proved and to be trained.

Our purposeful coming here reflects a premortal existence (a first estate) in which man Bad reached a point when, in the wisdom of God, this second estate became necessary to prepare man for a third and final resurrected estate wherein he might be "added upon" (see Abraham 3:25-26). The scriptures therefore contain numerous pointed references to the tutoring and refining process of life:

Nevertheless the Lord seeth fit to chasten his people; yea, he trieth their patience and their faith (Mosiah 23:21).

And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the lord their God shall command them (Abraham 3:25). (For other references on proving" see Exodus 16:4; Deuteronomy 8:2, 16; 13:3.)

Obviously, for the plan of salvation to unfold in an orderly manner and to accomplish the ordained purposes of God, he must, as Paul indicated, "determine. . . the bounds of their habitation" beforehand (Acts 17:26).

Joseph Smith taught: "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. I suppose I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council." (Teachings, p. 365.) We do not read of Joseph's so speaking until after Liberty Jail, for it was in that prison-temple that revelation came concerning the Council of the Eternal God (D&C 121:32). However, since in 1838 Joseph wrote, of his 1820 vision, "many other things did [the Savior] say unto me, which I cannot write at this time," we cannot be sure he first heard of this council in 1839 (see JS-H 1:20).

The comments in Jeremiah 1:5 clearly and unequivocally speak of Jeremiah's foreordination as "a prophet unto the nations." The biblical example of foreordination is a direct evidence of the truthfulness of what we read in the book of Abraham.

Now the lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born. (Abraham 3:22-23.)

With such foreknowledge as to both souls and roles, God would "set the bounds of the people" (Deuteronomy 32:8; see also Genesis 10:32) and make determinations as to chronology—what Paul called "the times before appointed" (Acts 17:26).

Paul clearly preached the doctrine of foreordination: "For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate [^2] to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren" (Romans 8:29).

How could God foreknow a people unless they existed before their birth here? "God hath not cast away his people which he foreknew. Know ye not what the scripture saith of Elias? how he maketh intercession to God against Israel......(Romans 11:2.)

Paul similarly declared: "According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love. Having predestinated [^3] us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will." (Ephesians 1:4-5.)

This doctrine, therefore, did not apply solely to Jesus or Jeremiah:

But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, because God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth (2 Thessalonians 2:13).

Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began ... (2 Timothy 1:9).

Peter likewise preached the doctrines of foreknowledge and foreordination: "Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace unto you, and peace, be multiplied." (1 Peter 1:2.)

Thus we see that God's foreknowledge and the doctrine of foreordination go together. (See Blake Ostler, "Clothed Upon: A Unique Aspect of Christian Antiquity," BYU Studies, vol. 22, no. 1 [Winter 1982], pp. 31-33.) The one makes the other possible, as a loving Father in Heaven executes his plan of salvation for his children, desiring, as his glory, our salvation and our happiness.

As just illustrated, the Holy Bible contains much more pertaining to the precious, plain doctrine of the premortal existence than many realize. But appropriately the fulness has been restored in the fulness of times.

This doctrine is a major example of a key doctrine which for various reasons and causes did not make its way fully into the Holy Bible. The devoted and talented King James scholars loyally and effectively translated that work from the materials at hand, but they could not translate that which had been previously "held back." What we have as surviving verses on this subject, though the Bible itself has been of immeasurable value to Christendom through the centuries, does not represent the fulness.

Some scholars and preachers attempt to confine the doctrine of premortal existence to Jesus only—with Lucifer in one scene. This results in an enormous distortion of reality which carries with it tremendous consequences for mankind. In many ways, it is the equivalent of saying, "Yes, Jesus was resurrected, but the resurrection only applies to him and not to all the rest of us." To attempt to strip away from all the rest of us the reality of our premortal existence is to rob us of our identity, to lessen our full accountability, and to dim our perspectives concerning ourselves and the purposes of life.

Although our Bible does not spell out a premortal life, it contains some bracing references to God's being the Father of our spirits.

And they fell upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with all the congregation? (Numbers 16:22.)

Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it (Ecclesiastes 12:7).

The burden of the word of the lord for Israel, saith the lord, which stretcheth forth the heavens, and layeth the foundation of the earth, and formeth the spirit of man within him (Zechariah 12:1).

Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live? (Hebrews 12:9.)

Once again, the "other books" give us both verification and clarification:

Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be. (D&C 93:29.)

But behold, the resurrection of Christ redeemeth mankind, yea, even all mankind, and bringeth them back into the presence of the Lord (Helaman 14:17).

And that it might be filled with the measure of man, according to his creation before the world was made (D&C 49:17).

In the aggregate these further attestations to the premortal existence of man point directly and consistently to the shared reality of our having lived as individual entities before coming to this life. Jesus, the Father's designated leader there, is our Savior here.

Long before Joseph Smith's time, what had failed to be included in the Bible was lost, and ancient documents bearing upon such matters had not yet emerged. Hugh Nibley has observed: "Few people realize that in Joseph Smith's day no really ancient manuscripts were known. Egyptian and Babylonian could not be read; the Greek and Latin classics were the oldest literature available. . . . The oldest text of the Hebrew Bible was the Ben Asher Codex from the ninth century A.D. Today we have whole libraries of documents more than four thousand years old—not just their contents, but the actual writings themselves going back to the very beginnings of civilization" (Timely and Timeless, pp. 103-4). [^4]

Interestingly enough some recently available historical evidence indicates that, while the doctrine of premortal existence did not survive in full abundance to take its place in the Holy Bible, it was taught by some during and after the apostolic era in the meridian of time. In fact, it was not until A.D. 553, and perhaps a few years prior, that (by the action of the Second Council of Constantinople) teachers of this doctrine were declared "anathema" (see Adolf Harnack, History of Dogma, vol. IV [New York: Dover Publishers, 1961], pp. 245, 347-49; also Philip Hughes, The Church in Crisis: A History of the General Councils, 325-1870 [Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1964], pp. 117-18).

The Nag Hammadi library gives us some information in the Apocryphon [^5] of James, Codex I (about A.D. 150) from a Gnostic document. Jesus is there quoted as saying to Peter and James, while speaking of the extent of the two disciples' sufferings, "If you consider how long the world existed [before] you fell [into it] and how long it will exist after you, you will find that your life is a single day and your sufferings a single hour."

Many of Origen's writings are certainly lost to us because his teachings were condemned. Blake Ostler has written, "When Origen stated, 'We believe that other worlds existed before the present world came into being,' he was not expressing a personal opinion, instead he seemed to be stating an article of faith belonging to the Christian church of his day." (From unpublished paper, April 10, 1981, and—letter to author, October 4, 1985, citing Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, Ante-Nicene Fathers [Grand Rapids: Christian Lit. Co., 1893], 5:341.)

It is striking that, similar to what we find in the book of Abraham, Origen described the variety of man's mortal circumstances as having some relationship to their lives before coming here. [^6] Unsurprisingly, it resembles what Alma sets forth:

And this is the manner after which they were ordained—being called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God, on account of their exceeding faith and good works; in the first place being left to choose good or evil; therefore they having chosen good, and exercising exceedingly great faith, are called with a holy calling, yea, with that holy calling which was prepared with, and according to, a preparatory redemption for such.

Or in fine, in the first place they were on the same standing with their brethren; thus this holy calling being prepared from the foundation of the world for such as would not harden their hearts, being in and through the atonement of the Only Begotten Son, who was prepared. (Alma 13:3, 5.)

Further light comes from the book of Abraham:

Howbeit that he made the greater star; as, also, if there be two spirits, and one shall be more intelligent than the other, yet these two spirits, notwithstanding one is more intelligent than the other, have no beginning; they existed before, they shall have no end, they shall exist after, for they are gnolaum, or eternal.

And the Lord said unto me: These two facts do exist, that there are two spirits, one being more intelligent than the other; there shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all. (Abraham 3:18-19.)

The Talmud and the Midrash clearly teach the doctrine of the premortal existence of souls. In another Jewish book, "God is represented as taking counsel with the souls of the righteous before he created the earth" (James Hastings, Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, 1 :x. [New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1924]).

Justin Martyr (A.D. 100-167) also taught this doctrine, including the concept that if men "by their good works prove themselves worthy of His plan they are considered worthy... to return to His presence and reign with Him" (Justin Martyr, Apologia I pro Christianis, 10 Greek text, in J. P. Migne, Patrologiae Graecae 161 vols. [Paris: n.p., 1857-68], 6:340F).

Critics of this doctrine, of course, are quick to say that Justin Martyr was a Platonist before his conversion and simply brought that doctrine with him. Others are quick to pass off the episode in which Jesus and his disciples encountered the blind man as merely being evidence that the disciples were otherwise aware of the doctrine of the premortal existence. Such an approach leaves Jesus' stunning reply, full of implications, without a response.

Clement, Bishop of Rome, who was acquainted with the original Apostles, in a somewhat helpful passage urged his members, "Let us consider, therefore, brethren, whereof we are made, who and what kind of men we came into the world... [God] that made us, and formed us, brought us into His own world having presented us with His benefits, even before we were born" (I Clement, xxxviii, 3-4, p. 1:285, following the translation of Robert M. Grant and Holt Grahm, The Apostolic Fathers 2:67; see also Lost Books of the Bible [New York: Bell Publishing, 1979], p. 130).

Blake Ostler in the previously cited BYU Studies article (vol. 22, pp. 31-33) discusses how various early writings provide us with confirmation that this doctrine was taught anciently.

Origen wrote about present blessings being related to previous obedience, recognizing that if individuals were elected "not on the grounds of justice and according to their deserts, but undeservedly," then God would be a respector of persons (De Principiis I, vii. 4; cf. III, v. 4-5). Note the parallels in modern scripture:

There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—

And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated. (D&C 130:20-21.)

For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world (D&C 132:5).

Unfortunately the time came, as Paul had prophesied, when early Church members could not endure this or other sound doctrine, and the truth gave place to fables (see 2 Timothy 4:3).

Happily, for what we know of this precious doctrine we are not dependent on research—but on revelation!

Hugh Nibley has stressed that the doctrine of premortal existence is related to the plurality of worlds. We know that Jesus has created innumerable worlds besides this one.

All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made (John 1:3).

[God] hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds (Hebrews 1:2). The comparative clarity of latter-day revelations is, as always, impressive:

That by him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God (D&C 76:24).

And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten....

But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you. For behold, there are many worlds that have passed away by the word of my power. And there are many that now stand, and innumerable are they unto man; but all things are numbered unto me, for they are mine and I know them. ...

And as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words. (Moses 1:33, 35, 38.

Granted, the ordering simplicity of the doctrines of premortal existence and plurality of worlds offends some. They would rather continue to engage in bewailing the human condition, or in eating, drinking, and being merry while life lasts and before man is extinguished, like victims of amnesia strangely uninterested in their pasts.

Latter-day Saints do not, of course, ask others to accept such truths against their wills. We seek tolerance for our gospel views, not involuntary agreement with them. We fully expect such doctrines to be scrutinized and even criticized by others. We reserve the same freedom to engage in scrutiny of their beliefs. All in mutual good will, however.

Neither do we ask others to believe this doctrine because it is comforting—only because it is true! In fact, premortality is not an easy doctrine. Like other central truths in the gospel of Jesus Christ, it is a hard saying (see John 6:60, 66). It brings much needed identity but also much accountability.

It is a plain and precious doctrine, however. Those of us in the restored Church have an obligation and duty to share—with all who have eyes to see and ears to hear—that which is essential to our understanding the purposes of life, our own identity, and the very ground of our being.

Thus do the "other books" (the Book of Mormon, the Pearl of Great Price, the Doctrine and Covenants, and Joseph Smith's incomplete but inspired translation of the Bible) provide a comparative fulness of understanding concerning this and other doctrines. This is a fulness which constitutes a pivotal contribution to beleagured, provincial mankind. It came to us, via translation and revelation, through Joseph Smith, and the prison-temple played a part in its enhancement and articulation.

One of the significant developments we see in the ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith is how, for instance, his reading of the book of Genesis for the purpose of better translation catapulted him, and therefore us, into further understanding. Though we lack details of the experience, it was out of this effort that we were to receive through revelation to the "choice seer" the remarkable book of Moses with its many special insights related to premortality and the plurality of God's creations.

Did this process of supplying additional scriptures operate as revelation did in the case of the prophet Samuel (see 1 Samuel 9:15), when "the Lord ... told Samuel in his ear"? Or was it by Joseph's seeing replacement words on a page? We do not know in every instance whether it was visual, aural, or otherwise. But the enlargement was real, because it carried Joseph Smith not only beyond what was then available, but in the case of the doctrine of premortality beyond what was even under discussion.

Joseph's awareness of these doctrines may have ripened from recognition to appreciation of them long before he began to speak about them. The ripening which led to understanding could not have been instantaneous. True, the words earlier fell from his lips as he translated or dictated. But later on the words came from his heart, and the revealed truths became his own.

In fact, in the early days of the Restoration, these concepts arrived like dinner guests, nearly all at once. There was scarcely time to greet them. Only later was there time truly to get acquainted. Then the Prophet-host learned of the relationships of these "dinner guests" and of the antiquity of their credentials.

The arriving all at once is best illustrated by how closely grouped they were by approximate chronology. Further, it is instructive to "line up" in this way the various scriptures which came through the Prophet Joseph concerning our premortal existence, whether by revelation or translation:

Mid-1829—2 Nephi 2:17-18 (the devil is a fallen angel)

Mid-1829—2 Nephi 9:8, 9, 16 (the devil is a fallen angel and our spirits can become subject to him)

Mid-1829—Mosiah 3:6 (evil spirits can dwell in mortals)

Mid-1829—Alma 13:2-5 (some mortals were called and prepared from the foundation of the world)

June 1830—Moses 1:33-34 (other worlds were created for a purpose and Adam as the first man of all men)

September 1830—D&C 29:28, 36, 40, 42 (about devils, angels, and how a third of the hosts of heaven fell because of the misuse of their agency and became subject to the devil and his angels)

June-October 1830—Moses 3:4-5 (about the spiritual creation of all things before they were naturally upon the earth)

June-October 1830—Moses 4:1-4 (Satan's premortal bid for power and Jesus' accepting of the Father's plan; the rebellion in heaven)

June-October 1830—Moses 5:24 (Lucifer's premortal role)

March 1831—D&C 49:17 (man was created before the world was)

February 16, 1832—D&C 76:25-28 (Satan's premortal rebellion)

May 6, 1833—D&C 93:29, 33, 38 (a most clear-cut statement of premortal existence)

1842—(the book of Abraham published, which speaks of "the intelligences that were organized before the world was" [see Abraham 3:22])

All of the above scriptures except the book of Abraham came very early in Joseph's ministry. Yet there is an apparent "gap" of six years before the Prophet began to speak or write publicly of the doctrine of premortal existence. Whether this reflected imperfect record-keeping, the Lord's timing, Joseph's degree of readiness, or the people's readiness to receive, or all such factors, we do not know. But it is clear that since the revelations came incrementally, Joseph's understanding came likewise.

Finally, just over two months before the martyrdom, there came the soaring King Follett sermon—April 7, 1844. Joseph then declared, among many things, "If men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not comprehend themselves" (Teachings, p. 343).

The highly knowledgeable Apostle John wrote about the final triumph of the Lord's people and how, finally, "they that are with" Christ will be those who are "called, and chosen, and faithful" (Revelation 17:14). From the Apostle Joseph, however, we receive needed and added light and knowledge about what the phrase "called and prepared from the foundation of the world" meant!

Such revelations signaled the end of a long darkness in human history, a scarcity like that in another time during which the word of the Lord was precious . . . ; there was no open vision" (1 Samuel 3:1). This powerful doctrine of a premortal life was made plain and was esteemed as precious by Joseph who, like Jeremiah, was long before his mortal birth "ordained . . . a prophet unto the nations" (Jeremiah 1:5).

So much illumination came from the revelation received and contemplations made in the dimly lit Liberty Jail. This Missouri dungeon served as Joseph's tutoring temple during months of incarceration, months of preparation for the final five years of his earthly ministry.
