Neal A. Maxwell, But for a Small Moment ( 1986)

Chapter 6

"Endure It Well"

As the Prophet Joseph Smith was told in the prison-temple, experiencing and enduring are part of the essence of significant spiritual development, the end for which all serious disciples are to strive. The Missouri dungeon provided just such a tutoring mixture of obscurity, adversity, irony, and testimony.

Three times Jesus has told us that we are to seek to become like the Father and like the Savior, an objective not to be reached without obedience in the midst of soul stretching:

Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect (Matthew 5:48).

Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect (3 Nephi 12:48).

Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am. (3 Nephi 27:27.)

This same pattern was operative anciently, as evidenced by the Lord's allowing some of the heathen nations with their influence to remain in the land of Canaan as Israel's neighbors: "And they were to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would hearken unto the commandments of the Lord, which he commanded their fathers by the hand of Moses" (Judges 3:4).

Some of the soul-stretching experiences are so wrenching that even the best Saints need reassurance during the process: "Know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good" (D&C 122:7). Has the Lord provided similar assurances and such tender tutoring to other prophets in other ages and extremities? We do not know the complete answer on this, but if so, given his varied and significant challenges, Joseph the son of Jacob would surely have qualified.

When one ponders the words of that ancient Joseph concerning the latter-day seer and prophet, "he shall be like unto me" (2 Nephi 3:15), certain similarities are striking, though of varying exactitude.

Initially both had inauspicious beginnings and were unlikely candidates to make the impact they did—whether in ancient Egypt or in modern America.

Both had visions at young and tender ages (see Genesis 37:2-5; Joseph Smith—History 1).

The visions brought both men hatred. Both men knew sibling jealousy or other ill feelings. Ancient Joseph's brothers "envied him" (Genesis 37:7-11). Modern Joseph had to contend with a mercurial brother, William, whom he forgave many times (History of the Church 2:353-54).

Both men were falsely accused.

Both Josephs were generous to those who betrayed them. Ancient Joseph was generous to his once-betraying brothers, whom he later saved from starvation (Genesis 43:29-30).

Both men were jailed and knew what it was to be in a "pit" (Genesis 37:23-24).

Both prophesied remarkably of the future of their nations (Genesis 41:29-31; D&C 87).

Both men helped those who shared their imprisonment but later forgot them. With ancient Joseph, it was the chief butler (Genesis 40:21-23); modern Joseph worried over ill Sidney Rigdon, who was freed in January, 1839. The Prophet rejoiced. Three months later, the Prophet inquired "after Elder Rigdon if he has not forgotten us" (Writings, p. 399).

Both were "like unto" each other in being amazingly resilient in the midst of adversity, a truly striking quality.

Both knew separation from their families and friends. Ancient and anxious Joseph asked the question of his brothers, "Doth my father yet live?" (Genesis 45:3.) Modern Joseph, during his imprisonment, asked the question, "Doth my friends yet live? If they live, do they remember me?" (Writings, p. 409.)

With these and perhaps other similarities, it is no wonder that ancient Joseph wrote foretellingly of modern Joseph, "He shall be like unto me." And, significantly, modern Joseph wrote from Liberty Jail amid afflictions, "I feel like Joseph in Egypt" (Writings, p. 409). [^1]

For ancient Joseph, adversity and absence from family and home paved the way for his later preservation of the lives of many Egyptians and others (see Genesis 45:5; 50:20). The modern Joseph ended a different form of "famine in the land" (see Amos 8:11-12), becoming the means of bringing spiritual food to millions upon millions!

We are left to wonder how much pondering Joseph Smith, Jr., did with regard to the words in the Book of Mormon which he translated and which forecast his special relationship with ancient Joseph. In any event, the special relationship of the two Josephs was further reinforced by revelation which came to him in 1830 while translating Genesis chapter 50, and by a father's blessing in 1834. Finally, in Liberty Jail in 1839, Joseph wrote of the parallel! [^2]

Clearly, for us and the prophets to be so prepared and tutored requires a system that features proving, reproving, and improving. Properly responded to, all these experiences can lead us, attribute by attribute, to become ever more like the Father and the Son. Just as Joseph's successor, Brigham Young, once said of a destination finally reached, "This is the place," so it might be said of God's developmental pattern for mortality, "This is the process."

It is important, however, for us to recognize in all of this that we must first truly desire such spiritual development (see D&C section 4). Like the desire for faith and knowledge, in the matter of spiritual growth we must first desire and then let the desire work within us until we can believe sufficiently to give heedful place for a portion of the Lord's words to operate in our lives (Alma 32:27-28).

Then, as this process of challenge and response unfolds, we must be able to "endure it well" and "valiantly," as the Prophet was told in Liberty Jail, and to see, if necessary, months or even years as merely constituting "a small moment" (D&C 121:7-8, 29; 122:4).

Paul wrote with the same perspective about our afflictions being "but for a moment" and yet that they "worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory" (2 Corinthians 4:17).

Desire, challenge, obedient response, and subsequent development interplay in the life of each serious disciple. So with Abraham: "And said unto him, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and come into the land which I shall shew thee." Commanded by the Lord to go to another land, Abraham obeyed: "Then came he out of the land of the Chaldaeans, and dwelt in Charran: and from thence, when his father was dead, he removed him into this land, wherein ye now dwell" (Acts 7:3, 4).

Yet this direction depended for its fulfillment upon the genuineness of Abraham's desire for greater happiness, greater peace, and greater rest. Abraham realized he was a rightful heir, entitled to be a high priest, so he genuinely sought the blessings of the fathers and the ordination. He desired to administer the blessings of the fathers to others as a true follower of righteousness (See Abraham 1:1-2).

Because Abraham really desired several outcomes, his discipleship was a serious and obedient discipleship. The rest is superb religious history. Though not told about them, we can be sure that there were plenty of pressing "cares of the world" in which Abraham could have earnestly and sincerely entangled himself. But he chose otherwise because he desired otherwise.

This same process pertains to the development of all disciples. It is not just for the prophets.

Such development usually occurs in a world too busy to notice and too disdainful when it does. Little wonder that obscurity is often the setting and adversity the catalyst!

Historian Dean Jessee has written well [^3] of the adversity in the days in Liberty Jail, which, with its window looking into developmental discipleship, tells us much about the crunching moments and the stern stuff of which such challenges are made.

An eye-witness who saw the prisoners arrive said that Joseph Smith was the last to enter the jail. He "looked at the curious multitude that had gathered . . . lifted his hat and said in a distinct voice, ‘Good afternoon, gentlemen,’ and disappeared behind the heavy iron door" (Lyman Littlefield, Remin., of LDS, pp. 79-80; quoted in Dean Jessee's manuscript "Walls, Grates, and Screeking Iron Doors": The Prison Experiences of Mormon Leaders in Missouri—1838-1839).

Shortly after his call to the Council of the Twelve in 1839, George A. Smith described his visit in company with Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball:

"We traveled next day to Liberty, and put up at a hotel, waited till victuals were carried in, towards evening to the prisoners, when Judge Tillery and the jailor permitted us to go in and see the prisoners. We were locked in with them for about an hour. Joseph told me of my calling to the Apostleship and enquired how I liked it. I replied I was pleased with the appointment, and would do my best to honor it. He spent most of the time conversing with Brothers Brigham and Heber, and I have always regarded it as a blessing that I had the privilege of being locked up with those who were imprisoned for the Kingdom of heaven's sake, if it was but for an hour" (George Albert Smith Memoirs, pp. 123-125; quoted in the Dean Jessee manuscript).

As word of the occupants of the prison spread, the place took on some of the aspects of a zoo. Hyrum Smith was exasperated at the curiosity seekers who crowded to see them. "We are often inspected by fools who act as though we were elephants or dromedarys or sea hogs or some monstrous whale or sea serpents. We have never had our teeth examined like an old horse, but expect [to] every day when ... a new swarm come[s] that have never seen us (HS Diary, 3.18. 1839; quoted in the Dean Jessee manuscript).

Lyman Wight spoke of the "scanty" rations which he, the Prophet, and others received in Liberty Jail. I have previously noted that what was supplied came frequently by way of leftovers from the jailer's own table, brought "in a basket, on which the chickens had roosted the night before without being cleaned."

Faced with such circumstances, a failure to understand the tutoring, improving, and reproving dimension of this mortal life can cause us to "stumble exceedingly" (1 Nephi 13:34). The absence of such precious and plain perspective can result in resentment toward life and, unlike the response of stout Job, in our "[charging] God foolishly" (Job 1:22).

In "all these things" the importance of having a clear view of reality in order to achieve personal spiritual development cannot be overemphasized.

This journey of deepening discipleship, therefore, is not one step but many. It is the work of this lifetime, and more. Indeed, as already shown, our journey actually began long, long ago.

Irony often joins adversity and obscurity as part of the challenges which go with soul stretching. There are many examples of the interplay of irony and history. Human history's greatest and saddest irony is that a few of the mortal family crucified their perfect King, Jesus Christ: ". . . and there is none other nation on earth that would crucify their God" (2 Nephi 10:3; see Acts 2:36).

There are happy ironies in human affairs, however. Paul—a zealous, legalistic Pharisee devoted to a keen and strict observance of the law of Moses—went through the "mighty change" in his heart and life after being called by the crucified but resurrected Christ. Later Paul gave us the supernal verses on charity (see 1 Corinthians 13). It was Paul, ironically, who spent much of his ministry in striving against the Judaizing of converts to Christianity.

There is yet another irony in Paul's ministry: He was earlier present as a cloak holder at the stoning of Stephen.

Of this episode Sir Thomas More, himself a victim of and witness to an abundance of irony, generously observed just as he was about to be martyred:

Paul ... was present, and consented to the death of St. Stephen, and kept their clothes that stoned him to death, and yet be they [Stephen and Paul] now both twain Holy Saints in heaven, and shall continue there friends for ever, so I verily trust and ... pray, that though your lordships have now here in earth been judges to my condemnation, we may yet hereafter in heaven merrily all meet together, to our everlasting salvation. (Anthony Kenny, Thomas More [Oxford University Press, 1983], p. 88.)

Sir Thomas More, as an adviser, had earlier warned Henry VIII:

"I must put your Highness in remembrance of one thing, and that is this. The Pope, as Your Grace knoweth, is a Prince as you are, and in league with all the other Christian Princes. It may hereafter so fall out that Your Grace and he may vary upon some points of the league, whereupon may grow breach of amity and war between you both. I think it best, therefore, that the place be amended, and his authority more slenderly touched."

"Nay," quoth His Grace, "that shall it not. We are so much bounden unto the See of Rome that we cannot do too much honour to it." (Thomas More, p. 51.)

Later on, the Pope excommunicated Henry VIII. More would not endorse Henry's marriage to Anne Boleyn and was beheaded at the order of the same king he had warned not to be too close to the Pope! More, ironically, was made a Catholic saint, having lost his life at the hands of a king who once said he could not do too much to honor the Pope.

One genuinely hopes that at least some of the critics of or the defectors from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will, with change of heart, one day be able to experience the same happy irony which Paul and Stephen experienced.

There was irony in Liberty Jail: grossly abused by men and a system which exercised unrighteous dominion, Joseph was there schooled in the Lord's refined way of leadership. The two unsuccessful escape efforts preceded the great and emancipating revelations to Joseph. Though told before of his special relationship to ancient Joseph, it was in Liberty that the Prophet first publicly noted it. Though deprived of constitutional rights, Joseph hailed the United States Constitution. Though betrayed by friends who helped put him there, Joseph was counseled to be long-suffering. Though in bad circumstances, Joseph was told it should be for his good.

In any case, part of what must be endured "well" and "valiantly" (D&C 121:8, 29) is irony. Irony is so often like salt in an already painful wound, or like giving vinegar to the thirsty (see Matthew 27:34, 48). But irony, meekly experienced, can stiffen righteous resolve and deepen memory.

Empathy, mercy, and humility can emerge from adversity much enhanced. Joseph himself traced increased feelings of sensitivity to his Liberty Jail experience:

No tongue can tell what inexpressible joy it gives a man to see the face of one who has been a friend, after having been inclosed in the walls of a prison for five months. It seems to me that my heart will always be more tender after this than ever it was before. . . . For my part I think I never could have felt as I now do if I had not suffered the wrongs that I have suffered. All things shall work together for good to them that love God. (Writings, pp. 386-87.)

Furthermore, according to what was revealed in Liberty Jail, the Restoration was not—and is not—fully finished yet! There is much more to come, as we see in these verses:

God shall give unto you knowledge . . . that has not been revealed since the world was until now;

Which our forefathers have awaited with anxious expectation to be revealed in the last times, which their minds were pointed to by the angels, as held in reserve for the fulness of their glory;

A time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld, whether there be one God or many gods, they shall be manifest.

All thrones and dominions, principalities and powers, shall be revealed and set forth upon all who have endured valiantly for the gospel of Jesus Christ.

And also, if there be bounds set to the heavens or to the seas, or to the dry land, or to the sun, moon, or stars—

All the times of their revolutions, all the appointed days, months, and years, and all the days of their days, months, and years, and all their glories, laws, and set times, shall be revealed in the days of the dispensation of the fulness of times—

According to that which was ordained in the midst of the Council of the Eternal God of all other gods before this world was, that should be reserved unto the finishing and the end thereof, when every man shall enter into his eternal presence and into his immortal rest. (D&C 121:26-32.)

Our forefathers "awaited with anxious expectation" for these things—to be had only in the very last times. This remarkable array of things yet to come will, of course, include the fulness of John the Baptist's record: "And it shall come to pass, that if you are faithful you shall receive the fulness of the record of John" (D&C 93:18).

But John's record was had once before, and the things being discussed now apparently have never been fully revealed, from the beginning of the world.

When the time comes the Lord will "set forth" further things we need to know about "thrones, dominions, principalities, and powers." Will the faithful then know what ancient Abraham earlier knew? Yes, but also more! Some promised knowledge concerns the astro-physical order of the cosmos, its appointed days and years, the set times, glories, and laws that pertain to the sun, the moon, the stars, and the heavens. Perhaps even more important, we will then learn about matters "according to that which was ordained in the midst of the Council of the Eternal God of all other gods" before the world was.

We are enclosed in the midst of effulgent, everlasting meaning.

Therefore, while Liberty Jail had only two small windows out of which Joseph could look when permitted, the widest window in Liberty Jail was that through which the Prophet received a tremendous amount that mattered, including the promises of revelation to come to the Church much later, having been "reserved unto the finishing and the end thereof" (D&C 121:32).

As noted, the grim conditions of Joseph and his fellow prisoners caused them to make two attempts at escape. Both of them failed. The revelations, on the other hand, provided conceptual breakouts which no mortal could prevent, emancipating the Prophet Joseph Smith and his followers from provincialism forever.

Even with and perhaps because of such vistas, the revelations given to jailed Joseph counseled him to be patient. This included being patient about the manner and the season in which the Lord will bring judgment upon those who are the sworn enemies of his work; he will bring his "swift judgment in the season thereof" (D&C 121:24), that season not being always according to the timetable we might desire.

Elsewhere the Lord said that the confounding of the enemies of his work would be done "in mine own due time" (D&C 71:10). Once again, there is the reminder of the importance of patience.

In pondering the expectations which go with being called and chosen, we recognize that "many" are called but "few" are chosen (D&C 121:34). One reason for the distinction between being "called" and being "chosen" is that the latter can understand this next reality: the powers of heaven are accessed and controlled only upon the principles of righteousness (D&C 121:36).

The Lord thus drew a sharp distinction, and this in the midst of the abuse and injustice of Liberty Jail, between those who would use power as it is usually employed: to cover their sins, glorify their pride and ambition, and seek control or dominion over others—and those who would lead as Jesus led.

Still earlier, at Kirtland, a parallel prescription came to Joseph about how the quorums composed of these priesthood holders should make decisions. The same virtues are to operate: "The decisions of these quorums, or either of them, are to be made in all righteousness, in holiness, and lowliness of heart, meekness and long suffering, and in faith, and virtue, and knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and charity; because the promise is, if these things abound in them they shall not be unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord" (D&C 107:30-31; see 2 Peter 1:8).

Unjustly reproved by Missouri's judicial system, Joseph was given almost clinical counsel on how to redeem those who required reproof:

Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy;

That he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death. (D&C 121:43-44.)

This redemptive counsel parallels the outreaching counsel of Paul:

But speaking the truth in love. . . . (Ephesians 4:15).

So that contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with over-much sorrow.

Wherefore I beseech you that ye would confirm your love toward him. (2 Corinthians 2:7-8.)

Human agency, of course, when misused, produces much misery, irony, and adversity.

At this historical distance we cannot fully measure the interplay within the Prophet of the revelations given him about man's moral agency, man's premortality, God's mercy, and salvation for the dead.

God, who is perfect in love, is not indifferent to human suffering. Being perfect in his love and mercy, how can he possibly be? We are his spirit children. But God is also deeply, deeply committed to man's freedom of choice. Genuine agency, misused, may produce not only happy but harsh consequences. The ripple effects roll like tidal waves throughout all of human history.

Therefore, it is important and helpful to ponder, much more than we do now, how the concepts of premortal existence and salvation for the dead are conjoined. When grown together, they are the means of insuring and demonstrating the mercy and justice of God. Clearly, by itself this tight time frame we call mortality does not permit such a balancing.

In the brevity of this experience, many die at birth or very young. This makes the doctrine of the plan of salvation even more significant, because our individual existence is a continuum, reaching a point at which there will be ultimate justice and mercy.

Though the revelation comprising what is now section 137 of the Doctrine and Covenants was given to Joseph in 1836, it was accepted by the Church as embodied scripture only in 1980. Apparently the gradual process of recognition and appreciation operates institutionally as well as individually. This section's illuminating verses bear directly upon the assurance of the mercy and justice of God and the diverse human circumstance:

Thus came the voice of the Lord unto me, saying: All who have died without a knowledge of this gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God;

Also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom;

For I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts.

And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven. (D&C 137:7-10.)

There are demographics, too, to drive this doctrine: of the approximately 70 billion individuals who, up to now, have inhabited this planet, probably not more than one percent have really heard the gospel. Today no more than one-tenth of one percent of the world's population are members of the Church. Even so, before the final judgment and resurrection all will have had an adequate opportunity to hear the gospel of Jesus Christ. This underscores the mercy of God and the justice of God. (See D&C 1:2.) Infant mortality, which rages in so many parts of the world, is also placed in a reassuring doctrinal context (see D&C 137:10).

Only a few (and these are they who were once privileged of the Lord but who, in mortality, betrayed the Lord) will not receive a kingdom of glory. Though differing dramatically in degree, the end results of the atonement of Jesus Christ include everlasting life in the telestial kingdom, which is still a kingdom of glory. Better still will be the terrestrial kingdom; and, of course, the most prized of all, the celestial kingdom.

Concerning what Paul gave us in several verses (about gradations of salvation), Joseph received and transmitted dozens of verses (see 1 Corinthians 15:40-42; D&C 76).

On one occasion the Prophet Joseph observed, "There are some things in my own bosom that must remain there. If Paul could say ‘I knew a man who ascended to the third heaven and saw things unlawful for man to utter,’ I more." (Words, p. 207.)

Little wonder that the Prophet's mind fastened so tightly upon temple work and salvation for the dead near the end of his ministry. No wonder, either, that a long-suffering God does not always punish swiftly. No wonder, either, given the injustice of the human circumstance and the misuse of human moral agency, that we are counseled to "endure it well" and to view the tribulations through which we pass as being "but a small moment."

Not only is Joseph being told, therefore, to put it all in perspective, but so are we.

Not only were Joseph's days known, but no righteous individual dies an untimely death.

Not only is Joseph being reminded that Jesus descended "below all;" we are being reminded, too, about the power and eloquence of Jesus’ example. Our faith in him who so "descended" is necessary in order for us to ascend to where he now is. His was a perfected and earned empathy—earned "according to the flesh."

And he shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people.

And he will take upon him death, that he may loose the bands of death which bind his people; and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities. (Alma 7:11-12.)

What we receive, sometimes only in precious fragments, from Paul and others in holy scripture (see Isaiah 53:4-5; Hebrews 2:18; Matthew 8:17) about how Jesus bore not only our sins but also our infirmities and sicknesses is thus given in greater fulness through Joseph Smith.

We see Joseph's dawning consciousness of both his and others’ human frailties. Hence his desire that his people allow for the fact that "our light speeches from time to time, they have nothing to do with the fixed principle of our hearts" (Writings, p. 376).

Surely the spirit of generosity which the Prophet pledged from Liberty Jail was present in his redemptive, post-Liberty Jail letter (July 22, 1840) to W. W. Phelps, whose betrayal had helped put Joseph in jail. Phelps wrote to Joseph Smith on June 29, 1840, seeking to regain the fellowship and membership he once had. Joseph's reply is a classic:

Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois July 22, 1840 Dear Brother Phelps:

I must say that it is with no ordinary feelings I endeavor to write a few lines to you in answer to yours of the 29th ultimo; at the same time I am rejoiced at the privilege granted me. You may in some measure realize what my feelings, as well as Elder Rigdon's and Brother Hyrum's were, when we read your letter—truly our hearts were melted into tenderness and compassion when we ascertained your resolves, etc.

I can assure you I feel a disposition to act on your case in a manner that will meet the approbation of Jehovah (whose servant I am), and agreeable to the principles of truth and righteousness which have been revealed; and inasmuch as long-suffering, patience, and mercy have ever characterized the dealings of our Heavenly Father towards the humble and penitent, I feel disposed to copy the example and cherish the same principles, [and] by so doing be a savior of my fellow men.

It is true that we have suffered much in consequence of your behavior—the cup of gall, already full enough for mortals to drink, was indeed filled to overflowing when you turned against us. One with whom we had oft taken sweet counsel together, and enjoyed many refreshing seasons from the Lord—"had it been an enemy, we could have borne it." In the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day when strangers carried away captive his forces, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Far West, even thou wast as one of them; but thou shouldst not have "looked on the day of thy brother, in the day that he became a stranger, neither shouldst thou have spoken proudly in the day of distress." However, the cup has been drunk, the will of our Heavenly Father has been done, and we are yet alive, for which we thank the Lord. And having been delivered from the hands of wicked men by the mercy of our God, we say it is your privilege to be delivered from the power of the adversary, be brought into the liberty of God's dear children, and again take your stand among the Saints of the Most High, and by diligence, humility, and love unfeigned, commend yourself to our God, and your God, and to the Church of Jesus Christ.

Believing your confession to be real, and your repentance genuine, I shall be happy once again to give you the right hand of fellowship, and rejoice over the returning prodigal.

Your letter was read to the Saints last Sunday, and an expression of their feeling was taken, when it was unanimously resolved that W. W. Phelps should be received into fellowship.

"Come on, dear brother, since the war is past, For friends at first are friends again at last." Yours as ever, Joseph Smith, Jr. (Writings, pp. 472-73.)

After the Prophet Joseph's martyrdom, this talented "prodigal" composed "Praise to the Man" (Hymns [new edition], no. 27).

Of even greater testifying significance is the hymn of President John Taylor, "The Seer, the Seer, Joseph the Seer"—especially since its author shared in the explosions and cacophony of Carthage!

In readying himself for what would follow the Missouri experiences, Joseph expressed concern over the need to watch over the Church more closely. From Liberty Jail he wrote of this frustration. In his March 1839 epistle to the Church, he observed that some were in their "evil works of darkness going on leading the minds of the weak and unwary into confusion and distraction" while the presidency of the Church were "ignorant as well as innocent" of that which was going on. Joseph displayed a deep concern for the weak and those less able to bear such vexing confusion and distraction. (Writings, p. 380.) Unattended to, he wrote, this pattern had given to some "power to lead the minds of the ignorant and unwary and thereby obtain such influence that when we approached their iniquities the devil gained great advantage" [^4] (Writings, p. 380).

It may have been only the scribal pattern of transcribing the Prophet's epistle for the Church at Quincy, but the Prophet observed how "finally, all enmity, malice, and hatred and past differences, misunderstandings, and mismanagements be slain victims at the feet of hope, and when the heart is sufficiently contrite, then the voice of inspiration steals along and whispers" (Writings, p. 394). Sequentially, there then appeared much of the magnificent revelation we now know as section 121, suggesting the Prophet's own readiness to receive the "voice of inspiration."

Given the tutorial explicitness of the prison-temple, as might be expected the first four recorded sermons given by Joseph after emancipation from Liberty Jail show the influence of that profound experience upon him.

On June 27, 1839, as Joseph spoke about the gift of the Holy Ghost, he stressed how vital the "principle of righteousness" is. The earlier revelation received in Liberty Jail declared that "the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness" (D&C 121:36; Words, p. 3).

On July 2, 1839, in Brigham Young's dwelling in Montrose, Iowa, in counseling the Twelve, Joseph told them that they should "profit by this important key . . . that in all your trials, troubles, and temptations, afflictions, bonds, imprisonment, and death, see to it that you do not betray heaven, that you do not betray Jesus Christ, that you do not betray your brethren, and that you do not betray the revelations of God, whether in the Bible, the Book of Mormon, or the Doctrine and Covenants, or any of the word of God" (Words, pp. 7-8). Again, there is the deep urgency and the fervent testimony regarding scripture and revelation.

Having borne testimony from Liberty Jail that God was true and Jesus Christ was true and the Book of Mormon was true and the Book of Commandments was true (Writings, p. 407), a freed Joseph now reminded the people of these and other things.

On July 7, 1839, a Sunday, in an apparently very brief address, Joseph said, "Remember, Brethren, that if you are imprisoned, Brother Joseph has been imprisoned before you. If you are placed where you can only see your Brethren through the gates of a window while in irons because of the gospel of Jesus Christ, remember, Brother Joseph has been in like circumstances" (Words, p. 8). "All these things" had given Joseph experience, for his good and now the Church's.

Also, at some time before August 8, 1839, Joseph gave a doctrinal address stating that "the spirit of man is not a created being; it existed from eternity and will exist to eternity. Anything created cannot be eternal" (Words, p. 9). Surely this doctrine was among the things which, while in Liberty Jail, Joseph felt a sense of urgency to impart to the Saints along with further information about the order and fulness of the holy priesthood.

In November 1839 Joseph reflected upon and gave an account of his Missouri experience and his perspective during those sufferings: "Death stared me in the face, and . . . my destruction was determined upon, as far as man was concerned; yet, from my first entrance into the camp, I felt an assurance that I, with my brethren and our families, should be delivered. Yes, that still small voice, which has so often whispered consolation to my soul, in the depth of sorrow and distress, bade me be of good cheer, and promised deliverance, which gave me great comfort" (Writings, p. 443).

Furthermore, Joseph observed how trials can work together for our good and prepare us "for the society of those who have come up out of great tribulation . . . ; remember the words of the Savior, ‘The servant is not above his Lord, if they have persecuted me, they will persecute you.’ . . . Afflictions, persecutions, imprisonments and deaths, we must expect. (Writings, p. 444.) A prepared Joseph was, like his Master, striving to prepare his followers for what lay ahead.

When the jailed Joseph was instructed, "Hold on thy way" (D&C 122:9), this counsel meant holding not only onto the iron rod but also to the Christian virtues under development within him. The crisis was no time, for instance, for Joseph to become like his captors—impatient, merciless, and cruel. The events during and after Missouri showed Joseph's determination to stay the course.

Joseph's sense of his impending martyrdom, for instance, was expressed several times, but it is especially significant that it did not contain bitterness. His loyalty to the standard that was the United States Constitution would remain with him, as in this instance: "If I lose my life in a good cause, I am will[ing] to be sacrificed on the altar of virtue, righteousness, and truth in maintaining the laws and Constitution of the United States if need be for the general good of mankind" (Words, p. 320).

For all of us, to "hold on" includes, therefore, holding on not only to our beliefs but also to our proven and tested patterns of behavior and Christian virtues under cultivation, and seeking to deepen even further their development. Endurance is continuance in striving for spiritual improvement, outlasting while becoming.

The time may come when the place that was Liberty Jail will be appropriately honored—not only for what it was and what it symbolized for Joseph but also for what it can teach all of us about our own discipleship, as we, in our time and turn, seek to "endure it well."

God's "pavilion" (which understandably seemed to Joseph for a brief, agonizing moment, to be out of range) was not an unreachable, far pavilion. A loving Lord quickly responded to Joseph's pleas and did so in a tender sunburst of celestial communication (see D&C 121:1-8).

The soul-weaving which occurred in Joseph, including that during his sojourn in jail, makes germane these lines by an unidentified author:

My life is but a Weaving, between my God and me, I do not choose the colors, He worketh steadily. Oftimes He weaveth sorrow, and I, in foolish pride, Forget He sees the upper, and I the underside.

Not till the loom is silent, and the shuttles cease to fly, Will God unroll the canvas and explain the reason why The dark threads are as needful in the Weaver's skillful hand As the threads of gold and silver in the pattern He has planned.

God saw the upper side, while fools mock Joseph's weaknesses—the underside.

As the ends of the earth inquire after his name, they will come to contemplate the full tapestry of Joseph's life. In this tapestry the strands and threads from the prison-temple will be prominently and resplendently represented.
