Neal A. Maxwell, But for a Small Moment ( 1986)

Chapter 7

"The Ends of the Earth Shall Inquire After Thy Name"

Today's Church members, all of us, would do well to examine the significant but soul-stretching beginning days of the Church for general perspective but also for indicators as to some things which may likewise stretch us in the unpeaceful, latter days. Though we must be ever careful about allowing for differences in scale and circumstance, there are major lessons for us.

Joseph, as a revelator, received more than he could at first fully understand. Life's experiences and the Lord's counseling further illuminated these truths for him. In fact, Joseph observed that "time and experience" are needed to learn some things. If time and experience are involved, then there is a corresponding need for us to have patience and faith; first, patience to cope with the expanse of time over which some learning occurs; second, faith as evidence of God's unseen purposes to help us pass meekly through the relevant experiences. Is this not the reality which Joseph Smith earlier translated? "Nevertheless the Lord seeth fit to chasten his people; yea, he trieth their patience and their faith" (Mosiah 23:21).

In addition to time and experience, however, solemn searching and contemplating in communicating with God are necessary to find out and to understand the deep things of God. Just as "time and experience" bring about learning, so does searching and trying.

And now, behold, because ye have tried the experiment,... ye must needs know that the seed is good.

And now, behold, is your knowledge perfect? Yea, your knowledge is perfect in that thing, and your faith is dormant; and this because you know. (Alma 32:33-34.)

If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself (John 7:17).

It is, wrote Jacob and Paul, the Spirit which aids our search: "for the Spirit. . . speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be" (Jacob 4:13; see also 1 Corinthians 2:10). The interplay of time, experience, searching, thinking, pondering, trying, and communicating with God is facilitated by the Holy Spirit. The scriptures provide a superb way to induce this interplay, if we will but "feast upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do" (2 Nephi 32:3).

So postured, we can then learn from our experiences. Joseph later spoke of his Missouri experience, counseling the Saints, "Alter your tribulations, if you do these things, and exercise fervent prayer and faith in the sight of God..., he shall give unto you knowledge" (Writings, p. 397).

Peter wrote that patience—in part, no doubt, in adversity—combined with other virtues could produce a special yield:

For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ (2 Peter 1:8).

But the God of all grace, ... after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you (1 Peter 5:10).

It is in this setting of managed adversity with our virtues in evidence that the Lord will keep his promise to pour further knowledge upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints, individually and collectively (D&C 121:33).

Virtue is crucial. There is little or no spiritual progress when individuals, in the words of President Marion G. Romney, "try to serve the Lord without offending the devil" (Ensign, October 1983, p. 6).

Thus we see how experiences illuminate principles, and principles illuminate experiences.

Given the reality of this process, how could our learning be other than "line upon line," experience upon experience, and understanding upon understanding?

Gradual unfolding is seen even in the brightest and the best. Mormon, for instance, puzzled over the actual condition of a translated being: "It did seem unto them like a transfiguration of them." "Whether they were mortal or immortal, from the day of their transfiguration, I know not." Then, "Since I wrote, I have inquired of the Lord, and he hath made it manifest unto me" (3 Nephi 28:15, 17, 37). This unfolding of understanding occurred even as Mormon, at one point, had seen the three Nephites and they had ministered to him (v. 26).

As the Prophet Joseph deepened his discipleship he then was in a position to have his understanding expanded under the direction of Heavenly Father. One of the great things we can learn, then, is that the process is always essentially the same for everybody. There are no shortcuts.

If in the midst of "all these things" Joseph came gradually to appreciate some of the deep doctrines which had come through him—whether by translation or revelation—why should we be surprised?

How many times did Jesus tell the original Apostles of the impending resurrection? (See Mark 9:31-32; 16:14; Luke 9:44-45; 18:33-34; 24:25, 41.) Yet only later, after tutoring experiences, did such things dawn on the original Twelve: "These things understood not his disciples at the first: but when Jesus was glorified, then remembered they that these things were written of him, and that they had done these things unto him" (John 12:16).

If the original Twelve at first could not manage what Jesus meant by being about his Father's business (see Luke 2:49-50), or all his declarations of Messiahship (see John 8:25-27), or his parable about his shepherdship and the scattered fold (John 10:6)—why should not Joseph require tutoring time on the subjects of our premortal existence, the plan of salvation, and the nature of God?

In contrast, those who "will not search" or who will not understand the things of God (2 Nephi 32:7), or who "willingly are ignorant" (2 Peter 3:5) will view no stretching vistas. They will ignore the crucial insights called forth by the interplay of revelation and introspection such as Joseph had in the prison-temple.

Others, like the Amulek of his earlier years, will even find that their past spiritual experiences are lost, as they become busy with the pressing cares of the world. Thus preoccupied, the unlearning are "called many times and [they will] not hear" (Alma 10:6).

The manner in which Joseph maintained his felicity in the midst of the adversity, obscurity, and irony of Liberty Jail is impressive indeed. If he had not done so, if he had not followed counsel—"all these things shall give thee experience and shall be for thy good," "endure it well," "hold on the way," and "but a small moment"—there perhaps would not have been an outcome in which "the ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name" (D&C 122:1).

"All these things" included false charges, a biased judicial and political system. Yet Joseph was "of good cheer" and supported the "glorious standard" of the United States Constitution. Clearly the 1833 revelations to Joseph concerning the Constitution's origins and importance were reverenced in the Prophet's expression from jail (see D&C sections 98, 101).

Joseph's being "of good cheer" is all the more commendable in view of the Lord's warning imagery: "Thine enemies prowl around thee" (D&C 122:6); the "very jaws of hell" seemed to gape at him (D&C 122:7). If hell has its own halitosis, Joseph could tell us!

Nor should we forget that the Lord told suffering Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail that hell would "rage" against him (D&C 122:1). Rage is not a mild word, and not all the raging against Joseph occurred then. Moreover, "fools shall have [Joseph] in derision" (D&C 122:1). In our day fresh deluges of derision are likely to flow periodically.

The Prophet was warned that there would be those who would lift up their heels against the Lord's anointed, crying that they had sinned when they had not sinned, and such critics would swear falsely (D&C 121:16-20). There is still another lesson which is applicable in our time and is to be distinguished from observing the process of spiritual growth in others. On this lesson, the episode involving Thomas B. Marsh is very instructive. He let a dispute over milk cause him to focus, jealously rather than mercifully, on some minor imperfections in the Prophet Joseph Smith, which finally led to his disaffection and excommunication. Lorenzo Snow, on the other hand, said that while he too had noticed some minor imperfections in the Prophet, he was grateful that the Lord could use Joseph Smith for so very significant a work; and that thus there might be some hope for him, Lorenzo Snow. Indeed, there was hope for President Snow, who viewed others graciously and charitably as if through the "windows of heaven." Indeed, there is hope for all of us if we will let the Lord work with us in our weaknesses.

From the writings of Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail we should ponder other instructive observations, such as the periodic relevance of the following: "Those who bear false witness against us do seem to have a great triumph over us for the present" (Writings, p. 375).

Joseph was like a predecessor prophet, Elisha, who was in the grip of a similar circumstance in the sense of its being outwardly hopeless. Even so, Elisha counseled, "Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them" (2 Kings 6:16). Joseph Smith knew what Elisha knew. So must we.

Joseph wrote echoing Isaiah, "We have spoken words and men have made us offenders" (Writings, p. 376; see 2 Nephi 27:32; Isaiah 29:21). The last episode of this kind has yet to occur.

Joseph saw parallels with John: "they hate us. . . because of the testimony of Jesus Christ" (Writings, p. 377; see Revelation 1:9; 6:9; 12:17). This will yet occur, again and again, in the present dispensation.

Joseph's enemies were in some respects less troublesome than former friends. "Mormon dissenters are running through the world and are spreading various foul and libelous reports against us thinking thereby to gain the friendship of the world. . .; they [the world] make a tool of these fellows. . . and after that they hate them worse than they do us" (Writings, p. 379; see also D&C 121:20).

Yet the Prophet was assured that the people of the Church would never be turned against him by the testimony of traitors (D&C 122:3). Nevertheless, traitors would have sufficient influence to cast him into trouble (D&C 122:4).

Perhaps those now in watchcare roles in the kingdom can learn from Joseph in yet another way. Again, from Liberty Jail: "Your humble servant or servants intend from henceforth to [disapprove] everything that is not in accordance with the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ... They will not hold their peace as in times past when they see iniquity beginning to rear its head for fear of traitors or the consequences that shall flow by reproving those who... seek to destroy the flock." (Writings, pp. 405-6.) Earlier identification and quiet redemptive remonstration are to be preferred to delayed, embittering, public showdowns.

This vow did not mean, however, that the Prophet intended to be less merciful than before. Perhaps he was even more merciful. His redemptive, eloquent letter to W. W. Phelps, quoted previously, is the epitome of a merciful and forgiving spirit.

Like the prophet Samuel, Joseph was often required to perform unpleasant tasks from which he was not to shrink. Having done a disagreeable duty, "Samuel grew, and the Lord was with him, and did let none of his words fall to the ground" (1 Samuel 3:19; see 1 Samuel 2:26; also Luke 2:52).

If Joseph was earlier hesitant to set the Church in order because of concern for how such watchcare would be received, at this distance we cannot confirm it. For us in our time it is not an easy thing for most of us to please the Lord first and mortals next. Aging Eli, an extreme example, was aware that his sons were debauched. He asked them, "Why do ye such things?" but his earlier neglect of his sons' wrongdoings made his later rebuke of them too mild to be effective. So disposed over time, "the sons of Eli... knew not the Lord." Moreover, their sensuous life-style caused other of the Lord's "people to transgress."

A prophet came to Eli with the Lord's complaint that Eli "honourest thy sons above me." He had subordinated deference to divinity to deference to family. (See 1 Samuel 2:12-29.)

Some things the adversary inflicted upon the Church in its beginning days may occur again as human affairs enter the winding-up stage in preparation for the second coming of the Savior. The Apostle John, who was permitted to see not only his own time but our time, spoke of the adversary's sense of urgency: "he knoweth that he hath but a short time" (Revelation 12:12).

Peter's words were not overly dramatic when he described the adversary as a "roaring lion" (1 Peter 5:8). The current bellicosity with which the adversary challenges things once sacred suggests he is not merely clearing his throat. After all, he "spreadeth his dominions" (D&C 82:5) and uses barrages of "fiery darts." What are we to do?

These words came as translation through Joseph:

And I said unto them that it was the word of God; and whoso would hearken unto the word of God, and would hold fast unto it, they would never perish; neither could the temptations and the fiery darts of the adversary overpower them unto blindness, to lead them away to destruction (1 Nephi 15:24).

Yet you should have been faithful; and he would have extended his arm and supported you against all the fiery darts of the adversary; and he would have been with you in every time of trouble (D&C 3:8).

The Pauline prescription is parallel:

Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all saints (Ephesians 6:18; see also D&C 27:17).

Helaman, too, wrote of the "whirlwind" in the midst of which are the devil's sharp shafts (Helaman 5:12).

In such inclement and dark "weather," holding fast to the rod of iron (or the word of God—1 Nephi 15:23-24) and having oil in our lamps, rather than complaining of the darkness, is the way.

We should not be surprised, therefore, as such challenges emerge in our time and in our lives. We will likely have opportunities, again and again, to ponder the comforting and consoling words of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail, "My son, peace be unto thy soul" (D&C 121:7). Not that the afflictions will thereby be lessened. Surely of all the generations who have ever lived, those who live in the dispensation of the fulness of times cannot expect to be exempt from chastisement and trial (see Mosiah 23:21).

Even when one is steadfast in the midst of "all of these things," there is often an accompanying sorrow. This occurs when those about us, whom we love, fall, defect, or slacken in their faith. This too was something the Prophet Joseph learned to cope with, though the betrayals from inside and the loss of the one-time faithful wrenched his heart more than we can measure.

Whether as leaders, neighbors, or parents, we all have moments when we see others pursuing courses which will produce misery for them and theirs. We should love, remonstrate, and exemplify to the degree we can. But when we have done all we can, it is sometimes to no avail. We are then thrown back, and sometimes none too gently, on the rock of reality: this life is a probationary estate concerning which the Lord has said to us all, nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself" (Moses 3:17).

Moral agency in the face of difficult choices was not for Adam and Eve alone (Moses 7:32; D&C 101:78). There are blessings if we choose aright and penalties if we choose wrongly. Therefore, attempting to stand between friends and the consequences of their wrong choices is not realistic; it is not nearly as useful as being lovingly at their sides before and when choices are being made. Men and women really are "free to choose" (2 Nephi 2:27), and we cannot and should not try to have it otherwise.

Do we always know, however, what consequences will flow from certain decisions? Many times, not. Part of living consists of learning, personally and vicariously, what actions produce what consequences. When we govern ourselves by correct principles, we also govern our consequences.

As men "act according to their wills" (Alma 12:31), there are consequences, good and bad. Part of maturing spiritually is to realize this. One of the great virtues of meekness is making allowance for the fact that God does know best. Trusting him and trusting his principles is an act of high intelligence.

Even so, did the one-third of the hosts of heaven know back then all that would later flow from their rebellion? Likely not. But there would have been warning words, "plainly manifest," though they could neither feel in advance nor experience anticipatory anguish. But they were unwilling to trust Father.

Behold, here is the agency of man, and here is the condemnation of man; because that which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them, and they receive not the light (D&C 93:31).

So of the process called the plan of salvation, and of the executing Name thereof, it is correctly said, "there is none other way" (2 Nephi 9:41; Mosiah 3:17; D&C 18:23).

When we see someone striding towards a cliff or the unpleasant consequences of his actions, what are we to do? Joseph said it—move early as the first challenge appears; do early on what is right, without worrying unduly. And what is the manner of reproof, if such is needed?

Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy;

That he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death. (D&C 121:43-44.)

Tough love is doing all one can, risking being misunderstood in the process, yet finally accepting that others are meant to be "free to choose." Tough love never quits; it is unconditional. But neither is it unaware of Lehi's "trembling parent" (2 Nephi 1:14).

We are to write off neither individuals nor Ninevehs. Yet we are to engage in "speaking the truth in love" (Ephesians 4:15), as Joseph Smith did with presidential aspirant Stephen A. Douglas. One wonders if Douglas, in his busy political life, ever paused long enough later in life to let the Holy Ghost preach to him from the pulpit of memory.

Another of the prophet's observations from Liberty Jail, this one to a friendly nonmember, was, "The name Mormon, and Mormonism, was given to us by our enemies, but Latter-day Saints was the real name by which the Church was organized" (Writings, p. 420).

Names do matter.

The Good Shepherd taught his followers that his sheep "hear (and know] his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name" (John 10:3-4; italics added). This was how Christ called Peter: "Thou art Simon the son of Jona"(John 1:42).

When the Father and the Son called the leader-prophet of the latter days, Joseph later recorded, "One of them spake unto me, calling me by name" (JS-H 1:17; italics added). The pattern of personalization prevailed in Liberty Jail: "Know thou, my son (D&C 122:7). "Peace be unto thy soul" (D&C 121:7).

As Truman Madsen has observed, the Prophet Joseph's request for a certain hymn to be sung in the final jail was for lyrics that included the line, "He spake, and my poor name he named" ("A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief," Hymns [new edition], no. 29).

This pattern of individualization is not only highly impressive but it also shows individualized love. As the resurrected Jesus prepared to part from his Nephite Twelve, "he spake unto his disciples, one by one" asking what they desired of him "after that I am gone to the Father" (3 Nephi 28:1; italics added).

So as we look through the bars at Liberty Jail we see an imperfect but improving Joseph. All was not tidiness or smoothness. Edges and corners were being painfully and obviously knocked off. But Joseph was striving to serve and to become like his perfect Master, Jesus, who had borne so much more—indeed, all! Joseph had "deepness of earth," but it took the harrowing of special experiences to increase his spiritual yield to "a hundred fold" (see Matthew 13:5, 8).

No mortal is to any full degree truly like Jesus. Even so, Jesus had one Judas; Joseph, several. Jesus had one doubting Thomas; Joseph, several. Yet no one was happier than Joseph when prodigals returned, voting with their feet on the road of repentance and reconciliation. Only the meek can finally align intentions and actions.

Near the end of his eventful and revelation-filled ministry, Joseph seemed to realize how difficult it might be for others to understand him fully. "I don't blame any one for not believing my history. If I had not experienced what I have, I would not have believed it myself" (History of the Church 6:317). [^1]

Joseph, who lived his life "in crescendo," followed the counsel, "Endure it well." Now it remains for his people to do likewise.

Joseph's sincere words of salutation in a secluded grove ushered in this dispensation. They were words of anxious petition uttered in distress. Joseph said he exerted "all [his] powers to call upon God" (JS-H 1:16). Twenty-four springs later, Joseph, in a different distress, cried "O Lord my God!" (D&C 135:1.)

God did not fail to respond at either time.

And Joseph Smith did not fail God.

As promised, this "choice seer" lived "to finish the work God had given him to do."

We too must be occupied with our work. Church members today, perhaps more than ever in recent memory, must first get their own witness as to the prophetic mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith and second be willing to bear that witness publicly and privately. We must not forget the lesson President David O. McKay taught us about how his own discouraged father, while on his mission, was advised by the Spirit that he must declare publicly his testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith. After he had done this the gloom lifted, and his mission was successful. It will not be otherwise with us today.

The prophecy given by the angel Moroni was that Joseph's name "should be had for good and evil among all nations." The adversary will be doing his relentless part with regard to the negative portion of that prophecy. By word and deed, faithful Church members must see to it that the positive portion is fulfilled.

The latter-day work begun by a latter-day seer is spreading throughout the world. What began when Joseph saw a pillar of glorious light is now a worldwide, burgeoning spiritual light which can no longer be hidden.

No wonder that, with more frequency and in more places, "the ends of the earth . . . inquire after [Joseph's] name"!

---
Notas:
[^1] 2. Joseph had been very close to Liberty, Missouri, before; it was a few miles from there that the men of Zion's Camp ended their march in 1834, smitten by cholera. Of that march, the author has said: "God is more concerned with growth than with geography. Thus, those who marched in Zion's Camp were not exploring the Missouri countryside but their own possibilities." (Conference Report, October 1976, p. 16.)
