We live in extremely trying and challenging moments in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times. We all yearn for hope, peace, love, and the knowledge that our Heavenly Father is ever present to assist us over the hurdles we encounter on our earthly sojourn. There are temptations of every kind—so many dissenting voices—which can test our faith and make us lose our way.

On the introductory page of the Book of Mormon it is affirmed that the Book of Mormon tells us what to do to gain peace in this life and eternal salvation in the life to come.

The Prophet Joseph Smith testified, “The Book of Mormon [is] the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book.”

We, as members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, are truly blessed to have the most correct book on earth—this prized possession—which can transform our lives and change the face of the earth. What more do we need?

President Ezra Taft Benson taught that the Book of Mormon is the keystone of our religion in at least three ways:

1.  Witness of Christ—It bears witness of His reality with power and clarity.

2.  Fulness of Doctrine—In the Book of Mormon we find the fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ and the doctrines required for our salvation and exaltation.

3.  Foundation of Testimony—One cannot gain a testimony of the claims of the Restoration and all that accompanies it without knowing that the Book of Mormon is true.

As witnesses of this profound book, we need to share it with our brothers and sisters—hence our task is to declare the gospel and to do it effectively. In the Doctrine and Covenants we are counseled: “Seek not to declare my word, but first seek to obtain my word, and then shall your tongue be loosed; then, if you desire, you shall have my Spirit and my word, yea, the power of God unto the convincing of men.”

Our faith may be tried, and at times the faith of our fellow saints; and others who may not be of our faith will not believe everything in the gospel. President Ezra Taft Benson taught how the Book of Mormon can be the central resource in responding to such situations:

“We are to use the Book of Mormon in handling objections to the Church. . . .

“All objections, whether they be on abortion, plural marriage, seventh-day worship, etc., basically hinge on whether Joseph Smith and his successors were and are prophets of God receiving divine revelation. . . .

“. . . The only problem the objector has to resolve for himself is whether the Book of Mormon is true. For if the Book of Mormon is true, then Jesus is the Christ, Joseph Smith was his prophet, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is true, and it is being led today by a prophet receiving revelation.”

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that the Book of Mormon is central to our faith, beliefs, and testimony. “Take away the Book of Mormon and the revelations, and where is our religion?” he asked. “We have none.”

We need to know for ourselves that the Book of Mormon is true and to develop a personal testimony. “And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost.”

President Thomas S. Monson, during the April 2017 general conference, implored each of us to prayerfully study and ponder the Book of Mormon each day. As we do so, he promised that we will be in a position to hear the voice of the Spirit, to resist temptation, to overcome doubt and fear and to receive heaven’s help in our lives.

I have enjoyed these blessings as I read and ponder the Book of Mormon every day. I was privileged many years ago to have a meeting with one General Authority who, during our discussion, mentioned that he reads the Book of Mormon daily. It struck me as he spoke, and my thoughts raced, “If this man, about 70 years old who grew up in the Church, reads this book every day, how much more do I need it as a novice and convert to the Church?” That meeting changed my life forever. I just love starting my day having the nourishment of the soothing words of the Book of Mormon. Much like Nephi, “my soul delighteth in the scriptures and my heart pondereth them.”

President Russell M. Nelson promised that the “truths of the Book of Mormon have the power to heal, comfort, restore, succor, strengthen, console, and cheer our souls.”

I witnessed firsthand how these blessings—as promised by our dear prophet—changed the life of Brother Joseph Tembo* from the Copperbelt in Zambia. We visited this brother when I was assigned to preside over a district conference a few years ago. Upon entering his home, I noticed in his room a small table on the left with a pile of scriptures. I just marveled as I was informed that he had been inactive for the past seven years and had become somewhat disaffected. As we discussed with him, he said something profound, “I haven’t been going to Church for the past seven years because of some offense. I still know the gospel is true. Reading the Book of Mormon daily has kept me going.” The Book of Mormon had surely comforted, strengthened and consoled him during his greatest time of need. It was therefore easy to help him find his way back to Church again. 

This also strengthened my own testimony that scripture study should have a daily set time, not leftover time! And as President Harold B. Lee cautioned, “If we are not reading the scriptures daily, our testimonies are growing thinner.”

As we seek to increase our faith in Heavenly Father and in His Son, Jesus Christ, and His Atonement, we need to “press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end.” “The words of Christ will tell [us] all things what [we] should do.” The Book of Mormon is for our profit and learning. It testifies of Jesus Christ and answers the questions of the soul.

*Name has been changed

Walter Chatora was named an Area Seventy in April 2014.  He is married to Diana Tapfumanei; they are the parents of three children. Elder and Sister Chatora reside in Centurion, Pretoria, South Africa.
