Like many other 16-year-old seminary students throughout the world, Kim Tae Whan, a Korean member, had studied Luke chapter 10, Christ’s parable of the Good Samaritan.

One morning Tae Whan asked his mother, “Mom, will you prepare for me another lunch today?” Mrs. Kim prepared another lunch, thinking that her son was growing so fast that he needed a little more to eat. Every day afterwards she would prepare an extra lunch for him to take.

One day Dr. Kim received a telephone call at work from a close friend.

“Hello, Dr. Kim. How is your family?

“They’re fine!” replied Dr. Kim cheerfully.

The two friends talked back and forth until Mr. Lee blurted out, “Are you sure your family isn’t having any problems lately?”

Pausing, Dr. Kim answered quizzically, “Why? What’s wrong?”

“Dr. Kim, I saw Tae Whan down on the corner selling newspapers the other day.”

“You saw what? Are you sure?”

“I’m positive! I was just concerned about your family’s welfare and wanted to check with you.”

Dr. Kim sat that afternoon in the office puzzled, wondering why Tae Whan would do such a thing and not say anything to anyone. That night after dinner, Dr. Kim quietly waited for the opportunity to talk to his son. Finally he said, “Tae Whan, could I speak to you for a minute?”

“Yes, Dad.”

“Son, I got a call today from Mr. Lee. He said he saw you downtown selling papers the other day. Is that true?”

Tae Whan answered sheepishly, “Yes, Dad, but I did it to help a classmate. He didn’t have a lunch so I’ve been giving my extra one to him. And for every paper we sell, we earn 40 won (8¢).”

“Son, why are you doing this? You should have asked me first.”

“But, Dad, every time I help my friend, I feel I’m becoming more like the Good Samaritan. Besides that, I want to help my classmates who aren’t as fortunate as I. I’m not really doing that much. I read about it in my seminary manual and felt it was the thing I ought to do.”

Tae Whan knows the meaning of the Savior’s commandment: “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself.” (Luke 10:27.)
