1 Clem. 16:1 For Christ is with them that are lowly of mind, not with them that exalt themselves over the flock.

1 Clem. 16:2 The scepter of the majesty of God, even our Lord Jesus Christ, came not in the pomp of arrogance or of pride, though He might have done so, but in lowliness of mind, according as the Holy Spirit spake concerning Him.

1 Clem. 16:3 For He saith Lord, who believed our report? and to whom was the arm of the Lord revealed? We announced Him in His presence. As a child was He, as a root in a thirsty ground. There is no form in Him, neither glory. And we beheld Him, and He had no form nor comeliness, but His form was mean, lacking more than the form of men. He was a man of stripes and of toil, and knowing how to bear infirmity: for His face is turned away. He was dishonored and held of no account.

1 Clem. 16:4 He beareth our sins and suffereth pain for our sakes: and we accounted Him to be in toil and in stripes and in affliction.

1 Clem. 16:5 And He was wounded for our sins and hath been afflicted for our iniquities. The chastisement of our peace is upon Him. With His bruises we were healed.

1 Clem. 16:6 We all went astray like sheep, each man went astray in his own path:

1 Clem. 16:7 and the Lord delivered Him over for our sins. And He openeth not His mouth, because He is afflicted. As a sheep He was led to slaughter; and as a lamb before his shearer is dumb, so openeth He not His mouth. In His humiliation His judgment was taken away.

1 Clem. 16:8 His generation who shall declare? For His life is taken away from the earth.

1 Clem. 16:9 For the iniquities of my people He is come to death.

1 Clem. 16:10 And I will give the wicked for His burial, and the rich for His death; for He wrought no iniquity, neither was guile found in His mouth. And the Lord desireth to cleanse Him from His stripes.

1 Clem. 16:11 If ye offer for sin, your soul shall see along lived seed.

1 Clem. 16:12 And the Lord desireth to take away from the toil of His soul, to show Him light and to mould Him with understanding, to justify a Just One that is a good servant unto many. And He shall bear their sins.

1 Clem. 16:13 Therefore He shall inherit many, and shall divide the spoils of the strong; because His soul was delivered unto death, and He was reckoned unto the transgressors;

1 Clem. 16:14 and He bare the sins of many, and for their sins was He delivered up.

1 Clem. 16:15 And again He Himself saith; But I am a worm and no man, a reproach of men and an outcast of the people.

1 Clem. 16:16 All they that beheld me mocked at me; they spake with their lips; they wagged their heads, saying, He hoped on the Lord; let Him deliver him, or let Him save him, for He desireth him.

1 Clem. 16:17 Ye see, dearly beloved, what is the pattern that hath been given unto us; for, if the Lord was thus lowly of mind, what should we do, who through Him have been brought under the yoke of His grace?
