1 Clem. 55:6 To no less peril did Esther also, who was perfect in faith, expose herself, that she might deliver the twelve tribes of Israel, when they were on the point to perish. For through her fasting and her humiliation she entreated the all seeing Master, the God of the ages; and He, seeing the humility of her soul, delivered the people for whose sake she encountered the peril.

1 Clem. 56:1 Therefore let us also make intercession for them that are in any transgression, that forbearance and humility may be given them, to the end that they may yield not unto us, but unto the will of God. For so shall the compassionate remembrance of them with God and the saints be fruitful unto them, and perfect.

1 Clem. 56:2 Let us accept chastisement, whereat no man ought to be vexed, dearly beloved. The admonition which we give one to another is good and exceeding useful; for it joineth us unto the will of God.

1 Clem. 56:3 For thus saith the holy word; The Lord hath indeed chastened me, and hath not delivered me over unto death.

1 Clem. 56:4 For whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.

1 Clem. 56:5 For the righteous, it is said, shall chasten me in mercy and shall reprove me, but let not the mercy of sinners anoint my head.

1 Clem. 56:6 And again He saith; Blessed is the man whom the Lord hath reproved, and refuse not thou the admonition of the Almighty. For He causeth pain, and he restoreth again:

1 Clem. 56:7 He hath smitten, and His hands have healed.

1 Clem. 56:8 Six times shall He rescue thee from afflictions and at the seventh no evil shall touch thee.

1 Clem. 56:9 In famine he shall deliver thee from death, and in war He shall release thee from the arm of the sword.

1 Clem. 56:10 And from the scourge of the tongue He shall hide thee and thou shalt not be afraid when evils approach.

1 Clem. 56:11 Thou shalt laugh at the unrighteous and wicked, and of the wild beasts thou shalt not be afraid.

1 Clem. 56:12 For wild beasts shall be at peace with thee.

1 Clem. 56:13 Then shalt thou know that thy house shall be at peace: and the abode of thy tabernacle shall not go wrong,

1 Clem. 56:14 and thou shalt know that thy seed is many, and thy children as the plenteous herbage of the field.

1 Clem. 56:15 And thou shalt come to the grave as ripe corn reaped in due season, or as the heap of the threshing floor gathered together at the right time.

1 Clem. 56:16 Ye see, dearly beloved, how great protection there is for them that are chastened by the Master: for being a kind father He chasteneth us to the end that we may obtain mercy through His holy chastisement.
