Many reasons could be given as to why the Old Testament is the least read and least understood book of the standard works: the Old Testament writers lived thousands of years ago, they wrote in Hebrew and used unfamiliar poetic styles, their culture and symbolism are alien to us, and so on. These barriers are gradually overcome as one reads the Old Testament while studying other scriptures, commentaries, and supplementary resources. As the reader appreciates the great variety and richness of the Old Testament writings, he can choose the books, chapters, and sections that will best enlighten and inspire him at a particular time. This book should encourage and help in that selection process, as it provides introductions and background material for each of the thirty-nine Old Testament books.

While reading the Old Testament, most readers have questions about certain passages and topics. Answers to some commonly asked questions are included in this book.

Charts, maps, illustrations, and extra enrichment material about the Old Testament are also provided.

Together, these introductions, answers to commonly asked questions, and additional materials will help overcome some of the barriers that often discourage the Old Testament reader. However, this book will only prove helpful if the reader will exert effort in reading and studying the scriptures and other available material.

The purpose of this book is not to answer every question or even most questions that an Old Testament reader might have. It does, however, attempt to lead the reader into the work and through some of the more difficult passages. It suggests other resources, especially those found in the new Latter-day Saint edition of the King James Version of the Bible. References in this book to the Topical Guide, Bible Dictionary, Joseph Smith Translation, and Maps pertain to that edition of the Bible. (The abbreviation "BD" refers to the Bible Dictionary. "TG" refers to the Topical Guide. "JST" refers to the Joseph Smith Translation.)

With thanks to my father, Daniel, for his example; my wife, V-Ann, for her patience; our six children for their long-suffering; and Charlotte, Julie, Lorraine, and Susan for their help.
