(Gen. 1:5)

Three theories are accepted by various Latter-day Saints as a possible answer to this question:

Some hold that each day of the creation was the same length as under our present system of time. They believe that if man, with his limited capacity, experience, and power can use greenhouses and controlled conditions to put "years" of growth on young trees within a few weeks, then God, with his capacities, could develop this earth through the seven periods of creation within a week of our time.

Many Latter-day Saints combine the creation stories of Genesis and the Pearl of Great Price with a vision given to Abraham wherein he was told that one revolution of the Lord's governing star, Kolob, was equal to one thousand years of earth's time. (Abr. 3:4.) They suppose that this same time relationship existed before the days of Abraham and before the fall of Adam (and of the earth) and that each "day" of creation (according to Kolob time) was a thousand years of our time. Based upon the first viewpoint discussed (one day equals one day), if God has the power to complete a creation stage within one day, he could also do it within one thousand years.

Some Latter-day Saints combine the various creation accounts and note that Abraham used the word "time," not "day," to summarize the events of each creative period. They also stress that only after each stage or series of creative events was completed was it called a "day" or a "time." Thus, each period would not even have to be the same length of time, but when one stage of the creation was completed it was called a "day" and then the next stage was begun. (See Abr. 4:5, 8, 13, 19, 23, 31; 5:2-3, 13.) The name "day" or "time" was only given the work after it was completed. The term "day" would thus not have to be a set length of time. It could be like our use of the term "day" in the statement, "We live in a modern day and age." Here "day" means the last number of years (even centuries) of our time.

Some adherents of this third viewpoint also suggest that geologists, earth scientists, and other specialists usually recognize the same general sequence of events as recorded in the creation story, but identify many thousands and millions of years for each stage.

### Summary:

The Lord has not revealed in the scriptures the exact length of time of the creation process. It is important to note what questions of the creation he did answer. He did not tell us how long the creation took, but he did emphasize who created this earth--God, and why--for man and woman so that they could achieve their immortality and eternal life. Eventually we will know the answers to the questions of the creation, but for now it is important to recognize who the creator was and why he organized this earth and allowed us to come here.
