(Isa. 62:5)

Joseph Smith in his inspired translation changed the word "sons" to "God." This not only clarifies the phrase but it also makes a better synonomous parallelism between the four parts of the verse so that they now compare as follows:

(a) As a man marries a virgin,

(b) So does God marry [make a covenant] with us;

(a1) As the groom rejoices over his bride,

(b1) So does God rejoice over us.

Who Is Talking to Whom in This Chapter?

(Isa. 63)

Isaiah 63 is a dialogue between Isaiah and the Messiah, but there are no quotation marks to separate the speakers. See if you can identify Isaiah's question and the Lord's response in verse one, and then Isaiah's second question in verse two and the Lord's answer in verses 3-6. Verses 7-19 are Isaiah's response. The importance of this chapter will become more clear after studying the following Bible footnotes: 2b and 3c, 3b and 4b, 9b and 9c (including D&C 133:53 and Abr. 1:15), 14d, 16a, and 17a.

Why Would Christ Come from Edom in the Last Days?

(Isa. 63:1)

By using some of the Bible aids, we can find two good possible answers. First, look at Map 7 or 9 and find Edom or Bozrah in the area southeast of the Salt (or Dead) Sea. Anyone coming from this area to Jerusalem would usually travel north along the King's Highway through Moab and then swing west to cross the Jordan Valley and climb up the mountains.

Secondly, review footnote 1b and see how the term "Edom" (later called "Idumea") symbolically represents the "world" as revealed in Doctrine and Covenants section one.

Thus Isaiah's describing the second coming of Christ as being from Edom could have two meanings:

The next verses in Isaiah 63 describe how Christ's robes have been soiled as he has come from the wicked world and has cleansed it.

Why Does Isaiah Usually Mix Bad and Good News Together in a Chapter?

(Isa. 66)

Isaiah often begins a chapter in a negative tone as he rebukes sinners and their wickedness. He then holds out a promise of blessings and restoration as the people repent. But he does not end on a high, optimistic note; instead he usually concludes with a sober admonition or warning. This pattern could be diagrammed as follows:

See if you can identify this pattern in Isaiah 66.

This pattern is also found in the collection of all sixty-six chapters of Isaiah. Chapter 66 summarizes the book of Isaiah and provides a last promise and warning to Israel.
