The book of Jeremiah is important for many reasons. First, it is one of the largest books in the scriptures (second only to Psalms). Second, it contains many warnings and prophecies for the House of Israel, especially the Jews. Third, it presents the personality and burdens of a prophet in greater depth than any other book.

The contents of the book include prose and poetry, history and biography, warnings and prophecies. The book has three sets of records and an appendix:

The material in the first two dozen chapters is organized in probable chronological order, as these prophecies and warnings were delivered during the reigns of the three major kings, Josiah, Jehoiakim, and Zedekiah. (See BD "Jeremiah"; "Josiah.") Chapters 25-45 are also roughly chronological, but they overlap the earlier chapters (25-27 revert to the time of Jehoiakim and 27:12 to 29:32 are again during Zedekiah's reign). More importantly, they include prophecies of the last days and many biographical insights into the life and struggles of Jeremiah. The next set of prophecies (46-51) deal with various foreign nations. They were originally given at different, scattered times throughout Jeremiah's ministry and later arranged into their present order. The last chapter contains much of the historical material found in 2 Kings 24-25 and serves as a historical conclusion to the book.

It appears that the first set of chapters (1-24) was probably prepared by Jeremiah and written by his scribe, Baruch. It includes Jeremiah's insights and feelings about his calling as a prophet. These expressions open up his personality by showing his love for the people (8:18-22), his sorrow for their condition (9:1; 13:17; 14:17), and his pleadings on their behalf with the Lord (14:7-9). By reading the following selections, one can begin to appreciate his attitudes about his call and his feelings for the burden he carried as the Lord's spokesman to a wicked generation:

1:4-10 His calling and initial hesitancy.

5:14 His words would condemn the people.

8:18-22 His love for Israel.

9:1 His tears shed for Israel.

10:19-24 His rejection by society and petition for divine counsel.

11:18-20 His petitions for judgment upon those who threatened his life.

12:1-4 His expression of personal righteousness (compare Job 31) and the

Lord's response (12:5-6).

15:10-18 His personal frustrations (compare Elijah in 1 Kgs. 19:4) and the

Lord's response (15:19-21).

16:1-9 His lack of a (second?) wife and family; he was not to mourn

during the destruction.

17:9-10 His self-judgment.

17:14-18 His request for vindication from the Lord.

18:18-23 His life threatened by a conspiracy.

20:7-18 His burdens as a prophet.

23:28-32 His conflict with false prophets.

By understanding the feelings and problems of this great prophet, one can study the lives and writings of his contemporaries and see why Habakkuk questioned the Lord about justice (Hab. 1), why Urijah lost his life for giving the same prophecies as Jeremiah (Jer. 26), why Zephaniah called for a great day of judgment from the Lord (Zeph. 1), and why Lehi feared for his life and took his family out of wicked Judah (1 Ne. 1).

Jeremiah is an Old Testament prophet of particular interest to Mormons because he lived and preached in Jerusalem during the same time period as Lehi, the founder of the primary Book of Mormon colony in the Americas. Both prophets had a clear understanding of the destruction awaiting Jerusalem and, since they actively preached this destruction, they were threatened and persecuted.

Both men also received insights into future events concerning the Israelites, and, in particular, they prophesied about a later gathering when the Israelites would return to their promised land and be recognized as the Lord's chosen people. Both prophets anticipated a partial return of Israelites or Jews after the Babylonian captivity and foresaw a later and more significant return when the Messiah would come in power as Israel's great deliverer.

Most Mormons are aware of Lehi's preachings concerning Israel and the last days, but they are usually unfamiliar with the insights Jeremiah had in these matters.

Of special interest to Mormons is the fact that some of Jeremiah's prophecies have been accomplished, although the Jews have not yet recognized their fulfillment. Mormons should also better appreciate how the Lord has prepared the world and the Jews for the manifestation of these prophecies, how they themselves can recognize some prophecies now being fulfilled, and how they can be aware of future events concerning the gathering of the Jews.

Jeremiah was apparently a young man (1:6) when he received his prophetic calling about 627 B.C. (1:2). As he preached to the remnants of the Israelite tribes then living in the Judean countryside, he spoke mainly to members of the tribe of Judah. He was a Levite, but his priestly family lived in the tribal area of Benjamin, and both these tribes had many people living near Jerusalem. Although the northern ten tribes had been "lost" for almost one hundred years, descendants from most, if not all, of the other tribes of Israel were also scattered among the inhabitants. Since the tribe of Judah was so numerous, and because it supplied the kings and the leadership for the whole area, the combined group of Israelites became known as Jews. In fact, the first scriptural reference by a prophet of the term "Jew" is in the book of Jeremiah (34:9).

These Jews were soon to face strong threats to their existence as a kingdom and as a people when the Babylonians sought to control their country. At first, the Jews did not feel threatened by the Babylonians, since peace and plenty had been prophesied by generations of false prophets. In fact, after the days of Isaiah and the righteous King Hezekiah, the Jews had entered into a state of complete apostasy. Hezekiah's son, Manasseh, ruled for over fifty years and not only encouraged this religious retrogression, but offered one of his sons as a human sacrifice. Manasseh's grandson, Josiah, became king at the age of eight, after his father was murdered because of his wickedness. Twelve years later, Josiah began some religious reforms by cleansing Judah and Jerusalem of their idols. He even had the bones of the priests of Baal burned upon their altars.

It was during this religious reform and in the thirteenth year of the reign of Josiah that Jeremiah received his call. Five years later, while the temple was being repaired, a copy of the Torah (the Law) was found among some rubble. After it was read to Josiah, he was so shocked by the extent of the apostasy among the Jews that he immediately ordered all idols in the land to be destroyed and instigated more rigorous religious reforms. The temple was purified and the Passover celebration was reinstated. (2 Kgs. 22-23; 2 Chr. 34-35.) The royal reforms remained external, however, as the people were not converted from their false practices. When Josiah died, nineteen years after he began his reforms, the Jews quickly reverted to idol worship. (2 Kgs. 23:31-37;2 Chr. 36:1-21.)

Jeremiah then recorded many prophecies about Israel's later return and restoration in the land. The second portion of his writings (25-45) also included some important prophecies about the Jews in the last days.

Jeremiah is a major prophet because of his many writings. His writings are also interesting because of the personal insights they provide, but he is important for yet another reason. In the New Testament, Jesus was asked if he were another Jeremiah. (Matt. 16:14.) There are many comparisons between these two great servants of our Heavenly Father. They both foretold the end of a Jewish state (587 B.C. and A.D. 70) and the destruction of Jerusalem and her temple. In both cases the doom of the city was followed by a dispersion of the Jews. Both were charged with blasphemy because they criticized the formalized religion and the corrupted temple ritual of their times. They both questioned the external sacrifices when internally the people were wicked. They were both ridiculed by the leaders of society and often ignored by the masses. They were both falsely accused and imprisoned. And (if the traditions about Jeremiah's death are true), they both sealed their witnesses with their own lives.

Jeremiah is an important prophet because of his writings and his life. His writings record why Judah fell and how it will be restored. His life shows the heart of a prophet and the model of a true servant of the Lord.
