(Jer. 16, 23, 30-33.)

Starting in verse fourteen of chapter sixteen, Jeremiah makes some prophecies concerning Israel's return in the last days. This return, he says, will be so impressive that the Israelites will recognize the hand of the Lord in it. They will refer to the miracle of the return as a means of identifying or recognizing their God--they will no longer know him as the Lord that brought them out of Egypt, but as the Lord who brought them from the land of the north and from all the countries where he had driven them.

Latter-day Saints who are students of Israeli history know that the Jews have been gathered home from the lands of the north and over ninety countries of the earth. These Jews, who automatically and immediately are accepted as Israeli citizens under the "law of the return," have returned from countries as far apart as New Zealand and Lithuania, Argentina and India, Canada and South Africa. Most of them have come from middle eastern or eastern European countries to the country of Israel. Shortly after Israel became independent in 1948, one hundred twenty thousand Jews immigrated from Rumania. Over one hundred thousand Jews left Russia, Poland, and Iraq to go to Israel. Over thirty thousand Jews moved to Israel from Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria, Turkey, Syria, and Iran. (Martin Gilbert, Jewish History Atlas, pp. 97-99.)

As Jeremiah prophesied, many Jews have returned from the north and from the countries where they had been driven. They now dwell in their own land in the state of Israel. However, most Jews living in Israel do not identify the Lord as the causative factor behind their gathering. These Israelis would maintain that their country came into existence through political, military, social, and monetary means, not through any divine guidance. This appears to be a contradiction of Jeremiah's prophecy, as he stated that the Israelites would identify their Lord as the force behind their return.

This same type of apparent contradiction is present in many Book of Mormon prophecies concerning the specific gathering of the Jews to the Holy Land. The prophecies state that after the Jews begin to believe in Christ, then they will be gathered in from their long dispersion. Obviously, the Jews in Israel do not believe in Jesus as the Christ or as their Messiah.

If the Jews now gathered together in Israel do not recognize the Lord's hand in their return and if they do not believe in Christ, are they, then, fulfilling these prophecies of Jeremiah, Jacob, Nephi, and Mormon? The answer is probably not. However, they are fulfilling some of the lesser-known prophecies of Jeremiah and Book of Mormon prophets; the more famous prophecies mentioned above are yet to be fulfilled by a righteous group of returning Jews.

As Jeremiah prophesied concerning the gathering of Judah, he understood that a key element of this restoration was the attitude of the Jews to their Lord, Jehovah. The relationship between the gathering of the Jews and their attitudes toward Jehovah is presented in Jeremiah 23:3-8; 30:3-11, 21, 24; 31:1; 32:37-40; and 33:7, 8, 10-11, 14-16.

In chapter twenty-three of Jeremiah, the Lord first denounces the pastors, shepherds, or rulers under whose leadership the people had abandoned righteousness and incurred the exile. In verse three, he promises that he will gather his flock out of the countries and bring them back and make them fruitful. The Lord will then set up shepherds over them so that they will no longer fear men but will have trust in the Lord. A righteous Davidic king is promised them. (See Isa. 11; D&C 113; Zech. 3:8; 6:12; Ezek. 34:23-25; Hosea 3:5.) The Lord then mentions again the new identity he will have for the Israelites in the last days (23:8).

In chapter thirty, the Lord promises the return of Israel and Judah. He mentions a period of such fear and anguish that the gestures displayed by men would be comparable to these of a woman in childbirth. This period of time, ushering in the final deliverance, would be great in suffering and distress, but would free the Israelites from their yokes as they would serve the Lord their God and David, their king, whom he would raise up unto them (30:5-9). The Lord promises that he will save Israel, but his divine justice demands that Israel's sins will not go unpunished. Therefore, he will correct Israel "in measure" before Israel can be pardoned (30:11). Later in the chapter, the land and its prosperity is promised to Jacob's children. They will establish their congregation before the Lord, and he will punish their oppressors. Their righteous prince will be close to the Lord, and the Lord will accept them as his people. These events are to take place in the end of days or, in other words, during our dispensation (30:18-24).

Chapter thirty-one contains prophecies about the restoration of the northern kingdom. The promise of restoration as given to Jerusalem is found in chapter thirty-two (see especially verses 36-44).

Chapter thirty-three is a good summary of the prophecies of the last days because it repeats many of the prophecies given earlier in Jeremiah. For example, the Jews and Israelites will return and be cleansed from their iniquities (33:7-9). The people will give thanks to their Lord, and he will bring forth a righteous leader for them (33:10-16). The Lord will remember his covenant with Israel. Davidic kings and Levites will continue to live and rule among the people as assuredly as day follows night. The Lord will not forget the promises he made to Abraham, Jacob, and David (3:17-24).

These prophecies of Jeremiah are open to us if only we will study them. However, they are basically an outline of the events of the last days. Further information about them is contained in the Book of Mormon. (See 1 Ne. 19:15-16; 2 Ne. 6:11; 10:7; Morm. 5:14.)

When one quickly reads Jeremiah and the Book of Mormon prophets and then recalls their prophecies concerning the gathering of Israel in the last days, he remembers that when Israel accepts the Lord (or recognizes Christ as their Messiah) they will be gathered in. This general understanding is basically correct as one surveys the prophecies concerning the whole house of Israel and their gathering.

However, a more precise study of the scriptures reveals that some rather specific correlations can be established between the relationship of the Israelites to their Lord and the gathering back to their land. This is particularly true for one branch of the Israelites--the Jews. One of three conditions mentioned in the Book of Mormon scriptures listed above must precede any gathering of the Jews: (1) that they no longer rebuke Christ; (2) that they come to a knowledge of Christ; (3) that they begin to believe in Christ as their Messiah.

Although any of these conditions could precede a gathering of the Jews, the Lord will not accept the inhabitants of Israel as his people until they believe in him as their God. When they are righteous and God-fearing, he will restore them to the lands of their inheritance and protect them from their enemies. In other words, although the Lord might lead the Jews back to their land under various conditions, he will not recognize them as legitimate heirs of the land until they properly worship him. Jeremiah recognized this clearly (32:37-41). The Book of Mormon provides more insight into these relationships; it indicates that some Jews will come to a knowledge and belief of their Messiah before they are gathered, while others will come to this knowledge and belief after they are gathered to their land. (Compare 2 Ne. 10:7 with 3 Ne. 20:13.)

Understanding this fact helps answer two questions that Latter-day Saints have as they attempt to understand the events of the last days: (1) Why are most Jews, who are returning to Israel, nonreligious Israelites who do not recognize the Lord or his hand in their gathering? and (2) Why will great punishments come upon the Jews in the great and dreadful day of the Lord if they are his chosen people? The truth is that nonreligious, nonbelieving, and even "wicked" Jews are today fulfilling prophecies. As they reject the Lord and his laws, he will justly punish them in the future. Knowing this, we can better appreciate the fulfillment of some of Jeremiah's prophecies.
