These five hymns of sorrow express the feelings of Judah when Jerusalem and the temple were destroyed by the Babylonians in 587 B.C. (See BD "Lamentations.") They continue as a part of Jewish liturgy and are recited late each summer in remembrance of the destruction of the temples of Solomon and Herod, which occurred on the same day (ninth of Ab) six hundred fifty-seven years apart. Lamentations 4:1-13 is quoted below in a modern translation prepared by the Jewish Publication Society. Compare this with the King James Version and try to appreciate the genuine remorse being expressed.

1 Alas!

The gold is dulled,

Debased the finest gold!

The sacred gems are spilled

At every street corner.

2 The precious children of Zion;

Once valued as gold--

Alas, they accounted as earthen pots,

Work of a potter's hands!

3 Even jackal offer the breast

And suckle their young;

But my poor people has turned cruel,

Like ostriches of the desert.

4 The tongue of the suckling cleaves

To its palate for thirst.

Little children beg for bread;

None gives them a morsel.

5 Those who feasted on dainties

Lie famished in the streets;

Those who were reared in purple

Have embraced refuse heaps.

6 The guilt of my poor people

Exceeded the iniquity of Sodom,

Which was overthrown in a moment,

Without a hand striking it.

7 Her elect were purer than snow,

Whiter than milk;

Their limbs were ruddier than coral,

Their bodies were like sapphire.

8 Now their faces are blacker than soot,

They are not recognized in the streets;

Their skin has shriveled on their bones,

It has become dry as wood.

9 Better off were the slain of the sword

Than those slain by famine,

Who pined away, [as though] wounded,

For lack of the fruits of the field.

10 With their own hands, tender-hearted women

Have cooked their children;

Such became their fare,

In the disaster of my poor people.

11 The Lord vented all His fury,

Poured out His blazing wrath;

He kindled a fire in Zion

Which consumed its foundations.

12 The kings of the earth did not believe,

Nor any of the inhabitants of the world,

That foe or adversary could enter

The gates of Jerusalem.

13 It was for the sins of her prophets,

The iniquities of her priests,

Who had shed in her midst

The blood of the just.
