(Lam. 3:41)

Many scriptures suggest the raising of one's spirit, soul, voice, or heart toward God (for example 2 Kgs. 19:4; Ps. 25:1; 143:8; Enos 4; D&C 25:13; 27:15; 30:6; 31:3; 35:26). The Israelites also included the physical act of raising their hands as they prayed.

David compared the incense and sacrifices of the tabernacle-temple with his own prayers and the lifting up of his hands (Ps. 141:2). These actions were all brought before the Lord and were raised up toward him. The raising of one's arms was similar to the ascending incense.

Solomon raised his hands as he dedicated the temple (1 Kgs. 8:22). Isaiah wrote that the Israelites stretched forth their hands in unanswered prayers (Isa. 1:15). Enoch, when he had stretched forth his arms in prayer, received an answer from the Lord (Moses 7:41).

Additional associations with the raising of hands in prayer is explained by Hugh Nibley:

What H. Leclercq calls "that magnificent gesture" of raising both hands high above the head with which those in the prayer circle began their prayer was, as he notes, a natural gesture both of supplication and submission. It was specifically a conscious imitation of the crucifixion, and that brings to mind the significant detail, mentioned by the Synoptic writers, that the Lord on the Cross called upon the Father in a strange tongue: those who were standing by, though Aramaic was supposed to be their native tongue, disagreed as to the meaning (see Mark 15:33ff.), and indeed the Mss give many variant readings of an utterance which the writers of the Gospels left untranslated, plainly because there was some doubt as to the meaning. It recalls the cry of distress of David in Psalm 54:2: "Hear my prayer, O God; give ear to the words of my mouth," and in Psalm 55:1: "Give ear to my prayer, O God. . . . (Hugh Nibley, "The Early Christian Prayer Circle," Brigham Young University Studies, Fall, 1978, p. 53.)

Modern Orthodox Jews still use their hands as they pray. They usually do not pray with folded arms, especially when they are praying out loud. If not holding a prayer book in their hands, they often have their hands in front of them while moving and even raising them.
