Raised in Judah, Ezekiel was taken with ten thousand other Jews to Babylon in 597 B.C. Four years later, when he apparently was thirty years old, he received his first vision (1:1). As he recorded this vision, he described God's throne and the cherubim attending it in great detail, but the reader is still puzzled as to how to picture what he saw.

He received five specific charges from the Lord:

The fifth charge or commission is particularly puzzling. It is unclear whether his silence was to be only outside the house, or if he was only to speak the oracles and prophecies given him by the Lord and nothing else, or if he was to be completely silent for the whole time.

Perhaps because of his dumbness, he performed a number of symbolic acts that served as vivid teaching demonstrations about the impending destruction upon Jerusalem:

These symbolic acts, combined with Ezekiel's recorded messages, left no doubt in the minds of the Jewish faithful in exile that the Lord was prophesying doom upon Jerusalem. Contrary to their hopes of a temporary sojourn in Babylon, they were to prepare room for the new waves of exiles. Ezekiel's denunciations of the wickedness of Jerusalem's Jews was shrill and pointed. He also used allegory (especially in chapters 16 and 23) to portray their idolatry and breaking the Lord's covenants.

Many Jews in exile felt the sins of their fathers and others of their own generation were to blame for their condition (18:2). Ezekiel placed the blame upon themselves and reminded them of their personal responsibilities. (Study 3:16-21; 14:12-23; 18:1-32; and 33:1-20 to see how he espoused this important concept.)

After presenting acts and teachings of judgment upon Judah and Jerusalem in his first twenty-four chapters, Ezekiel delivers three types of messages in his last twenty-four chapters. Chapters 27-32 contain oracles against the foreign nations. Chapters 33-39 proclaim hope as Ezekiel anticipates the restoration of Israel. In the last chapters, 40-48, Ezekiel prophesies of the last days as he describes the restored temple in Jerusalem and other conditions in Israel, including the territories of the twelve tribes.

Although stern in his early pronouncements, Ezekiel also expressed hope for future Israel. Although bizarre, he was also effective in communicating the messages from the Lord. Although visionary, he was also down-to-earth as he mingled with and taught the Jews in their Babylonian exile. Although the Babylonian Jews could look to Daniel with pride because of his role with the kings, they associated on a more personal level with their own priest-prophet of the captivity, Ezekiel.

Bible Dictionary references: Ezekiel; Cherubim; Ephraim, Stick of; Judah, Stick of; Gog; Magog.
