Daniel is usually well-known to LDS readers for two reasons: (1) the stories of his youth and his episode in the lion's den and (2) his prophecy about the stone (the restored Church) that would roll forth and fill the earth. Both of these events are recorded in the first half of Daniel. The material in the second half of Daniel is much less familiar.

The two halves of Daniel (1-6 and 7-12) differ in many ways. The first portion is written mostly in Aramaic and records historical events, personalities, and prophecies, while the second is in Hebrew and consists of great apocalyptic visions. The first half is clear, simple, and easy to understand, while the second is symbolic and difficult.

The four apocalyptic visions of Daniel use symbols and signs to represent ancient history and to make predictions about future events when tribulations and sorrows would give way to triumph and peace. Modern readers are not alone as they struggle to understand the symbols and signs in Daniel and how they have been or will be fulfilled. Jews and Christians over the centuries have sought different fulfillments of these visions. Daniel himself did not immediately understand the meaning of what he had heard (12:8). He was told to be patient, and that the righteous who were wise in the last days would understand.

There are many ways that the Lord has revealed the events of the last days to his ancient prophets. As the prophets and writers recorded their knowledge, some (Isaiah) used prophetic symbolism, others (Song of Solomon) made allegorical representations, and still others (Daniel, Ezekiel, John) wrote apocalyptic visions. Earlier in this book in the introduction to the Song of Solomon we saw how all three forms (Isa. 66:5-13; Song. 6:10; JST Rev. 12:1, 7) were used to describe a woman appearing as a moon and a sun in the last days. But without the key from modern revelation (D&C 109:73) we would have a difficult time understanding the meaning of any one of the three ancient descriptions of this event. If we are righteous and faithful, if we listen to the modern prophets, if we study the prophecies contained in the scriptures, and if we observe the events of our age, we can understand these ancient, symbolic writings. In many ways it is easier for us to understand them than it was for the ancient peoples. Also it has been prophesied that we would be better able to understand them. (Dan. 12:10; Isa. 11:9.)

Bible Dictionary references: Daniel; Daniel, Book of; Abomination of Desolation; Adam; Gabriel; Mene mene tekel upharsin; Messiah; Michael.
