Hosea seemed to be unlikely material for a prophet. His marriage to an immoral woman and her desertion did not provide the ideal family model for other Israelites. Rather than serving as a model, Hosea's family was a mirror that reflected the immorality, disruption, and lack of family ties then present among the Israelites. His family became a symbol of the relationship of the Lord with his chosen family, the Israelites.

The book of Hosea first develops the Hosea family relationships and then illustrates the same trends in the Lord's actions with Israel. The first three chapters relate that Hosea makes an unexpected choice of a wife with an immoral background, but they are able to start a family. The wife, Gomer, soon tires of family responsibilities and returns to her life as a harlot. Hosea keeps informed of her life, and when she is ready to return home, he is willing to buy her back, which he does with tender love and a sincere hope for an eternal relationship.

The next ten chapters show the covenant relationship between the Lord and Israel being broken by the people's wickedness. They would shortly become separated as Israel continued her wicked ways. But later, even many centuries later, the Lord would still keep in touch with Israel until some of her children were willing to return to him and be accepted in his house with all the blessings and promises of a righteous people.

The last chapter is an open invitation to Israel to return to the Lord to receive these blessings. The book could be outlined as follows:

I. Hosea's marital experience portrays God's relationship with Israel (1-3).

A. Hosea marries Gomer, whose three children are a sign to Israel (1).

B. Gomer rejects her husband, while he waits (2).

C. Hosea redeems his wife from her owner (3).

II. Hosea's words of judgment to Israel (and later Judah, 4-13).

A. Pride, idolatry, and corruption of Israel (and Judah) (4-8).

B. Judgments and captivity to come upon Israel as the Lord awaits her return (9-11).

C. The Lord's actions with Jacob (Israel) and his redeeming powers (12-13).

III. A call to Israel to repent and be blessed (14).

Hosea is difficult to understand and translate because of the poor quality of the Hebrew text. Even the earliest copies from the Dead Sea Scrolls show signs of a sloppy Hebrew transmission of the Hosea material. In fact, the Hebrew text of Hosea is probably more corrupt than any other Old Testament book. Many of the alterations may be accidental. For example, in the Hebrew text, some letters are transposed (like spelling "strength" as "strenght" or "bale" as "able"). Also, some similar consonants are confused with each other (as in English, writing "strength" as "strenyth" or "bale" as "dale"). Compare the following footnotes in the Bible to see some of the possible changes as the text is "straightened out" or modified:

Footnote (alternate

King James Version meaning)

4:18 with shame do love deeply love and

dishonor

5:11 commandment filth (or vanity)

13:14 repentance compassion In spite of these questions about Hosea's family and the poor Hebrew text, the book of Hosea gives hope and promise to Israelites as they return to the Lord. Hosea's symbolism of a renewed marriage covenant between the Lord and Israel was later repeated by the prophets Isaiah (40, 49, 51, 54, 61, 62, 66), Jeremiah (2, 3), and Ezekiel (16, 33).

There is also a lesson from Hosea for Latter-day Saints today as they see loved ones go the way of the world. We should not lose contact with them but wait, hope, and pray for their return to the family of the Lord as his chosen children. (See BD "Hosea.")
