Amos, the "burden bearer," lived in a small village six miles south of Bethlehem where he could look down upon the Jordan Valley and the Dead Sea. As a wool producer, he probably made trips into the northern towns of Israel and saw the religious and social corruption which he strongly rebuked.

Amos apparently appreciated that people do not like to be called to repentance. Instead of beginning his work with an immediate rebuke of the Israelites (as did Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Micah), Amos first addressed the neighboring nations that did not share any heritage with the descendants of Abraham. After denouncing these three foreign nations (Syria, Philistia, Phoenicia), he warned some of the other tribes descended from Abraham (and Lot) of the judgments of the Lord coming upon them. After warning Edom, Ammon, and Moab, Amos pronounced the Lord's word upon Judah and finally Israel. (See BD "Amos"; see also "History of the Palestine Area, 760-690 B.C.," on pp. 98-101 of this book.)

The third chapter of Amos is familiar to most Latter-day Saints because of the statement that the Lord reveals his word to the prophets (verse 7). This secret word of the Lord to Amos was a revelation about the wickedness of the people. Amos used this statement to answer the question, "By what authority does a prophet call a people to repentance?" Amos had outlined some examples of cause and effect relationships (verses 3-6) and concluded with the fact that if problems or judgments were coming upon a people, it would be because the Lord knew of their wickedness (JST verse 16). The Lord knew and revealed this message to the prophet Amos, who then reviewed the many ways the people merited divine judgments because of their wickedness (3-6).

The third and last section of Amos (7-9) includes five visions (locusts, 7:1-3; fire, 7:4-6; plumb line, 7:7-9; basket of ripe fruit, 8:1-3; and the Lord in the temple, 9:1-4), an account of how Amos was forbidden to testify any more in Bethel (7:10-17), prophecies of doom (8:4-9:10), and promises of a restoration, a return of some Israelites, and the Lord's blessings in the land (9:11-15).
