This shortest book of the Old Testament contains a pronouncement against Edom (verses 1-14) and a promise of the day of the Lord (verses 15-21). It was written after a destruction and invasion of Jerusalem in which the Edomites willingly participated (verse 11). This was probably the Babylonian invasion of 587-86 B.C., for which ample Edomite hostility was recorded. (Lam. 4:21; Ezek. 25:12-14; 35:5, 10-15; 36:5; Ps. 137:7.)

There are many similarities between the first nine verses of Obadiah and chapter 49 of Jeremiah. It is unclear if these contemporary prophets were quoting from each other (and if so, who was quoting whom) or if they both were using an earlier prophecy against Edom as the basis for their own pronouncements.

Similarly, there are many comparisons between the last half dozen verses of Obadiah with the writings of Joel. However, Joel recorded in 2:32 that he was quoting an earlier prophecy (of Obadiah in verse 17) by stating "as the Lord has said."

John the Revelator also built upon Obadiah's words. He amplified two phrases found in the last verses of Obadiah. The holy mountain of Zion (verses 16, 17, 21) would be reserved for those who have escaped condemnation and judgment in the events immediately preceding the Millennium. John's new Jerusalem would be a holy city for those whose names were found in the book of life and who were victorious over sin. (Rev. 21:7, 27.) Thus, Latter-day Saints can easily associate "saviors on Mount Zion" (verse 21) with such record keeping and righteousness (as demonstrated through books of remembrance and temple work).

Also the phrase "the kingdom shall be the Lord's" in verse 21 was expanded by John into the triumphal chorus: "the kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ." (Rev. 11:15.)

Although short, this book had a message for ancient Israel and her prophets. It also inspired Christ's beloved apostle, John. It can also edify us today as it encourages us to become saviors on Mount Zion lest we want to suffer as did the ancient Edomites; for those who are not for the Lord will be against him and his work. (See BD "Obadiah"; see also "History of the Palestine Area, 690-580 B.C.," on pages 105-8 of this book.)
