The story of Jonah is more familiar to most Bible readers than any other writing among the twelve minor prophets. Containing mostly historical narrative and very little prophecy, this short book reveals surprise after surprise in the attitudes and actions of an ancient Israelite prophet.

The first surprise comes when Jonah is told to preach repentance to a pagan nation (1:1-2). Usually the prophets prophesied judgments to the gentiles and saved their messages of repentance to be given to Israel, but Jonah was to go to the powerful enemy of Israel.

The second surprise is Jonah's reaction to the divine commission--he goes in the opposite direction (1:3). Earlier prophets had lost their lives in less bold actions against the Lord (see the story of Balaam in Num. 22-24 and the episode of the man of God from Judah in 1 Kings 13:20-24).

Instead of the Lord striking down Jonah, he preserved Jonah's life through a great fish he had prepared for this purpose--a third surprise (1:17, 2:10).

The fourth surprise comes when the wicked, war-loving, pagan Assyrians in Ninevah and its suburbs repent, and the Lord's punishments against them are stayed (3:5-10; see also "History of the Palestine Area," on pp. 98-101 of this book.)

The last surprise occurs as Jonah becomes upset at the Lord's mercy and asks the Lord to take his life (4:1-3).

A reader might ask why a prophet might exhibit such attitudes and then be so honest as to record them for posterity. There have been other great religious leaders who honestly admitted earlier, serious mistakes in their lives (Paul and Alma the Younger), but with Jonah we are not told how these experiences may have affected his later life and ministry.

Even though the story of Jonah as presently recorded was possibly written by someone long after Jonah's time (see BD "Jonah"), he must have told or written his story in order for it to become so well known. Also, the prayer of chapter two was probably recorded by him shortly after the event occurred.

Many Bible critics consider the story of Jonah to be an allegory or a parable. However, Jesus said that Jonah preached repentance to Nineveh (Luke 11:29-32) and that the episode in the whale was a sign of Christ's own death and resurrection.

The four chapters of the book are neatly organized as follows:

Chapter 1: Jonah's mission to Nineveh; his disobedience and the results.

Chapter 2: Jonah's prayer to the Lord.

Chapter 3: Jonah's mission to Nineveh: his obedience and the results.

Chapter 4: The Lord's discourse to Jonah.

More than a story about Jonah, this book illustrates the love and patience of God toward a weak servant and His children outside the house of Israel.
