Micah contains many little messages assembled together without an easily recognized design.

The smaller segments of Micah are grouped into three collections found in chapters 1-2, 3-5, and 6-7. Each collection begins with an exhortation to the audience to "hear" the Lord's words (1:2; 3:1; 6:1). Micah then gives a series of judgments or warnings and finally concludes each message with a promise (2:12-13; 4:1-5:15; 7:14-20). The pattern of a warning followed by a promise is used by many other prophets. This pattern becomes the central theme of Micah as he warns that God will send judgment for Judah's sins, but promises eventual pardon and blessings.

In order to see how various smaller segments or literary units are combined into a larger message, the concluding promise (4-5) of Micah's second collection (3-5) is outlined below in greater detail. Portions of this promise were quoted by the Jews to the wise men and King Herod (Micah 5:2 in Matt. 2:5-6) and by Christ to the assembled Nephites and Lamanites (Micah 4:12-13 and 5:8-15 in 3 Ne. 20:15-20; 21:12-31.) Notice how in each literary unit there is often a combination of parallelisms. Read the verses and particularly try to match up the similar parts (A with A1, B with B1, etc.). Study each segment as a separate lesson or message and combine them to better appreciate the variety of the promises given to Israel.

Micah's words later helped preserve Jeremiah's life, as the elders of Judah quoted his warnings of 3:12. (Jer. 26:18.) Jesus also quoted Micah 7:6. (Matt. 10:35-36.)

First read this book for an overall impression. Then watch for key words and phrases, especially if they are repeated. Study the smaller segments, messages, and individual verses and appreciate their subtle meanings and poetic patterns. Finally, organize the separate elements back into a general theme or message and see how your understanding of the whole book (or chapter) has been enriched by a deeper knowledge of the component parts. Each time you come back to that portion of the scriptures, you will be able to glean new insights and meaning from the passages as your own spiritual level increases. Thus, the scriptures can be an always new source of inspiration and direction. Even in a short book such as Micah, great richness is available. (See BD "Micah.")

Micah 4-5
