(Micah 2:12)

The term "remnant of Israel" or "remnant of Jacob" almost always refers to the descendants of Jacob who settled in America--that is, the Book of Mormon community of Lehi. These descendants are so identified in the Book of Mormon by Nephi (2 Ne. 28:2), Christ (3 Ne. 20:16), Mormon (Morm. 7:10), and Moroni (Book of Mormon title page).

This "remnant of Israel" should not be confused with the "remnant of Judah" *Isa. 37:31-32, Jer. 40:11, 15), which would be the Jews. Sometimes a "remnant" (without a modifying phrase) could refer to the descendants of the northern tribes preserved or returning from the Assyrian captivity (2 Chr. 30:6; Isa. 11:11, 16); or it could refer to those returning in the last days from Judah (Micah 5:3; Ezek. 6:8); or it could refer to both groups (Jer. 23:3; Isa. 1:9).

While reading the scriptures (particularly the prophetic portions), whenever you come upon the term "remnant" you should see if this term is defined or modified (remnant "of Israel" or "of Judah," etc.) in order to understand which group of Israelites is being discussed. If no modifiers are present, study the term in its context to see if it applies to any or all groups of Israelites in the last days.

Joseph Fielding Smith made the following statement about the remnants of Israel:

The remnant of the house of Israel spoken of in First Nephi, chapter 13, and Third Nephi, chapters 16, 20, and 21, does not have reference only to the descendants of Lehi, but to all the house of Israel, the children of Jacob, those upon this land and those in other lands. . . . Remember that all through the Lord has been speaking of the remnant of Jacob or Israel, and of the great promises made to the gentiles who are on this land and in all other lands, if they will only come into the Church and be numbered with the house of Israel. Their privileges would be to assist in building the New Jerusalem, and if they refuse, then shall the punishments come upon them. (DS 2:248, 250.)

Footnotes
