Haggai is often called the "temple prophet" because of his admonition to rebuild the Lord's house in Jerusalem. Haggai received four messages or commissions from the Lord that are recorded in his brief book of thirty-eight verses.

The first message challenged the Jews to rebuild their temple (1:1-15). This message was dated in the fall of 520 B.C. It had been over sixteen years since about fifty thousand Jews had returned from Babylonia to Judea. They had quickly built an altar for sacrifices and had laid the foundation for a temple, but the temple work had been set aside because of Samaritan opposition and because the people became involved in their own homes and fields. However, the fields were not fully productive, and the people waited for a better opportunity to finish the temple. In his first message, Haggai told the Jews the land was cursed because they lacked spirituality. If they would put the temple first, their fields would be blessed. They quickly responded and resumed the temple construction within a few weeks (review Ezra 1-6 for further details concerning these events).

The second message of Haggai was to encourage the people in the temple project (2:1-9). They did not have the resources to build a magnificent temple like Solomon's, yet they were promised God's glory and presence if they completed and respected their temple.

Haggai's third message from the Lord evaluated the situation of ritual impurity among the people (2:10-19). As an unclean object rendered objects and people unclean, so would impure Israelites contaminate the temple. Physical blessings were promised them if they would honor the temple.

The fourth message of Haggai was messianic. It promised the blessings of David's throne to Zerubbabel, the Jewish governor of Judea and grandson of King Jehoichin (compare Zech. 6:11-13, where another prophet used the crowning of Joshua, the high priest of this time period, as a symbolic representation of the Messiah). Both Jehoichin (also called Jeconiah) and Zerubbabel were among Christ's ancestry. (See Matt. 1:12.)

Haggai's messages were well received by the people. This was one of the few times when the Israelites responded positively to a prophet's voice. Similar blessings and promises apply to people today if they will heed the voice of the modern prophets. (See BD "Haggai.")
