Among the twelve books of the minor prophets, Malachi is probably the favorite among Latter-day Saints. They are especially familiar with the last two chapters (3-4) because they were quoted by Christ in the Book of Mormon (3 Ne. 24-25) and by Moroni to Joseph Smith (JS-H 1:36-39). They also identify with the teachings on tithing (3:8-12), a book of remembrance (3:16-18), and the coming of Elijah to turn the hearts of parents and children to each other (4:5-6).

Malachi spoke to the Jews during a period of religious decline. Seventy years after the spiritual emphasis of Haggai and Zechariah, the people were neglecting their religious duties and criticizing God for their problems. The appointment of a zealous Jewish governor, Nehemiah, had recently resulted in the rebuilding of Jerusalem's walls and the institution of some religious reforms (compare Neh. 7-13 for more details on the religious problems of the period). But the people were discouraged and disappointed. Malachi came to them as a messenger of hope. He promised them immediate blessings if they properly served the Lord and a future glory after the Lord had purged the wicked from the earth in his great and dreadful day.

The people wanted the blessings without having to reform themselves. They criticized Malachi's accusations and doubted whether God would ever show his power. These attitudes were demonstrated in a repeated rhetorical pattern of teaching that Malachi had to use with the people. It involved three steps, as seen in Malachi 3:8:

The key element in this pattern was the phrase "And (yet, but) ye say . . .," which would introduce the question or statement by which the Jews tried to defend or justify themselves. This phrase was repeated eight times in Malachi's short book: 1:2, 6, 7; 2:14, 17; 3:7, 8, 13.

The book of Malachi can be divided into seven main sections. In each of the first six sections, Malachi addresses a particular unrighteous group and their problems. He usually gives them some hope or promises them a blessing if they will correct their weakness. These sections are outlined as follows:

Verses Problem Promise

1:2-5 People questioning God will destroy Edom

God's love. (the wicked).

1:6-2:9 Sins of the priests. Covenant of peace

with the Levites.

2:10-16 Adultery and God wants a godly

idolatry. people.

2:17-3:6 Doubting God's God will be pleased

justice. with Judah (after

a purging).

3:7-12 Withholding tithes, Windows of heaven

offerings (sins will be opened.

of the people).

3:13-18 Sceptics wonder why Righteous people will

they should keep be God's jewels.

the commandments.

The last section (and chapter) of Malachi talks about the coming great and dreadful day of the Lord. It is organized into a weak chiastic pattern:

(a) The day of the Lord is coming; the wicked will be burned as stubble (1).

(b) Those who fear (revere) the Lord will have power over the wicked (2, 3).

(c) Remember (and keep) the laws and the commandments (4).

(b1) Those parents and children who remember each other will be preserved (5, 6).

(a1) The great and dreadful day of the Lord is coming; the earth will almost be destroyed (5, 6).

Malachi was the last of the Old Testament prophets, literally and symbolically. Between his ministry (about 450-430 B.C.) and the time of the New Testament there were no prophets among the Jews. Indeed, the Jews still consider Malachi as their last prophet, since they do not accept the prophets and apostles of Jesus or the living prophets of today.

Symbolically Malachi was the last prophet to a dispensation that began with a great prophet, Moses, and many miracles and teachings. But a thousand years later the people were still slaves, not to Egypt, but to worldliness, pride, and their physical appetites. What good had the centuries of preaching, teaching, and prophesying done for the Israelites? Only a few of them followed the Lord. As Malachi reviewed their sins and problems, he warned them of the Lord's final judgments and refining fires. There would come a time when the wicked would be consumed and the Lord would finally rule over his children on a world of righteousness. Malachi's witness of this coming judgment and day of the Lord is an appropriate conclusion to the witness of the Old Testament. (See BD "Malachi.")
