(Gen. 25:31-34)

The firstborn son had the first right to receive the birthright inheritance and the birthright blessing. The birthright inheritance dealt with physical property, such as flocks and herds. Unless the father had determined otherwise (see Gen. 48:5; 1 Chr. 5:1, 2) at the father's death, the physical property was to be divided into balanced portions equal to the number of sons, plus one. The eldest son received the double portion. (Deut. 21:17.) With the inheritance, he assumed responsibility for his mother and unmarried sisters. He also was to be a financial resource for his brothers in times of hardship. Basically he provided for the physical welfare of the family and usually served as the social-political leader of the family or clan.

The birthright blessing was spiritual. In the patriarchal order of the priesthood, it included the keys of the priesthood and the authority to preside as the religious leader of the family or clan. Rather than automatically belonging to the eldest son, it was given to the most righteous son. In fact, for all the patriarchal families with more than one son, the birthright blessing went to a younger son: Shem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and Ephraim each received the birthright blessing even though none of them was an eldest son.

One reason why some negative, almost sordid information was given in Genesis about some of the sons in these families was to demonstrate why they had lost the birthright blessings.

The prerogative for both the birthright inheritance and the birthright blessing originally rested exclusively with the father. He could give gifts (as Abraham did to Keturah's sons in Gen. 25:6), pass out the inheritance (compare the story of the prodigal son who received his early in Luke 15:11-12) and pronounce the blessing. (See Gen. 27:30-36.) Jacob received his blessing initially through deceit, but eventually acquired it in full integrity. (See Gen. 27:30-36; 28:1-4.) After the time of Moses, the inheritance automatically went to the eldest son, regardless of whether or not his mother was the first or favored wife. (See Deut. 21:15-17.) The birthright blessing was still conditional.

Bible Dictionary references: Firstborn; Birthright; Inheritance.
