(Exodus 3:6)

A modern prophet, Spencer W. Kimball, has given a clear answer to this question:

It must be obvious, then, that to endure the glory of the Father or of the glorified Christ, a mortal being must be translated or otherwise fortified.

Grease on the swimmer's body or a heavy rubber skin-diver's suit may protect one from cold and wet; an asbestos suit might protect a firefighter from flames; a bullet-proof vest may save one from assassin's bullets; one's heated home may protect from winter's chilling blasts; deep shade or smoked glass can modify the withering heat and burning rays of the midday sun. There is a protective force that God brings into play when he exposes his human servants to the glories of his person and his works.

Moses, a prophet of God, held the protecting holy priesthood: ". . . and the glory of God was upon Moses; therefore Moses could endure his presence." (Moses 1:2.)

In heavenly glorious vision, Moses "beheld the world . . . and all the children of men . . . ." (Moses 1:8.) He was protected then, but when the protection from such transcendent glory was relaxed, Moses was left near-helpless. (FPM, p. 86.)

Joseph [Smith] had had the same general experience as Abraham and Moses and Enoch, who had seen the Lord and heard his voice. In addition, he heard the Father, bearing witness of the Son, as had Peter, James, and John on Transfiguration's mount. He had seen the person of Elohim. He had fought a desperate battle with the powers of darkness as had Moses and Abraham. And like them all, he was protected by the glory of the Lord. . . .

In light of the testimony of Joseph Smith, the ancient scriptures take on new meaning, their literal verity confirmed by the experience of modern man who, quickened and protected by the Spirit, actually saw the Father and the Son. How great a blessing to see God and commune directly with him while yet in mortality! Though few of us will have that blessing, we can, through understanding the scriptures and by humble prayer, come in impressive measure to know God. We have the promise that if we sufficiently purify our hearts we shall surely see God and know him as he is! (FPM, p. 93.)
