Leviticus is an unknown, almost "sealed" book to most Latter-day Saints. Most of the ritual laws and sacrifices in this book are not easily understood. Indeed, most of them are no longer practiced by Jews, Christians, or Moslems, although all three religions recognize the scriptural validity of this work. But rather than discarding Leviticus as a meaningless set of archaic religious laws, one should evaluate the role of these laws within ancient Israel. Then one can appreciate how: the symbolism of the sacrifices directed Israel toward Christ (1-7); the example of Aaron and his sons taught them about service (8-10); the laws of purification kept them physically and spiritually clean (11-15); the Day of Atonement forced them to annually evaluate their lives in preparation for the final day of judgment (16); the code of holiness distinguished them as a peculiar people, in the world but not of the world (17-25); and the promises and vows between the Lord and his people guaranteed them a special, eternal relationship (26).

The following introduction to Leviticus highlights some of its values:

Leviticus is essentially a rule-book--the book of laws given by God to his people through Moses at Sinai. The laws cover ritual and worship and many aspects of life--but all seen in relation to him. The book takes its name from the fact that it was the Levitical priests (Aaron and his sons and descendants, helped in the practical work of the tabernacle by the rest of the Levites) who administered the laws. But the book is not for the priests alone. God intended all his people to know and keep his law. Again and again Moses is told to 'speak to the people of Israel'.

To many modern readers it may seem a strange book, perhaps even a repulsive one with all its blood-sacrifices. Some see it as reflecting only an odd set of ancient taboos. Yet take it away and whole areas of Scripture become inexplicable. Without the message of Leviticus the key event of all time, the [Atonement and] death of Jesus Christ, is an enigma. The ritual and the rules were never simply an end in themselves. As the sacrifices were performed day after day, year after year, as the Day of Atonement came and went, Israel was constantly reminded of the sin which cut them off from God's presence. They had broken covenant with God by disobeying his laws and were under sentence of death. But God in his mercy showed them that he would accept a substitute--the death of an animal, perfect and blameless, instead of the offender. God was holy--a moral holiness unknown in the gods of the nations around. He demanded holiness in his people. The laws on ritual purity hammered this home in practical everyday experience.

Yet the book has value apart from its vital role in God's message of salvation. The laws in Leviticus show God working in harmony with his own natural laws for the good of his people. Although Israel had to obey the laws in blind trust (when they chose to do so at all), we can see how those laws were actually working for the nation's health and well-being. Because we know more today about the sources of infection and pollution, about quarantine and isolation, hygiene and preventive medicine, we can watch Israel's obedience actually fulfilling God's promise to take away their sickness (Exodus 23:25). And this not by magic, but by the natural working of principles we now, at least in part, can understand. (David and Pat Alexander, eds., Eerdman's Handbook to the Bible [Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1973], p. 172.)

Bible Dictionary references:
