(Lev. 5-7)

It was also sometimes called the whole burnt offering because the whole animal was consumed upon the altar. The altar was "the table of the Lord" (Mal. 1:7, 12; Ps. 23:5) and whatever was put upon it was the "food of God" (Lev. 21:6, 8, 17, 21).

Procedure: (1) The person brought an unblemished male animal to the gate and dedicated it as an offering by laying his hands upon the animal's head. (2) He then slew the animal. (3) The priests collected the blood and sprinkled it around the altar. (4) The person skinned the animal (the priest kept the skin [Lev. 7:8]), and cut it into pieces. (5) The priests offered the pieces upon the altar after washing the inwards and legs with water.

This offering was a continuation of the sacrifice inaugurated in the days of Adam (Moses 5:4-8), and practiced by various individuals on down to the time of Jacob. It represented the spotless sacrifice of the Savior. Under the law of Moses there was a burnt offering of lamb each morning and each night on behalf of all Israel. (Ex. 29:38-42.) The morning sacrifice was to burn all day, and the evening sacrifice was to burn all night. (Lev. 6:9.) The priests were to see that the fire of the altar was kept burning perpetually. (Lev. 6:13.)

This offering took several forms. Usually it was in the form of fine flour that would be given raw or as baked cakes. The ingredients of the offering included flour, oil, frankincense, and salt. Honey and leaven were not to be used.

Only a "memorial" or portion of this offering was burnt upon the altar. The main part of it was to be eaten by the priests and their families.

This was an offering shared by the altar of God, the priest, and the family of the person making the offering. It was a feast of conciliation, a feast of communion, a feast of thanksgiving. The sacrificial victim could be chosen from among the cattle, the sheep, or the goats. As the animal was brought to the door of the tabernacle, the owner laid his hands upon its head and offered a prayer of thanksgiving. Therefore this offering is sometimes called a thank offering. After the animal was killed at the altar, the kidneys and internal fat were burned on the altar. The breast and the right thigh were given to the priest after they had been waved in the direction of the tabernacle, thereby signifying that it had been given to God and was now conferred upon his servants. (Lev. 7:28-34.) The rest of the meat was eaten by the offerer and his family at a so-called "sacrificial" meal, or meal of "thanksgiving." (Lev. 7:15-16.)

This offering was made for sins committed in ignorance but subsequently discovered. It was for offenses that could not be undone or repaired. If the offense could be repaired, a trespass offering was made. The ritual for a sin offering varied according to the rank of the offender. One distinction of the sin offering from the regular burnt offering was the disposition of the blood. The priest smeared the blood of the victim on the horns of the altar of incense inside the tabernacle and then poured out the rest at the base of the brazen altar of sacrifice outside. On the annual Day of Atonement the distinctive aspect of the sin offering was the fact that the priest took some of the blood into the holy of holies and sprinkled it before the mercy seat. (Lev. 16:14.)

A portion of the animal (the internal fat and the kidneys) was burned upon the altar and the rest of the animal was taken outside the camp to be burned in the area where the ashes of the altar were poured out.

This offering was appropriate in those cases where a person discovered that he had sinned or trespassed against the Lord or his neighbor, and was able to remedy or repair the damage. (Lev. 5:16; 6:4-5.) The scripture suggests two types of offenses for which the trespass offering would be appropriate. One was where a person found that he had held back or consumed something that belonged to the Lord such as tithes or firstborn of flocks. (Lev. 5:15.) The penalty was not only to restore to the sanctuary of the Lord that which had been withheld, but to add one-fifth thereto as a penalty. (Lev. 5:16.) A second kind of offense was where something had been withheld or disallowed to a neighbor by deceit. (Lev. 6:2-3.) Here again he had to restore that which had been lost by his neighbor plus one-fifth of its value for a penalty.
