(Lev. 19:15)

The Law of Moses is usually considered a harsh system of justice, but in many ways it was more fair and helpful to individuals and society than our current system of justice. Justice under the Law of Moses had three main criteria: (1) the rights of the victim were of greatest priority, (2) the burden of responsibility rested upon the offender, and (3) the offender was helped toward repentance.

However, even after a person was found guilty of, for example, assault, and the judge ordered that he provide a strong manservant to work six months for the victim while the victim's broken arm healed, the guilty person still had at least three options: (1) he could accept the arbitrated decision of the judge, (2) he could opt for an eye for an eye (in this case a broken arm for a broken arm) if he felt the sentence was too harsh or unattainable, or (3) he could forfeit all rights as a member of Israelite society and flee the country to avoid punishment. However, this last choice would only be made in desperation or foolishness, because he would hardly be accepted in any other country on any more than the lowest level of their social order. And if he ever returned to Israel, any relative of the victim could automatically execute an eye-for-an-eye punishment.

None of these three options are pleasant, but the responsibility for the problem was upon the guilty party, and in order to satisfy justice, he had to make some choice.

Let us compare how ancient Israelite law and our system of justice would handle the same case. Suppose that two men got into an argument and started fighting. The one who started the fight knocked the other person to the ground. His head hit a rock and he is killed. The first man had not wanted to kill the other man, so he was not found guilty of murder, but of manslaughter.

In our society he would be sent to jail for a number of years, which would cost taxpayers thousands of dollars a year. In the meantime, his family and the family of the victim would both probably go on welfare, with additional burdens placed upon society. Even though the community did not commit the act, they assume the burden of the guilty person, his family, and the victim's family.

Under Israelite law, the guilty person would assume the responsibility for the victim's family while still providing for the welfare of his own family. If he refused, it would be a life for a life, so he would almost always accept the extra burden of caring for the victim's family rather than be executed or leave the country.

Direct or complete restitution was impossible in this case, since the father could not be replaced in the victim's family, but they should have some satisfaction in realizing that the guilty person was taking care of them. Compare our society, where the victim's family is left on its own and usually has only the temporary satisfaction of seeing the guilty person go to jail for a few years before he is set free, and yet they are still struggling to provide for themselves.

In summary, the Mosaic law was concerned with helping the victim. Only if a guilty party could not be found to compensate the victim would society assume the burden of caring for the victim and his family.

Society's burden was to teach and administer the system of justice, while the offender had the responsibility for reparation to the victim. The system also helped the guilty person recognize his errors and repent as he made restitution. The guilty party also had his rights, but his options were restricted to either righting the wrong or leaving the society if he could not be a positive part of it.

If the system was fairly applied, the whole society benefited, and those who erred were encouraged toward repentance and full participation in society. In many ways it was a better system of justice than our own today.
