(Num. 22-24)

Balaam was a prophet often inspired by the Lord. The leader of the Moabites repeatedly sought out Balaam and requested him to curse Israel, but Balaam ignored the bribes and threats and only blessed Israel and prophesied of the Messiah.

Later, under circumstances not recorded, Balaam became involved again with the Moabites. He would not curse Israel for Moab's sake, but he did inform the Moabites that the Israelites would lose the grace and strength of the Lord only as they sinned. Thereafter the Moabites and Midianites enticed many Israelites into idolatry and adultery until a plague struck Israel, taking twenty-four thousand casualties. Finally Israel repented and fought against and prevailed over the Midianites. One casualty of the war was Balaam, who was killed by the Israelites. (Num. 31:16, 8; 25:1-9, 16-18; 31:1-20.)

Elder Bruce R. McConkie summarized the story of Balaam as follows:

What a story this is! Here is a prophet of God who is firmly committed to declare only what the Lord of heaven directs. There does not seem to be the slightest doubt in his mind about the course he should pursue. He represents the Lord, and neither a house full of gold and silver nor high honors offered by the king can sway him from his determined course, which has been charted for him by that God whom he serves.

But greed for wealth and lust for honor beckon him. How marvelous it would be to be rich and powerful--as well as having the prophetic powers that already are his.

Perhaps the Lord would let him compromise his standards and have some worldly prosperity and power as well as a testimony of the gospel. Of course he knew the gospel was true, as it were, but why should he be denied the things his political file leader could confer?

I wonder how often some of us get our direction from the Church and then, Balaam-like, plead for some worldly rewards and finally receive an answer which says, in effect, if you are determined to be a millionaire or to gain this or that worldly honor, go ahead, with the understanding that you will continue to serve the Lord. Then we wonder why things don't work out for us as well as they would have done if we had put first in our lives the things of God's kingdom?

What are the rewards of unrighteousness? Do they not include seeking for worldly things when these run counter to the interests of the Church?

And don't we all know people who, though they were once firm and steadfast in testimony, are now opposing the Lord's purposes and interests on earth because money and power have twisted their judgment of what should or should not be.

Balaam, the prophet, inspired and mighty as he once was, lost his soul in the end because he set his heart on the things of this world rather than the riches of eternity. (Bruce R. McConkie, "The Story of a Prophet's Madness," New Era, Apr. 1972, p. 7.)
