As the name Deuteronomy (repetition or "second-saying" of the law) may suggest, this book at first appears to be a simple restatement of the major laws and teachings of Moses. However, they are structured together in a format found in other Near Eastern records. The form of this book is very similar to the vassal treaties made between great kings and the rulers of smaller, subject states. The classical format contained the following parts:

The component parts of such a treaty or covenant are seen in Deuteronomy:

Some scholars believe Moses or later Israelite religious leaders borrowed the vassal treaty format used between secular rulers and adapted it to the religious covenant between God and Israel. More correctly, both Moses and secular kings have followed an ancient covenant arrangement between God and man. Since the days of Adam, the people have entered into covenants with the Lord. These continue in the Church today. It is especially interesting to consider the temple ordinances from the standpoint of this classical format.

Thus, the book of Deuteronomy is more than Moses' review of his earlier teachings. It goes beyond a "last lecture" and becomes a capstone for the covenant relationship between the Lord and Israel. This covenant formula in Deuteronomy was not only for the generation of Israelites listening to Moses but it should also be accepted by each following generation:

Using the form of an address, Moses is portrayed as explaining the divine will to a new generation which had not itself experienced the formative events of its religious history. Deuteronomy, therefore, serves as a commentary on how future generations are to approach the law and it functions as a guide in establishing its canonical role. The book instructs future Israel on the manner in which past tradition is properly made alive in fresh commitment to the God of the covenant.

First, Deuteronomy emphasizes that God's covenant is not tied to past history, but is still offered to all the people. The continuity of the covenant relationship is in no way weakened by the passing of time, but in the act of commitment Israel of every age partakes of the self-same event of Sinai.

Secondly, the promise of God to his people still lies in the future. Israel's existence is characterized by an election, but this only can anticipate in faith the possession of her heritage.

Thirdly, Deuteronomy teaches that the law demands a response of commitment. The writer of the book strives to inculcate the law into the will of his people. The purpose of God remains a dynamic imperative which evokes an active choice in order to share in the living tradition of God's people.

Finally, the ability to summarize the law in terms of loving God with heart, soul and mind is a major check against all forms of legalism. The Mosiac law testifies to the living will of God whose eternal purpose for the life of his people offers the only grounds for hope and salvation. (Brevard S. Childs, Introduction to the Old Testament as Scripture [Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1979], p. 224.)

Deuteronomy is the capstone of the five books of Moses. It epitomizes the Law (or Torah) of God as he teaches Israel about their covenant relationship. It is no wonder then that this book became the foundation for the later prophetic writings. Bible readers cannot fully understand Isaiah, Jeremiah, Alma, Paul, or the other prophets and apostles without appreciating how often they built upon the principles, concepts, symbolisms, and terminology of Deuteronomy as they taught and often quoted from this work. Latter-day Saints can read it and then better appreciate their role as covenant Israelites. They can study it and then evaluate their own commitments to the Lord. It can inspire readers today to improve their covenant relationship with the Lord.

Bible Dictionary references: Deuteronomy; Covenant; Frontlets; Inheritance; Peculiar; Pentateuch; Phylacteries; Punishments; Retaliation; Revenge; Torah. (Also note the quotations from Deuteronomy in the New Testament, which are listed on page 656 of the Bible Dictionary.)
