The book of Judges is a collection of biographical narratives combined by a later writer (probably Samuel) who joined historical events into a theological framework for the whole time period from Joshua to King Saul. The writer first reviewed some of the historical material found in Joshua, and then gave an introduction to the whole book (1:1-3:6). In the introduction he stated the framework for the collection of narratives. In the generations after Joshua, the Lord had warned the Israelites that they had not heeded his command to cleanse the land of the wicked Canaanites. Therefore he would preserve the Canaanites in the land as a snare and a test (just as he would later preserve the Lamanites with the Nephites) to see whether the Israelites would follow the Lord (2:3, 20-22).

Then the main section of the book records how twelve judges rescued later generations as they turned away from God. These judges usually tried to bring righteousness to Israel, but the people quickly reverted back to their wicked ways. Judges 2:11-19 previews this cycle, which repeated itself throughout the book:

The Israelite judges were more than military leaders and judicious administrators. (See BD "Judges.") Some composed poems in the form of songs (Deborah, 5) or riddles (Samson, 14:14, 18; 15:16) or parables (Gideon's son, Jothan, 9:8-15). Although most judges exhibited charisma, some hesitated to go into battle (Deborah, Gideon) or required promises from the people before leading them (Jephthah). One, Samson, acted without assistance from Israelite forces. One characteristic many of them shared was having the Spirit of the Lord with them (Othniel, 3:10; Deborah, a prophetess, 4:4; Gideon, 6:34; Jephthah, 11:29; Samson, 13:25; 14:6, 19; 15:14, 19). The Israelites recognized the presence of the Lord with these leaders, and even though the people were wicked they willingly followed these righteous judges (like the wicked Nephites who followed Mormon in spite of his exhortations toward their repentance; Morm. 3:1-15).

The following chart shows where the twelve judges lived and repelled the invasions from almost all of Israel's enemies from about 1250 to 1050 B.C.:

The Twelve Judges and Their Victories

The last part of the book of Judges (17-21) consists of two appendixes summarizing the wicked and chaotic conditions in Israel. Whereas the introduction to the book contrasts the effective leadership of Joshua with the weakness of later generations, this conclusion to the book shows how Israelite society had degenerated even further into apostasy, priestcraft, sodomy, and civil war. In the story of Micah (17, 18), idolatry and a bribable priesthood became norms of society. During the time of the Levite and his prostitute wife (19-21), sexual abuses became so entrenched that a civil war was required to cleanse out the wicked and their defenders. One Israelite tribe, Benjamin, was almost destroyed in the process.

The spiritual framework of the whole book was one of gradually increasing wickedness. Initially the people willingly followed the Lord's prophet Joshua. Then their wickedness required external, forced humility before they followed inspired judges. Finally, their apostasy and immorality was so pervasive that the elders of Israel had to initiate a civil war before Israel lost all claims to being the people of God.

The book of Judges highlights a period of political disunity when there was no king in Israel and a time of spiritual disorganization when every person did what he thought was right. The book prepares the political and spiritual stage for the book of Samuel, which records how Israel received her first king and how Samuel became the first great prophet after Joshua. After centuries of weakness under the judges, Israel will finally be rescued from all her enemies, renewed through kingly leadership, and prepared by prophets to achieve her destiny. Studying the book of Judges shows how God worked with individuals and a whole nation to elevate them toward their divine potential even though they sought to become progressively more wicked.

Bible Dictionary references: Judges, Book of; Architecture; Baal; Benjamin; Dan; Furniture; Gideon; Grove; High Places; House; Philistines; Rain; Ras Shamrah Tablets.
