(Judg. 2:11-13)

Baal and Ashtart were the main pair of gods among the Canaanites. Baal was the great male weather god, while Ashtart was the fertility goddess. Together they were responsible for the proper combination of moisture and earth and of germination and growth to ensure a successful harvest. They combined the mysteries of agriculture and sex into an apostate Canaanite religion.

Baal not only competed with Yahweh for the religious devotion of the Israelites, but was also an apostate substitute for Jehovah. According to Canaanite mythology, Baal's father was El (meaning god), the head of the gods. Baal came into power on this earth after he conquered Yamm, the dragon god of the sea (Satan?). Later, while building a temple upon this earth, Baal was killed by Mot, the god of drought, death, and the netherworld (Satan?). With help from members of his divine family, Baal was rescued from Mot, resurrected, and put on his throne. He could then join with his mother Ashtart (Ishtar or Asherah) and provide life upon the earth. Images, idols, and shrines of Baal and Ashtart (plural Baalim and Ashtaroth) were scattered throughout the land, in the "groves" and upon the "high places" where the Canaanites worshiped.

Rather than anticipating the later time when the Lord of this earth, Jehovah, would live thereon and become subject to Satan's temptations before his atonement and resurrection, the Canaanites believed that the master of the earth, Baal, had been on the earth and had already fought death (Mot). However, they also believed that Baal was not completely victorious because he still had to confront Mot each year. Indeed, Baal experienced temporary death annually and his conflict with Mot was represented on earth by the conflict waged in nature at the changes of the seasons. Baal personified spring and moisture while Mot represented the dry summer months and the drought season in Canaan. The cycles of spring and summer, fertility and drought, life and death, were all combined by the Canaanites into the story of Baal. Their religion gave them the false hope that they could control these cycles and have power to guarantee fertility of the soil. To release this power, they reenacted the life of Baal in his temple or shrine through pageantry, ritual, female idols, naked images, phallic sculptures, and religious prostitution.

Readers of the Old Testament usually assume that Baal paganism and Jehovah worship were completely different types of religion. More correctly, the Baal religion was just an apostate form of the true religion. It distorted the true relationship between God and man, it renounced the atoning powers of God, and it introduced emotional and sensual forms of worship which appeased the masses. Thus ancient Israelites faced much the same spiritual environment as modern, true believers in God do. Dominant apostate religions and worldly enticements still distract the righteous from their true purpose on earth, and each individual must still decide if he or she will serve the Lord or a form of Baal and Ashtart.
