(Judg. 4)

It seems natural to assume that a "prophetess" was simply a woman prophet. Actually, a prophetess in the Old Testament could be: (1) the wife of a prophet, (2) a woman who received prophecies of the future, or (3) someone gifted with poetical inspiration, since inspired, sacred poetry was considered to be divine. Several other prophetesses are mentioned in the Bible, such as Miriam, Hannah, Isaiah's wife, and Anna. Miriam and Deborah were probably called prophetesses because of their poetical inspiration as they developed their own special gifts of the Spirit.

The song of Deborah (Judg. 5) shows that she was a prophetess in the poetical sense. She also served as a judge who built upon her human perspectives and relied upon spiritual insight to make her decisions. She was confident in her relationship with God as evidenced in the counsel she gave Barak: "Hath not the Lord God of Israel commanded . . .?" (Judg. 4:6.) She was a social leader and an ancient "Joan of Arc" who inspired the Israelites in battle. (Judg. 4:8.) She also demonstrated her development of the gift of prophecy. Her prophecy concerning Sisera's fate (Judg. 4:9) was fulfilled, which confirmed the fact that she did receive some knowledge of the future. All these characteristics show that Deborah was a prophetess who, as well as being poetically inspired, was also a spiritual leader of the people.

The gifts of the spirit, including prophecy, are promised to those who believe in God and follow his commandments. (Mark 16:16-18.) Paul has encouraged us to "desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy." (1 Cor. 14:1.) We must develop these spiritual gifts if we are to see and understand God (D&C 46:31) and if we want to witness his promised miracles, signs, and wonders (D&C 35:8). We should all be prophets or prophetesses within the areas of our own spiritual development and stewardships. Through the power of the Holy Ghost we can best receive and apply these gifts of the spirit. (D&C 46:8-28: see AF, pp. 217-18.)
