(Judg. 11:30-39)

Although a social outcast, Jephthah was recognized for his leadership abilities. As he confronted the Ammonites, he reviewed the biblical history of how the Israelites had conquered the Transjordan area from the Amorites, thus disproving the Ammonite claims to the land. The Ammonites still desired to control that area, and Jephthah gathered an Israelite army to repel the invasion. Before going into battle with the Spirit of the Lord upon him, Jephthah vowed that if he returned victorious he would dedicate to the Lord whatever came first out of his house to meet him. Then he added, "and I will offer it up for a burnt offering" (11:31). This promise and its fulfillment have disturbed Bible readers and confused Bible scholars for centuries.

When Jephthah returned victorious, his only child, a daughter, came out to meet him. He told her of his promise and she was willing to abide by it. She asked for a two-month period of fellowship and mourning with her friends. Then she returned to her father "who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed: and she knew no man" (11:39).

Scholars agree that she was dedicated to the Lord and that she left Jephthah's home. They disagree as to whether her dedication to the Lord comprised a lifetime of religious service (probably at the tabernacle) without the opportunity of raising a family (like being a fulltime, lifelong welfare or proselyting missionary), or the taking of her life as a burnt offering or human sacrifice.

Joseph Smith apparently did not question the Lord about this dilemma, because he made no changes in the text of his inspired translation. The story as contained in the original Hebrew is, however, ambiguous as to how the vow was to be fulfilled. The phrase "and I will offer it up for a burnt offering" (11:31) could be translated a number of ways: "and/also/but/therefore/then/or I will offer/give/rise/lift/carry it as an offering/gift/ascent/lifting/sacrifice." It is perhaps significant that the fulfillment of this vow as recorded in verse 39 concludes with the phrase "and she knew no man." This phrase could be another way of saying "she died childless (as she was sacrificed as a burnt offering)." But it seems to mean that "she did not marry and raise a family (as she served the Lord the rest of her natural life)."

With the limited material available, and lacking revealed commentary, the answer to this dilemma is left to the individual reader. Regardless of what type of sacrifice Jephthah's daughter became, there are some positive objectives to be derived from this story:
