(Judg. 13:5; 16:1-20)

An angel of the Lord had promised Samson's parents that their child would begin to deliver Israel from the Philistines if he would remain a Nazarite. A Nazarite was not to have strong drink, nor could he eat any fruit of the vine (grapes, raisins, etc.). He was not to have his hair cut, nor could he touch a dead person. If a person should die while the Nazarite was touching him, the Nazarite had to go through a week-long cleansing process. (Num. 6:2-12.)

As long as Samson remained faithful to his Nazarite vows, he had the strength of the Lord with him. Thus, even after his immorality in Gaza (Judg. 16:1) and his love affair with Delilah (16:4-20), he still had the strength to take down and carry city gates (16:3) and to break the bonds of strong ropes (16:12). The Lord has told us that when we do what he says, he is bound to grant us the associated blessing. And when we obtain any blessing from him it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated. (D&C 82:10; 130:20-21.) Samson was obeying the Nazarite vows. Thus, the Lord was bound to bless him as promised. However, Samson was disobeying other commandments and thus lost the precious blessing of the companionship of the Spirit of God. He was therefore unable to discern Delilah's true motives. Ironically, Delilah had a better sense of discernment than Samson; she could recognize when he finally told her the truth. (Judg. 16:18.) As Delilah cut Samson's hair, his vow was broken, and the Lord's power departed from him.

When a Nazarite vow or covenant was broken, it was sometimes possible to renew the vow after a period of repentance. (Num. 6:9-12.) Apparently Samson went through a period of repentance and recommitment because he again received extraordinary strength as he destroyed the Philistine temple and his own life. (Judg. 16:30.)

Tragedy came upon Samson because as he broke one commandment (morality) he lost the Spirit of the Lord. This led to his breaking other covenants and resulted in weakness, blindness, slavery, and death (both physical and spiritual).
