The first book of Samuel continues the narrative of the book of Judges (review the concluding paragraphs in the article on the book of Judges in this book). Although Judges demonstrates the growing wickedness among the Israelites, the short story of Ruth indicates that there were still noble, honorable people in the land. The book of Samuel introduces new models of righteousness (Hannah, Samuel, Jonathan, David, Nathan, etc.), but it also warns us of human weaknesses (Eli, Saul, David, Ammon, Absalom, etc.). Thus, it continues the themes of both Judges and Ruth. In fact, Samuel was probably the primary editor behind all three books.

Samuel was the youthful servant of Eli, the high priest, and later became the prophet, seer, and judge of Israel. He bridged a crucial time period as Israel changed from a loose confederation of tribes under the leadership of elders and judges to a monarchy under the rule of Saul and then David. The lives of these three men, Samuel, Saul, and David, dominate the books of Samuel, which record the following events:

1 Samuel

I. Life and administration of Samuel (1-12).

A. Inspired promise, youth, prophetic call (1-3).

B. Ark of the covenant and the Philistines (4-6).

C. Samuel leads and teaches Israel (7).

D. Desires for and dangers of a king (8).

E. Saul to be a "prince over Israel" (9-10:16).

F. Saul's inhibitions (10:17-27).

G. Saul exhibits leadership (11).

H. Samuel's last message and warning (12).

II. Saul as king (13-31).

A. Saul vacillates between strength and weakness (13-15).

B. David's anointing, victory over Goliath, interactions with Saul's family (16-20).

C. Saul seeks David's life (21-24).

D. David's friends and refuge among the Philistines (25-27).

E. Saul's discouragement, defeat, and death (28-31).

2 Samuel

I. The kingship of David (1-24).

A. David consolidates rule and conquers Jerusalem (1-6).

B. Promises to David and his family (7).

C. David's strong rule (8-10).

D. David and Bathsheba (11-12).

E. David loses spirit of leadership (13-21, 24).

F. David's last words--a psalm and a prayer (22-23).

A number of important lessons can be learned from these stories: the Lord answers prayers (of Hannah, David), the importance of religious leaders and their families in setting a good example (Eli and his sons, Samuel's sons), the calling of a young prophet (Samuel), having trust in the Lord (ark of the covenant and the Philistines), the dangers of centralized rule (Israel desires a king), the value of personal integrity and discipline (Saul's problems in his relationship with God), a young man grows in favor with the Lord (David), the evils of jealousy (Saul), trust in the Lord during periods of persecution (David), power and promises to the righteous (David), danger of evil thoughts and acts (David and Bathsheba), the frustrations of life without the Spirit of God (David), and the need to account for stewardships before death (Samuel and David).

In other words, there is a wealth of stories, moral lessons, gospel themes, historical facts, and personality insights in these chapters. For the first time since the life of Moses, the Old Testament record has slowed down a little and given us more material covering just a short time period with enough facts to study characters, events, and feelings in greater depth. The books of Samuel are a record deserving careful study. The footnotes and topical guide references in the LDS edition of the Bible help clarify this material so that its richness can be appreciated.

Bible Dictionary references: Samuel; Samuel, Books of; Anoint; Dagon; David; Eli; Emerods; Giants; Jerusalem; Prophet; Saul; Seer; Shiloh; Sling; Zadok.
