The two books now known as 1 and 2 Kings originally formed a single work. Due to the length of the material, it was anciently divided into two scrolls, approximately equal in size. The formal division into two separate books was completed by the sixteenth century A.D. in the Hebrew printed editions of the Old Testament, and this pattern continued into the King James Version. Here, we will consider them as one book.

The book of Kings opens with a glorious portrayal of King Solomon's reign and ends with the last king of Judah as a captive in Babylon. Within its history, we see Israel reach its zenith under Solomon and then divide into two separate kingdoms, Israel and Judah, which both fall into wickedness before their destruction and captivity by Mesopotamian powers.

First we see the northern kingdom of Israel follow prophetic promises and the leadership of Jeroboam to break away from the southern tribes. Within two dynamic centuries, Israel rises to power and influence, struggles with changing dynasties, sinks into moral corruption (especially under Ahab and Jezebel), and then experiences a brief burst of glory under Jeroboam II before being destroyed by the Assyrians in 721 B.C.

We also see the smaller, weaker southern kingdom of Judah consolidate its rule under the house of David to seek its own power and independence. Its relationship with Israel sometimes draws the two nations together, but it usually weakens both as they compete and even war with each other.

In the century after Israel's destruction, Judah stands alone against the Assyrians, experiences worse moral corruption (under wicked King Manasseh), and attempts a religious revival under King Josiah, but is so weakened that it becomes a political pawn of Babylon and Egypt until the Babylonians destroy its capital and temple during 587-586 B.C.

The book of Kings is more than the historical review of the rise and fall of Israelite nations. In its pages we also observe individuals struggling for higher and nobler ideals against religious and political obstacles. Elijah confronts the priests of Baal supported by the Tyrian princess Jezebel. Kings contend against neighboring nations and Mesopotamian powers. Elisha and later prophets struggle against religious indifference, immorality, and selfishness. Good and bad kings, weak and strong leaders, charismatic and mild prophets interact with each other through centuries of Israelite history and provide us with personality insights, historical backgrounds, literary masterpieces, and above all an understanding of God's involvement with the chosen family of Jacob. We see how the Lord warns and chastens Israel and Judah, and how they disregard the warnings until complete destruction comes upon them. We need to turn to the prophetic literature (especially Isaiah and Jeremiah) of the same time period to appreciate the promises of a Messiah and of an eventual restoration and blessings that would later come to the descendants of these defeated Israelite nations. (See TG "Israel, Gathering of.") The book of Kings only briefly mentions the promises of their repentance and forgiveness (see 1 Kgs. 8:46-53) as it records their downfall.

An unknown editor or compiler used a number of records to complete this work. He probably lived during the reign of Jehoiachin, one of the last kings of Judah, and finished this book by 590 B.C. He mentioned at least three major sources for his material: the Acts of Solomon (1 Kgs. 11:41), and the books of the chronicles of the kings of Israel (1 Kgs. 14:19) and of Judah (1 Kgs. 14:29). Records of Ahab (1 Kgs. 20, 22), Elijah (1 Kgs. 17-19, 21;2 Kgs. 1), Elisha (2 Kgs. 2-8, 13) Isaiah (2 Kgs. 18-20), and the temple (2 Kgs. 12, 16, 23), may have also been used.

The compiler followed the pattern of other ancient historians. He used available records, selected the desired material, and added his own commentary and those additional items which he felt were essential. After his record of Solomon's reign and the division of Israel and Judah, he developed a pattern or framework to tell the story of almost all the kings. First he gave an opening formula (in which were given the date the reign began, its length, the synchronism with the king of the other kingdom, and, in the case of the Judean kings, the name of the king's mother); next came his judgment or religious evaluation of the king in question (such as, "And he [Hezekiah] did right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that David his father did." 2 Kgs. 18:3); then followed various extracts from the sources and other records; and finally came his closing formula (indicating which records contained further information and recording the king's death, place of burial, and successor's name). The compiler followed this pattern in all cases except for the last king of his record, Jehoiachin, and those kings who were either assassinated or deposed and who were usually not given a proper or state burial.

The book of Kings divides easily into three major sections:

I. Solomon's Reign (1-11).

A. Last days of David and Solomon's accession (1, 2).

B. Solomon and his glory (3-11).

II. The divided kingdom, Israel and Judah (1 Kgs. 12-2 Kgs. 17).

A. Division and reigns of Jeroboam and Rehoboam (12-14).

B. Synchronistic history of Israel and Judah (15, 16).

C. Ahab and the fall of the house of Omni (1 Kgs. 17-2 Kgs. 10).

D. Synchronistic history of Israel and Judah until the fall of Israel to Assyria (11-17).

III. The kingdom of Judah alone (18-25).

A. Reign of good King Hezekiah (18-20).

B. Wicked King Manasseh (21).

C. Reformation of Josiah (22-23:30).

D. Disruption and destruction of Judah (23:31-25:30).

The compiler of the book of Kings is sometimes called the "Deuteronomistic writer" because of the religious message that his "historical" book presented. Shortly before the writer compiled his material, King Josiah of Judah had initiated a major religious reform and temple renovation. While cleaning the temple storerooms, workers found a scroll of the book of Deuteronomy. Most religious records and sacred writings had earlier been destroyed by the wicked King Manasseh. The reading of this recovered book of Deuteronomy to King Josiah demonstrated how far Judah had departed from the law of Moses. Deuteronomy chapters 27 and 28 clearly indicated the blessings of obedience and the curses of disobedience to the Sinai covenant. The compiler of the book of Kings observed the fulfillment of these Deuteronomistic promises and emphasized the patterns of obedience or disobedience and of blessings or curses which characterized the period of Israelite kings. Like Mormon extracting, compiling, and commenting on the large plates of Nephi (which contained a secular history), the compiler of the book of Kings used secular historical records to demonstrate how the kings' and people's religious behavior had affected their military and political conditions. The writer did not distort history, but he reviewed it within the context of the broader dimensions of God-man relationships. A modern Old Testament scholar, Brevard S. Childs, has evaluated the compiler's use of historical sources:

It is evident that the books of Kings represent only a skeletal account of a history which extends from the accession of Solomon to the destruction of Jerusalem in 587. A most striking feature is the conscious principle of selection which is operative throughout the books. Not only is the reader continually told where he can find additional information about each king ('now the rest of the acts of N . . . are they not written in the book of the . . . '), but also there is no attempt whatever to give a detailed account of each king's reign. The obvious lack of concern for a detailed survey would confirm the conclusion that the writer's purpose in the history lay elsewhere. Several indices reveal the author's true intention. First of all, the writer makes it clear that he conceives of his task as describing a unified history of events of one people within a circumscribed period. In spite of the political division into two kingdoms the writer refuses to treat them separately, but shuttles back and forth between them. The history ends with the loss of the land and the exile of the people. However, the threat of this disaster appears from the beginning of the history and connects the various reigns like a red thread. The writer continually recapitulates prior events and adumbrates future ones in order to enforce his theological interpretation of the whole history as a unified entity.

Secondly, the writer's consistent attempt to offer reasons for the impending judgment further confirms his intention to explain as well as to describe why Israel was destroyed. Sometimes he uses a stereotyped expression to characterize a reign ('he did not turn from the sins of Jeroboam', II Kings 3:1; 10.28; 13.2, etc.), but at other times he reveals an essential feature of his composition by assigning a lengthy theological explanation to justify the divine judgment (1 Kings 11:9ff.; II Kings 17:7ff.). The author's concern to see an inner connection between the various epochs of Israel's history sets his work apart from the various sources which he had at his disposal.

The manner in which the reader is constantly referred back to the writer's sources indicates that he did not envision his composition to be in contradiction with his sources. He was not attempting to rewrite history nor to supply hitherto unknown information. Neither was he writing a 'theological history' which operated on its own principles apart from the history found in the official records. Event and interpretation belonged together and he needed only a selection from a larger historical sequence to demonstrate his thesis. (Brevard S. Childs, Introduction to the Old Testament as Scripture [Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1979], pp. 288-89.)

The book of Kings is not a "historical" work according to the modern definition of that term. The compiler of the book did not write history as much as he illustrated how the hand of the Lord could be seen in the historical events of ancient Israel. Of greatest historical value are the selections and excerpts from earlier records that he included, often in their original form, in his work. Of weakest historical validity are the chronological dates he used. The different earlier records which he used apparently had their own unique dating systems. As he recorded the chronological data from the different sources, he simply listed the dates and did not attempt to correlate them with the other sources.

In spite of these deficiencies, the book of Kings provides a historical record of this time period that is more accurate, complete, and enlightening than any other history of the same age. The book also provides us with insights into the lives of the prophets Elijah and Elisha. It gives us historical background and some information about the lives of other great prophets, such as Jonah, Amos, Hosea, Micah, Isaiah, Zephaniah, Jeremiah, Lehi, Nahum, and Habakkuk. More importantly, the book of Kings shows us how God dealt with the children of Israel. Perhaps we can recognize similar patterns and warnings in our society, as we modern children of Israel strive to honor and represent him in an increasingly wicked world.

Bible Dictionary references:

1 Kings: Kings, Books of; Ahab; Asa; Bethel; Calves; Elias; Elijah; Idol; Israel, Kingdom of; Jeroboam; Judah, Kingdom of; Rehoboam; Schools of the Prophets; Solomon; Temple; Temple of Solomon.

2 Kings: Assyria; Babylon; Captivities of the Israelites; Commerce; Diaspora; Dispersion; Elisha; Hezekiah; Hezekiah's Tunnel; Jew; Josiah; Molech; Samaritans; Ship.
