These books were originally preserved on one scroll, called Ezra. Early Christianity separated the work into two sections, Ezra and Nehemiah, named after the principal personalities encountered in each. A Jewish division of the work followed much later (in the 1500s). From the standpoint of authorship, purpose, and teachings, it is much easier to discuss these two books as a unit. In fact, they were originally part of an even larger collection of writings, 1 and 2 Chronicles. They overlap in that 2 Chronicles 36:22-23 is repeated in Ezra 1:1-3. Such deliberate repetition was a Semitic literary device used to indicate an original connection between the two parts. What was originally a very large work, probably of one author, has since been divided into four segments: 1 and 2 Chronicles, Ezra, and Nehemiah. Both external factors (the unwieldy use of a large scroll) and internal characteristics (different chronological time periods, events, and personalities) led to this division.

These books are easily organized into four parts:

The writer of these books was probably Ezra (although the work appears to have been modified and edited a few decades later). He continues the theological history of Chronicles (see pp. 110-13) and hopes that the negative experiences of Israel are not to be repeated by his struggling religious community in Jerusalem. If his contemporaries would read his work and heed his lessons, they would be heirs for divine blessings and protection.

The lessons from the past demonstrated that Israel had almost always been in conflict with her political neighbors and the religious environment of the world. The Judean community during the time of Ezra faced similar conflicts as their neighbors opposed them and as they were tempted to intermarry with their neighbors and lose their distinctiveness. Yet if they were righteous, they would be protected from their enemies. The theme of divine assistance was illustrated repeatedly as the author showed how God used different foreign leaders to allow the return and restoration of the Jewish community.

Although contemporary Latter-day Saints are far removed from ancient Jerusalem, the Persians, and the Samaritans, they still face political and social challenges and the pressures of a worldly society. The religious community of Ezra did not endure; those Jews fell into a period of apostasy long before Christ's birth. Although Christ's spiritual kingdom of today will remain upon the earth until his second coming, individuals within that kingdom can easily fall away if they disregard the warnings of the ancient scribe, Ezra, and of their contemporary prophets.

Bible Dictionary references: Ezra; Nehemiah; Canon; Cyrus; Gentile; Judea; Scribe; Synagogue; Synagogue, the Great; Temple of Zerubbabel; Temple on Mount Gerizim; Zerubbabel.
