Ecclesiastes is an expression of skepticism whose gloomy mood is all the more striking because of its placement between works of optimism (Proverbs) and love (Song of Solomon). It presents the conflict between the philosophies of the world and faith in God. One man, a "son of David" struggles with this eternal conflict.

The "son of David" could be David's literal son, the next king of Jerusalem, Solomon. What man was better able to evaluate life at its best--with spiritual gifts, power, fame, riches, and love--and at its worst--with wickedness, emptiness, a lack of spiritual direction, and a fear of divine judgments. Yet a declaration of faith (Eccl. 12:13, 14) is not recorded in the scriptural accounts on Solomon. Also, the language, style, and some vocabulary come from a later time in Israel's history. It could be a later, rewritten version of a record of Solomon, but more likely it was composed by someone else.

The term "son" in "son of David" in the original classical Hebrew is not restricted to his own immediate family; it means "a male descendant." Terms such as grandson or great-grandson were not used. Thus, a later descendant of David who himself might have been a king over Jerusalem (as many were for over four centuries) might have composed this work. It could represent either his own struggles, or the conflict of a faithful king in a wicked generation, such as Hezekiah during the time of Isaiah or Josiah during the time of Jeremiah.

Or the term "son of David" might be figurative, meaning "a follower of David." In Ecclesiastes 12:12 the term "son" is used by the author or preacher (as he calls himself in 1:1) as he addresses a listener or disciple. Such a use of the word "son" is seen repeatedly in Proverbs and other biblical literature. Thus, the preacher may be using the life of David as a model to represent the emptiness of physical life without a spiritual purpose. David also experienced the best and the worst of life as he gloried in the praise of God and man before he was disgraced before both. In the depths of misery and sin he repented and he turned back to the Lord. Solomon, however, did not repent and turn back to the Lord, as did David his father. (JST 1 Kgs. 11:33.) Thus, the life of David served as a valid model for the preacher.

The preacher also may have followed his own path of worldliness and attempted to repent. In any case, the question of authorship should not distract from the book's message of how one may struggle and journey toward faith in a world of doubt. He vacillates between faith and skepticism. His weak hopes appear to be stifled by doubt. For most of the book, the outcome remains unsure and faith appears to be defeated, but in the end it triumphs.

The conflict presented in Ecclesiastes could have been that of David, of Solomon, or of a later king or leader in Jerusalem. Almost everyone goes through the same conflict as he struggles to develop faith in a world of doubt. Until one knows for himself, he would be wise to follow the counsel of the preacher and remember that the whole purpose of mortality is to develop faith and to keep the Lord's commandments (12:13). (See BD "Ecclesiastes.")
