The writings of Isaiah constitute the most important prophetic discourses of the Old Testament. Isaiah is quoted more in the New Testament, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and among the Dead Sea Scrolls, than any other Old Testament prophet. Jesus also quoted Isaiah extensively as he began his ministry (compare Isa. 61:1-3 with Luke 4:16-21), taught the Jews, and visited the Nephites. In 3 Nephi, he evaluated the prophecies of Isaiah, proclaimed that all of them would be fulfilled, and commanded his followers to search the words of Isaiah. (3 Ne. 20:11-12; 23:1-3.)

Isaiah was born about 775 B.C. during the reigns of two strong Israelite kings. In the northern kingdom of Israel, Jeroboam II beautified Samaria and expanded his country's borders and influence to their greatest extent since Solomon's time. In the southern kingdom of Judah, Uzziah served as Jerusalem's most powerful king in more than a century. Wealth, social injustices, immorality, and growing pagan worship characterized both societies. This was also a time of peace for both kingdoms, since neither Assyria (to the northeast) nor Egypt (to the southwest) had strong rulers.

Shortly after Isaiah reached adulthood, the two Israelite kingdoms weakened just as one of Assyria's most powerful kings, Tiglath-Pileser III (or Pul, as he was called in the Bible), came to the throne in 745 B.C. Civil dissensions, rebel rulers, international warfare, and assassinations had disrupted the northern kingdom of Israel, while in Judah, Uzziah had become a leper, a social outcast, and a coregent king with his son after he tried to burn the priestly incense in the temple in 750 B.C.

Isaiah was called as a prophet about a decade later. In the year that King Uzziah died, about 740 B.C., Isaiah received a great vision concerning his calling (Isa. 6) and was soon recognized by both kingdoms as a prophet of the Lord.

Isaiah says very little about his background, family life, or personal feelings. He had at least two sons, whose names contained prophetic warnings (Isa. 7:3; 8:3). According to Jewish tradition, he was related to the royal family, and one of his daughters married King Hezekiah, the grandson of Uzziah. He suffered a martyr's death at the hands of the wicked King Manasseh, who had Isaiah encased in a tree trunk and sawn asunder with a wooden saw.

Isaiah and his contemporary prophets (Amos, Hosea, and Micah) exhorted the Israelites to return to complete obedience of the laws of Moses. According to his own writings, he did not perform many great miracles although he did promise a miraculous deliverance to Jerusalem (37) and prophesied health to Hezekiah and then gave him a sign or miracle by having the sun's shadow recede (38). His greatest power came not as a lawgiver (like Moses) and not as a miracle worker (like Elijah) but as a prophet and seer who prophesied about many future events in the history of the world.

Isaiah's warnings and prophecies cover almost three thousand years of Israelite history. They also foretell the first and second coming of the Messiah, the restoration of the gospel, the gathering of the house of Israel, the events and leaders before the Millennium, and some characteristics of the Millennium. The following is a brief summary of his writings:

Chapter Description, with major themes italicized

1-12 Warnings to ancient Israelites and their leaders with prophecies about later times and leaders (including the Messiah).

13-23 Prophecies concerning the foreign nations and their later representations upon the earth until the last days.

24-27 Isaiah's apocalypse: prophecies, psalms, and prayers about the judgment of the world and the blessings of Israel in the last days.

28-35 First judgment, then paradise: a warning to Israel of her sufferings and to the wicked world (Edom) of its destruction before the Millennium, when the earth will blossom as a rose and the righteous will be blessed with hidden knowledge and scriptures, noble leaders, justice, and peace.

36-39 Historical narrative of the Assyrian invasion and King Hezekiah.

40-47 Affirmation of God's power and glory with prophecies concerning his servants (both messianic and secular) who will deliver the righteous from death, wickedness, and oppression.

48-52 Israel, Israel, Israel: a call to scattered "blood Israel" to join with "covenant Israel" and to become jointheirs to the "land Israel" and the blessings of righteousness in Zion.

53 The great servant song of the Messiah.

54-58 Encouragements to Israel and the world to join the Lord's work, to trust in his ways, and to keep his commandments (such as the sabbath, morality, fasting, and charity) and to always turn away from sin.

59-66 Prophecies of the great and dreadful day of the Lord, including the gathering, the Restoration, temporal and spiritual blessings, the return of Christ, and the creation of a new heaven and a new earth.

It is assumed that Isaiah arranged his writings into their present order, although a scribe or disciple may have done so. Much of the historical material (especially chapters 36-39) is contained in 2 Kings 14-21 and 2 Chronicles 26-33.

Portions of Isaiah's writings (especially his history of Uzziah; see 2 Chr. 26:22) were later lost or corrupted by editing and deletion. Many sacred writings were lost during the fifty-five-year reign of Manasseh, who killed many righteous people and offered his own son as a human sacrifice. The Babylonian invasion and captivity resulted in other lost records. After the return from Babylon, Jewish scribes, led by Ezra, collected sacred writings, compared variant manuscripts, and prepared standardized copies. The accepted Hebrew translation (the Masora) of the Old Testament was a continuation of the Ezra tradition. The contents of the Greek translation (the Septuagint) and the translated biblical portions in the Book of Mormon (which came from the Brass Plates of Laban, taken from Jerusalem before the Babylonian captivity) differed somewhat from the Masoretic text, although the Isaiah material was basically the same in all three versions.

In spite of the passage of time and the ravages and pressures without and within Judaism, most of Isaiah's writings have remained relatively intact. They provide powerful warnings and prophecies to the world from an Old Testament prophet who was great like unto Moses (Deut. 18:15) and who communed with God (2 Ne. 11:2). (See Bd "Isaiah.")
