In sweeping panoramic visions, the Lord taught Isaiah remarkable truths about our time. When Moroni visited Joseph Smith on the night of September 21, 1823, he quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah and told Joseph that "it was about to be fulfilled." (JS-H 1:40.) This important chapter describes people and events associated with the Millennium. It contains some classic verses about the wolf and the lamb dwelling together and how Israel will be gathered a second time.

Verse one carries over some of the ideas introduced in the previous chapter where the Lord warns Assyria of her pride and eventual fall. The time would come when the oppressed of Israel would have power over the oppressor. The mighty trees (or leaders) of Assyria would be hewn down (or humbled). Isaiah begins his prophecy in chapter eleven speaking of new trees (or leaders) that would come forth out of Israel to rule and bless the earth.

This verse appears to be an example of synonymous parallelism, a poetic device used by Isaiah in nearly every chapter. Apparently in this reference to two separate individuals (rod--branch; stem--roots) he is saying the same thing twice, but in slightly different words:

a. And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse,

b. And a branch shall grow out of his roots.

In Doctrine and Covenants 113 the Lord identifies two key terms used in this verse: the "rod" and "stem of Jesse." The "rod" is "a servant in the hands of Christ, who is partly a descendant of Jesse as well as of Ephraim . . . on whom there is laid much power." (D&C 113:3, 4.) The "stem" is Christ himself. (See D&C 113:1-2.) Therefore, the first part of verse one could be translated: "And there shall come forth a descendant of Jesse and Ephraim who shall be powerful servant in the hands of Christ . . ."

Continuing the parallelism, the second part of the verse ("and a branch shall grow out of his roots") could read: ". . . yea, a helper from among his children shall come forth."

The term "branch" in the King James text comes from a Hebrew word that appears in only one other place in the Old Testament--Daniel 11:7. In Daniel's vision of the last days, he mentions a "branch" coming from "roots" ("roots" in Daniel is the same Hebrew word found in Isaiah 11:1). This "branch from the roots" would stand forth in the end of days as a leader against the evil king and army of the north. This wicked king would bring about an "abomination of desolation" in Jerusalem and exalt himself above God, until Michael would lead an army against him. (See Dan. 11:7-12:1.)

Many other scriptures prophesy about the "branch" or leader who will build a temple and fight against the wicked king and stand witness of the Lord's final victory in the last days. He is called by many names and titles, including: "my servant, the branch" (Zech. 3:8-9); "my servant David," a "king" over the Jews (Ezek. 37:21-28); "a righteous Branch and a King" in whose days Judah would be saved (Jer. 23:3-8); "a Branch of righteousness" (Jer. 33:15); "a leader and commander to the people" (Isa. 55:3-4); and "David their king in the latter days" (Hosea 3:4-5).

Modern prophets have also discussed this Jewish leader of the last days. Joseph Smith said, "The throne and kingdom of David is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage." (HC 6:253.) In his dedicatory prayer on the Mount of Olives, Orson Hyde prophesied, "Raise up Jerusalem . . . with David Thy servant, constitute her people a distinct nation and government, with David, even a descendant from the loins of ancient David to be their king." (HC 4:457.)

In summary, the servant ("rod" and "branch") of Isaiah 11:1 appears to describe the great Jewish leader of the last days who will be called David. He will be an instrument of the Lord to fulfill the divine plan of events before the Millennium.

Verses two through five describe some characteristics of this leader. The Spirit of God will rest upon him, and other spiritual gifts will be his. He will be led to reverence the Lord. He will judge righteously through the power of discernment. Like the prophets Joshua (Deut. 34:9) and Samuel (1 Sam. 16:7) and Jesus (John 7:24), he will not depend upon the physical senses of man, but upon the Spirit of God, and will be able to judge in righteousness and equity. (See 1 Cor. 2:10-16.) Indeed, "righteousness shall be the girdle [strength] of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins [sinews]." Just as a branch and its roots share identifying characteristics, the servant is obviously very much like his master, Christ.

These spiritual powers and promises also belong to Christ (D&C 113:2; 2 Ne. 30:9-11) as he is their giver. He promises to share them with his endowed and faithful disciples. (Alma 20:4; D&C 113:8.) As his servants live righteously and increase their spiritual powers, they become more and more like Christ. These verses therefore achieve a double fulfillment as they describe both Christ and his servants. (Compare Ps. 22, 110.)

Verses six through nine describe the millennial period of peace among animals (wolf and lamb, leopard and goat, lion and calf) and man and the animals (children and poisonous serpents). The earth will begin to fill the measure of her creation as righteousness will prevail and as the knowledge of the glory of God will fill the world even as the waters cover the sea. (See also Hab. 2:14.) Enmity between animals will cease and Satan will be bound as men's righteousness and knowledge increase. (D&C 101:26-34; 2 Ne. 30:16-18.) The gospel will be spread to all nations until "all the inhabitants of the earth shall embrace it." (DS 3:64-65.)

Another major figure of the last days is introduced in verse ten: a "root of Jesse, . . . shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek." The Lord identifies this "root of Jesse" as "a descendant of Jesse, as well as of Joseph, unto whom rightly belongs the priesthood, and the keys of the kingdom, for an ensign, and for the gathering of my people in the last days." (D&C 113:5-6.)

This servant would hold the priesthood keys that would serve as an ensign for the Gentiles and result in the gathering of Israel in the last days. This servant is often identified as the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Although Joseph Smith demonstrated the characteristics of the "root of Jesse," he might not be the only "root of Jesse" in these last days. Many of the presidents of the Church have been related to Joseph Smith and all have held the priesthood and the keys of the kingdom that he held. The "root of Jesse" could also be that particular prophet who holds the keys when Christ returns to personally preside over his kingdom. In any case, the "root of Jesse" is a great leader in the Church of Jesus Christ in this dispensation.

Verses eleven and twelve elaborate on the gathering of Israel and the role of an ensign. The first gathering of Israel took place after the Babylonian captivity; the second gathering will see remnants return from all directions (as symbolized by different countries: Assyria--Modern Iraq; Egypt, Pathros--Egypt; Cush--Ethiopia; Elam--Iran; Shinar--Iraq; Hamath--Syria) and from various continents (islands of the sea). The Lord will also set up a church (or ensign) for the nations and the scattered outcasts of Israel.

Verses thirteen and fourteen show that after the dispersed of the Jews (Judah) and the remnants of Israel, including the ten tribes (Ephraim), return, they will work together and prevail over their earlier enemies to the east (Edom, Moab, Ammon--Modern Jordan) and west (Philistines--Gaza Strip). The old hostility between Israel (Ephraim) and Judah will cease as they unite their righteous efforts.

Various interpretations have been rendered for the term "tongue of the Egyptian sea" in verse fifteen. It might be the western arm of the Red Sea (or Gulf of Suez) near the Suez Canal. Another possibility is the delta (or tongue) of the Nile that protrudes into the Mediterranean Sea along Egypt's north coast. The most likely explanation would be the large inland sea created late each spring as the Nile overflows its banks and floods a large part of the valley, like a tongue sticking far inland. Isaiah 19:5-10 describes this event in greater detail. This prophecy has been fulfilled since the building of the Aswan Dam and the destruction of the traditional way of life along the Nile.

The Lord will also divert "the river" (usually understood to be the Euphrates River) into seven streams so travelers can walk across without getting their feet wet. Verse sixteen says that a highway will be prepared for the remnant of Israel coming from Assyria (the land on the other side of the Euphrates). Isaiah 19:23-25 prophesies of a highway all the way from Assyria (through Israel) to Egypt. Other prophecies also describe a great highway for the righteous in the last days. (Isa. 35:8-10; 51:9-11; D&C 133:27.)

Although this highway could be a literal, physical road, it may represent any means of transportation, such as an airway or railroad. The Lord did not create a literal road for ancient Israel, but he did prepare the way for them so they would reach their destination. He will do the same for Israel in the last days, and they will recognize his hand in their return. (Jer. 16:14-15; 30; 31.)

The eleventh chapter of Isaiah contains some marvelous prophecies of the last days. It enlightens modern Israelites about the roles of two great leaders who will prepare the way for the coming of Christ in power and glory. They may be the two saviors, or messiahs known in Jewish tradition as "Messiah ben David" (a redeemer descended from David) and "Messiah ben Joseph" (a redeemer descended from Joseph).

Isaiah also describes aspects of the gathering and how the Lord will prepare the way for scattered Israel to return. Ephraim and Judah will work together against common foes. They will lead the world to a universal knowledge of the gospel and toward the millennial period of peace and righteousness. Contemporary Israelites need to understand these prophecies so they can be directed and encouraged in their efforts toward establishing this golden age.
