(Isa. 36-39)

Isaiah was not always the best of friends with the king of Judah. Earlier (in chapter 7) he had warned Ahaz to worry less about Syro-Israelite invasion and more about the righteousness of his people. Instead, Ahaz allied with the Assyrians, who quickly conquered Syria and Israel and then deported the ten tribes. The kingdom of Judah was not conquered by the Assyrians, but they were required to pay Assyrian taxes.

After the death of Ahaz in 720, his son Hezekiah became the king. Hezekiah had already ruled together with his father and he had instituted some religious reform. After he became the sole ruler, he became even more zealous in counteracting his father's paganism. He became a close friend to the prophet Isaiah. Although the internal affairs and religious behavior of the kingdom of Judah were improving, the Jews were still subject to Assyrian taxes and armies. Sometime during this period, Hezekiah became gravely ill and feared for his life. After an early warning of immediate death, Isaiah promised Hezekiah fifteen more years of life and gave a miraculous sign to verify this promise (38).

Shortly thereafter, Hezekiah received envoys and gifts from Babylon. The Babylonians were also subjects of the Assyrians at this time, but they hoped to regain their independence and they cultivated the friendships of other rulers who might join in a rebellion against Assyria. Hezekiah tried to impress the Babylonians and showed off the wealth and riches of Judah. He was later chastised by Isaiah for this vanity and was told that the wealth and sons of Judah would be captured by Babylon (39).

Shortly thereafter, a new powerful king, Sennacherib, ascended the Assyrian throne and the plans for a rebellion were halted. Indeed, Sennacherib consolidated his power and ruled with great authority. About 704, he decided that tribute from Judah was not enough and that he wanted to conquer the territory and rule it directly. (2 Kgs. 18:13-36.) He destroyed some Judean fortified cities and brought his psychological warfare and vast army machine to besiege Jerusalem in 701.

In preparation for this inevitable assault, Hezekiah had strengthened the walls and built a tunnel to bring water within the walls. Hezekiah's tunnel was an ancient engineering wonder, but it and his other efforts were not enough to discourage the mighty Assyrians. In this time of need, he sought counsel and direction from Isaiah, who promised Jerusalem a miraculous deliverance from Sennacherib. After almost two hundred thousand Assyrians were destroyed by an angel of the Lord (perhaps through a plague), Sennacherib withdrew his army and Jerusalem was preserved, as promised by the Lord and Isaiah (36-37). This constituted perhaps the greatest political event in Isaiah's ministry. These chapters also bear witness of Isaiah's authority and the power of his priesthood.
