(Isa. 53)

The servant song of Isaiah 53 is undoubtedly the most profound of Isaiah's writings. In verses 1-3, Isaiah briefly reviews Jesus' youth and public ministry. He concludes in verses 10-12 with some words about Christ's blessing in the eternities. However, Isaiah presents his most important concepts about Christ's role during mortality in the middle verses (4-9). These key verses highlight the atoning sacrifice of Jesus. Because of the Atonement, we rightfully call him Jesus Christ or Jesus the Messiah, since these honorary titles are derived from Greek and Hebrew words that refer to his role as our Savior.

Jesus is our Savior because he fulfilled the demands of justice and opened the gates of mercy, which lead to the resurrection and eternal life. Because of his perfect life as the Son of God and his perfect love for us, he bore our griefs (or sicknesses) and carried our sorrows (or sins). (Isa. 53:4.)

The law of justice works in relationship to the other laws of God in the moral realm. In essence, the law of justice might be explained as follows:

The law of justice requires that God must be a God of order and that he must be just and impartial. Because of the law of justice, God can make such statements as these: "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise" (D&C 82:10); "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated--And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law which it is predicated." (D&C 130:20-21.)

The law of mercy agrees entirely with the law of justice. However, the law of mercy introduces the possibility of vicarious payment of the penalty for laws that have been transgressed. In essence, the law of mercy might be paraphrased as follows: Whenever a law is transgressed, a payment must be made; however, the person who transgressed the law does not need to make payment if he will repent and if he can find someone else who is both able and willing to make payment. The law of mercy insists that the demands of the law of justice be met fully. As Alma stated, "Justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved. What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, Nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God." Alma 42:24-25.)

The law of justice made the atonement of Jesus Christ necessary. When Adam fell, he transgressed a law that had physical and spiritual death as its punishment. Thus, the law of justice demanded payment for the broken law.

The law of mercy made the atonement of Jesus Christ possible. In order for Jesus Christ to pay fully for the law Adam had transgressed, it was necessary that the Savior be both able and willing to make atonement. He was willing to make payment because of his great love for mankind, and he was able to make payment because he lived a sinless life and because he had the power to atone for the spiritual and physical deaths introduced by the fall of Adam and Eve. Because of this atonement, he is rightfully referred to as the Savior and Redeemer of all mankind. (See MD pp. 60-66; DS 1:126.)

Every person benefits unconditionally from two major aspects of atonement: the resurrection and the full payment for the original transgression of Adam and Eve. However, as Mosiah indicates, there are also some conditional aspects of the atonement, and in order to benefit from these a person must repent of his sins. Otherwise, "mercy could have no claim" upon the person, for the law of mercy is made active in the life of a person only upon the conditions of repentance. (Mosiah 3:25-27.)

In summary, Christ fulfilled many demands of the law of justice and brought into effect the powers of the law of mercy. These two laws are diagrammed in the following chart. Note how the law of mercy provides an alternate means of satisfying justice after a person has repented.
