Have you played the game follow-the-leader? Have you helped your mom set the table and arranged the plates and glasses just the way she did? Have you watched your parents fast, pray, or study the scriptures and wanted to be like them?

If you’ve done any of these things, you are learning by following the example of a leader.

When Jesus Christ lived on the earth, He set a perfect example for us to follow in how we treat other people. He said, “I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you” (John 13:15). Jesus was such a great leader because He was the perfect follower of His Father.

I can be kind. Jesus taught that we can share with others. We can visit people who are sick. We can make others feel welcome. Christ did these things, and we can, too. He said when we do these things for others, we are doing it for Him (see Matt. 25:40). Surely that is why being kind helps us feel close to our Savior.

I can love everyone. When Jesus knew He was about to be crucified, He gave His disciples an important commandment—to love one another the way He loved them. He told them that people would know they were His disciples if they did. People will know we are followers of Jesus Christ when we love everyone.

I can serve others. Jesus spent His whole life serving others. He even gave His life for others—for us. He taught and showed by His actions that the greatest among us are those who serve others (see Matt. 23:11). Some people think if everyone serves them they are very important. Jesus Christ taught a better way—to serve others by helping and comforting them.

“Follow me,” Jesus said (John 12:26). Let us follow this Leader forever!

Make a kindness bouquet. First mount page 3 on lightweight cardboard. Then color and cut out the pieces. Glue the centers to the flowers, and attach the flowers and the leaves to straws, sticks, or pencils (see diagrams). Use these flowers as patterns to make several of each kind. Every time you see someone do a kind deed, give him or her a flower or put one into a vase.

1.  One of the wonderful examples the Savior gave us was of concern for Mary, His mother (see John 19:25–27). Invite three mothers to come to Primary, and have them stand behind a chalkboard or blanket. Prepare questions for the children to ask them, such as “What is your favorite color and why?” “What is your favorite scripture story?” “What do you like best about Sundays?” Have the children guess who the mothers are. When all the mothers are revealed, have each briefly tell why she is grateful to be a mother. Have each child write or draw a thank-you note for his or her mother. You might include a fill-in-the-blank statement, such as “Thanks for teaching me …”

2.  Ask the children to stand up if they belong to one of the groups you describe. Group possibilities: people who have birthdays in May, who are seven years old, who play a musical instrument, and so on. Explain that while the children have many differences, they also have much in common. Using pictures from the meetinghouse library or the Gospel Art Picture Kit, tell the stories of the Samaritan woman at the well (see John 4:5–30, 39–42), Zacchaeus (see Luke 19:2–10), the Canaanite woman (see Matt. 15:22–28), Cornelius (see Acts 10), and the sons of Mosiah preaching to the Lamanites (see Mosiah 28:1–8). Help the children understand that the gospel is for all people (see Rev. 14:6). Point out that no matter what our differences are, we are all Heavenly Father’s children and should love everyone, not just people like us. Have the children repeat John 13:34. Sing “Jesus Said Love Everyone” (Children’s Songbook, 61) or “Love One Another” (Children’s Songbook, 136).
