SOLOMON MACK, THE FATHER OF LUCY MACK--EXTRACT FROM HIS NARRATIVE.

My father, Solomon Mack, was born in the town of Lyme, New London county, State of Connecticut, September 26, 1735. His father, Ebenezer Mack, was a man of considerable property, and lived in good style, commanding all the attention and respect which are ever shown to those who live in fine circumstances, and habits of strict morality. For a length of time he fully enjoyed the fruits of his industry. But this state of things did not always continue for a series of misfortunes visited my grand-parents, by which they were reduced to that extremity, that a once happy and flourishing family were compelled to disperse, and throw themselves upon the charity of a cold, unfeeling world.

My father was taken into the family of a neighboring farmer, where he remained until he was nearly twenty-one years of age, about which time he enlisted in the service of his country.

I have a sketch of my father's life, written by himself, in which is detailed an account of his several campaigns, and many of his adventures, while in the army. From this, I extract the following:

    At the age of twenty-one years, I left my master. Shortly after
    which, I enlisted in the services of my country, under the command
    of Captain Henry, and was annexed to the regiment commanded by Col.
    Whiting.

    From Connecticut, we marched to Fort Edwards, in the state of New
    York. We were in a severe battle, fought at Half-way Brook in 1855
    [should likely read 1775--Transcriber]. During this expedition, I
    caught a heavy cold, which rendered me unfit for business until the
    return of warm weather. I was carried the ensuing spring to Albany.

    In the year 1757, I had two teams in the King's service, which was
    employed in carrying the general's baggage. While thus engaged,
    I went one morning to yoke my team, but three of my oxen were
    missing. When this knowledge came to the officer, he was very
    angry, and drawing his sword, threatened to run it through me. He
    then ordered me to get three other oxen, which I accordingly did,
    and proceeded with the baggage to Fort Edwards, and the next day I
    returned in order to find my missing oxen.

    While I was performing this trip, the following circumstance
    occurred. About half way from Stillwater to Fort Edwards, I espied
    four Indians nearly thirty rods distant, coming out of the woods;
    they were armed with scalping knives, tomahawks and guns. I was
    alone, but about twenty rods behind me was a man by the name of
    Webster. I saw my danger, and that there was no way to escape,
    unless I could do it by stratagem; so I rushed upon them, calling
    in the mean time at the top of my voice, Rush on! rush on my boys!
    we'll have the devils. The only weapon I had, was a walking staff,
    yet I ran toward them, and as the other man appeared just at that
    instant, it gave them a terrible fright, and I saw no more of them.

    I hastened to Stillwater the next day, as aforementioned, and
    finding my oxen soon after I arrived there, I returned the same
    night to Fort Edwards, a distance of seven miles, the whole of
    which was a dense forest.

    In 1758, I enlisted under Major Spenser, and went immediately over
    Lake George, with a company who crossed in boats, to the western
    side, where we had a bloody and hot engagement with the enemy, in
    which Lord Howe fell at the onset of the battle. His bowels were
    taken out and buried, but his body was embalmed, and carried to
    England.

    The next day we marched to the breastworks, but were unsuccessful,
    being compelled to retreat with a loss of five hundred men killed,
    and as many more wounded.

    In this contest I narrowly escaped--a musket ball passed under
    my chin, within half an inch of my neck. The army then returned
    to Lake George, and, on its way thither, a large scouting party
    of the enemy came round by Skeenesborough, and, at Half-way
    Brook, destroyed a large number of both men and teams. Upon this,
    one thousand of our men were detached to repair immediately to
    Skeenesborough in pursuit of them; but when we arrived at South
    Bay, the enemy were entirely out of our reach.

    The enemy then marched to Ticonderoga, New York, in order to
    procure supplies, after which they immediately pursued us, but we
    eluded them by hastening to Woodcreek, and thence to Fort Ann,
    where we arrived on the 13th day of the month. We had just reached
    this place, when the sentry gave information that the enemy was all
    around us, in consequence of which we were suddenly called to arms.
    Major Putman led the company, and Major Rogers brought up the rear.
    We marched but three-quarters of a mile, when we came suddenly
    upon a company of Indians that were lying in ambush. Major Putman
    marched his men through their ranks, whereupon the Indians fired,
    which threw our men into some confusion. Major Putnam was captured
    by them, and would have been killed by an Indian, had he not been
    rescued by a French lieutenant.

    The enemy rose like a cloud, and fired a whole volley upon us, and
    as I was in the foremost rank, the retreat of my company brought me
    in the rear, and the tomahawks and bullets flew around me like hail
    stones. As I was running, I saw not far before me a windfall, which
    was so high that it appeared to me insurmountable, however, by
    making great exertions, I succeeded in getting over it. Running a
    little farther, I observed a man who had in this last conflict been
    badly wounded, and the Indians were close upon him; nevertheless
    I turned aside for the purpose of assisting him, and succeeded in
    getting him into the midst of our army, in safety.

    In this encounter, a man named Gersham Bowley, had nine bullets
    shot through his clothes but received no personal injury. Ensign
    Worcester received nine wounds, was scalped and tomahawked,
    notwithstanding which, he lived, and finally recovered.

    The above engagement commenced early in the morning, and continued
    until about three o'clock p. m., in which half of our men were
    either killed, wounded or taken prisoners. In consequence of this
    tremendous slaughter we were compelled to send to Fort Edwards for
    men, in order to assist in carrying our wounded, which were about
    eighty in number.

    The distance we had to carry them, was nearly fourteen miles. To
    carry so many thus far, was truly very fatiguing, insomuch that
    when we arrived at the place of destination, my strength was about
    exhausted.

    I proceeded immediately to Albany, for the purpose of getting
    supplies, and returned again to the army as soon as circumstances
    would admit.

    Autumn having now arrived I went home, where I tarried the ensuing
    winter.

    In the spring of 1759, the army marched to Crownpoint, where I
    received my discharge. In the same year, I became acquainted with
    an accomplished young woman, a school teacher, by the name of
    Lydia Gates. She was the daughter of Nathan Gates, who was a man
    of wealth, living in the town of East Haddam, Connecticut. To this
    young woman I was married shortly after becoming acquainted with
    her.

    Having received a large amount of money for my services in the
    army, and deeming it prudent to make an investment of the same in
    real estate, I contracted for the whole town of Granville, in the
    state of New York. On the execution of the deed, I paid all the
    money that was required in the stipulation, which stipulation also
    called for the building of a number of log houses. I accordingly
    went to work to fulfill this part of the contract, but after
    laboring a short time, I had the misfortune to cut my leg, which
    subjected me, during that season, to the care of the physician. I
    hired a man to do the work, and paid him in advance, in order to
    fulfill my part of the contract; but he ran away with the money,
    without performing the labor, and the consequence was, I lost the
    land altogether.

    In 1761, we moved to the town of Marlow, where we remained until
    we had four children. When we moved there it was no other than a
    desolate and dreary wilderness. Only four families resided within
    forty miles. Here I was thrown into a situation to appreciate more
    fully the talents and virtues of my excellent wife; for, as our
    children were deprived of schools, she assumed the charge of their
    education, and performed the duties of an instructress as none,
    save a mother, is capable of. Precepts accompanied with examples
    such as hers, were calculated to make impressions on the minds of
    the young, never to be forgotten.

    She, besides instructing them in the various branches of an
    ordinary education, was in the habit of calling them together both
    morning and evening, and teaching them to pray; meanwhile urging
    upon them the necessity of love toward each other, as well as
    devotional feelings towards Him who made them.

    In this manner my first children became confirmed in habits of
    piety, gentleness, and reflection, which afforded great assistance
    in guiding those who came after them, into the same happy channel.
    The education of my children would have been a more difficult
    task, if they had not inherited much of their mother's excellent
    disposition.

    In 1776, I enlisted in the service of my country and was for a
    considerable length of time in the land forces, after which I went
    with my two sons, Jason and Stephen, on a privateering expedition,
    commanded by Captain Havens. Soon after, we set sail we were driven
    upon Horseneck. We succeeded, however, in getting some of our
    guns on shore, and bringing them to bear upon the enemy, so as to
    exchange many shots with them; yet they cut away our rigging, and
    left our vessel much shattered.

    We then hauled off and cast anchor; but, in a short time we espied
    two row-gallies, two sloops, and two schooners. We quickly weighed
    anchor, and hauled to shore again, and had barely time to post
    four cannon in a position in which they could be used, before a
    sanguinary, contest commenced. The balls from the enemy's guns tore
    up the ground, cutting asunder the saplings in every direction.
    One of the row-gallies went round a point of land with the view of
    hemming us in, but we killed forty of their men, with our small
    arms, which caused the enemy to abandon their purpose.

    My son Stephen, in company with the cabin boys, was sent to a house
    not far from the shore, with a wounded man. Just as they entered
    the house, an eighteen-pounder followed them. A woman was engaged
    in frying cakes, at the time, and being somewhat alarmed, she
    concluded to retire into the cellar, saying, as she left, that the
    boys might have the cakes, as she was going below.

    The boys were highly delighted at this, and they went to work
    cooking and feasting upon the lady's sweet cakes, while the
    artillery of the contending armies was thundering in their ears,
    dealing out death and destruction on every hand. At the head of
    this party of boys, was Stephen Mack, my second son, a bold and
    fearless stripling of fourteen.

    In this contest the enemy was far superior to us in point of
    numbers, yet we maintained our ground with such valor that they
    thought it better to leave us, and accordingly did so. Soon after
    this, we hoisted sail and made for New London.

    When hostilities ceased and peace and tranquility were again
    restored, we freighted a vessel for Liverpool. Selling both ship
    and cargo in this place, we embarked on board Captain Foster's
    vessel, which I afterwards purchased; but, in consequence of storms
    and wrecks, I was compelled to sell her, and was left completely
    destitute.

    I struggled a little longer to obtain property, in making
    adventures, then returned to my family, after an absence of four
    years, about pennyless. After this I determined to follow phantoms
    no longer, but devote the rest of my life to the service of God and
    my family.

I shall now lay aside my father's journal, as I have made such extracts as are adapted to my purpose, and take up the history of his children.
