JOSEPH SMITH, SENIOR, REMOVES TO NORWICH, THENCE TO PALMYRA--HIS DREAM
OF THE IMAGES--OF THE JUDGMENT.

When health returned to us, as one would naturally suppose, it found us in quite low circumstances. We were compelled to strain every energy to provide for our present necessities, instead of making arrangements for the future, as we had previously contemplated.

Shortly after sickness left our family, we moved to Norwich, in the state of Vermont. In this place we established ourselves on a farm belonging to one Esquire Moredock. The first year our crops failed; yet, by selling fruit which grew on the place, we succeeded in obtaining bread for the family, and, by making considerable exertion, we were enabled to sustain ourselves.

The crops the second year were as the year before--a perfect failure. Mr. Smith now determined to plant once more, and if he should meet with no better success than he had the two preceding years, he would then go to the state of New York, where wheat was raised in abundance.

The next year an untimely frost destroyed the crops, and being the third year in succession in which the crops had failed, it almost caused a famine. This was enough; my husband was now altogether decided upon going to New York. He came in, one day, in quite a thoughtful mood, and sat down; after meditating some time, he observed that, could he so arrange his affairs, he would be glad to start soon for New York with a Mr. Howard, who was going to Palmyra. He further remarked, that he could not leave consistently, as the situation of the family would not admit of his absence; besides, he was owing some money that must first be paid.

I told him it was my opinion he might get both his creditors and debtors together, and arrange matters between them in such a way as to give satisfaction to all parties concerned; and, in relation to the family, I thought I could make every necessary preparation to follow as soon as he would be ready for us. He accordingly called upon all with whom he had any dealings, and settled up his accounts with them. There were, however, some who, in the time of settlement, neglected to bring forward their books, consequently they were not balanced, or there were no entries made in them to show the settlement; but in cases of this kind, he called witnesses, that there might be evidence of the fact.

Having thus arranged his business, Mr. Smith set out for Palmyra, in company with Mr. Howard. After his departure, I and those of the family who were of much size, toiled faithfully, until we considered ourselves fully prepared to leave at a moment's warning. We shortly received a communication from Mr. Smith, requesting us to make ourselves ready to take up a journey for Palmyra. In a short time after this, a team came for us. As we were about starting on this journey, several of those gentlemen who had withheld their books, in the time of settlement, now brought them forth, and claimed the accounts which had been settled, and which they had, in the presence of witnesses, agreed to erase. We were all ready for the journey, and the teams were waiting on expense. Under these circumstances, I concluded it would be more to our advantage to pay their unjust claims than to hazard a lawsuit. Therefore, by making considerable exertion, I raised the required sum, which was one hundred and fifty dollars, and liquidated the demand.

A gentleman by the name of Flagg, a wealthy settler, living in the town of Hanover, also a Mr. Howard, who resided in Norwich, were both acquainted with the circumstance mentioned above. They were very indignant at it, and requested me to give them a sufficient time to get the witnesses together, and they would endeavor to recover that which had been taken from me by fraud. I told them I could not do so, for my husband had sent teams for me, which were on expense; moreover, there was an uncertainty in getting the money back again, and in case of failure, I should not be able to raise the means necessary to take the family where we contemplated moving.

They then proposed raising some money by subscription, saying, "We know the people feel as we do concerning this matter, and if you will receive it, we will make you a handsome present." This I utterly refused. The idea of receiving assistance in such a way as this was indeed very repulsive to my feelings, and I rejected their offer.

My aged mother, who had lived with us some time, assisted in preparing for the journey. She came with us to Royalton, where she resided until she died, which was two years afterwards, in consequence of an injury which she received by getting upset in a wagon while traveling with us.

On arriving at Royalton, I had a scene to pass through, and it was truly a severe one--one to which I shall ever look back with peculiar feelings. Here I was to take leave of my affectionate mother. The parting hour came; my mother wept over me, long and bitterly. She told me that it was not probable she should ever behold my face again; "But, my dear child," said she, "I have lived long--my days are nearly numbered--I must soon exchange the things of this world for those which pertain to another state of existence, where I hope to enjoy the society of the blessed; and now as my last admonition, I beseech you to continue faithful in the service of God to the end of your days, that I may have the pleasure of embracing you in another and fairer world above."

This parting scene was at one Willard Pierce's, a tavern keeper. From his house my mother went to Daniel Mack's, with whom she afterwards lived until her decease.

Having traveled a short distance, I discovered that Mr. Howard, our teamster, was an unprincipled and unfeeling wretch, by the way in which he handled both our goods and money, as well as by his treatment of my children, especially Joseph. He would compel him to travel miles at a time on foot, notwithstanding he was still lame. We bore patiently with his abuse, until we got about twenty miles west of Utica, when one morning, as we were getting ready to continue our journey, my oldest son came to me and said, "Mother, Mr. Howard has thrown the goods out of the wagon, and is about starting off with the team." Upon hearing this, I told him to call the man in. I met him in the bar-room, in the presence of a large company of travelers, both male and female, and I demanded his reason for the course which he was taking. He told me the money which I had given him was all expended, and he could go no further.

I then turned to those present and said, "Gentlemen and ladies, please give your attention for a moment. Now, as sure as there is a God in heaven, that team, as well as the goods, belong to my husband, and this man intends to take them from me, or at least the team, leaving me with eight children, without the means of proceeding on my journey." Then turning to Mr. Howard, I said, "Sir, I now forbid you touching the team, or driving it one step further. You can go about your own business; I have no use for you. I shall take charge of the team myself, and hereafter attend to my own affairs." I accordingly did so, and proceeding on our journey, we in a short time arrived at Palmyra, with a small portion of our effects, and barely two cents in cash.

When I again met my husband at Palmyra, we were much reduced--not from indolence, but on account of many reverses of fortune, with which our lives had been rather singularly marked. Notwithstanding our misfortunes, and the embarrassments with which we were surrounded, I was quite happy in once more having the society of my husband, and in throwing myself and children upon the care and affection of a tender companion and father.

We all now sat down, and counselled together relative to the course which was best for us to adopt in our destitute circumstances, and we came to the conclusion to unite our energies in endeavoring to obtain a piece of land. Having done considerable at painting oil-cloth coverings for tables, stands, etc., I set up the business, and did extremely well. I furnished all the provisions for the family, and, besides this, began to replenish our household furniture, in a very short time, by my own exertions.

My husband and his sons, Alvin and Hyrum, set themselves to work to pay for one hundred acres of land for which Mr. Smith contracted with a land agent. In a year, we made nearly all of the first payment, erected a log house, and commenced clearing. I believe something like thirty acres of land were made ready for cultivation the first year.

I shall now deviate a little from my subject, in order to relate another very singular dream which my husband had about this time, which is as follows:--

    "I dreamed," said he, "that I was traveling on foot, and I was very
    sick, and so lame I could hardly walk. My guide, as usual, attended
    me. Traveling some time together, I became so lame that I thought
    I could go no further. I informed my guide of this, and asked him
    what I should do. He told me to travel on till I came to a certain
    garden. So I arose and started for this garden. While on my way
    thither, I asked my guide how I should know the place. He said,
    'Proceed until you come to a very large gate; open this, and you
    will see a garden, blooming with the most beautiful flowers that
    your eyes ever beheld, and there you shall be healed.' By limping
    along with great difficulty, I finally reached the gate; and, on
    entering it, I saw the before-mentioned garden, which was beautiful
    beyond description, being filled with the most delicate flowers of
    every kind and color. In the garden were walks about three and a
    half feet wide, which were set on both sides with marble stones.
    One of the walks ran from the gate through the centre of the
    garden; and on each side of this was a very richly carved seat, and
    on each seat were placed six wooden images, each of which was the
    size of a very large man. When I came to the first image on the
    right side, it arose and bowed to me with much deference. I then
    turned to the one which sat opposite me, on the left side, and it
    arose and bowed to me in the same manner as the first. I continued
    turning, first to the right and then to the left, until the whole
    twelve had made their obeisance, after which I was entirely healed.
    I then asked my guide the meaning of all this, but I awoke before I
    received an answer."

I will now return to the subject of the farm. When the time for making the second payment drew nigh, Alvin went from home to get work, in order to raise the money, and after much hardship and fatigue, returned with the required amount. This payment being made, we felt relieved, as this was the only thing that troubled us; for we had a snug log-house, neatly furnished, and the means of living comfortably. It was now only two years since we entered Palmyra, almost destitute of money, property, or acquaintance. The hand of friendship was extended on every side, and we blessed God, with our whole heart, for his "mercy, which endureth for ever." And not only temporal blessings were bestowed upon us, but also spiritual were administered. The Scripture, which saith, "Your old men shall dream dreams," was fulfilled in the case of my husband, for, about this time, he had another vision, which I shall here relate; this, with one more, is all of his that I shall obtrude upon the attention of my readers. He received two more visions, which would probably be somewhat interesting, but I cannot remember them distinctly enough to rehearse them in full. The following, which was the sixth, ran thus:--

    "I thought I was walking alone; I was much fatigued, nevertheless I
    continued traveling. It seemed to me that I was going to meeting,
    that it was the day of judgment, and that I was going to be judged.

    "When I came in sight of the meeting-house, I saw multitudes of
    people coming from every direction, and pressing with great anxiety
    towards the door of this great building; but I thought I should
    get there in time, hence there was no need of being in a hurry.
    But, on arriving at the door, I found it shut; I knocked for
    admission, and was informed by the porter that I had come too late.
    I felt exceedingly troubled, and prayed earnestly for admittance.
    Presently I found that my flesh was perishing. I continued to pray,
    still my flesh withered upon my bones. I was in a state of almost
    total despair, when the porter asked me if I had done all that was
    necessary in order to receive admission. I replied, that I had
    done all that was in my power to do. 'Then,' observed the porter,
    'justice must be satisfied; after this, mercy hath her claims.'

    "It then occurred to me to call upon God, in the name of his Son
    Jesus; and I cried out, in the agony of my soul, 'Oh, Lord God, I
    beseech thee, in the name of Jesus Christ, to forgive my sins.'
    After which I felt considerably strengthened, and I began to amend.
    The porter or angel then remarked, that it was necessary to plead
    the merits of Jesus, for he was the advocate with the Father, and a
    Mediator between God and man.

    "I was now made quite whole, and the door was opened, but, on
    entering, I awoke."

The following spring, we commenced making preparations for building another house, one that would be more comfortable for persons in advanced life.
