HISTORY OF JOSEPH THE PROPHET COMMENCES--SEVENTH VISION OF JOSEPH
SMITH, SENIOR.

I now come to the history of Joseph. By reference to the table (chap. ix), you will find the date and place of his birth; beside which, except what has already been said, I shall say nothing respecting him until he arrived at the age of fourteen. However, in this I am aware that some of my readers will be disappointed, for I suppose, from questions which are frequently asked me, that it is thought by some that I shall be likely to tell many very remarkable incidents which attended his childhood; but, as nothing occurred during his early life, except those trivial circumstances which are common to that state of human existence, I pass them in silence.

At the age of fourteen, an incident occurred which alarmed us much, as we knew not the cause of it. Joseph being a remarkably quiet, well-disposed child, we did not suspect that any one had aught against him. He was out one evening on an errand, and, on returning home, as he was passing through the door-yard, a gun was fired across his pathway, with the evident intention of shooting him. He sprang to the door much frightened. We immediately went in search of the assassin, but could find no trace of him that evening. The next morning we found his tracks under a wagon, where he lay when he fired; and the following day we found the balls, which were discharged from the gun, lodged in the head and neck of a cow that was standing opposite the wagon in a dark corner. We have not as yet discovered the man who made this attempt at murder, neither can we discover the cause thereof.

I shall here insert the seventh vision that my husband had, which vision was received in the year 1819. It was as follows:

    "I dreamed," said he, "that a man with a pedler's budget on his
    back, came in, and thus addressed me: 'Sir, will you trade with me
    to-day? I have now called upon you seven times, I have traded with
    you each time, and have always found you strictly honest in all
    your dealings. Your measures are always heaped, and your weights
    overbalance; and I have now come to tell you that this is the last
    time I shall ever call on you, and that there is but one thing
    which you lack, in order to secure your salvation.' As I earnestly
    desired to know what it was that I still lacked, I requested him to
    write the same upon paper. He said he would do so. I then sprang to
    get some paper, but, in my excitement, I awoke."

Shortly after my husband received the foregoing vision, there was a great revival in religion, which extended to all the denominations of Christians in the surrounding country in which we resided. Many of the world's people, becoming concerned about the salvation of their souls, came forward and presented themselves as seekers after religion. Most of them were desirous of uniting with some church, but were not decided as to the particular faith which they would adopt. When the numerous meetings were about breaking up, and the candidates and the various leading church members began to consult upon the subject of adopting the candidates into some church or churches, as the case might be, a dispute arose, and there was a great contention among them.

While these things were going forward, Joseph's mind became considerably troubled with regard to religion; and the following extract from his history will show, more clearly than I can express, the state of his feelings, and the result of his reflections on this occasion:--

    I was at this time in my fifteenth year. My father's family was
    proselyted to the Presbyterian faith, and four of them joined
    that church, namely, my mother Lucy, my brothers Hyrum and Samuel
    Harrison, and my sister Sophronia.

    During this time of great excitement, my mind was called up to
    serious reflection and great uneasiness; but though my feelings
    were deep, and often poignant, still I kept myself aloof from all
    those parties, though I attended their several meetings as often as
    occasion would permit. In process of time, my mind became somewhat
    partial to the Methodist sect, and I felt some desire to be united
    with them, but so great were the confusion and strife among the
    different denominations, that it was impossible for a person, young
    as I was, and so unacquainted with men and things, to come to any
    certain conclusion who was right and who was wrong. My mind at
    different times was greatly excited, the cry and tumult were so
    great and incessant. The Presbyterians were most decided against
    the Baptists and Methodists, and used all the powers of either
    reason or sophistry to prove their errors, or at least to make the
    people think they were in error. On the other hand, the Baptists
    and Methodists, in their turn, were equally zealous in endeavoring
    to establish their own tenets and disprove all others.

    In the midst of this war of words, and tumult of opinion, I often
    said to myself, What is to be done? Who, of all these parties,
    are right? or, are they all wrong together? If any one of them be
    right, which is it? and how shall I know it?

    While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the
    contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading in
    the epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads,
    "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all
    men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him."
    Never did any passage of Scripture come with more power to the
    heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter
    with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on
    it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from
    God, I did, for how to act I did not know, and, unless I could get
    more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers
    of religion of the different sects understood the same passages so
    differently, as to destroy all confidence in settling the question
    by an appeal to the Bible. At length I came to the conclusion, that
    I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do
    as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the
    determination to ask of God, concluding that if he gave wisdom to
    them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid,
    I might venture. So, in accordance with this my determination to
    ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on
    the morning of a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring of 1820.
    It was the first time in my life that I had made such an attempt;
    for amidst all my anxieties I had never as yet made the attempt
    to pray vocally. After I had retired into the place where I had
    previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding
    myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of
    my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was
    seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such
    an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue, so that I
    could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed
    to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction. But
    exerting all my powers to call upon God, to deliver me out of the
    power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very
    moment when I was ready to sink into despair, and abandon myself
    to destruction--not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some
    actual being from the unseen world, who had such a marvelous power
    as I had never before felt in any being; just at this moment of
    great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above
    the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell
    upon me. It no sooner appeared, than I found myself delivered from
    the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me, I saw
    two personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description,
    standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me
    by name, and said pointing to the other, "This is my beloved Son;
    hear him!"

    My object in going to enquire of the Lord, was to know which of
    all these sects was right, that I might know which to join. No
    sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be
    able to speak, than I asked the personages who stood above me in
    the light, which of all the sects was right--and which I should
    join. I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were
    all wrong; and the personage who addressed me said that all their
    creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors
    were all corrupt; that "they draw near to me with their lips,
    but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrines the
    commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny
    the power thereof." He again forbade me to join with any of them;
    and many other things did he say unto me which I cannot write at
    this time. When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my
    back, looking up into heaven. When the light had departed, I had no
    strength; but soon recovering in some degree, I went home. And as
    I leaned up to the fireplace, mother enquired what the matter was.
    I replied, "Never mind, all is well--I am well enough off." I then
    said to my mother, "I have learned for myself that Presbyterianism
    is not true." It seems as though the adversary was aware, at a very
    early period of my life, that I was destined to prove a disturber
    and an annoyer of his kingdom; else why should the powers of
    darkness combine against me? Why the opposition and persecution
    that arose against me, almost in my infancy?

    Some few days after I had this vision, I happened to be in company
    with one of the Methodist preachers who was very active in the
    before-mentioned religious excitement, and conversing with him upon
    the subject of religion, I took occasion to give him an account
    of the vision which I had had. I was greatly surprised at his
    behavior: he treated my communication not only lightly, but with
    great contempt, saying it was all of the devil; that there was
    no such thing as visions or revelations in these days; that all
    such things had ceased with the apostles, and that there would
    never be any more of them. I soon found, however, that my telling
    the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among
    professors of religion, and was the cause of great persecution,
    which continued to increase; and though I was an obscure boy, only
    between fourteen and fifteen years of age, and my circumstances
    in life such as to make a boy of no consequence in the world, yet
    men of high standing would take notice sufficient to excite the
    public mind against me and create a bitter persecution; and this
    was common among all the sects--all united to persecute me. It
    caused me serious reflection, then, and often has since, how very
    strange it was that an obscure boy, of a little over fourteen years
    of age--and one, too, who was doomed to the necessity of obtaining
    a scanty maintenance by his daily labors, should be thought a
    character of sufficient importance to attract the attention of
    the great ones of the most popular sects of the day, in a manner
    to create in them a spirit of the most bitter persecution and
    reviling. But strange or not, so it was, and it was often the cause
    of great sorrow to myself. However, it was, nevertheless, a fact
    that I had beheld a vision. I have thought since, that I felt much
    like Paul when he made his defense before King Agrippa, and related
    the account of the vision he had when he "saw a light and heard a
    voice;" but still there were but few who believed him. Some said
    he was dishonest, others said he was mad, and he was ridiculed and
    reviled; but all this did not destroy the reality of his vision.
    He had seen a vision--he knew he had--and all the persecution
    under heaven could not make it otherwise; and though they should
    persecute him unto death, yet he knew, and would know to his latest
    breath, that he had both seen a light and heard a voice speaking
    unto him, and all the world could not make him think or believe
    otherwise. So it was with me. I had actually seen a light, and in
    the midst of that light I saw two personages, and they did in
    reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for
    saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they
    were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil
    against me falsely, for so saying, I was led to say in my heart,
    Why persecute for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision;
    and who am I that I can withstand God? or why does the world think
    to make me deny what I have actually seen? for I had seen a vision.
    I knew it, and I knew that God knew it; and I could not deny it,
    neither dared I do it--at least, I knew that by so doing I would
    offend God, and come under condemnation.--Times and Seasons, vol.
    iii, p. 727; Supp. to Mill. Star, vol. xiv, p. 2; History of the
    Church, vol. i, pp. 3-8.

From this time until the twenty-first of September, 1823, Joseph continued, as usual, to labor with his father, and nothing during this interval occurred of very great importance--though he suffered every kind of opposition and persecution from the different orders of religionists.

On the evening of the twenty-first of September, he retired to his bed in quite a serious and contemplative state of mind. He shortly betook himself to prayer and supplication to Almighty God, for a manifestation of his standing before him, and while thus engaged he received the following vision:

    While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a
    light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the
    room was lighter than at noon-day, when immediately a personage
    appeared at my bed-side, standing in the air, for his feet did
    not touch the floor. He had on a loose robe of most exquisite
    whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever
    seen, nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to
    appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked,
    and his arms also, a little above the wrist; so also were his
    feet naked, as were his legs a little above the ankles. His head
    and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other
    clothing on but this robe, as it was open, so that I could see
    into his bosom. Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his
    whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance
    truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so
    very bright as immediately around his person. When I first looked
    upon him I was afraid, but the fear soon left me. He called me
    by name, and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the
    presence of God to me, and that his name was Moroni; that God had
    a work for me to do, and that my name should be had for good and
    evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues; or that it should be
    both good and evil spoken of among all people. He said there was a
    book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the
    former inhabitants of this continent, and the source from whence
    they sprang. He also said that the fullness of the everlasting
    gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the
    ancient inhabitants. Also, that there were two stones in silver
    bows, and these stones fastened to a breastplate, constituted what
    is called the Urim and Thummim, deposited with the plates; and the
    possession and use of these stones were what constituted seers in
    ancient or former times; and that God had prepared them for the
    purpose of translating the book. After telling me these things, he
    commenced quoting the prophecies of the Old Testament. He first
    quoted part of the third chapter of Malachi; and he quoted also the
    fourth or last chapter of the same prophecy, though with a little
    variation from the way it reads in our Bibles. Instead of quoting
    the first verse as it reads in our books, he quoted it thus: "For
    behold the day cometh that shall burn as an oven; and all the
    proud, yea, and all who do wickedly, shall burn as stubble, for
    they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it
    shall leave them neither root nor branch." And again he quoted the
    fifth verse thus: "Behold, I will reveal unto you the priesthood
    by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great
    and dreadful day of the Lord." He also quoted the next verse
    differently: "And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the
    promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall
    turn to their fathers; if it were not so, the whole earth would
    be utterly wasted at his coming." In addition to these, he quoted
    the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying that it was about to be
    fulfilled. He quoted also the third chapter of Acts, twenty-second
    and twenty-third verses, precisely as they stand in our New
    Testament. He said that that Prophet was Christ, but the day had
    not yet come "when they who would not hear his voice should be cut
    off from among the people," but soon would come. He also quoted the
    second chapter of Joel, from the twenty-eighth verse to the last.
    He also said that this was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be.
    And he further stated the fullness of the Gentiles was soon to come
    in. He quoted many other passages of Scripture, and offered many
    explanations which cannot be mentioned here. Again, he told me that
    when I got those plates of which he had spoken, (for the time that
    they should be obtained was not then fulfilled,) I should not show
    them to any person, neither the breastplate, with the Urim and
    Thummim, only to those to whom I should be commanded to show them:
    if I did I should be destroyed. While he was conversing with me
    about the plates, the vision was opened to my mind that I could see
    the place where the plates were deposited, and that so clearly and
    distinctly, that I knew the place again when I visited it.

    After this communication, I saw the light in the room begin to
    gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking
    to me, and it continued to do so until the room was again left
    dark, except just around him; when instantly I saw, as it were, a
    conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended till he entirely
    disappeared, and the room was left as it had been before this
    heavenly light made its appearance.

    I lay musing on the singularity of the scene, and marveling
    greatly at what had been told to me by this extraordinary
    messenger, when, in the midst of my meditation, I suddenly
    discovered that my room was again beginning to get lighted, and, in
    an instant, as it were, the same heavenly messenger was again by
    my bed-side. He commenced, and again related the very same things
    which he had done at his first visit, without the least variation,
    which having done, he informed me of great judgments which were
    coming upon the earth, with great desolations by famine, sword, and
    pestilence: and that these grievous judgments would come on the
    earth in this generation. Having related these things, he again
    ascended as he had done before.--Times and Seasons, vol. iii, p.
    729; Supplement to Millennial Star, vol. xiv, p. 4; History of
    the Church, vol. i, pp. 11-14.

When the angel ascended the second time, he left Joseph overwhelmed with astonishment, yet gave him but a short time to contemplate the things which he had told him before he made his reappearance, and rehearsed the same things over, adding a few words of caution and instruction, thus: that he must beware of covetousness, and he must not suppose the record was to be brought forth with the view of getting gain, for this was not the case, but that it was to bring forth light and intelligence, which had for a long time been lost to the world; and that when he went to get the plates, he must be on his guard, or his mind would be filled with darkness. The angel then told him to tell his father all which he had both seen and heard.
