JOSEPH AND HYRUM ASSASSINATED.

About the time that John C. Bennett left Nauvoo, an election was held for the office of mayor, and Joseph, being one of the candidates, was elected to that office. I mention this fact, in order to explain a circumstance that took place in the winter of 1843 and 1844, which was as follows. Joseph, in organizing the city police, remarked, that, "were it not for enemies within the city, there would be no danger from foes without," adding, "If it were not for a Brutus, I might live as long as Caesar would have lived."

Some one, who suspected that Joseph alluded to William Law, went to the latter and informed him that Joseph regarded him as a Brutus; and, that it was his own opinion, that he (Law) was in imminent danger. Law, on hearing this tale, went immediately to Joseph, who straightway called a council, and had all that knew anything concerning the matter brought together, and thus succeeded in satisfying Law, that he intended no evil in what he had said.

About this time, a man by the name of Joseph Jackson, who had been in the city several months, being desirous to marry Lovina Smith, Hyrum's oldest daughter, asked her father if he was willing to receive him as a son-in-law. Being answered in the negative, he went and requested Joseph to use his influence in his favor. As Joseph refused to do that, he next applied to Law, who was our secret enemy, for assistance in stealing Lovina from her father, and from this time forth, he continued seeking out our enemies, till he succeeded in getting a number to join him in a conspiracy to murder the whole Smith family. They commenced holding secret meetings, one of which was attended by a man named Eaton, who was our friend, and he exposed the plot.

This man declared that the Higbees, Laws and Fosters were all connected with Jackson in his operations. There was also another individual, named Augustine Spencer, a dissolute character, (although a member of an excellent family,) who, I believe, was concerned in this conspiracy. About the time of Eaton's disclosures, this man went to the house of his brother Orson, and abused my sons and the Church at such a rate, that Orson finally told him that he must either stop or leave the house. Augustine refused, and they grappled. In the contest Orson was considerably injured. He went immediately to Joseph, and, stating the case, asked for a warrant. Joseph advised him to go to Dr. Foster, who was a justice of the peace. Accordingly, he went and demanded a warrant of Foster, but was refused. On account of this refusal, Foster was brought before Esquire Wells, and tried for non-performance of duty. At this trial Joseph met Charles Foster, the doctor's brother, who attempted to shoot him, as soon as they met, but was hindered by Joseph's catching his hands, and holding him by main force, in which way Joseph was compelled to confine him above an hour, in order to preserve his own life.

Jackson and the apostates continued to gather strength, till, finally, they established a printing press in our midst. Through this organ they belched forth the most intolerable, and the blackest lies that were ever palmed upon a community. Being advised by men of influence and standing, to have this scandalous press removed, the city council took the matter into consideration, and finding that the law would allow them to do so, they declared it a nuisance, and had it treated accordingly.

At this the apostates left the city, in a great rage, swearing vengeance against Joseph and the city council, and, in fact, the whole city. They went forthwith to Carthage, and got out writs for Joseph and all those who were in any wise concerned in the destruction of the press. But, having no hope of justice in that place, the brethren took out a writ of habeas corpus, and were tried before Esquire Wells, at Nauvoo. With this the apostates were not satisfied. They then called upon one Levi Williams, who was a bitter enemy to us, whenever he was sufficiently sober to know his own sentiments, for he was a drunken, ignorant, illiterate brute, that never had a particle of character or influence until he began to call mob meetings, and placed himself at the head of a rabble like unto himself, to drive the "Mormons," at which time he was joined by certain unmentionable ones in Warsaw and Carthage; and for his zeal in promoting mobocracy, he became the intimate acquaintance and confidential friend of some certain preachers, lawyers, and representatives, and, finally, of Joseph Jackson and the apostates. He, as Colonel Levi Williams, commands the militia, (alias mob) of Hancock county. On this man, I say, they called for assistance to drag Joseph and Hyrum, with the rest of the council, to Carthage. Williams swore it should be done, and gathered his band together. Joseph, not wishing to fall into the hands of wolves or tigers, called upon the Legion to be in readiness to defend the city and its chartered rights. Just at this crisis, Governor Ford arrived in Quincy. The apostates then appealed from the mob to the Governor. At this time he came into the midst of the mob, and asked them if they would stand by him in executing and defending the law. They said they would; and so he organized them into militia, and then demanded the brethren for trial upon the warrant issued by Smith; (as he did not choose to recognize the right of habeas corpus granted us in the city charter). At the same time he pledged the faith of the state that the brethren should be protected from mob violence. Those called for in the warrant, made their appearance at Carthage, June 24, 1844. On the morning of the twenty-fifth, Joseph and Hyrum were arrested for treason, by a warrant founded upon the oaths of A. O. Norton and Augustine Spencer.

I will not dwell upon the awful scene which succeeded. My heart is thrilled with grief and indignation, and my blood curdles in my veins whenever I speak of it.

My sons were thrown into jail, where they remained three days in company with Brothers Richards, Taylor and Markham. At the end of this time, the Governor disbanded most of the men, but left a guard of eight of our bitterest enemies over the jail, and sixty more of the same character about a hundred yards distant. He then came into Nauvoo with a guard of fifty or sixty men, made a short speech, and returned immediately. During his absence from Carthage, the guard rushed Brother Markham out of the place at the point of the bayonet. Soon after this, two hundred of those discharged in the morning rushed into Carthage, armed, and painted black, red and yellow, and in ten minutes fled again, leaving my sons murdered and mangled corpses!

In leaving the place, a few of them found Samuel coming into Carthage, alone, on horseback, and, finding that he was one of our family, they attempted to shoot him, but he escaped out of their hands, although they pursued him at the top of their speed for more than two hours. He succeeded the next day in getting to Nauvoo in season to go out and meet the procession with the bodies of Hyrum and Joseph, as the mob had the kindness to allow us the privilege of bringing them home, and burying them in Nauvoo, notwithstanding the immense reward which was offered by the Missourians for Joseph's head.

Their bodies were attended home by only two persons, save those that went from this place. These were Brother Willard Richards and a Mr. Hamilton; Brother John Taylor having been shot in prison, and nearly killed, he could not be moved until some time afterwards.

After the corpses were washed and dressed in their burial clothes, we were allowed to see them. I had for a long time braced every nerve, roused every energy of my soul, and called upon God to strengthen me; but when I entered the room, and saw my murdered sons extended both at once before my eyes, and heard the sobs and groans of my family, and the cries of "Father! Husband! Brothers!" from the lips of their wives, children, brothers and sisters, it was too much, I sank back, crying to the Lord, in the agony of my soul, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken this family!" A voice replied, "I have taken them to myself, that they might have rest." Emma was carried back to her room almost in a state of insensibility. Her oldest son approached the corpse, and dropped upon his knees, and laying his cheek against his father's, and kissing him, exclaimed, "Oh, my father! my father!" As for myself, I was swallowed up in the depths of my afflictions; and though my soul was filled with horror past imagination, yet I was dumb, until I arose again to contemplate the spectacle before me, Oh! at that moment how my mind flew through every scene of sorrow and distress which we had passed, together, in which they had shown the innocence and sympathy which filled their guileless hearts. As I looked upon their peaceful, smiling countenances, I seemed almost to hear them say,--"Mother, weep not for us, we have overcome the world by love; we carried to them the gospel, that their souls might be saved; they slew us for our testimony, and thus placed us beyond their power; their ascendency is for a moment, ours is an eternal triumph."

I then thought upon the promise which I had received in Missouri, that in five years Joseph should have power over all his enemies. The time had elapsed and the promise was fulfilled.

I left the scene and returned to my room, to ponder upon the calamities of my family. Soon after this, Samuel said, "Mother, I have had a dreadful distress in my side ever since I was chased by the mob, and I think I have received some injury which is going to make me sick." And indeed he was then not able to sit up, as he had been broken of his rest, besides being dreadfully fatigued in the chase, which, joined to the shock occasioned by the death of his brothers, brought on a disease that never was removed.

On the following day the funeral rites of the murdered ones were attended to, in the midst of terror and alarm, for the mob had made their arrangements to burn the city that night, but by the diligence of the brethren, they were kept at bay until they became discouraged, and returned to their homes.

In a short time Samuel, who continued unwell, was confined to his bed, and lingering till the thirtieth of July, his spirit forsook its earthly tabernacle, and went to join his brothers, and the ancient martyrs, in the Paradise of God.

At this time, William was absent on a mission to the Eastern States. And he had taken his family with him, in consequence of his wife being afflicted with the dropsy, hoping that the journey might be a benefit to her. Thus was I left desolate in my distress. I had reared six sons to manhood, and of them all, one only remained, and he was too far distant to speak one consoling word to me in this trying hour. It would have been some satisfaction to me, if I had expected his immediate return, but his wife was lying at the point of death, which compelled him to remain where he was. His case was, if it were possible, worse than mine, for he had to bear all his grief alone in a land of strangers, confined to the side of his dying wife, and absent from those who felt the deepest interest in his welfare; whilst I was surrounded with friends, being in the midst of the Church; my daughters, too, were with me, and from their society I derived great comfort.

The Church at this time was in a state of gloomy suspense. Not knowing who was to take the place of Joseph, the people were greatly wrought upon with anxiety, lest an impostor should arise and deceive many. Suddenly, Sidney Rigdon made his appearance from Pittsburgh, and rather insinuated that the Church ought to make choice of him, not as President, but as guardian; for "Joseph," said he, "is still President, and the Church must be built up unto him." But before he could carry his measures into effect, the Twelve, who had also been absent, arrived, and assuming their proper places, all was set to rights.

William, however, did not return till the spring of 1845, when, with great difficulty, he got his wife to Nauvoo. She survived but a short time after her arrival, for in about two weeks, to complete the sum of William's afflictions, he followed her to the grave. Her disease was brought on by her exposures in Missouri, so that she was what might be termed an indirect martyr to the cause of Christ, which makes the sum of martyrs in our family no less than six in number.

Shortly after William's return from the east, he was ordained Patriarch of the Church, in the place of Hyrum, who held the keys of that Priesthood previous to his death.

Here ends the history of my life, as well as that of my family, as far as I intend carrying it for the present. And I shall leave the world to judge, as seemeth them good, concerning what I have written. But this much I will say, that the testimony which I have given is true, and will stand for ever; and the same will be my testimony in the day of God Almighty, when I shall meet them, concerning whom I have testified, before angels, and the spirits of the just made perfect, before archangels and seraphims, cherubims and gods; where the brief authority of the unjust man will shrink to nothingness before him who is the Lord of lords, and God of gods; and where the righteousness of the just shall exalt them in the scale, wherein God weigheth the hearts of men. And now having, in common with the Saints, appealed in vain for justice, to Lilburn W. Boggs, Thomas Carlin, Martin Van Buren, and Thomas Ford, I bid them a last farewell, until I shall appear with them before Him who is the judge of both the quick and dead; to whom I solemnly appeal in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

APPENDIX.

* * * *

A JOURNAL KEPT BY DON C. SMITH, WHILE ON A MISSION WITH GEORGE A.
SMITH, HIS COUSIN.

At a meeting of the High Council held in Adam-ondi-Ahman, I was appointed, in company with my cousin, George A. Smith, Lorenzo D. Barnes and Harrison Sagers, to take a mission to the east and south, for the purpose of raising means to buy out the mobbers in Daviess county, Missouri; also to effect an exchange of farms between the brethren in the east, and the mobbers in our immediate neighborhood.

On the twenty-sixth of September, 1838, we took leave of our friends, and started on our mission, in company with Brother Earl, who proposed taking us in his wagon as far as Richmond, a distance of seventy miles. We stopped at Far West to see Brother Joseph. He sanctioned our mission, and bid us God-speed. On our way to Richmond, we stayed over night with Captain Alpheus Cutler, formerly of the United States army. He and his family treated us with much kindness. We also called on John Goodson, who a few days previous had shared freely in the hospitality of my uncle's house, yet he had not the politeness to ask either cousin George or myself to take breakfast with him.

When we got to the landing, we found the river very low, and but one boat up, which was the Kansas. Whilst waiting for this boat, we had an interview with David Whitmer. He had not confidence to look us in the face, for he had become our enemy; yet, when we parted, he shook hands with us quite cordially, and wished us success.

On the thirtieth of September, we went on board the Kansas; this was a very slow conveyance, for one of the wheels was broken; besides, the river being very low, and full of snags and sand bars, we got along but slowly on our journey. Here we traveled in company with General Wilson and Samuel Lucas, besides many others who had taken an active part in the expulsion of the Saints from Jackson County, in 1833. General Atchison was also on board. On arriving at De Witt, we found about seventy of the brethren with their families, surrounded by a mob of about two hundred men. When the boat landed, the women and children were much frightened, supposing that we also were mob. We would have stopped and assisted them what we could, but we were unarmed, and, upon consulting together, it was thought advisable for us to fulfil our mission, so we returned to the boat, and proceeded on our journey. From this onward, the "Mormons" were the only subject of conversation, and nothing was heard but the most bitter imprecations against them. General Wilson related many of his deeds of noble daring in the Jackson mob, one of which was the following: "I went in company with forty others to the house of one Hiram Page, who was a 'Mormon,' in Jackson county. We got logs and broke in every door and window at the same instant; and pointing our rifles at the family, we told them, we would be God d--d if we didn't shoot every one of them if Page did not come out. At that, a tall woman made her appearance with a child in her arms. I told the boys, she was too d--d tall. In a moment the boys stripped her, and found it was Page. I told them to give him a d--d good one. We gave him sixty or seventy lashes with hickory withes which we had prepared. Then, after pulling the roof off this house, we went to the next d--d 'Mormon's' house, and whipped him in like manner. We continued until we whipped ten or fifteen of the God d--d 'Mormons' and demolished their houses that night. If the Carroll boys would do that way, they might conquer; but it is no use to think of driving them without about four to one. I wish I could stay, I would help drive the d--d 'Mormons' to hell, old Joe, and all the rest."

At this, I looked the General sternly in the face, and told him that he was neither a republican nor a gentleman, but a savage, without a single principle of honor. "If," said I, "the 'Mormons' have broken the law, let it be strictly executed against them; but such anti-republican and unconstitutional acts as these related by you, are below the brutes." We were upon the hurricane deck, and a large company present were listening to the conversation. When I ceased speaking, the General placed his hand upon his pistol, but I felt safe, for Cousin George stood by his side, watching every move the General made, and would have knocked him into the river instantly, had he attempted to draw a deadly weapon. But General Atchinson saved him the trouble by saying, "I'll be God d--d, if Smith ain't right." At this, Wilson left the company rather crest-fallen. In the course of the conversation, Wilson said that the best plan was, to rush into the "Mormon" settlement, murder the men, make slaves of the children, take possession of the property, and use the women as they pleased.

There was a gentleman present from Baltimore, Maryland; he said he never was among such a pack of d--d savages before; that he had passed through Far West, and saw nothing among the "Mormons" but good order. Then, drawing his pistols, he discharged them; and re-loading, he said, "If God spares my life till I get out of Upper Missouri, I will never be found associating with such devils again."

Shortly after this, we were invited to preach on board. Elder Barnes gave them a good lecture, and I bore testimony. The rest of the way we were treated more civilly, but, being deck passengers, and having very little money, we suffered much for food. On one occasion we paid twelve and a half cents for one dozen ears of [Indian] corn; and after grating it, we paid a woman twelve and a half cents more for baking it into bread, although it was badly done, being neither sifted, nor the whole kernels taken out; but we were so hungry that we were glad to get it.

We continued our journey together through every species of hardship and fatigue, until the eleventh of October, when Elder Barnes and H. Sagers left us, after our giving them all the money we had; they started for Cincinnati, and we to visit the churches in West Tennessee, Soon after this, Julian Moses, who had fallen in company with us on the way, gave us a five franc piece, and bade us farewell. This left cousin George and myself alone and in a strange land; and we soon found that the mob spirit was here as well as in Missouri, for it was not long before we were mobbed by near twenty men, who surrounded the house in the night, and terrified the family very much; however, we succeeded in driving them away. After which we continued our journey until we arrived at Brother Utley's, in Benton county, a neighborhood where Brothers Patten and Woodruff were mobbed some years ago. We soon made our business known to all the Saints, who said they would use every effort to be on hand with their money and means--some in the fall, others in the spring. We received from Brother West twenty-eight dollars to bear our expenses; and also from others, acts of kindness which will never be forgotten.

About this time our minds were seized with an awful foreboding--horror seemed to have laid his grasp upon us--we lay awake night after night, for we could not sleep. Our forebodings increased, and we felt sure that all was not right; yet we continued preaching until the Lord showed us that the Saints would be driven from Missouri. We then started home, and, on arriving at Wyatt's Mills, which was on our return, we were told that, if we preached there, it should cost us our lives. We gave out an appointment at the house of sister Foster, a wealthy widow. She advised us to give it up; but, as she had no fears for herself, her property or family, we concluded to fulfil our appointment. The hour of meeting came, and many attended. Cousin George preached about an hour, during which time a man named Fitch, came in at the head of twelve other mobbers, who had large, hickory clubs, and they sat down with their hats on. When Cousin George took his seat, I arose and addressed them for an hour and a half, during which time, I told them that I was a patriot--that I was free--that I loved my country--that I loved liberty--that I despised both mobs and mobbers--that no gentleman or Christian at heart, would ever be guilty of such things or countenance them. At this the mob pulled off their hats, laid down their clubs, and listened with almost breathless attention.

After meeting, Mr. Fitch came to us and said that he was ashamed of his conduct, and would never do the like again, that he had been misinformed about us by some religious bigots.

We continued our journey until we reached the town of Columbus, Hickman county, Kentucky. Here we put up with Captain Robinson, formerly an officer in the army, who treated us very kindly, assuring us that we were welcome to stay at his house until a boat should come, if it were three months. While here a company of thirteen hundred Cherokee Indians encamped on the bank of the river, to wait for ferry privileges. They felt deeply wounded at leaving their native country for the west. They said they were leaving a fine country, rich in mineral, but the whites knew very little of its value. They excited our sympathies very much; little did I think that my own wife and helpless babes were objects of greater sympathy than these.

At length a boat came along, and we went on board. We had to pay all our money (five dollars) for fare, and eat and lie among negroes, as we took a deck passage. About ninety miles from St. Louis, our boat got aground, where it lay for three days. During this time we had nothing to eat but a little parched corn. They finally gave up the boat and left her. We went to the clerk and got two dollars of our money back, after which we went on board of a little boat that landed us in St. Louis the next morning. Here we found Elder Orson Pratt; he told us that Joseph was a prisoner with many others, and that David Patten was killed, giving us a long and sorrowful account of the sufferings of the Saints, which filled our hearts with sorrow.

The next morning we started again on our journey. When we arrived at Huntsville, we stopped at the house of George Lyman, to rest, he being uncle to Cousin George, whose feet had now become very sore with traveling. Here we heard dreadful tales concerning our friends in Daviess county, that they were all murdered, and that my brothers, Joseph and Hyrum, were shot with a hundred balls.

We had not been long in Huntsville till the mob made a rally to use us up with the rest of the Smiths, and, at the earnest request of our friends, we thought best to push on. The wind was in our faces, the ground was slippery, it was night, and very dark, nevertheless we proceeded on our journey. Traveling twenty-two miles, we came to the Chariton river, which we found frozen over, but the ice too weak to bear us, and the boat on the west side of the river. We went to the next ferry. Finding that there was no boat here, and that in the next neighborhood a man's brains were beat out for being a "Mormon," we returned to the first ferry, and tried by hallooing to raise the ferryman on the opposite side of the river, but were not able to awaken him. We were almost benumbed with cold, and to warm ourselves we commenced scuffling and jumping, we then beat our feet upon the logs and stumps, in order to start a circulation of blood; but at last Cousin George became so cold and sleepy that he said he could not stand it any longer, and lay down. I told him he was freezing to death; I then cut a stick and said I would thrash him. At this he got up and undertook to thrash me, this stirred his blood a little, but he soon lay down again; however, the ferryman in a short time came over, and set us on our own side of the river. We then traveled on until about breakfast time, when we stopped at the house of a man, who, we afterwards learned, was Senator Ashby, that commanded the mob at Haun's Mill. That night we stayed at one of the bitterest of mobocrats, by the name of Fox, and started the next morning without breakfast. Our route lay through a wild prairie, where there was but very little track, and only one house in forty miles. The northwest wind blew fiercely in our faces, and the ground was so slippery that we could scarcely keep our feet, and when the night came on, to add to our perplexity, we lost our way. Soon after which, I became so cold that it was with great difficulty I could keep from freezing. We also became extremely thirsty; however, we found a remedy for this, by cutting through ice three inches thick. While we were drinking we heard a cow bell, this caused our hearts to leap for joy, and we arose and steered our course towards the sound. We soon entered a grove, which sheltered us from the wind, and we felt more comfortable. In a short time we came to a house, where George was well acquainted; here we were made welcome and kindly entertained. We laid down to rest about 2 o'clock in the morning, after having traveled one hundred and ten miles in two days and two nights. After breakfast, I set out for Far West, leaving George sick with our hospitable friend. When I arrived, I was fortunate enough to find my family alive and in tolerable health, which was more than I could have expected, considering the scenes of persecution through which they had passed.

* * * *

LETTERS OF DON C. SMITH TO HIS WIFE, AGNES.

    Cohocton, Steuben Co., June 25, 1836.

    Dear Companion,

    I received your letter bearing the date June 15, which I perused
    with eagerness, being the first I had received from you during
    my absence. I was rejoiced to hear that you were as well as you
    expressed, but grieved that your rest should be disturbed by
    the nervous affection of which you speak. You say that you are
    willing to submit to the will of the Lord in all things, this
    also is a source of great consolation to me; for if these be your
    feelings, even when deprived of my society, in order to advance
    the prosperity of the kingdom of God (as nothing else would tear
    me from you), I feel that the Lord will bless, keep, preserve and
    uphold you, so let your faith fail not, and your prayers cease not,
    and you shall be healed of your nervous complaint, and all other
    afflictions. For God is willing, and abundantly able, to raise you
    up and give you all the righteous desires of your heart, for he has
    said, "Ask and ye shall receive," and he has never lied; and I can
    truly say that he has been my help in every time of need.

    When I left home, I set my face, like a flint, towards Boston,
    until I found that it was my duty to return home. On arriving at
    Seneca Falls, I laid the matter before Samuel and Wilber, and we
    united our hearts in prayer before the Lord, who signified, by
    the voice of his Spirit, to Samuel, that he should continue his
    journey, but that we should return, after a short time, to our
    families; so tell Mary that we have not forsaken him; no, nor ever
    will, for he is as faithful as the sun--the Lord will not forsake
    him, and angels will bear him up, and bring him off triumphant and
    victorious. I heard of the death of grandmother, while at Aven, I
    could not help weeping for her, although she has gone to rest. I
    called at Uncle John's--grandmother was asleep--I laid my hand on
    her head, and asked the Lord to spare her, that I might see her
    again in the flesh. But when I left, I felt as though she would be
    taken before I returned, which caused me to feel sorrowful; but I
    do not desire to call her back to this world of trouble. I must
    close by saying, that I expect to labor in the vineyard, until I
    start for home. And, if the Lord will, I shall see you as soon as
    the last of July, then I shall finish this letter.

    Yours till death,

    Don C. Smith.

Agnes M. Smith.

In the month of June, 1839, Don Carlos came from McDonough county to Commerce, for the purpose of making preparations to establish a printing press. As the press and type had been buried during the Missouri troubles, and were considerably injured by the dampness which they had gathered, it was necessary to get them into use as soon as possible; and in order to do this, Carlos was under the necessity of cleaning out a cellar, through which a spring was constantly flowing, for there was no other place at liberty where he could put up the press. The dampness of the place, together with his labor, caused him to take a severe cold, with which he was sick some time; nevertheless, he continued his labor, until he got the press into operation, and issued one number of the paper. He then went to McDonough, and visited his family; after which, he returned to Commerce, but found the distress so great that no business could be done. Upon his arrival in Commerce, he wrote to his wife the following letter, which shows the situation of the Church at that time, as well as his affectionate disposition, which was breathed in every word he spoke to his family, and stamped upon every line he wrote to them when absent.

    Commerce, July 25, 1839.

    Beloved,

    I am in tolerable health, and have just risen from imploring the
    Throne of Grace, in behalf of you and our children, that God would
    preserve you all in health, and give you every needed blessing,
    and protect you by day and by night. When I arrived here, nothing
    had been done in the office, as Brother Robinson had been sick
    every day since I left. And I have done but little labor since I
    returned, except struggling against the destroyer, and attending
    upon the sick--there are not well ones enough to take care of the
    sick--there has been but one death, however, since my return.
    McLerry, Sophronia and Clarinda, are very sick. Sister E. Robinson
    has been nigh unto death. Last Tuesday, I in company with George A.
    Smith, administered to sixteen souls; some notable miracles were
    wrought under our hands. I never had so great power over disease,
    as I had this week; for this let God be glorified. There is now
    between fifty and one hundred sick, but they are generally on the
    gain; I do not know of more than two or three who are considered
    dangerous. I send you some money that you may not be destitute, in
    case you should be sick, and need anything which you have not in
    the house. Agnes, the Lord being my helper, you shall not want,
    Elijah's God will bless you, and I will bless you, for you are
    entwined around my heart with ties that are stronger than death,
    and time cannot sever them. Deprived of your society, and that of
    my prattling babes, life would be irksome. Oh! that we may all
    live, and enjoy health and prosperity, until the coming of the Son
    of Man, that we may be a comfort to each other, and instil into
    the tender and noble minds of our children, principles of truth
    and virtue, which shall abide with them for ever, is my constant
    prayer. From your husband, who will ever remain, devoted and
    affectionate, both in time and eternity,

    Don C. Smith.

While Don Carlos was at work in the before mentioned cellar, he took a severe pain in his side, which was never altogether removed. About a fortnight prior to his death, his family were very sick; and in taking care of them, he caught a violent cold--a fever set in, and the pain in his side increased, and with all our exertions, we were unable to arrest the disease, which I have no doubt was consumption, brought on by his working in a damp room, in which he printed his paper.

* * * *

ELEGY

ON THE DEATH OF THE DEARLY BELOVED AND MUCH LAMENTED FATHER IN ISRAEL,
JOSEPH SMITH, SENIOR, A PATRIARCH IN THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF
LATTER-DAY SAINTS, WHO DIED AT NAUVOO, SEPTEMBER 14 1840.

By Miss E. R. Snow.

  Zion's noblest sons are weeping;
    See her daughters bathed in tears,
  Where the Patriarch is sleeping
    Nature's sleep--the sleep of years.
  Hushed is every note of gladness--
    Every minstrel bows full low--
  Every heart is tuned to sadness--
    Every bosom feels the blow.

  Zion's children loved him dearly;
    Zion was his daily care:
  That his loss is felt sincerely,
    Thousand weeping Saints declare;
  Thousands, who have shared his blessing,
    Thousands whom his service blessed,
  By his faith and prayers suppressing
    Evils which their lives opprest.

  Faith and works, most sweetly blended,
    Proved his steadfast heart sincere;
  And the power of God attended
    His official labors here;
  Long he stemmed the powers of darkness,
    Like an anchor in the flood:
  Like an oak amid the tempest,
    Bold and fearlessly he stood.

  Years have witnessed his devotions,
    By the love of God inspired,
  When his spirit's pure emotions,
    Were with holy ardor fired.
  Oft he wept for suffering Zion--
    All her sorrows were his own:
  When she passed through grievous trials,
    Her oppressions weighed him down.

  Now he's gone, we'd not recall him
    From a paradise of bliss,
  Where no evil can befall him,
    To a changing world like this.
  His loved name will never perish,
    Nor his mem'ry crown the dust;
  For the Saints of God will cherish
    The remembrance of the JUST.

  Faith's sweet voice of consolation,
    Soothes our grief: his spirit's flown,
  Upward to a holier station,
    Nearer the celestial throne;
  There to plead the cause of Zion,
    In the council of the JUST--
  In the court the Saints rely on,
    Pending causes to ADJUST.

  Though his earthly part is sleeping,
    Lowly 'neath the prairie sod;
  Soon the grave will yield its keeping--
    Yield to life the man of God.
  When the heavens and earth are shaken,
    When all things shall be restored--
  When the trump of God shall waken
    Those that sleep in Christ the Lord.

* * * *

LINES WRITTEN ON THE DEATH OF GEN. DON CARLOS SMITH

By Miss E. R. Snow.

"Thy shaft flew thrice, and thrice my peace was slain."

  The insatiate archer, Death, once more
  Has bathed his shaft in human gore;
  The pale-faced monarch's crimsoned bow.
  Once more has laid a good man low.

  If tears of love could ever save
  A noble victim from the grave;
  If strong affection e'er had power
  To rescue in the dying hour;
  If kindred sympathy could hold
  A jewel in its sacred fold;
  If friendship could produce a charm.
  The heartless tyrant to disarm;
  If wide-acknowledged worth could be
  A screen from mortal destiny;
  If pure integrity of heart
  Could baffle death's malignant dart;
  If usefulness and noble zeal,
  Devotedness to Zion's weal,
  A conduct graced with purposed aim,
  A reputation free from blame,
  Could save a mortal from the tomb,
  And stamp with an eternal bloom;
  He never could have bowed to death,
  Or yielded up his mortal breath.

  Ours is the sorrow, ours the loss,
  For, through the triumphs of the Cross,
  His noble part, by death set free,
  On wings of immortality,
  Tracing the steps the Savior trod,
  Has reached the Paradise of God.
  There he rejoins the ransomed choir,
  There, there he hails his noble sire,
  A patriarch of these latter-days,
  Whose goodness memory loves to trace
  With reverence, gratitude, and love;
  He left us for the courts above.
  There with the spirits of the just,
  Where Zion's welfare is discussed,
  Once more their efforts to combine
  In Zion's cause.--And shall we mourn
  For those who have been upwards borne!
  And shall the Legion's sorrow flow,
  As if a Chieftain were laid low,
  Who threw his frail escutcheon by,
  To join the Legion formed on high?
  Yes, mourn.--The loss is great to earth,
  A loss of high exalted worth.

* * * *

THE ASSASSINATION OF JOSEPH AND HYRUM SMITH, FIRST PRESIDENTS OF THE
CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS, WHO WERE MASSACRED BY A
MOB IN CARTHAGE, HANCOCK COUNTY, ILL., ON JUNE 27, 1844.

By Miss E. R. Snow.

  Ye heavens attend! Let all the earth give ear!
  Let Gods and Seraphs, men and angels hear--
  The worlds on high--the universe shall know
  What awful scenes are acted here below!
  Had Nature's self a heart, her heart would bleed,
  For never, since the Son of God was slain,
  Has blood so noble flowed from human vein,
  As that which now, on God, for vengeance calls
  From "Freedom's ground"--from Carthage prison walls!

  Oh! Illinois! thy soil has drunk the blood
  Of Prophets, martyred for the truth of God.
  Once loved America! What can atone
  For the pure blood of innocence thou'st sown?
  Were all thy streams in teary torrents shed
  To mourn the fate of those illustrious dead,
  How vain the tribute, for the noblest worth
  That graced thy surface, degraded earth!

  Oh! wretched murd'rers! fierce for human blood!
  You've slain the Prophets of the living God,
  Who've borne oppression from their early youth,
  To plant on earth the principles of truth.

  Shades of our patriotic fathers! Can it be?
  Beneath your blood-stained flag of liberty!
  The firm supporters of our country's cause
  Are butchered, while submissive to her laws!
  Yes, blameless men, defamed by hellish lies,
  Have thus been offer'd as a sacrifice
  T' appease the ragings of a brutish clan,
  That has defied the laws of God and man!
  'Twas not for crime or guilt of theirs they fell;
  Against the laws they never did rebel.
  True to their country, yet her plighted fate
  Has proved an instrument of cruel death!
  Where are thy far-famed laws, Columbia, where
  Thy boasted freedom--thy protecting care?
  Is this a land of rights? Stern FACTS shall say,
  If legal justice here maintains its sway,
  The official powers of state are sheer pretense,
  When they're exerted in the Saints' defense.

  Great men have fallen, and mighty men have died;
  Nations have mourned their fav'rites and their pride;
  But two, so wise, so virtuous, great, and good,
  Before on earth, at once, have never stood
  Since the creation. Men whom God ordained
  To publish truth where error long had reigned,
  Of whom the world itself unworthy proved.
  It knew them not, but men with hatred moved,
  And with infernal spirits have combined
  Against the best, the noblest, of mankind.

  Oh! persecution! shall thy purple hand
  Spread utter destruction through the land?
  Shall freedom's banner be no more unfurled?
  Has peace, indeed, been taken from the world?

  Thou God of Jacob, in this trying hour,
  Help us to trust in thy Almighty power;
  Support thy Saints beneath this awful stroke,
  Make bare thine arm to break oppression's yoke.
  We mourn thy Prophet, from whose lips have flowed
  The words of life thy Spirit has bestowed;
  A depth of thought no human art could reach,
  From time to time rolled in sublimest speech,
  From the celestial fountain, through his mind,
  To purify and elevate mankind.
  The rich intelligence by him brought forth,
  Is like the sunbeam spreading o'er the earth.

  Now Zion mourns, she mourns an earthly head;
  The Prophet and the Patriarch are dead!
  The blackest deed that men or devils know, Since
  Calvary's scene, has laid the brothers low.
  One in their life, and one in death--they proved
  How strong their friendship--how they truly loved.
  True to their mission, until death they stood,
  Then sealed their testimony with their blood.
  All hearts with sorrow bleed, and every eye
  Is bathed in tears--each bosom heaves a sigh--
  Heart-broken widows' agonizing groans
  Are mingled with the helpless orphans' moans!

  Ye Saints! be still, and know that God is just,
  With steadfast purpose in his promise trust.
  Girded with sackcloth, own his mighty hand,
  And wait his judgments on this guilty land!
  The noble martyrs' now have gone to move
  The cause of Zion in the courts above.

The End.
