David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

PREFACE

The idea for this book began to form many years ago when we discovered the rich treasure trove of journals, letters, and other documents created by nine relatively young apostles and their associates as they laid the foundation for the growth of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the British Isles. If there was ever a story shouting to be told, this was it. It was a natural for the audience we were concerned with most: the general readership of the Church and especially missionary-minded young adults. But it was also a topic in which we felt our colleagues in the scholarly community would take great interest. In short, it harmonized perfectly with our continuing efforts to combine scholarship and faith in what we write.

Our yearning to complete the work, despite a myriad of other projects in which we were each involved, was enhanced when we visited the British Isles in 1987, during the sesquicentennial celebration of the opening of the British Mission. As we walked where the early apostles had walked, visited the cities and villages where they had worked, stood on the Hereford Beacon (one of the beautiful Malvern Hills) reading Wilford Woodruff's powerful meditations on that spot, and visited among the Saints in Britain, we became more determined to tell the story as completely as possible.

At first we planned to create a book of documents: the letters and journals we found were charged with religious and social drama. But as we began to write the introductory and connecting narratives, we saw that we must do more. The historical setting must be illuminated, for it added so much to our understanding of what was going on. The meaning and consequences of the mission also must be explained, for it had significance far beyond the immediate results. Consequently, after nearly fifteen years, we have produced the volume you have in your hands.

The story of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in the British Isles between 1837 and 1841 is a most momentous story in the history of Mormon missionary work: poignant, powerful, and inspiring. Especially with reference to the 1840-41 mission, no other single assignment has had such a profound and far-reaching effect upon the Church. The apostles and their co-workers baptized thousands of people and created a missionary system that made an extraordinary contribution to continuing Church growth. The Twelve also organized an emigration program that, within fifty years, resulted in the migration of more than 88,000 European Saints, including 55,000 Britons, to America, and they established a publication program that had a significant effect on the Church. Perhaps equally important were the far-reaching consequences of this unique shared experience of the Twelve for their quorum. During the first several years after the Church was organized, the apostles had no direct authority within the stakes where high councils were established, and neither had they functioned effectively as a quorum. The mission to England proved to be a testing ground, uniting the Twelve as they had never been before and preparing them to carry out even greater responsibilities. Shortly after their return, a delighted Prophet Joseph Smith told a special conference that henceforth the Twelve would be his right hand in conducting "the business of the church" in Nauvoo and throughout the world. [^1] This new relationship with Joseph and the Saints prepared the Quorum of the Twelve to assume Church leadership at the death of the Prophet just three years later.

Students of Mormon history have long discussed the mission of the Twelve to Great Britain, [^2] but the chapters of this book provide a depth and richness never before available, including detailed consideration of vital topics not explored elsewhere. First is a general discussion of the apostles as individuals and the setting in which they found themselves in Great Britain. Then comes a discussion of the organization of the Quorum and the powerful work of Elders Kimball and Hyde as they directed the opening of the mission in 1837. The book follows the apostles in 1839 and 1840 as they struggled against incredible odds to make their way from Nauvoo to New York City and then on to England for the mission of 1840-41. In Britain they discovered many devoulty religious people, some of whom were seeking a gospel message more in tune with their reading of the New Testament than what they found in the Church of England or other mainline churches. Many were already well prepared for the message of the Restoration the apostles brought them. The book also explores the missionary methods used by the apostles, as well as their success in establishing a publication program and a vast emigration system. It follows the apostles as they labored in some of England's larger cities as well as in the countryside, experiencing both success and failure. And it relates heartwarming personal stories, such as that of Willard Richards and his wife, Jennetta, whom he married while on his mission, and those of the wives and families the apostles left behind in Illinois and Iowa. The personal struggles several of the wives endured to maintain their faith, eke out a living, and give moral support to their absent husbands during the difficult early days of Nauvoo was a poignant and essential element in the story of the mission itself. This, then, is the rich and singular story of a group of remarkable men with a most remarkable mission. We hope the story you read has the same profound effect on you as it has had on us.

EDITORIAL METHOD

In an effort to capture as much as possible of the spirit of the first missionaries to Great Britain, we have quoted liberally from their letters and journals. We have attempted to preserve the integrity of the original documents and convey the style of each writer, both in the text and in Appendix B. With minor exceptions, therefore, we have transcribed the documents as faithfully as possible, including retaining original spelling and grammar. We have silently omitted inadvertent repetitions and the author's deletions, except in those few cases where the deleted material conveys useful information. Where the author added material between the lines, we have simply inserted it so that it reads as the writer intended. To improve readability, we have added a minimum of punctuation and paragraphing and have supplied capitalization, where missing, both at the beginning of sentences and for the names of people and places. Terminal dashes have been converted to periods. We have placed in brackets editorial insertions that supply missing or unintelligible text (our best guess about an illegible word). Editorial comments that are not part of the original text are italicized within brackets.

Because of the number of notes in this work, we have used short citations within the chapters and given full documentation in the Bibliography. All citations from material in the Church Archives are courtesy of the Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and are used here by permission. The first citation within each chapter to letters published in the Millennial Star or other such periodicals gives the inclusive pages in that publication where the entire letter is found; subsequent citations within each chapter refer only to the quotation itself. To make references to Wilford Woodruff's Journal, edited by Scott G. Kenney, more readily usable by the reader, we have cited the date as well as the volume and page number. In citing Joseph Fielding's diary, we have given the page number of the typescript, because the dates are sometimes obscure and difficult to ascertain. Latter-day Saint scriptural citations are from current editions.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Smith, History of the Church, 4:403.
[^2] 2. See Allen and Thorp, "Mission of the Twelve"; Evans, Century of "Mormonism," 85-200; Bloxham, "Call of the Apostles" and "Apostolic Foundations."
