David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

Chapter 1

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCTHE MEN AND THEIR MISSION

On April 6, 1840, thirty-eight-year-old Heber C. Kimball arrived in England for the second time in three years. Eight months earlier, as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, he had left Nauvoo (formerly Commerce), Illinois, to fulfill a commandment of the Lord received by revelation through Joseph Smith for the Twelve to "go over the great waters, and there promulgate my gospel." [^1] Ill and penniless, Heber had somehow made his way to New York City and then, with the help of friends and in the company of Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, and George A. Smith, on to Britain. Two other apostles, Wilford Woodruff and John Taylor, were already there, and Willard Richards was ordained on April 14, bringing to eight the number of apostles who served in England. On May 2 Heber was in the village of Clitheroe, north of Preston, Lancashire, where he took time to write to his wife, Vilate.

The letter must have taken Elder Kimball hours to finish as he poured out his loneliness as well as much of the excitement, tenderness, sorrow, and joy that were making this mission memorable. When he had arrived by train in Penwortham, he reported, Saints who had been expecting the American missionaries for months were at the railway station to meet him, and as he put his head out of the window, they raised a red flag to let the neighbors know he had arrived. It was a time of rejoicing, he wrote, reflecting the immeasurable love the Penwortham Saints felt for the apostle who had brought them the gospel nearly three years earlier. There was also anti-Mormonism in Penwortham, but that did not concern Heber for, he declared, this "is the Lords own work, and he will take care of it." He told of great missionary success, but his most ardent comments concerned the goodness of the Saints toward the Twelve. "Yes if we were infants," he said, "they could not be more kind than thay are to us." He anguished, however, at the suffering he saw among the poverty-stricken members of the Church, some of whom wept because they could not provide food for him as they had done on his previous mission. "I will tell you my dear wife this is hard." [^2]

THE MISSIONS OF THE TWELVE TO THE BRITISH ISLES

Heber C. Kimball's tender compassion for the Saints in England was shared by all the members of the Quorum of the Twelve who, at that moment, were engaged in a mission unique in the annals of LDS history. Soon after the Quorum of the Twelve was organized in Kirtland, Ohio, in 1835, the apostles were instructed that their central duty was to be "special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world," [^3] but the difficulties facing the Church prevented any of them from taking the LDS message beyond the United States and Canada. Those difficulties included disagreements and apostasy among the Twelve, who for a time were anything but a united quorum. In 1837, however, Joseph Smith felt inspired to begin the task of sending the gospel overseas, and he dispatched Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde to lead the first mission to England. Although they remained less than a year, their remarkable success laid the foundation for even more remarkable accomplishments when, beginning in 1840, eight apostles spent a year or more in the British Isles fulfilling the commandment that the Twelve as a quorum should proclaim the gospel overseas. This is the only time in the history of the Church that the Quorum of the Twelve as a body has been called to travel outside America for such an assignment.

The message the apostles carried was one of faith, hope, love, and salvation, which they believed had profound implications for all the peoples of the world. The ancient gospel of Jesus Christ, lost through apostasy, had been restored, and new witnesses of the reality of the living Christ had appeared. Joseph Smith had seen him, along with the Father, in a vision in 1820. Later, after a series of visits from an angel named Moroni, Joseph had received and translated an ancient record, the Book of Mormon, itself another testament of Jesus Christ as well as a history of ancient inhabitants of the American continent and Christ's ministry among them. In addition, the priesthood, or the authority to perform saving ordinances and otherwise act in the name of God, had been restored to the Prophet Joseph, who in 1830 had been commanded to organize the Church, the restored kingdom of God. The missionaries also told the people of Great Britain that the restoration of the gospel was one of the final heralds of the rapidly approaching Millennium. Though the world could not escape the wars and calamities that prophecy declared would precede the Millennium, those who accepted and lived the restored gospel would find spiritual salvation. Moreover, the apostles carried the message that a gathering place had been designated in America where the Saints of God would build a loving, righteous community prepared to meet and reign with the Savior when he finally came in glory. Much of the message of the Restoration was summarized in the first issue of The Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star, published in Manchester in May 1840:

The long night of darkness is now far spent—the truth revived in its primitive simplicity and purity. . . . It has pleased the Almighty to send forth an HOLY ANGEL, to restore the fulness of the gospel with all its attendant blessings, to bring together his wandering sheep into one fold, to restore to them "the faith which was once delivered to the saints," and to send his servants in these last days, with a special message to all the inhabitants of the earth, in order to prepare all who will hearken for the Second Advent of the Messiah, which is now near at hand. [^4]

The circumstances of the time were enough to make the challenge in 1840 and 1841 overwhelming, but in addition, the apostles lacked a full quorum to discharge the most important commission they had yet received. Six of the original Twelve were gone: five had apostatized, and one, David W. Patten, had died a martyr in Missouri in October 1838. Four were replaced before the apostles left for the British Isles, and another new apostle was ordained in England, but one vacancy remained in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles until the mission was completed. Two apostles, John E. Page and William Smith, simply never accepted the challenge to go to Britain. Both pleaded poverty and other personal difficulties. In addition, a brief period of apostasy kept Orson Hyde from going with the others. In April 1840, however, he and John E. Page were called on a special mission to Palestine; once again, Page failed to go. Elder Hyde prepared enthusiastically, and a year later he met with his brethren as he traveled through Britain on his way to Palestine. Nine apostles, therefore, served on the two apostolic missions to Great Britain, but only eight represented the quorum during the momentous years of 1840 and 1841.

THOSE WHO SERVED

The nine apostles who served in the British Isles between 1837 and 1841 had much in common with each other as well as considerable diversity of personality and talent, all of which contributed to the success of their historic assignment. Their average age at the beginning of 1840 was thirty-one. Most had been reared in a rural New England or New York background, and even before they joined the Mormons, some were taking part in the early westward movement that became a vital part of the expanding and maturing of America. Although they were not frontiersmen in the sense of carving new paths and new communities in the wilderness, they were nevertheless members of young, maturing communities near the edge of the line of American settlements, and they shared in the vibrant, reforming, democratic spirit that characterized this era in American history.

Their formal education was limited. Many of their letters, like those of Heber C. Kimball, reveal a lack of modern-day sophistication in grammar and punctuation, and their spelling was usually a phonetic representation of their pronunciation. Upon reading their writings, however, we quickly become acquainted with powerful and compelling personalities. John Taylor, Orson Hyde, and the Pratt brothers showed the greatest refinement in literary style, but profound spiritual strengths are equally apparent in the writing of those who were not so proficient. It is impressive to see these faithful missionaries struggling away at numerous letters, reports, journals, and publications, and to feel the powerful spirit that comes through their writings. Extensive quotations from the apostles' writings in the chapters that follow illustrate that spirit.

Before their conversion to Mormonism, most of the early apostles were "seekers." That is, they were believers in God and Christ but were not satisfied that traditional Christian churches taught or practiced the ancient gospel of Christ in its simple purity, and they were seeking a restoration of that gospel. Their conversions, for the most part, came through reading the Book of Mormon, receiving a personal spiritual witness of its truthfulness, and becoming convinced that Joseph Smith was a prophet, chosen by God, through whom the priesthood and the ancient Church of Christ had been restored. Their own early seeking no doubt helped them empathize with many in the British Isles who were experiencing a similar quest.

The senior apostle, in age as well as position in the Quorum in 1840, was Brigham Young. He was thirty-eight when he arrived in England. Born in Vermont, he was reared there and in New York state. By profession he was a craftsman—carpenter, joiner, and glazier—and even before he became a Latter-day Saint, he was a dedicated Christian. He was converted to the Church in 1832 and soon became one of the Prophet's most avid supporters, especially during times of severe crisis and persecution. He was ordained an apostle in February 1835. Like that of Joseph Smith and other Church leaders, his formal education was minimal, but his wellrounded practical wisdom as well as his deep commitment to things spiritual could not be mistaken. As leader of the Twelve, he felt a profound responsibility to unify his quorum as well as to make the challenging overseas missionary enterprise an unqualified success for the Church.

Heber C. Kimball, also thirty-eight, grew up in Vermont, where his father was a blacksmith and where he went to school until he was about fourteen. He too learned blacksmithing and later became a potter. A hardworking tradesman, he had much in common with the people among whom he worked in England. Only three weeks after Heber and his wife, Vilate, joined the Baptist church in 1831, they encountered Mormon missionaries and, soon after, were baptized. Heber was one of the original members of the Quorum of the Twelve and, in 1837, he led the first small group of missionaries of England. A straightforward, hard-hitting preacher, he was known for never mincing words or equivocating. At the same time, he had a ready wit and a clever way with words. "Glad to hear of the prosperity of the work in that part of the Land," he wrote from London to George A. Smith in Staffordshire in December 1840. "You Say the Devle is mad. This maks me glad, and I Shall not try to pleas him. I know that your disposition is some like mine on this Subject." [^5]

Orson Hyde, a native of Connecticut, turned thirty-five in January 1840. As a fourteen-year-old youth he had walked six hundred miles to Ohio, where he worked in diverse occupations. In 1827, stirred by a revival in Kirtland, he became converted to the Methodist faith. Later, like many "seekers" and influenced by Sidney Rigdon, he joined the Campbellite movement, which claimed to have restored the ancient order of things. He became an active and successful preacher, missionary, and pastor. Then, in the fall of 1830, he was given a copy of the Book of Mormon by missionaries passing through. Though opposed to it at first, he ultimately became convinced of its truth, and in the fall of 1831 he was baptized by Sidney Rigdon, who had joined the Church the previous December. Orson performed several missions over the next few years. He became one of the original members of the Quorum of the Twelve in 1835, continued spending nearly all his time as a missionary, wrote the first missionary tract, and in 1837 went to England with Heber C. Kimball. After his return, Elder Hyde found himself caught up in the confusion swirling around Joseph Smith in the Missouri crisis, and as a result of what he later called a period of "affliction and darkness," he was dropped from the Quorum on May 4, 1839, just when the rest of his brethren were beginning to prepare to go to England. After a time of torment, anguish, and repentance, Orson was restored to fellowship in the Church and to membership in the Quorum on June 27. He remained in America, however, until his departure for Palestine early in 1841.

Born into a poor, hard-working family in the state of New York, Parley P. Pratt was thirty-two when he arrived in England. Before his conversion to Mormonism he, too, had been a "seeker," joined the Campbellite movement, was influenced by Sidney Rigdon, made his home in Ohio, and became a preacher. He was on a self-appointed mission, preaching for the Campbellites in New York, when he met the Mormon missionaries in 1830. Converted and ordained an elder, he was soon sent on a mission for the Church. Through him Sidney Rigdon was introduced to the Book of Mormon and joined the Church. Also one of the original Twelve, Elder Pratt had a flair for writing. He produced some of the most influential early doctrinal literature of the Church, and in England he became editor and publisher of the Church's Millennial Star.

Parley's younger brother, Orson Pratt, was twenty-eight. One of the best-educated and literate members of the Quorum, Orson was especially interested in geography, grammar, mathematics, and surveying. Highly philosophical in nature, he argued points of doctrine with great precision. He and his brother wrote most of the literature used by the missionaries. Converted to the Church through the instrumentality of Parley, he also was one of the original Twelve.

John Taylor, age thirty-one, was a native of England, where he went to school and became a devoutly religious young man. When John was ten, his father moved the family to a farm he had inherited, and John quickly learned the rigors associated with plowing, sowing, and harvesting. Four years later he returned to Liverpool, where he became apprenticed to a cooper, but a year later, after the business failed, he went to Penrith, Cumberland, where he became skilled in woodturning. Religious in nature, John, like many other Englishmen of the time, began to question the forms and rationalism of the Church of England, and he finally joined the Methodists and became a lay preacher. In 1830 the Taylor family emigrated to Canada, where John continued to study and preach. He had long sensed that he had a special religious mission in life, but, he became convinced and confided to his wife, "this is not the work: it is something of more importance." [^6] Never satisfied that the fullness of the gospel was taught by any of the churches, he anxiously looked forward to a time when there would be a restoration of the ancient order of things, and he was thus well prepared to receive the message Parley P. Pratt brought to him in 1836. [^7] A year after he was baptized he visited Kirtland, only to find the Church in the midst of a severe period of trial and apostasy. Even Parley P. Pratt was wavering, and in that tense setting the recent convert bore a powerful testimony of the divine mission of Joseph Smith. John Taylor was ordained an apostle in December 1838.

Wilford Woodruff, born and reared in rural Connecticut, was thirty-two years old when he went to England. As a young man, he learned the miller's trade from his father and eventually ran his own mill. He joined the Church in 1833, became one of its most hard-working missionaries, and, in this capacity, experienced both success and great trials. Among those chosen to fill the places of fallen leaders, he was ordained an apostle at the early-morning meeting in Far West, Missouri, on April 26, 1839, when the apostles took their official leave for England. Perhaps more dedicated to effective record keeping than any other missionary, Wilford Woodruff kept a magnificent journal, which has become one of the richest sources of early LDS history, including the story of this mission.

The youngest apostle in England was George A. Smith, age twenty-two. Growing up on a farm in New York left him well acquainted with long hours and hard work. As a youth he grew rapidly, attaining his full growth several years earlier than most young men. That gave him the awkwardness of an overgrown boy, and he also seemed weak—partly, perhaps, because he was growing too fast. Other boys at school often made fun of him and bullied him, but that only gave him the resolve to whip every boy his age, which he eventually did, and the taunting stopped. In the letters he wrote in England, his scrawled handwriting (partly the result of poor eyesight), his deep humility, and his confidence in the ultimate success of the mission all suggest a type that has since become almost legendary in Mormon missionary stories: the overgrown, awkward farm boy, innocent in the ways of the world and not versed in fine language but possessing a spirit that could bring the more sophisticated to their knees. As a youth George A. was a seeker for religious truth, but he was skeptical of the claims of his cousin, Joseph Smith, and of the Book of Mormon, and he hoped to find his answers within the Congregational church to which he belonged. He found the Latter-day Saint message irresistible, however, and in the fall of 1832 he was baptized. It was not long before he was on his way to Kirtland, Ohio, with his family to gather with the Saints and, for the first time, to meet his relative, the Prophet Joseph. He soon proved himself an avid defender of the faith, and during the march of Zion's Camp he became Joseph Smith's armor bearer and bodyguard. He helped quarry and haul the stone for the Kirtland Temple, and he became an enthusiastic and effective missionary. In April 1839 he was ordained to the apostleship at the impressive meeting at Far West, the youngest person in the history of the Church to have become a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

Willard Richards, age thirty-five, was born and reared in Massachusetts. He was well educated and before his conversion practiced medicine in Boston. Deeply religious in nature, he became disillusioned with the churches of the day but continued to believe that one day he would find a church that taught the full truth. In 1835 he received a copy of the Book of Mormon and, after reading it twice in ten days, he was convinced of its authenticity. After an 1836 visit by his cousins, Brigham and Joseph Young, Willard quit his practice of medicine and traveled with his brother Levi seven hundred miles to Kirtland to learn more. He was baptized by Brigham at the end of the year. After filling a mission in the eastern states, he accompanied Elders Kimball and Hyde on their 1837 mission to England. When the two apostles left England in 1838, Willard remained behind as a counselor to Joseph Fielding in the British Mission presidency. Designated by revelation to fill one of the vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve, he was ordained after the apostles returned to England in 1840.

"OLD ENGLAND" AS THE APOSTLES FOUND IT

On September 5, 1840, Brigham Young and Willard Richards wrote from England a twelve-page report to the First Presidency of the Church. They described the economic and social conditions of the people among whom the Quorum of the Twelve were laboring, mostly the working classes in the urban and industrial centers of Britain. The empathy they developed for the common people, and the importance they placed on trying to understand the society in which they worked, is nowhere more powerfully illustrated than in their report. [^8]

Unlike American society, the apostles noted, English society was divided into many classes, but in general three stood out: "Lords, Tradesmen, & mechanics or laborers, or, in other words, the highest, middle, & lowest classes." They complained that because historians had traditionally written only of the upper classes, their works did nothing to help foreigners understand current conditions. They then gave their own brief account of what had happened recently, beginning with the countryside. "A few years since, and almost every family had their garden, their cow on the common & their pig in the Stye, which added greatly to the comforts of the household; but now we seldom find either Garden, Cow or Pig." As they passed through various country villages, they saw stone walls thrown down, hedges decaying, and people close to starvation. When they inquired why this was happening, they said:

We generally get but one answer. . . . "Our Lords & masters have become more avaricious, & are trying to get all they can themselves, & will hardly let the poor live. You see my landlord has made my garden into a meadow, & feeds his own cattle upon it; the Lord of the manner fenced in the common, so that I had no place to keep my cow & I was obliged to sell her; I killed my pig to prevent its starving."

The apostles described the multitude of beggars who filled city streets and reported that crime, drunkenness, gambling, and swearing wee all commonplace and that opportunities for education among the poor were shameful. They complained of child labor, low wages, factory lockouts, and miserable living conditions, and their pained but witty observations on the subject of taxes would match those of any modern tax critic. There were

taxes of every kind, we might say, for smoke must not go up the chimney in England without a tax, Light must not come in at the window without paying duties. . . . There are taxes for living & taxes for dying, insomuch that it is very difficult for the poor to get buried any how, & a man may emigrate to America & find a grave, for less money, than he can get a decent burial for in Old England. We scarce recollect an article without tax except cats, mice & fleas.

With such observations from Elders Young and Richards as background, it is important to look briefly at the political and economic setting in which the apostles found themselves, particularly in the large cities. What they discovered had much to do with the way they approached their work and is essential to understanding their mission as a whole.

The apostles could not help but compare what they found in England with what they were familiar with in America. Most of them were much in tune with the dizzying spate of political and social change that swept the United States during the Jacksonian Era (1828—48), which included increased political democracy, education, temperance, attacks on corruption in public institutions, especially government, and reform of some of the shocking conditions in America's prisons and insane asylums. In England, however, they encountered social and economic ills more severe than anything they had known in America. Not surprisingly, they identified closely with the people who were struggling to rise above those obstacles. In addition, their common interest with leaders of the temperance movement often paved the way for them to preach the message of the restored gospel.

The differences they observed in politics and social class were especially striking. It was an article of American faith that anyone could obtain wealth and that any free, white male could rise to the highest political office in the land. Moreover, all white males could vote, regardless of property-holding status. By contrast, political equality and suffrage lagged far behind in England, and political elitism and exclusion were still the general rule. Agitation for reform led to the passage of an important reform bill in 1832, but "pocket boroughs," politically controlled by powerful individuals or families, remained, and fewer than 850,000 of the six million men in the United Kingdom could vote. [^9] Disdainful of such political elitism, the apostles were generally in sympathy with those demanding reform.

The reigning monarch was Queen Victoria, who, at age eighteen, ascended the throne in 1837, the year the British Mission was established. She was head of state for sixty-four years. [^10] When Elders Woodruff, Kimball, and Smith were in London in 1840, they visited the queen's palaces and observed all the elegance and external trappings of the monarchy—the parks, the stables, the horses and horsemen, the footmen, and the regal processions whenever the queen went out in public. On September 17, 1840, George A. Smith commented on such things when he and Elder Kimball visited the queen's stables at Buckingham Palace. The beds the horses lay on, he wryly observed, "are better than those which half the people in London sleep upon." [^11]

There were other differences between Jacksonian America and early Victorian England. In America the population was mainly rural and agricultural, [^12] and there was seemingly unending opportunity for agricultural expansion. In Britain, although most of the population still lived outside the cities, there was a rapid movement away from rural agriculture toward urban industrial employment. [^13] This movement was directly related to the Industrial Revolution, which made England the leading industrial nation of the world. The textile industry became England's leading exporter, and the increasing demand for coal to feed the textile factories led to expansion of the coal industry and hastened the development of the railroad. The success of the railroad in reducing shipping costs created larger markets, encouraging the building of more and larger factories as well as more sophisticated machinery. These developments in turn tended to drive "cottage workers" and other artisans and small manufacturers out of business, thus contributing even more to the growth of an urban working class completely dependent upon factory owners for its livelihood. Not everyone found work, however, and unemployment in some cities was surprisingly high. [^14]

The Industrial Revolution also created a new class of well-to-do factory owners, increased overall British wealth, and somewhat improved real wages, [^15] though wealth increased disproportionately. It seemed to many observers that the upper classes simply ignored the pitiable conditions that became increasingly characteristic of the lives of the new working classes. [^16]

Life in the poorer sections and slums was anything but pleasant or healthful. There were few parks or open areas. Often families were crowded into pathetically small rooms in row houses with neither front nor back yards and only narrow alleys separating the rows, and it was not uncommon for a family of six or eight to occupy just one room. Sanitary facilities ranged from primitive to nonexistent. In parts of Manchester, for example, one outhouse might be shared by as many as two hundred people.

Manchester, the nation's greatest textile center, symbolized the problems of industrial England. [^17] In May 1840 Heber C. Kimball described for his wife what he saw there:

I was asking some of my brethren what made the peopl look so bad. They said becaus they was famished for the wont of food. Say they to me thare are hundreds that are starving for the wont [of] food and others things. I thought thare was misry a nough in Preston. It is nothing to compare with manchester. I asked them if they thought the brethren went hungry. Yes menny of them had not to eat. Times are so hard they cant guit [get] work. Tharefore they have to go hungry. Thare has been such a change here in two years as never was known by the oldest men in this Land. . . . You may know by this that it is hard times in old England. [^18]

With a population of 170,000 people, Manchester was the location of over one hundred textile factories as well as chemical works, dye works, breweries, sawmills, iron works, hat makers, and machine manufacturers. Nearly 70 percent of its workers were factory operatives. Located on the east bank of the River Irwell, and at that river's junction with the Medlock and the Irk, Manchester's factories lined a huge network of canals. The town also boasted six railroads. The canals and railroads fed cotton and coal into the city's ever-hungry industrial plants, which in turn spewed their refuse into the water and their smoke and other pollutants into the atmosphere. Waste from the mills, dye works, tanneries, and gasworks made the rivers and canals seem more like flowing cesspools. [^19] Streets were typically narrow, and workers' houses were similar to the drab, unsightly row houses or small court houses that characterized other industrial towns. With sewage running in the streets and seeping into cellars, and pigs and other animals running freely, millions of people were literally living in filth. [^20] It seems little wonder that in 1840 the death rate in Manchester was extraordinarily high. [^21]

In earlier years the merchants and mill owners of Manchester lived close to their warehouses or even in apartments above them, and Mosely Street was once lined with handsome brick houses owned by these entrepreneurs. By 1840, however, Mosely Street as well as other once-fine residential sections were gradually becoming crowded warehouse areas, as the "respectable inhabitants" moved out into the suburbs.

Migrants poured in more rapidly than the economy could absorb, leading to high unemployment and privation. During his first visit to Manchester Wilford Woodruff, noting these things with some alarm, recorded in his journal:

There is trouble this morning in this town of Manchester. About 3,000 souls is flung out of employ at the factories because of the pressure of times & the lowering of the wages & they are standing in every corner of the Streets in groups counciling what to do, & their are at the present time (I have been informed) thousands of Souls are almost in a State of uter starvation. [^22]

Nevertheless, life in Manchester was not totally bleak, for even amid its difficulties there was a vibrant, bustling activity that tended to make the place exciting. In addition, a number of charitable institutions helped relieve the misery. These included several hospitals, a royal infirmary, a royal lunatic asylum, a royal dispensary, a workhouse, a night asylum for the destitute, and a humane society. Child labor was commonplace, but several factories provided at least some education for young workers. There were also schools for the children of the poor, a college, a school of medicine and surgery, several libraries, and some literary and scientific institutions. Manchester also had its better sections of town, which contrasted greatly with the manufacturing district and the worst living areas. From afar, with partially-wooded, rolling countryside surrounding it, the setting seemed almost idyllic—except for the ugly black smoke that continually hung over the city itself. Despite the problems he observed, Wilford Woodruff once called Manchester "the metropolis of the manufacturing Districts in England" and "a beautiful borough." [^23]

The importance of all this to the work of the apostles in the British Isles is seen in the fact that, except for the hundreds who joined the Church in Herefordshire, most Latter-day Saint converts came from the laboring classes in the industrial areas. At the general conference held in Manchester in April 1840, for example, thirty-three congregations were represented, with a total of 1517 members; 953, or 60.7 percent, of the members were from congregations in manufacturing towns and cities. [^24] Manchester itself had the largest branch of the Church in England, which consisted of some 240 members. Most were young, generally in their twenties or early thirties, the majority were unmarried, and there were more women than men. Many of the women worked in the factories, and the branch probably represented a fair cross-section of the general laborers, artisans, and lowermiddle-class citizenry of the town. [^25] A similar pattern developed in London. During the first five years of missionary work, most male converts came from the working classes, though there were a few merchants and white collar workers, along with one professional, Dr. William Copeland. Among the female converts, 6.3 percent were white collar workers, 37.5 percent were "skilled" laborers, 25 percent were "semiskilled," and 31.3 percent were identified as household servants. [^26]

Another aspect of the British setting important to the history of the Latter-day Saints was the fact that poor economic conditions contributed to the emigration of thousands of British citizens to other parts—particularly to the United States and Canada. More than 55,000 left in 1830, and by the late 1840s and early 1850s the annual figure was sometimes as high as 250,000. Emigration developed into an industry, featuring emigration agents, propaganda offices, and even shipping rebates. By holding out hope for a better future elsewhere, it functioned as a kind of safety valve that siphoned off the worst effects of economic discontent. It was not uncommon to hear emigrants sing as they left:

Brave men are we and be it understood

We left our country for our country's good,

And none may doubt our emigration

Was of great value to the British nation. [^27]

All this helped create an atmosphere for success when the apostles began to organize Latter-day Saint emigration, for the spirit of emigration was already there and much of the necessary machinery was in place.

Besides the problems in the cities, there were problems in the countryside, one of which was created by the enclosure movement alluded to in the report of Elders Young and Richards. Less than a century earlier the countryside boasted many open fields where small landowners and tenant farmers were allowed to graze their own cows and, perhaps, raise small gardens. As farming technology improved, however, the larger landowners began to hedge the fields and prohibit their use by anyone but themselves, thus eliminating a source of livelihood for those who once used those lands. By 1830 this enclosure movement was virtually complete.

Although they spent most of their time in the cities, working among the laboring classes, the apostles also visited the great museums and historic sites of Britain and demonstrated a sense of deep appreciation for the artistic and historic values preserved there. In addition, they spent considerable time doing missionary work and ministering to the Saints in the countryside, particularly in the picturesque villages in the vicinity of Preston and in the delightful farming communities of Herefordshire.

It was a combination of all these experiences that helped form the apostles' multifaceted images of early Victorian England. At the same time, the problems they witnessed firsthand only persuaded them more fully that judgments were about to be poured out upon the nations of the world, and particularly upon England. "The Distress of the nations is at the door in fulfillment of the word of God," wrote Elder Woodruff as he observed the unemployment and starvation in Manchester. [^28] With that in mind, as well as with monumental faith and a selfless spirit of Christian service, the apostles committed themselves to bringing as many souls as possible into the restored kingdom of God.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 4:1-2, 4-5.
[^2] Direct action was suggested in the parable contained in Joseph Smith's revelations of December 16, 1833, and February 24, 1834. The parable told of a nobleman and his vineyard and was given "that you may know my will concerning the redemption of Zion." The Lord of the vineyard then instructed his servant (i.e., Joseph Smith) to gather the young and middle-aged "warriors" and redeem the land that had been captured by the intruding enemy. See D&C 101:43-62; 103:15-22. See discussion of Zion's Camp and its broader setting in Church history in Allen and Leonard, Story of the Latter-day Saints, 84-93, and note other references in the Bibliography. See particularly Crawley and Anderson, "Realities of Zion's Camp."
[^3] D&C 105:18-19; italics added.
[^4] Sermon of Brigham Young, October 23, 1853, in Journal of Discourses 2:10.
[^5] See Smith, History of the Church 2:186-87, and note. See also D&C 18:37, where, in a June 1829 revelation, two of the three witnesses, Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer, were specifically designated to choose the Twelve. At this meeting, however, the third witness, Martin Harris, also participated in the selection.
[^6] D&C 107:23-24. Clearly the revelation did not mean that the Twelve were "equal" with the Presidency in the sense that the Presidency could not act without them, for the Presidency presided over them. In the absence of the Presidency, however, particularly as they traveled in the world, they had authority to act in behalf of the Church. Later, as will be seen at the end of this book, the Prophet gave them additional "keys of the kingdom," and their right to succeed him in the presidency became more clear.
[^7] Thomas B. Marsh and David W. Patten to Parley P. Pratt, May 10, 1837, Joseph Smith Letterbook, Joseph Smith Collection.
[^8] Smith, History of the Church 2:489.
[^9] Kimball, "Synopsis," Deseret News, April 14, 1858.
[^10] Kimball, Journal, 10.
[^11] Sermon by Heber C. Kimball, November 22, 1857, Journal of Discourses 6:65. Kimball later said that Hyrum Smith, "seeing the condition of the Church . . . wept like a little child" when he talked about the mission. Hyrum continually blessed and encouraged Kimball, "pouring out his soul in prophecies upon my head" and promising Heber that "you shall prosper as not many have prospered" (Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 105).
[^12] Kimball, Autobiography, ms.
[^13] P. Pratt, Autobiography, 130-31.
[^14] John Taylor, another transplanted Englishman in Canada, had also written at the Fieldings' request to explain more. See Journal of Discourses 23:31.
[^15] Ann [Fielding] Matthews to "Dear Brother & Sisters," January 18, 1837. Joseph Fielding Collection. This includes a letter from the Reverend Mr. Timothy R. Matthews.
[^16] John Taylor, Fielding's friend and religious mentor, had earlier "prophesied with . . . great Power" that the Spirit of God would be upon Brother Fielding "and he should lift up his voice in his native land." Though timid and unsure of himself, Fielding "began to believe that the Lord had called me to go to England" (Fielding, Diary, 4).
[^17] Kimball, Diary, June 1837.
[^18] Richards, Diary, June 5-13, 1837. Before departing, Heber also gathered his family about him and with full emotions blessed each of them and commended them to God. See Kimball, Journal, pp. v-vi, and Kimball, "Synopsis."
[^19] Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, June 27, 1837, Heber C. Kimball Collection; S. Kimball, Heber C. Kimball, 42.
[^20] "We were not becalmed o[n]ce," Orson Hyde reported to his wife, Marinda, "neither had we any heavy storms." Orson Hyde to Marinda Hyde, July 18, 1837; Messenger and Advocate 3 (August 1837): 550-52.
[^21] Ibid.
[^22] Richards, Diary, July 19, 1837; Kimball, Journal, 15.
[^23] Kimball, President Heber C. Kimball's Journal, 16.
[^24] Kimball, Journal, 15.
[^25] Richards, Diary, July 19, 1837; Kimball, Diary, July 1837.
[^26] Hoskins, English Landscape, 228.
[^27] Hardwick, Borough of Preston, 436.
[^28] Kimball, Diary, July 22, 1837; Fielding, Diary, 6.
