David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

Chapter 2

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCTHE FIRST MISSION TO ENGLAND, 1837 THROUGH 1838

Now behold, a marvelous work is about to come forth among the children of men.

Therefore, O ye that embark in the service of God, see that ye serve him with all your heart, might, mind and strength, that ye may stand blameless before God at the last day. . . .

For behold the field is white already to harvest; and lo, he that thrusteth in his sickle with his might, the same layeth up in store that he perisheth not, but bringeth salvation to his soul;

And faith, hope, charity and love, with an eye single to the glory of God, qualify him for the work. [^1]

With these words, given by revelation even before The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized, Joseph Smith called his father to be one of the first missionaries of Mormonism. The charge applied equally to subsequent missionaries, including members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles who would receive the commission to carry the Latter-day Saint message far beyond the confines of North America.

EARLY HISTORY OF THE QUORUM OF THE TWELVE

The Church was organized in Fayette, New York, on April 6, 1830, but in early 1831 Joseph Smith and most of his followers left New York for the vicinity of Kirtland, Ohio, where hundreds of other new converts welcomed them. Joseph had sent missionaries to western Missouri where, by revelation, the spot for Zion, or the "New Jerusalem," was designated, and in 1831 many Latter-day Saints began to purchase land and flock to Jackson County.

In 1833, however, the Jackson County Saints were driven brutally from their homes. In February 1834, responding to revelation, Joseph Smith, in Ohio, began enlisting volunteers to go to Missouri and help their fellow Saints recover their lost property. [^2] By June some two hundred recruits, called Zion's Camp, arrived in Missouri, only to learn that the promised help from the governor would not be forthcoming. The Prophet then disbanded the camp with a promise, given through revelation, that the Lord had prepared a special "blessing and an endowment" for those who had faithfully followed his words: "I have heard their prayers, and will accept their offering; and it is expedient in me that they should be brought thus far for a trial of their faith." [^3] Indeed, the arduous journey was a trial. Some grumbled, seeing little purpose to it. Others saw the trek as an unparalleled opportunity to learn at the feet of a prophet. "What have you gained by this journey?" a skeptic asked Brigham Young. "Just what we went for," Brigham shot back. "I would not exchange the knowledge I have received this season for the whole of Geauga county." [^4]

On February 14, 1835, back in Ohio, the Prophet called together those who had shared the challenges of Zion's Camp and announced that the time had come for the organization of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and that its members would be chosen from among their number. After a blessing from the First Presidency, and following the intent of a revelation given six years earlier, the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon made the selection. [^5] Nine of those chosen were veterans of Zion's Camp, and it appeared that their success in meeting that "trial of faith" boded well for their ability to weather still greater trials in their positions as Church leaders.

The Quorum of the Twelve Apostles held a unique place in the developing Church organization. A revelation the month after their ordination described them as a quorum "equal in authority and power" to the Presidency of the Church, though they would not function in that capacity until later. They were also designated "traveling councilors" and "special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world." [^6] The restored gospel was to be taken to the world, and the Twelve, as their central assignment, held the keys to lead the way.

At first the Twelve were not prepared to fill these roles. Though they shared important experiences on a mission in the East in 1835 and, after some difficulties, pulled themselves together to receive vital blessings in the Kirtland Temple in 1836, the Quorum seldom functioned unitedly. Relatively young and inexperienced as leaders, some had difficulty reconciling differences between the revealed promise of prominent position and the reality of their role in Kirtland. Their president, Thomas B. Marsh, an officious leader overly concerned with prerogative, set a tone that made it difficult for the Twelve to grow easily into their new roles.

Even in 1835, the Twelve understood their responsibility to take the gospel overseas, and England was the logical place to begin. They might well have set sail as a quorum as early as 1837, but in Kirtland the year opened with increasing disagreement about the role of Joseph as prophet-leader. By late spring, with deepening economic problems and the collapse of the charterless Kirtland bank, disagreement turned to disaffection, division, and apostasy. Of the Twelve, Lyman Johnson and John Boynton came out in open rebellion, Luke Johnson and William McLellin became disaffected, and Orson Hyde and the Pratt brothers were temporarily estranged from the Prophet after publicly criticizing his leadership. When news of the problems reached the two senior apostles in Missouri, they hastened to Ohio, hoping to unite the Twelve behind the Prophet and prepare for their foreign mission. [^7] This they could not do, however, for by the time they had reached Kirtland, Joseph Smith, despite the crisis, had already dispatched the first missionaries to England.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC"FOR THE SALVATION OF THIS CHURCH": THE FIRST CALL TO ENGLAND

To all appearances, the spring of 1837 was hardly the time to send any of his leaders abroad, but, Joseph Smith declared, "God revealed to me that something new must be done for the salvation of His Church," [^8] and this "something" was the mission to England. The announcement surprised Heber Kimball. On June 4 the Prophet approached him in the Kirtland Temple, saying, "The Spirit of the Lord has whispered to me, 'let my servant Heber go to England and proclaim my gospel and open the door of salvation to that nation.'" [^9] The news astounded him. He had long thought of preaching in England, but now, with Kirtland in crisis? And alone, without others of his quorum?

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCHeber had expected to be part of such a mission, but he considered himself an unlikely candidate to lead out. With his lack of formal education and limited experience as a leader, the idea of leading a mission to sophisticated England "was almost more than I could bear up under." [^10] He asked the Prophet if Brigham Young could accompany him, but needing "Brother Brigham" in Kirtland, Joseph would not consider it. One disaffected colleague chided Heber for being such a fool as to listen "to Joseph Smith, the fallen Prophet" and leave for England at such a time. Another also thought it foolish but, seeing his determination, gave him a cloak to help him on his way. Brigham Young urged him to go, promising "in the name of Israel's God you shall be blessed." [^11] In preparation, Heber daily retreated to the attic story of the temple and poured out his soul.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCIn the light of this call, previous experiences and premonitions held new meaning. Three months earlier Heber had told Brigham Young and Parley Pratt that he felt "deeply impressed and exercised about a foreign mission," believing the time "nearer than many knew or thought." [^12] The year before Heber had blessed Parley, encouraging him to go to Canada on a mission despite his debts and a sick wife. His wife would be healed, Kimball promised, the Lord would supply him with means, and "from the things growing out of this mission, shall the fulness of the gospel spread into England." [^13]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCParley P. Pratt's mission to Canada resulted in the conversion of John Taylor, the Fielding family, and other recent English immigrants who, anxious that their relatives should hear the message of the Restoration, [^14] would provide the vital link across the Atlantic. Joseph Fielding, for example, had in England a brother who was a minister and two sisters married to ministers. He and his two sisters in Canada had already written these family members about the Restoration. One sister, Ann, cautiously responded that "my mind seemed alternately to rejoice and mourn," and even her more skeptical minister husband, Timothy Matthews, desired to hear more. [^15] In June 1837, Fielding was already in Kirtland, ready to accompany Heber to England, while three other Canadian converts, John Goodson, Isaac Russell, and John Snyder, were preparing to meet them in New York and sail with them. [^16]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCElder Kimball met with the First Presidency on June 11 to be set apart for his mission. As they laid their hands upon him, Orson Hyde entered the room, begged forgiveness, and asked if he could accompany Heber to England. After blessing Heber, the First Presidency then set apart Elder Hyde as well as Joseph Fielding, a priest. [^17]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCSome time earlier Heber's close friend Willard Richards had made a covenant with him that he would be among the first to carry the gospel abroad. Although Willard was on a mission in the East when Heber received his call, he suddenly felt "a strong desire to start for Kirtland immediately." He arrived a week later, in time to accompany Brigham Young to the home of Joseph Smith on June 11 while the Prophet was giving final instructions to the departing missionaries. As Willard listened to all that went on, he later wrote in his journal, "I felt my heart burn within me strongly desiring that I might be one" of them, but he sadly concluded that it would be impossible because of the heavy responsibilities he had for the "temporal affairs" of the Church in Kirtland. The next day Elder Kimball surprised him on the street: "Elder Richards I am now ready to fulfil my engagement with you. You recollect it dont you. I start for England Tomorrow & you May go with me." At first Willard saw no way to extricate himself from his Kirtland responsibilities or to raise the money to go. Nevertheless, at 5 o'clock that afternoon, after Brigham agreed to handle his business, Willard Richards was set apart for the mission under the hands of Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum Smith. The next day, June 13, he said farewell to his friends, and at nine that morning left Kirtland in the company of Elders Kimball, Hyde, and Fielding. [^18]

With the help of donations from faithful Saints, the four traveled by steamboat, canal boat, and rail, arriving in New York City June 22. It took them a week to gather enough money for their passage to England but finally, now seven strong with the addition of the Canadian contingent, the missionaries boarded the sailing ship Garrick June 29 and headed out to sea July 1. The missionaries provided their own provisions and slept on buffalo robes rather than beds, but their "second cabin" accommodations proved comfortable enough. [^19]

A new vessel of some nine hundred tons and the largest ship sailing to Liverpool, the Garrick was the pride of the famed E. K. Collins Line of fast Atlantic packets and the "noblest" ship Heber had ever seen. Passage was safe and rapid. [^20] Though it sometimes took five or six weeks for sailing ships—thirty-one days even for fast packets,—spurred on by a substantial, wager with the rival Black Ball Line's South America and blessed by good weather, the Garrick crossed the Atlantic in eighteen days. Both ships had every inch of canvas spread as the Garrick reached Liverpool only minutes ahead of its rival. "Truly a more splendid sight is not often seen," reported Hyde. [^21] Unwilling to wait for a steamer to shuttle passengers ashore, the eager missionaries found space on a small boat that came alongside. Still several feet from the pier, Elder Kimball leaped out and waded ashore, followed immediately by Elders Hyde, Richards, and Goodson. The first Mormon missionaries had arrived in England. [^22]

Liverpool was England's chief port and also the port of embarkation through which practically every emigrant from England passed. Situated on the east bank of the Mersey River, it was the exporting harbor for all the rest of Lancashire, the center of British manufacturing. It had a population of approximately 223,000 people. On the east side, wide streets and squares boasted elegant houses, often built of brick with slate roofs; on the west side, near the docks and warehouses, stood poorer houses on narrow, busy streets. The city was well paved and lighted, and it had several libraries and news rooms as well as the Royal Institution, which housed a library, various lecture and committee rooms, a museum, a schoolroom, and a scientific laboratory. The art gallery, the zoological garden, the botanical garden, and several other public institutions provided educational and cultural activities.

The apostles' first impressions of their new mission field were not reassuring. Immediately they noticed the striking distinction between rich and poor. "Having no means, poor and penniless," Elder Kimball later wrote, "we wandered in the streets of that great city, where wealth and luxury, penury and want abound. I there met the rich attired in the most costly dresses, and the next moment was saluted with the cries of the poor, without covering sufficient to screne them from the weather; such a distinction I never saw before." [^23] His early fears about proclaiming the gospel in a land "so much extolled for religion" were not dispelled. "I was led to cry mightily to the Lord for wisdom and for that comfort and support which I so much needed." [^24]

The missionaries arranged lodging with a kind widow, offered a prayer of thanksgiving, and settled in. It took three days for the Custom House, swamped with business, to clear their trunks, and this time was spent mostly in prayer and council. [^25] As soon as possible, without even preaching in Liverpool, they left for Preston, where Joseph Fielding's family appeared to offer the best opening.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC"TRUTH WILL PREVAIL": THE ENGLISH FOUNDATION IN PRESTON

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCIn Preston the apostles experienced their first real glimpse of the new industrial civilization that made England so profoundly different from anything they had seen before. Their initial impressions were a mixture of marvel at the ingeniousness of the factory system and shock at the social conditions prevalent among the common people. The city had grown unusually rapidly: by 1837 it was burgeoning at a rate of approximately eighteen thousand newcomers annually, producing crowded conditions described by one historian as not bad enough to produce rebellion but not good enough to promote happiness. [^26] By the 1840s Preston had no fewer than thirty-eight cotton factories, which employed sixteen thousand workers.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCPreston, nevertheless, was attractively situated on the banks of the River Ribble, and from a distance it had a pleasant appearance. Within the city there were lovely homes, handsome public buildings, and elegant churches. Avenham Walk, which included a stretch along the banks of the Ribble, provided a relaxing atmosphere for an enjoyable Sunday stroll. As one city historian wrote in 1857: "Few towns, manufacturing or otherwise, of the size of Preston, possess so agreeable a promenade, within five minutes' walk from the business centre of the borough." [^27]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCThe missionaries arrived in Preston on Saturday, July 22, a "public day" or holiday before a Monday parliamentary election. Streets were thronged with factory hands released from work, bands played, and various groups marched, political banners flying. After unloading their trunks from the coach, the elders looked up and saw flying before them a large flag bearing the gilded motto: "Truth Will Prevail." With one voice they responded, "Amen, and amen." This they took as a sign from heaven of good things to come. [^28]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCWhile crossing the ocean Joseph Fielding had prayed fervently that the Lord would prepare the hearts of his brother and other relatives. While the other missionaries found lodging for themselves, Joseph looked up his brother, the Reverend James Fielding, who immediately made him welcome, invited him to stay at his house, and sent him back to the others with the happy news that he would like to see them that night. Accordingly, Elders Kimball, Hyde, and Goodson met with the Fielding brothers and a Reverend Watson, a brother-in-law. Everyone seemed friendly, and James even offered the elders his pulpit on Sunday afternoon. Joseph promised his brother that they would not abuse the privilege and that they would be cautious "so that he might judge of it before he repeated that favour." Earlier James had shared with his congregation the letters from Canada, prompting some to petition the Lord to send them his authorized servants. "Thus you see," Joseph wrote to his sister, "they prayed us here, no wonder that we should come." All this had created interest not just among Fielding's flock but "through the town, so that when the news was circulated that the Elders were come many were ready to hear." [^29]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCThe Reverend Fielding's Sunday morning announcement that one of the Latter-day Saint elders would preach in the afternoon packed Vauxhall Chapel. Heber Kimball experienced "peculier feelings" as he began his first sermon in England. The people were excited "to hear the strang[e] thing" from America, and he did not disappoint them. Declaring that an angel had committed the Everlasting Gospel to man, he called on them to repent, urged them to prepare for Christ's coming, and explained how they might "Enter I[n]to his Rest." Elder Hyde then bore testimony. The response was astounding, according to Elder Kimball's diary, and the people began to praise God for sending his servants to them. At Reverend Fielding's invitation the missionaries held another meeting that evening, where Elder Goodson preached and Joseph Fielding bore his testimony. [^30]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCMany people received their message favorably, and the missionaries were delighted when James Fielding let it be known that his chapel would be open to them again Wednesday night. Joseph was concerned, however, because his brother "did not seem to receive our Testimony himself." Indeed, before Wednesday, as James began to see how the message had taken hold of his people, "he began to wish he had not been so liberal." [^31]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCWednesday evening the chapel again was full. Elder Hyde preached and, Heber noted, the "power of god rested down on the congr[eg]ation and manny pricked to the hart." [^32] Too many for the Reverend Mr. Fielding. "The people began to believe more & more," Joseph wrote to his sister Mary, which "made Bro James begin to fear" and "to object." The baptism the following Sunday of nine people, including George D. Watt, one of James Fielding's "leading men," and others of his congregation, "had a great effect on his mind, and he began to oppose." [^33]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCWhile those who left James Fielding had no particular quarrel with him, observed Joseph, "the way seemd so plain that they could not but see it and . . . could not rest without doing it." [^34] By the time the Reverend Fielding closed his chapel to the elders, seeds had been planted not only in Fielding's congregation but throughout Preston. Private homes were opened, and the missionaries began to hold two or three meetings each night. Conversions continued.

Even while the elders felt blessed by the power of God, they were also keenly aware of the powers of darkness arrayed against them. One encounter came the night before their first baptisms. The two apostles occupied a tiny room on the top floor of a Saint Wilfred Street lodging house, and Elders Goodson, Russell, Snyder, and Richards occupied the floor below. The missionaries knew that Isaac Russell had long been troubled by what he thought were devils, though Heber Kimball, at least, did not fully believe all Russell had said about his difficulties. [^35] Tormented again during the early morning of Sunday, July 30, Russell went upstairs and awakened Elders Kimball and Hyde, asking for a blessing. Heber stood up and Orson sat on the bed while the two apostles laid their hands on Russell, prayed, and rebuked the spirits. As Heber later wrote:

While thus engaged, I was struck with great force by some invisible power and fell senseless on the floor as if I had been shot, and the first thing that I recollected was, that I was supported by Brothers Hyde and Russell, who were beseeching a throne of grace in my behalf. They then laid me on the bed, but my agony was so great that I could not endure, and I was obliged to get out, and fell on my knees and began to pray. I then sat on the bed and could distinctly see the evil spirits, who foamed and gnashed their teeth upon us. We gazed upon them about an hour and a half, and I shall never forget the horror and malignity depicted on the countenances of these foul spirits, and any attempt to paint the scene which then presented itself, or portray the malice and enmity depicted in their countenances would be vain.

I perspired exceedingly, and my clothes were as wet as if I had been taken out of the river. I felt exquisite pain, and was in the greatest distress for some time. However, I learned by it the power of the adversary, his enmity against the servants of God and got some understanding of the invisible world. [^36]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCAny doubts Heber had about the reality of Isaac Russell's confrontations with the powers of darkness were erased. Joseph Fielding, who also had doubted some of Russell's claims, was not present, but after he heard of the experience, he summarized in his diary the lessons of the night:

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCUpon the whole we got considerable Instruction from the Maneuvers of the Devil. The Spirit of the Devil produces Confusion, Disorder and Misery; the Spirit of God produces Calmness, Order and Happiness. If we never before knew that there were evil Spirits, we did now. We also knew how [to] feel for dear Bro. Russel. [^37]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCIt was only natural for Heber to conclude in his diary that "it seames that the devels an determined to distroy us and prevent the truth from being declared in England." When Joseph Smith later heard of it he rejoiced for, he said, "I then knew that the work of God had taken root in that land." [^38]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCExhausted from the experience of the night, the elders nevertheless met at the River Ribble early Sunday morning, just a week after their initial meeting with Reverend Fielding's congregation, to perform the first baptisms in Great Britain. Thousands of people were out taking their usual Sunday morning strolls in Avenham Park, along the banks of the river, and when they learned that the elders from America were going to hold a baptismal service, many stopped in curiosity.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCAmong the nine ready for baptism that day were two especially eager candidates who raced to the river to see who could be first. The winner was George D. Watt. [^39] The last of the nine was Elizabeth Ann Walmsley, a frail consumptive not expected to live, who was carried to the water by her husband. Elder Kimball had promised her that if she would repent and be baptized, she would be healed. She began to improve immediately, later emigrated to Utah, and died among the Saints at the age of eighty-two. [^40] Another of those baptized that day was Ann Dawson, who invited the missionaries to move to her boarding house, on Pole Street. There they found not only warm hospitality but also a room where they could begin to hold Church services.

The seven missionaries were delighted with their success and tireless in their continuing efforts. On Sunday afternoon Elder Russell stood on a pedestal in the marketplace preaching to a large crowd, several of whom were "pricked to the heart." The next day they decided to extend their reach by dividing up, and on Tuesday, August 1, Russell and Snyder left for Alston and Richards and Goodson for Bedford. Kimball, Hyde, and Fielding continued in Preston and its surrounding villages. [^41]

The missionaries experienced almost every reaction possible to their message: from immediate acceptance and joy to bitter confrontation. Perhaps the most difficult experience to bear, however, was the divisive effect it sometimes had on families, and there was no more touching example of this division than in the family of Joseph Fielding. Although he continued to live at his brother's home, James became increasingly bitter against the missionaries. On the morning of August 5, at the breakfast table, James sharply attacked the Book of Mormon. Joseph arose from the table, took the book in his hand, and declared as forcefully as he could that it was the word of God and that James must repent. He then left the house, seldom to return. [^42]

The effect on Joseph himself was devastating. His sister Ann, married to the Reverend Timothy Matthews of Bedford, later wrote him a sorrowful letter explaining her understanding that he had pronounced an anathema on James and confirming that she and Timothy had rejected the message of the missionaries. "I am now as a Stranger in my Native land, and almost to my Father's house," he wrote in a touching, bittersweet reflection. "I am something like Joseph when sold by his Brethren. The Devil would suggest perhaps I am wrong, but it cannot be. I have too much Evidence of the Truth to give way to such a thought. May the Lord help me to stand fast in the Liberty of the Gospel and my Calling." James later told Joseph that coming from America to oppose him within his own congregation had made religion "stink in the Noses of the sensible and intelligent," to which Joseph could only reply that he was content to suffer in the cause. Nevertheless, he admitted to himself, "I must not wonder that he is not friendly with me." [^43]

EXPANSION: PRESTON AND BEYOND

In Bedford, as in Preston, Elders Richards and Goodson began their missionary work with members of Joseph Fielding's family, who had learned of their message by letter from Canada in 1836. Ann Matthews, though cautious lest she be deluded, at first affirmed that she was looking for "a revival of primitive Power." The Reverend Timothy Matthews received the elders cordially, apparently believed what they had to say, and admonished his followers also to believe. Before long, however, he was vacillating: though convinced by the elders of the necessity of baptism by immersion, he sought out another minister to baptize him and his congregation. This strange conduct caused some of his parishioners to leave him. Many were baptized by the Latter-day Saint elders, including his "best member" and, eventually, most of his church. [^44] Thus it was that Reverend Matthews became the second of three ministers instrumental in opening important fields of labor for the first Latter-day Saint missionaries to England and whose congregation helped provide a nucleus of Latter-day Saint converts in their communities.

In Preston, meanwhile, success continued: Fielding baptized eight on Monday, July 31, Kimball baptized three on Thursday, one on Friday, and another on Saturday, and Hyde baptized six on Sunday. [^45]

The Friday baptism was a young woman, the daughter of a minister from the nearby village of Walkerfold. After meeting Elder Kimball and discussing the principles of the gospel with him at length, she twice went to hear him preach, believed his message, and asked to be baptized. Kimball immediately took her to the River Ribble and fulfilled her request. In addition, since she was leaving for her home village, he decided to confirm her a member of the Church there and then. This was the first confirmation in England. [^46] It was also Heber's introduction to Jennetta Richards, the woman who one year later married bachelor Willard Richards. [^47] It was through Jennetta, moreover, that Elder Kimball met the third minister (and congregation) of importance to the success of the mission.

The following Sunday evening, August 6, the elders gathered the new converts together at Ann Dawson's home to confirm them members of the Church. After administering the sacrament, the missionaries explained in detail the ordinance of laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost and then confirmed twenty-six people. This was the first official meeting of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints anywhere outside North America. "The spirit of the Lord rested down upon us in a powerful manner," Kimball wrote of this historic occasion, "which caused us to rejoice excedingly; thus the work of the Lord spread and prevailed." [^48]

Jennetta Richards, meanwhile, returned to Walkerfold, while Heber and his companions prayed earnestly that her father, the Reverend John Richards, would not only accept her decision to be baptized but also open his chapel to them. Though apprehensive that her father might find fault with her, Jennetta prayed for the same thing, and the following week Heber was delighted to receive a letter from the Reverend Richards requesting his presence and informing him that arrangements had been made for him to preach three times the following Sunday. [^49]

Heber gladly walked the fifteen miles to Walkerfold, where Richards received him cordially. There he preached in the reverend's chapel, not just on Sunday but on Monday and Wednesday as well. Doors were opened to private homes, and in the next two weeks he preached thirteen times, baptized eight people, and found "menny more that believed on my words." [^50] This was the first of many villages near Preston that Kimball worked in during his eight months in Lancashire.

Heber's first trip away from Preston was cut short by a vision in which he was told that he must return to Preston immediately. [^51] When he arrived there, he found that Orson Hyde and Joseph Fielding were preaching and baptizing every day, and that there was considerable business for him to attend to.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCConverts poured in from James Fielding's congregation, and eventually most of his church joined with the Saints. The Reverend Fielding, on the other hand, rued the day that he had invited the elders to preach in his chapel, for he now saw it as the "ruin" of his flock. "Kimball bored the holes, Goodson drove the nails, and Hyde clinched them," [^52] Fielding concluded, speaking of the first three sermons in his chapel. Little wonder that he and other ministers were soon accusing the missionaries of sheep stealing, and led out in organizing an intense opposition. "With regard to your robbing me of my flock," James wrote to his brother a year later, "I do not believe at all that you were sent of God to rend my little church to pieces. Were I to speak as 'plain' as you do I should boldly declare that it was not God but Satan as an angel of light sent you here." [^53]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCHeber and Orson continued to work together in and around Preston until, early in September, the Spirit spoke to Heber again, telling him to visit the little branch he had left in Walkerfold. [^54] Like Jennetta, most of those who accepted Kimball's message in Walkerfold were young people, and when he returned he found several of them persecuted by their parents, some even driven from their homes. His presence seemed to revive their spirits, and his heart went out to them for what they were being called upon to endure.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCJennetta's father, meanwhile, fearing the loss of members as well as salary, closed his chapel to the American missionary, but Heber quickly found new places to preach. For the time being John Richards remained friendly and frequently listened to the apostle preach, but he, like James Fielding, ultimately complained that Kimball had "ruined his church, and had taken away all his young members." [^55] Heber worked for several days, adding still more people to the Church, but he was also frustrated at times by the fact that most of those he met simply refused to listen. "O the darkness that covers the Earth," he lamented, for the priests had lulled the people to sleep, and it was like breaking through bars of iron to get to their hearts. [^56]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCThe work of the Lord in Preston was "going on in power," Kimball wrote with satisfaction in his diary, [^57] and by mid-September some ninety Latter-day Saints lived in that area, including a small branch of nineteen in Bedford. While Orson Hyde usually stayed close to Preston, Heber often went farther out into the countryside, visiting such places as Ribchester, Longridge, and Walkerfold, and then back to Preston for several days before returning again to the villages. "The Standard is planted in the Land and they can't Root it up for it has become so powerfull, and it is spreding," he wrote to his wife. [^58] His early doubts and fears about his own ability had fled, for "perfect love casts out all fear, I feel firm in the Lord, I never enjoyed myself better than I do now." [^59]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCWhen Ann Dawson's home became too small for the meetings of the Saints in Preston, they began to hold early-morning Sabbath meetings in the open air. Growing numbers and the approach of cold weather, however, made this increasingly impractical. In September the elders arranged to use the large and centrally located "Cock Pit," which could hold nearly eight hundred people. Originally an arena for cock fighting, its use for that grisly sport ended in 1830, and it was fitted out as a meeting hall for temperance gatherings and preaching. The seating was still arranged in the round, looking down on a bare earth center, but the elders were delighted with their new, gas-lighted facilities.

Nevertheless, there were some inconveniences. Located in the center of town, the hall stood near a church, perhaps the oldest in Lancashire, which boasted twelve bells. Rung before every service, the bells made so much noise that if the Saints were meeting next door, they had to pause until the ringing stopped. More serious, however, was the disturbance of a meeting by some Methodist ministers, but after the missionaries obtained preaching licenses, two local constables volunteered to protect them from any further such incidents. [^60]

On October 8, Elders Kimball and Hyde held a special conference in Preston. Nearly one hundred fifty Saints attended. Several men were ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood, and the Saints were divided into five branches. From then on, each branch held its own prayer meetings each Thursday, and on Sundays all would assemble in the Cock Pit for the sacrament and for preaching. It was a "refreshing time," Joseph Fielding noted in his diary, and the two apostles seemed "to act in perfect unison and as led by the Spirit of God." [^61]

Not in perfect unison, however, were Elders Goodson and Snyder. Each for his own reasons decided to return to North America, much against the wishes of the apostles, leaving the mission severely shorthanded. Kimball remained optimistic, however, even concluding that the Lord was "giving us more power than we had before." [^62]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCBy October a number of Preston ministers were concerned enough about inroads made by the American missionaries that they united to oppose them. Far from letting this discourage them, however, the apostles welcomed it, confident that God would turn it to good. As Orson Hyde noted earlier in a letter to his wife: though they had not spoken a "hard word against the priests" or against the sects, "yet they say all manner of evil against us." The people, in fact, "have discovered this difference between us . . . and it gives us unbounded influence." Indeed, as Heber Kimball observed, the priests helped fill the Cock Pit weekly by warning the people that it was "sure de[a]th" for them to hear the American elders preach, "for they will surely be caut in the Snare." [^63] The result, according to Elder Kimball, was that they baptized fifty people in eight days. On Sunday, October 15, they administered the sacrament to about two hundred people (apparently including some who were not yet Church members) and confirmed thirty-five. [^64]

In mid October the elders went before the Court of Quarter Sessions in Preston and obtained licenses to preach. At first they had not thought it necessary, but after consulting with friends, they realized that it was at least wisdom, for it was actually a requirement under the law. One of these friends, an attorney, was the son of the Reverend John Richards of Walkerfold, and it was he who helped them get their licenses. Heber later discovered, to his surprise, that there were few licensed preachers in Preston, a fact that he turned to his advantage. "When they abused me I told them if they did not cease their abuse I would see the laws put in force . . . and this generally silenced them." [^65]

The Church grew remarkably during the nine months the two apostles remained in England. Interest became so great in Preston that they could hardly fill one in ten of the calls that came to them. It was in the villages, however, that Elder Kimball found his greatest success. In many cases he went to particular "country towns" because someone had sent for him. In one instance he arrived to find a large congregation waiting. He preached and then went two miles farther to preach again. At the next stop, even before the people gathered, five presented themselves for baptism. He preached three sermons and baptized ten people, including two Methodist preachers. At Walkerfold he baptized another nine. In another town he baptized four members of the Thomas Benson family who, as soon as he entered the house, declared that he was a servant of God and announced they were ready for baptism. He also felt constrained to visit another home where he found that the family had been praying for him to come. He stayed with them half a day and baptized six. The first time he preached south of Preston he baptized twelve. And so it continued. [^66] During one four-week period Heber baptized more than a hundred people and was instrumental in building up churches in Eccleston, Wrightington, Askin, Exton, Daubers Lane, Chorley, Whittle, and Leyland Moss. "More loving and affectionate saints I never saw before," he wrote of the new converts. They were "patterns of humility." [^67]

The hearts of the first missionaries went out to the early converts in the Preston area. "They are nearly all poor," Joseph Fielding noted. "If others come in it appears the poor will be first. They have the least to sacrifice." Orson Hyde observed that they were "mostly manufacturers and some other mechanics," men and women of "open hearts and strong faith," but also "extremely poor, most of them not having a change of clothes decent to be baptized in." "It is as much as they can do to live," Heber C. Kimball wrote to his wife. "There is not more than one or two that could lodge us over night if they should try; and in fact, there are some that have not a bed to sleep on themselves." What they had, however, they shared willingly: "The brethren will frequently divide the last loaf with us, and will do all in their power for us," testified Elder Hyde. [^68]

At the end of October Joseph Fielding was ordained an elder, and the next month he accompanied Elder Kimball on a trip northeast of Preston. They preached and baptized in Ribchester, Thomly, Stoney Gate Lane, Waddington, Downham, and at the large market town of Clitheroe. In Clitheroe Kimball baptized a preacher and six members of the Methodist church following his first sermon. [^69]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCThe educated and polished Orson Hyde was especially impressive in the city. According to Joseph Fielding, he was "very faithful and diligent" and had "great power in his preaching." On Sunday, December 3, 1837, Fielding heard him preach "with extraordinary Power. I think I never heard anything to equal it. He was filled with the Spirit, as I never before saw any man." [^70] Elder Hyde had earlier written to his wife of his surprise at his own effectiveness. "I never before preached with that power and Spirit that I have since I come to this place," he confided to her. [^71] His writing was also important. His powerful A Prophetic Warning, reprinted as a broadside entitled A Timely Warning to the People of England, became the missionaries' basic tract.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCWhat seemed to set Heber C. Kimball apart was his spiritual power. Joseph Fielding called him "mighty in Tongues and in Prophesying" and "mighty in Faith and also in Preaching," while Orson Hyde wrote to his wife simply that "the Lord is with him." [^72] Elder Kimball himself noted the spiritual promptings that frequently guided his travels. "The Lord . . . warns me of almost every thing before hand," he wrote to Vilate in September, and in November he told her that God was "teaching me the things of the kingdom both in dreams and in vissions and so it is with Brother Hide." [^73] The combination of these gifts with his common, homespun approach proved especially effective. His sermons were very short, but he later recalled, "the Holy Ghost spake through me, and it was like melted lead to those who received." [^74] Brigham Young once described the warm, comfortable way Kimball put people at ease so he could teach them. "Come, my friend, sit down," he would say; "do not be in a hurry." Then he preached the Gospel in "a plain, familiar manner" that made his hearers believe what he said. Some stayed with him all day; some were converted after one sermon. He gently led them: "You see how plain the Gospel is? Come along now," and at the right moment he put his arm around them saying, "Come, let us go down to the water." [^75]

Elder Kimball's personality and approach exactly suited the common folk with whom he worked. He was easily accepted by workman and villager. "The Lord appointed me to that work because I was willing to be the simplest," he concluded later. [^76] Among Heber's converts were William and Ruth Clayton, a young couple in Penwortham, just across the River Ribble from Preston, where William was a factory clerk. Ruth believed first, but Heber's effect on William was more dramatic. When he was finally converted on October 21, he allowed Heber to take him out to the river and baptize him at 11 o'clock that night. [^77] William took to the gospel wholeheartedly and soon became one of the most successful missionaries in England. Ruth's relatives, the Moons, were also part of Heber's harvest, and through them more than thirty family members and friends were baptized. [^78] In 1840 her cousin, John Moon, led the first organized group of Saints to leave England for the United States.

WINTER MONTHS. THE CHILL OF THE AIR AND THE WARMTH OF THE SPIRIT

Christmas Day 1837 was celebrated in a special way by the British Saints. Early that morning, five people were baptized; then, at 10 A.M., Elders Kimball, Hyde, and Fielding conducted the first general conference of the Church in England. More than three hundred Saints, including those from Preston and representatives from branches throughout Lancashire, gathered in the Cock Pit. The elders blessed a hundred children, confirmed fourteen new members of the Church, ordained ten men to the office of priest, and seven, including William Clayton, to the office of teacher. It was also at that conference that the guide to health known as the "Word of Wisdom" was first publicly taught in England. [^79]

Immediately after the conference Elders Kimball and Hyde visited Longton, a few miles southwest of Preston and close to the sea. Though Hyde had preached there earlier, no one had been baptized. This time ten people asked for baptism. The weather was so cold, however, that the River Ribble was frozen over, so they all went down to the seashore and the new converts were baptized in the frigid ocean. [^80]

The two apostles planned to leave for America in the early spring, which made the next few months especially pivotal. In addition to continuing their missionary work, they had to organize and strengthen existing churches in preparation for their departure. Shortly after the conference Heber took Joseph Fielding as a companion on his village circuit to "regulate the churches," [^81] probably with an eye toward his remaining behind to preside over the mission.

They went north, up the Ribble Valley, where they preached regularly, blessed children, baptized and confirmed new converts, and instructed the Saints in their duties. Perhaps no visit pleased Elder Kimball more than their unusually long stay with the little branch at Walkerfold. [^82] Members there "have gone through much Persecution, but remain very firm," noted Fielding. Their meeting did not break up until two in the morning, and at that point the missionaries realized they had no place to spend the rest of the night. Evidently the families and friends of the young converts simply were not willing to entertain the American intruders. Their only option was to cross the frozen River Hodder into Yorkshire where, they believed, they could stay at the home of James Smithies, a member. The two missionaries were nevertheless overwhelmed with gratitude, and they stopped long enough on the ice for Heber to pray for the Saints at Walkerfold and to "give glory to God for we felt as though all heaven was pleas[ed] with what we had don that night." When they finally arrived at the Smithies home they had to rouse the family, but they were welcomed in and finally got to bed around four that morning. [^83]

Being continually on the move and having little sleep tested their endurance to the utmost, but the opportunities seemed almost endless. "We could not fill the calls we had from day to day," Kimball later recalled, "for the work kept spreading." From every direction around Preston came invitations and urgent pleas for their presence. [^84]

Many people thought the cold of winter would stop the missionaries, but they could not have been more wrong. [^85] "We would baptize as many as fifty in Preston in a week, exclusive of those in the country," Kimball later recalled, and with respect to the country he wrote in his diary that he had not preached once in a place but what he had baptized people and built up a church. [^86]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCFew experiences, however, surpassed those of Elder Kimball in March in the villages of Downham and Chatburn, some sixteen miles upriver from Preston. When earlier he had expressed his desire to visit them, some of the brethren from nearby branches tried to dissuade him. For thirty years, he was told, various ministers had attempted without success to establish churches in those towns, but they were wicked places and the people were hardened against the gospel. Nevertheless, Kimball said, he wanted to go, for "it was my business, 'to call not the righteous, but sinners to repentance.'" [^87]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCAccompanied by Joseph Fielding, Heber went first to Downham [^88] where, in a scene just the opposite of what he had been led to expect, he preached in a large barn and then baptized several people. As he prepared to leave Downham for an evening appointment in Clitheroe, a very pressing invitation reached him from Chatburn. So urgent was the plea that he finally sent Fielding to Clitheroe alone and walked to Chatburn. Someone had already obtained a large barn for him to preach in and there, surrounded by villagers, he proceeded to speak about the condition of the world, the blessings of embracing the truth, and the resurrection. "My remarks were accompanied by the spirit of the Lord and were received with joy," he noted. The so-called "obdurate" were "melted down into tenderness and love, and such a feeling was produced as I never saw before." As he concluded he felt someone pulling at his coat, and as he turned he heard Mrs. Elizabeth Partington earnestly asking, "'Please, sir, will you baptize me,' 'And me,' 'And me,' exclaimed more than a dozen voices." It took him until after midnight to baptize and confirm some twenty-five new converts. [^89]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC"These towns seemed to be affected from one end to the other," Kimball later recalled. "Parents called their children together, spoke to them of the subjects which I had preached, and warned them against swearing and all other evil practice. . . . Such a scene I presume was never witnessed in this place before—the hearts of the people appeared to be broken." As Kimball and Fielding began to leave the two towns, doors were crowded and villagers lined the streets, weeping as they said their farewells. The whole experience was an overwhelming spiritual highlight for the apostle from America, and it moved him to tears. His feelings can best be described in his own words:

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCWhile contemplating this scene we were induced to take off our hats, for we felt as if the place was holy ground—the Spirit of the Lord rested down upon us, and I was constrained to bless that whole region of country, we were followed by a great number, a considerable distance from the villages who could hardly seperate themselves from us. My heart was like unto theirs, and I thought my head was a fountain of tears, for I wept for several miles after I bid them adieu. [^90]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCFielding, too, was moved. "There is a wonderful Work in Downham and Chatburn," he wrote. "It appears as though the whole of the Inhabitants were turning to the Lord from 10 to 90 years old. . . . They are full of Love." [^91]

Earliest Missionary EffortsHCTHE APOSTLES SAY GOOD-BYE

With only a short time remaining before their return to America, word spread that the apostles would be leaving, and great numbers flocked to hear them. They also went from house to house in Preston, calling upon people to repent and baptizing as many as twenty in a day. The faith of the Saints was rewarded when the apostles were able to heal many of their sick. [^92]

In the villages, too, the Spirit continued strong. In a Baptist church in Barnaldwick, Elders Kimball and Hyde preached to several hundred people, and their message touched the hearts not only of the congregation but also of the minister. Even after the meeting finally broke up, conversations continued until nearly dawn. They could scarcely tear themselves away, and when they did so, the villagers "wept like little children." [^93]

On April 2 Elders Kimball and Fielding walked to Chatburn and Downham for a last farewell. As soon as they were seen in Chatburn, the people left their work and flocked to the streets to greet them. Children followed them from place to place, singing. "Some of them said that if they could but touch us they seem better. They evidently believe that there is Virtue in Brother Kimball's Cloake," wrote Fielding. "Such gratitude, I never witnessed before," concluded Heber. [^94] Just before leaving England, he sent a warm letter to the Saints of these two remarkable villages, giving them tender pastoral advice and expressing his heartfelt gratitude for their many kindnesses. [^95]

On Sunday, April 8, 1838, more than six hundred Saints from Preston and the surrounding villages assembled in the Cock Pit at 9 in the morning for a mission conference that lasted nearly eight hours. Perhaps the most important business was the selection of Joseph Fielding to be the mission president and Willard Richards and William Clayton to be his counselors. [^96] Joseph Fielding shuddered at the thought of having the full responsibility laid on his shoulders. "This work seems far too great for me," he wrote with trepidation. "My heart is ready to sink at the Thought, and nothing but a full belief that it is the Will of God could ever have induced me to take it upon me, but I know that my Strength is in the Lord, and I intend to be faithful, if I die under it." [^97]

Much more business was conducted at the conference:forty confirmations, more than one hundred children blessed, eight new elders ordained and others given the lesser priesthood, and hours of singing and instruction. [^98] Immediately after the public meeting, all the officers of the Church (nearly eighty had now been ordained) met in a private home to be instructed. Toward the end of the meeting President Joseph Fielding, on behalf of all the English Saints, thanked Elders Kimball and Hyde for their sacrifice in leaving their families, for their faithfulness and diligence in preaching the gospel, and for their kindness and instruction. Elder Kimball, in turn, on behalf of the Church in America, extended the hand of fellowship to the presidency in England "in token of Union or oneness." He then blessed each member of the new presidency. This "delightful yet an affecting time" ended some time after midnight. [^99]

As a final gesture of their love for the apostles, the English Saints raised enough money to pay their passage home. They donated bedding and provisions for the voyage back to America and gave them other presents. [^100] Elders Kimball, Hyde, and Russell left Preston on Tuesday, April 10, with the expectation of sailing the following Monday on the Garrick, the same ship that had brought them from America the year before. The press of well-wishers, meanwhile, prevented the apostles from giving more private instruction to Joseph Fielding and Willard Richards, but on Thursday these two joined them in Liverpool. By then word had spread that contrary winds were delaying the sailing, and other Saints from Preston soon arrived for the final farewell. The delay also prevented Elders Fielding and Richards from seeing their brethren sail for, after absorbing whatever additional counsel they could obtain and feeling the heavy weight of their new responsibilities, they departed to begin their ceaseless rounds of visiting members and branches. [^101]

When the Garrick finally sailed on April 20, it was into a storm that damaged the ship and left everyone ill. Even so, the well-built vessel made up lost time, and conveyed the returning missionaries to New York City, where they landed on May 12.

The first apostles in England left more than fifteen hundred members in Preston and the surrounding villages [^102] and a strong presidency to direct the work. But all this was only prelude, so far as the apostles were concerned, for they assured the Saints that they fully expected to return, this time with their entire quorum. What they did not anticipate was the months of hardship they would face before any of the Twelve would again set foot on English soil.

Footnotes

The name of Jennetta Richards's village is spelled both "Walker Fold" and "Walkerfold" in the early sources. For consistency, we have standardized the spelling as "Walkerfold."

---
Notas:
[^1] See D&C 118.
[^2] Smith, "History," April 17, 1839; see also Young, "History of Brigham Young," Deseret News, February 17, 1858, p. 394.
[^3] Young, "History," ms. For a reminiscent account of this meeting, see discourse by Elder Wilford Woodruff, December 12, 1869, Journal of Discourses 13:159.
[^4] Young, "History," ms.
[^5] Smith, History of the Church 3:306-7.
[^6] Turley, "Mission Journal," 5, 12-13.
[^7] Smith, "History."
[^8] See Woodruff, Journal, June 27, 1839, 1:341; compare with D&C 129:4-8. Even though Joseph Smith gave this information privately to the apostles in 1839, it was not recorded as a revelation until 1843. In the Church Archives is a manuscript by Willard Richards called "Pocket Companion" that contains many of these teachings. Richards may well have created this from notes shared with him by the apostles when they arrived in 1840.
[^9] Woodruff, Journal, July 2, 1839, 1:342-44.
[^10] Smith, History of the Church 3:383-84 (Appendix B, Document 2).
[^11] Woodruff, Journal, August 7, 1839, 1:349.
[^12] See Allen and Alexander, Manchester Mormons, and Allen, Trials of Discipleship, for details of this remarkable story.
[^13] The account here draws slightly on Noall, Intimate Disciple. This work is highly fictionalized, but its historical chronology and basic factual material seem reasonably accurate. See also Evans, Century of "Mormonism," 71-72.
[^14] Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 143.
[^15] Richards, Diary, March 22, 1838.
[^16] Ibid., June 29, 1838. He also wrote a prayer: "My heavenly father sanction it in heaven & bless our union to the fulfillment of the design for which marriage was instituted for Christs sake Amen & amen."
[^17] Fielding, Diary, 27.
[^18] Jennetta Richards to Willard Richards, July 22-27, 1838, typescript, Willard Richards Collection.
[^19] Jennetta Richards to Willard Richards, August 11, 1838, Willard Richards Collection.
[^20] Jennetta Richards to Willard Richards, September 7, 1838, Willard Richards Collection.
[^21] See Richards, Diary (expanded), August 6, 1838,
[^22] Richards, Diary, September 7, 1838.
[^23] Fielding, Diary, 27. Webster continued to bring ridiculous charges against the Church leaders, including a completely irrational accusation that Richards had helped Jane Dawson kill her daughter, Alice. On October 3 Willard and Jane were even hauled into court on that charge but were quickly released. Webster, meanwhile, left the Church and was officially excommunicated on September 30. Fielding, Diary, 18; Richards, Diary, September 30, and October 3, 1838.
[^24] Noall, Intimate Disciple, 230; Richards, Diary, September 24, 1838.
[^25] Fielding, Diary, 30.
[^26] Ibid., 29.
[^27] Ibid., 33.
[^28] Ibid., 34.
[^29] Ibid., 38-39, 47; Richards, Diary, July 17, December 17 and 28, 1839. Richards added "& no murmuring thought has risen in my bosom." Compare the expanded version, where he said, "And no murmuring thought has since been felt in my bosom."
[^30] Willard Richards to Joseph Fielding and William Clayton, Alston, May 7, 1839, Willard Richards Collection.
[^31] Heber C. Kimball to Fielding, Richards, and Clayton, Commerce, Illinois, July 25, 1839, Joseph Fielding Collection.
[^32] 32. Kimball, Diary, July 1837.
[^33] 33. Joseph Fielding to Mary Fielding, October 2, 1837; Fielding, Diary, 6.
[^34] 34. Joseph Fielding to Mary Fielding, October 2, 1837. See also Kimball, Diary, July 1837.
[^35] 35. Fielding, Diary, 7.
[^36] 36. Kimball, President Heber C. Kimball's Journal, 20. For a later recollection of the event by Orson Hyde, see Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 131. Whitney's account also quotes a few additional details from Heber, but we have been unable to find the original material apparently used by Whitney. See also Kimball, Journal, 19; Kimball, Diary, July 1837.
[^37] 37. Fielding, Diary, 8. Fielding's description of this event varies in some detail from Kimball's description. Fielding also records two experiences, one early Sunday morning and the other on Sunday night. Kimball, on the other hand, here mentions only one experience.
[^38] 38. Kimball, Diary, July-August 1837; Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 131-32.
[^39] 39. See Jones, "Who Came in Second?" Watt later became a clerk and scribe for both Joseph Smith and Brigham Young.
[^40] 40. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 135-36.
[^41] 41. Kimball, "Synopsis," Deseret News, April 21, 1858, 37.
[^42] 42. Fielding, Diary, 8. James Fielding's bitterness was fed by the anti-Mormon writings and sermons of Richard Livesey, a Methodist Episcopal minister from Massachusetts. James Fielding to Joseph Fielding, August 15, 1838, Fielding Collection.
[^43] 43. Fielding, Diary, 10.
[^44] 44. See Joseph Fielding to Mary Fielding, October 2, 1837, and Kimball, Journal,24.
[^45] 45. Kimball, Diary.
[^46] 46. The exact date of this baptism and confirmation is difficult to determine, for the chronology in both Kimball's and Fielding's diary is difficult to follow. In addition, Kimball, especially, often made mistakes in his diary. It appears from the Fielding diary, however, that Kimball first met Jennetta on Tuesday, August 1. If this is accurate, then her baptism took place on Friday, August 4. All the others who had been baptized were confirmed the following Sunday.
[^47] 47. Kimball, Diary; Kimball, "Synopsis," Deseret News, April 21, 1858; and Kimball, Journal, 21-22.
[^48] 48. Kimball, Journal, 21. See also Kimball, Diary, August 1837. The 1840 dictated account says "between forty and fifty," but Kimball did not have his diary with him when he dictated this account. Evidently he remembered that there had been "many" baptized and misremembered the exact number.
[^49] 49. Kimball, Diary, August 1837.
[^50] 50. Ibid.
[^51] 51. Ibid; Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, September 2, 1837, Heber C. Kimball Collection: "The Lord warned me in a vision to go back to Preston for I was wanted there; the Lord is with me, and warns me of almost every thing before hand."
[^52] 52. Kimball, Journal, 18. On September 11 Fielding noted in his diary that "almost all my Bro. James" people were baptized.
[^53] 53. James Fielding to Joseph Fielding, August 27, 1838, Joseph Fielding Collection.
[^54] 54. As in so many instances, the chronology here is confusing when Kimball's diary is compared with his 1840 published journal. As nearly as we can, however, we reconstruct the chronology from the diary adding to it the insights provided by the expanded, though chronologically questionable, 1840 journal.
[^55] 55. Kimball, Journal, 52. See also p. 23.
[^56] 56. Kimball, Diary, August-September 1837.
[^57] 57. Kimball, Diary, September 1837; see Fielding, Diary, 10, for numbers in Preston.
[^58] 58. Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, November 12, 1837, Heber C. Kimball Collection.
[^59] 59. Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, September 2, 1837, Elders' Journal 1 (October 1837): 4-7.
[^60] 60. Kimball, Journal, 26.
[^61] 61. Fielding, Diary, 12. See also Kimball, Diary, October 1837.
[^62] 62. Kimball, Diary, October 1837. See also Fielding's comments. "I think they should not have gone and Elders Kimball and Hyde believe so too. They left on the 5th. Bro. G. [Goodson] has some old Enemies in London, but he wanted to go home. Bro. Snyder has some business at home but not pressing. He had never spoken much in public, had not much liberty, and was discouraged. May the Lord yet bless them and make them useful in his Church" (Fielding, Diary, 12).
[^63] 63. Orson Hyde to Marinda Hyde, September 14, 1837, Elders' Journal 1 (November 1837): 19-22 (Appendix B, Document 1); Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, November 12, 1837, Heber C. Kimball Collection.
[^64] 64. Kimball, Diary, October 1837.
[^65] 65. Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 160-61.
[^66] 66. Kimball, Diary, October-December 1837.
[^67] 67. Kimball, Journal, 28.
[^68] 68. Fielding, Diary, 10; Orson Hyde to Marina Hyde, September 14, 1837, Elder's Journal 1 (November 1837): 19-21 (Appendix B, Document 1); and Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, September 2, 1837, Elder's Journal 1 (October 1837): 4-7.
[^69] 69. Kimball, Journal, 28.
[^70] 70. Fielding, Diary, September-December 7, 1837, 10, 14.
[^71] 71. Orson Hyde to Marinda Hyde, September 14, 1837 (Appendix B, Document 1).
[^72] 72. Fielding, Diary, 10 and 13; Orson Hyde to Marinda Hyde, September 14, 1837 (Appendix B, Document 1).
[^73] 73. Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, September 2, 1837; and Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, November 12, 1837, Kimball Collection. Twenty-five years later he wrote his sons who were in England as missionaries, recalling that "I was humble, knew nothing else but to trust in God alone . . . and his angels truly went with me" (Heber C. Kimball to David and Charles Kimball, July 27, 1863, Millennial Star 25 [October 17, 1863]: 669). Looking back in later years for the key, Heber thought in terms of the scriptural image of the weak made strong in the Lord. See sermon by Heber C. Kimball, November 22, 1857, Journal of Discourses 6:65. He also wrote to his sons that "I could not discover in all of this that it was me—I know that it was an invisible power and that it was of God" (Heber C. Kimball to David and Charles Kimball, November 10, 1863, Millennial Star 26 [February 6, 1864]: 91-92).
[^74] 74. Heber C. Kimball to David and Charles Kimball, July 27, 1863, Millennial Star 25 (October 17, 1863): 669.
[^75] 75. Remarks by Brigham Young, April 6, 1857; Journal of Discourses 4:305.
[^76] 76. Discourse by Heber C. Kimball, March 19, 1854, Journal of Discourses 3:113.
[^77] 77. Allen, Trials of Discipleship, 17.
[^78] 78. Moss, "Gospel Restored," 87.
[^79] 79. Kimball, Diary, Christmas 1837; Fielding, Diary, 15.
[^80] 80. Kimball, Diary; Kimball, Journal, 30. In the latter source, Kimball says they baptized fifteen, but since that account is based partly on reminiscence, we rely on the diary.
[^81] 81. Kimball, Diary, January 1838.
[^82] 82. Kimball's diary indicates that this meeting took place at Chaigley, while Fielding indicates that it was at Walkerfold. The two villages are so close together, however, that it is apparent that the Saints in both were all part of the same group.
[^83] 83. Fielding, Diary, January 23, 1838, 16; Kimball, Diary, January 1838.
[^84] 84. Kimball, Journal, 36.
[^85] 85. Fielding, Diary, February 14, 1838, 17.
[^86] 86. Kimball, Journal, 30; Kimball, Diary, 13.
[^87] 87. Kimball, Journal, 33.
[^88] 88. The exact chronology of these events, as well as others in February and March, is impossible to obtain from the sources extant. Some writers indicate that Kimball visited Chatburn first, then Downham. Our interpretation of the Fielding diary, coupled with some things written by Kimball, suggests that it was the other way around. Fielding's references to these events, however, are separated, sketchy, and chronologically confusing, while Kimball's references are separated, sometimes detailed, but still chronologically confusing.
[^89] 89. Kimball, Journal, 33-34.
[^90] 90. Kimball, Journal, 34.
[^91] 91. Fielding, Diary, 18.
[^92] 92. Kimball, Journal, 35-36.
[^93] 93. Kimball, Journal, 32-33.
[^94] 94. Fielding, Diary, 18; Kimball, Journal, 49.
[^95] 95. Heber C. Kimball to the Church of Latter-day Saints in Chatburn and Downham, April 15, 1838, Millennial Star 1 (August 1840): 103-4. In the Star the letter is dated 1840, but that is obviously an error.
[^96] 96. Kimball, Journal, 37-38; Fielding, Diary, 19. The apostles ordained each member of the new presidency to the office of high priest.
[^97] 97. Fielding, Diary, 19.
[^98] 98. Kimball, Journal, 37-38.
[^99] 99. Fielding, Diary, 19.
[^100] 100. Kimball, Journal, 40-41.
[^101] 101. Kimball, Journal, 40-41; Fielding, Diary, 19-20. See also Richards, Diary, 10-12 April 1838.
[^102] 102. Kimball, Journal, 41. Fielding noted in his diary (April 10, p. 19) that there were nearly one thousand members organized into twenty branches. No doubt hundreds of others baptized during the hurried mission were not so organized. Total baptisms in England during this period numbered between fifteen hundred and two thousand, but all did not remain in the Church. The numbers of nearly thirteen hundred members and twenty-six branches have also been used. See Evans, Century of "Mormonism." 244. Among the number was Alexander Neibaur, the first Jewish Latter-day Saint. See S. Kimball, Heber C. Kimball, 51.
