David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

Chapter 3

HCBETWEEN THE MISSIONS: PREPARATION AND TRIALS

When Heber C. Kimball arrived in Kirtland on May 22, 1838, he found that dissension and persecution had forced Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, and many others to flee Ohio and join the Saints in Missouri. Soon he, too, was on the way, arriving at Far West on July 25. Just two weeks earlier the Prophet had received the revelation that would send him back to England. [^1] "Let the Twelve be organized," it said, "and let men be appointed to supply the place of those who are fallen." The new appointees were specifically named: John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff, and Willard Richards. The revelation assured the apostles that their families would be cared for in their absence and even specified the exact date and place of their official leave-taking: "And next spring let them depart to go over the great waters, and there promulgate my gospel . . . and bear record of my name. Let them take leave of my saints in the city of Far West, on the twenty-sixth day of April next, on the building-spot of my house, saith the Lord."

Mission of the TwelveHCThis revelation could hardly have come at a less opportune time. Apostasy continued to plague the Church, and even the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles was still riddled with dissent. Four apostles had apostatized in the aftermath of the Kirtland difficulties, and by the end of the year Quorum president Thomas B. Marsh turned against the Church, and apostle David W. Pattern was killed as a result of renewed mob activity. Also in 1838, Missouri, Governor Lilburn W. Boggs issued his infamous "extermination order," brutalities such as the Haun's Mill massacre were perpetrated against the Saints, Joseph Smith along with some members of the Twelve and other Church leaders were jailed, and the Missouri Saints began another tragic exodus, this time to Illinois.

Mission of the TwelveHCIt would seem that Joseph Smith was singularly optimistic in sending the Quorum of the Twelve away in such trying times, for despite its lack of unity there were still within its ranks men who could be most helpful in the giant task of building a new gathering place for the Saints. Nevertheless, the commandment had been given. Perhaps the future well-being of the Church was directly related to the strengthening of the Twelve, both as individuals and as a quorum, that would result from this mission.

Mission of the TwelveHCAfter the departure of Thomas B. Marsh and the death of David W. Pattern, Brigham Young became the senior member of the Twelve. With the entire First Presidency imprisoned in Liberty, Missouri, it fell upon him and a few of his quorum to direct the Saints in their exodus from the state. On December 19 they ordained John Taylor and John E. Page to the apostleship. At his urging the Saints entered into a covenant that, regardless of means, none would be left behind, and because of his firm and energetic direction during this time of crisis, Elder Young began to emerge in the eyes of the Saints as a strong and effective leader.

Mission of the TwelveHCThe unfortunate image some still had of the Twelve, however, was emphasized on April 17, 1839, at a conference in Quincy, Illinois, when Brigham presented the name of George A. Smith, whom Joseph Smith had named from Liberty jail, to be sustained as one of the Twelve. The vote was in the affirmative, but not without a remark from Reynolds Cahoon that "there had been so much apostacy among the Twelve that he hoped the Saints would exercise faith to keep this one from flying [off] the track." [^2]

Mission of the TwelveHCIn Quincy, the Twelve held a council with other Church officials about returning to Missouri to fulfill the commandment to leave on their mission from Far West. Some present, believing that the Lord would take the will for the deed, did not expect the Twelve really to carry it through. "But I felt differently," Brigham later reported, "& so did the Twelve who were with me." [^3] He knew that anti-Mormons had boasted that the revelation could not be fulfilled, thus proving, they declared, that Joseph Smith was not a prophet. Brigham was determined never to let that happen. After each of the Twelve expressed his own feelings, Brigham announced that "the Lord God had spoke & it was our business to obey, & the Lord would take care of us." All present agreed to go and fulfill the revelation. [^4] The next day Elders Young, Pratt, Taylor, Woodruff, and Smith, accompanied by Alpheus Cutler, set out for Missouri. En route they encountered John E. Page, just leaving Missouri, and turned him around. Heber C. Kimball, directing the last few of the faithful still in Missouri, awaited them near Far West.

Mission of the TwelveHCBecause some of the Twelve were wanted men in Missouri—men whose enemies had sworn to kill them—some Saints found it hard to believe that the Lord would require them to return to the spot from which they had recently been driven just to fulfill the letter of the revelation. Theodore Turley, who was on the Far West committee on removal, thought otherwise. On April 5 eight men, including John Whitmer and Captain Bogart, who had led the mob forces in the Battle of Crooked River, confronted Turley in his office. Bogart taunted him with a copy of the revelation, reminding him that the Twelve were "scattered all over creation." They dare not come, he chided, for if they did they would be murdered, and since the revelation could not be fulfilled, Turley must give up his faith. "In the name of God that revelation will be fulfilled," Turley responded with the unwavering conviction that later resulted in his selection as one of the missionaries to accompany the Twelve to England. [^5]

Despite the dangers, some time before dawn on the morning of April 26, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John E. Page, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, and eighteen other Church members met at the designated spot. During a short service, Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith were ordained to the apostleship, other ordinations took place, several dissidents were excommunicated from the Church, the apostles each prayed, a song was sung, and a cornerstone was symbolically placed for the temple. Those present then quickly took leave of the place and made their way to Commerce, Illinois. On the way, however, Theodore Turley could not resist a quick stop at the home of Isaac Russell, whom he awakened and presented with the astonishing news that the Twelve had just left the temple site. Russell had baptized Turley in 1836, but he had returned early from the 1837 mission to England, and he was among those who had just been excommunicated during the meeting of the Twelve. [^6]

Although that was their official leave-taking, it was several months before any of the apostles were actually on their way to England. Like the other Saints so recently driven from Missouri, they too had to find places to settle their families either in western Illinois or across the Mississippi in Iowa Territory. With food and other provisions in short supply and poor living conditions in the swampy, malaria-infested river bottoms, suffering and death were commonplace among the Saints. Several miraculous healings rewarded their faith, but continuing hardships complicated preparations for the forthcoming mission.

Late in July young George A. Smith left his parents, brother, and sister at Green Plains, Illinois, and went to Commerce, expecting soon to accompany the rest of the Twelve to England. Instead, he wrote in his journal, "I found great numbers of the brethren lying sick. Joseph told me and Don Carlos [Joseph's brother] to begin at his house and lay hands on every sick person, rebuke their diseases and command them in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to arise and walk and not leave a single person on their bed." They spent all of July 23 administering to the sick, "a great number of whom were instantly healed, and gave glory to God." Over the next several weeks George A. attended council meetings with Joseph, Hyrum, and the Twelve, and spent his nights "watching with the sick, and going from cabin to cabin, and camp to camp, frequently watching with half a dozen families at once." [^7]

While disease devastated the weakened Saints, the apostles were urgently concerned with leaving their families prepared for a long separation. Buildings of any sort were scarce around the swampy lowlands of Commerce, and the Saints were living in tents, wagons, and other temporary structures. Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and Orson Pratt all moved their families into the old log barracks of an abandoned military post, Fort Des Moines, in Montrose, Iowa. Heber C. Kimball moved his wife and four children from temporary locations into a fourteen-by sixteen-foot log cabin he had built in Commerce. Parley P. Pratt had joined with Elder Kimball in purchasing some wooded land, and he began clearing it and building a cabin. He soon sold his holdings, however, and took his family with him when he left for his mission. His brother Orson, meanwhile, moved his wife and two children into one of the shanties on the Kimball property. George A. Smith took his father and brother John to Commerce, where they created a house for the family by moving a twelve-foot-square log stable to a better location, putting a new shake roof on it, and then moving in, even though it still had no chinking between the logs. Almost immediately the three of them became ill, and they remained so until George started for England.

Providing for their families was vital, but the spiritual preparation the apostles received before they left was even more critical to the success of their mission. The hectic summer of 1839 thus also became a period of intensive training for the Twelve. Joseph Smith met with them frequently and instructed them in spiritual affairs, doctrine, and practical leadership. The apostles, filled with anticipation of the coming mission, drank eagerly from the fountain of knowledge and inspiration that came from the Prophet in these private sessions. Foreshadowing some of their trying experiences with the powers of evil, for example, he gave them a "key" by which they could detect the devil if he were to appear as a man. This same instruction was later placed in the Doctrine and Covenants as a revelation to the entire Church. [^8]

The afternoon of Tuesday, July 2, was especially memorable. The apostles and others preparing to accompany them to England met with the First Presidency at the temporary quarters of Brigham Young in Iowa. The Presidency gave special blessings to the two newest apostles, Elders Woodruff and Smith, to Theodore Turley, and to the wives of some of the missionaries. Hyrum Smith arose and gave them what Wilford Woodruff described as "some precious things of the kingdom . . . yea precious principles that ought to be engraven upon our hearts & practiced in our lives." [^9] He talked to the apostles of prudence, love, and humility in exercising their priesthood authority, and of guarding against "self-sufficiency, self-righteousness, and self-importance." He urged the apostles to "be humble, and not be exalted, and beware of pride, and not seek to excel one above another, but act for each other's good, and pray for one another, and honor our brother or make honorable mention of his name, and not backbite and devour our brother." Remembering those who had fallen, he called for the Twelve to fortify themselves against a repetition of such apostasy. Would the new members "exalt themselves so high that they will soon tumble over and have a great fall . . . as several of the quorum have done," he wondered aloud, or "will they learn wisdom and be wise? O God! give them wisdom, and keep them humble, I pray." [^10]

On Sunday, July 7, several members of the Twelve met with the First Presidency and others in Commerce and gave their farewell addresses. According to Wilford Woodruff, President Rigdon's address "was of such a nature in appealing to our affections, in parting with our wives, and children, & the peculiarity of our mission, the perils we might meet with, & the blessings that we should receive, &c. that tears was brought from many eyes." "May the Lord enable us the Twelve ever to be meek & humble to lie passive in his hands as the clay is in the hands of the potter," he reflected in his diary that night.

In addition to receiving such vital counsel from the First Presidency, the apostles studied the scriptures and frequently met together to discuss their mission and its significance. This along with their preparations for leaving took them through the spring and early summer of 1839. The spirit of the times could have been expressed no more tenderly than in the way Wilford Woodruff did it in his journal the day before he left:

[August 7, 1839] I spent the day in preparing to leave home to go on my long mission to England. I make a sacrafice of my all for Christ sake to do his work. It is no small trial of faith to leave my family & my all & to start on a mission of four thousand miles to preach the gospel to the nations of the earth & that to without money purs or scrip with the power of desease resting upon me even a shock of the fever & ague every other day but yet I do this freely for Christ Sake trusting in him for the recompence of reward. May the Lord give me grace according [to] my day & a safe return to my family which favor I ask in the name of JESUS CHRIST. [^11]

WILLARD RICHARDS AND THE INTERREGNUM

In England, meanwhile, the new mission presidency succeeded not only in preserving the fledgling flock but also in strengthening it. Though disappointed that he and his colleagues could not maintain the momentum established by Elders Kimball and Hyde, Joseph Fielding could take satisfaction that they continued to attract new people to replace those who drifted away or were cut off. In addition, Willard Richards went through a trial by fire that, in its own way, tested his mettle as much as Zion's Camp had tested that of his future colleagues in the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles.

Joseph Fielding and Willard Richards traveled widely, doing missionary work, setting in order the affairs of the various branches, and working with local missionaries. William Clayton spent most of his time in Manchester, where he built up a branch of the church numbering about 240 people. [^12] All three suffered financial hardships, and Richards was troubled with illness. On the other hand, the two unmarried members of the presidency found new happiness, for each married a young woman he met while doing missionary work: Joseph Fielding married Hannah Greenwood of Preston, and Willard Richards married Jennetta Richards of Walkerfold.

The courtship and marriage of Willard and Jennetta Richards is of special interest here, not just because Willard became one of the Twelve but also because of what it reveals about the problems of the Saints during the interregnum. [^13] On Friday, August 4, 1837, the day he baptized Jennetta, Heber C. Kimball wrote to Willard, who was working in Bedford, saying, "I baptized your wife today." [^14] Willard was no doubt bemused, but the letter also aroused a compelling interest in meeting this young woman who already shared his surname.

Willard did not return to Preston until the following March, and a few days later he set out with Joseph Fielding to visit nearby towns. On March 22 he was in the home of Brother James Mercer of Thornley when Jennetta walked into the room. Apparently Heber had continued to press the idea of marriage, and perhaps both Willard and Jennetta were well prepared for their immediate mutual attraction. Accompanied by one of the Saints, they set out to attend a meeting. Somewhere along the way Willard remarked that "Richards" was a good name. "I never want to change it," he continued. "Do you?" "No, I do not," Jennetta replied without hesitation, and Willard noted in his journal that "I think she never will." [^15]

The courtship began immediately. Jennetta went to Preston and, for a few days at least, stayed in the home of Ann Dawson, though during the next several months she intermittently spent time in Preston, at home in Walkerfold, or with friends in nearby towns. The visits from Willard were also intermittent, since his pastoral duties continued, but on June 29 he gave her a ring. "We acknowledged each other as husband and wife," he wrote in his journal that night, "& sealed it with our mutual kisses." [^16]

Willard and Jennetta's happiness was tempered, however, by their certainty that her parents would never approve, and they even kept the engagement secret until after she came of age on her twenty-first birthday, a little less than two months later. [^17] Her life, meanwhile, was filled with frustration, for she knew her parents sensed her attraction to the American missionary. She had planned to leave home, but her mother was ill and, despite her parents' opposition to Willard and the Church, she could not tear herself away. She wrote on July 22, "I should like you my dearest love to let me know your mind upon my leaving home at the time appointed for I cannot think of leaving my poor mother in the delicate state of health she is in now with the little one without giving her time to get a servant." Besides, she said, her leaving might give her parents reason to suspect something, "which may cause both you my dearest love and I some trouble." In addition, she felt obligated to take care of other family responsibilities, including cleaning her father's chapel, and also to do considerable sewing for herself.

Jennetta received nothing but criticism from her parents about the Church and Willard. "What a thing it [is] to be married and be poor," her mother chided her, to which Jennetta defiantly replied that Willard might be poor in worldly property but he was rich in grace. Her mother even threatened her with what amounted to exile, saying that if she went to Preston "I shall never look upon you again." "Well," replied the distraught Jennetta, "if Father and Mother forsake a child for serving the Lord as well as she is able with all her might the Lord will not forsake her but take her in." Finally, on the night of Friday, July 27, her mother told her she must leave home—the tension between them had become too great. [^18]

Jennetta did not leave, however, and two weeks later she wrote to Willard again, describing the same kinds of problems along with a new objection. Willard was about to die of consumption, her mother told her, and was therefore just trying to cheat her. Jennetta did not believe it, but she knew of his recent illness, and she pleaded with him to carry an umbrella and take care of himself. "I hope my Dear Love you will be more careful of getting wet if not for your own sake do it because it is the earnest request of your Jennetta who loves you most dearly." [^19]

Several days later Jennetta went to Preston, and on August 21 she turned twenty-one. The two spent her birthday together, and on September 1 they officially registered their intent to marry. After that Jennetta went to Kirkham, where she stayed with her brother. In the meantime, she heard still another accusation against Willard. He was deceiving her, said her mother, for he was actually a widower and had said as much to people in England. Someone even suggested that he had a wife and family in America. Both stories were false, and Jennetta wrote to Willard: "I can as soon believe that the gospel you preach is false . . . for if you will deceive in one thing you will in another." Her brother, meantime, still wanted to investigate, and asked her to wait until he had done so. "He loves me as a Sister and wishes to be satisfied," she told Willard, but "I told him I was satisfied." If her brother found the story to be false he said he would withdraw his objections to their marriage. [^20]

Jennetta's romance was also troubled by the opposition of some of the Saints, who were not happy with the prospective union between the American missionary, whom they were supporting, and the daughter of the relatively well-off minister from Walkerfold. [^21] In September, for example, Jennetta had to return to Kirkham because no one in Preston was willing to let her stay with them, even though Willard was ill and needed nursing. [^22] In another instance, Thomas Webster and other dissidents charged that Willard had said that he would not marry until the coming of Christ. When, somehow, the dissidents heard he was about to wed, they began to say that a "prophecy" had failed. Willard was both startled and chagrined at the accusation. That was not what he said, he told Joseph Fielding, but if he said anything like it at all, it was after he became engaged and people had begun to press him about the rumors. Wishing to keep the engagement secret, he felt that his private affairs were no one else's business and said whatever he said only to "put them off." [^23]

Despite the problems, at 8 A.M. on September 24, 1838, only six months after their first meeting, Willard, age thirty-four, and Jennetta, age twenty-one, were married in the registrar's office in Preston. Joseph Fielding and his wife, Hannah, who had also received petty criticism for their recent marriage, signed the certificate as witnesses. "Most truly do I praise my Heavenly Father for his great kindness in providing me a partner according to his promise," the grateful Willard wrote that night. "I receive her from the Lord & hold her at his disposal. I pray my heavenly father he will bless us forever." [^24]

Willard and Jennetta had a six-day honeymoon near the sea and then returned to the rigors of missionary life. Jane Dawson allowed them to board at her house, along with the Fieldings, and from there the two mission leaders continued their work. Both Willard and Jennetta were frequently ill, however, and when both couples moved out of the Dawson home on December 20 they had to carry Jennetta in a chair. "I cannot but wonder at the Dealing of God with them," Joseph Fielding wrote. "Brother R[ichards] has been surprisingly patient in his Afflictions." [^25]

Life did not become easier, for Willard and Jennetta continued to struggle with ill health and with criticism from Preston Saints. For one thing, Jennetta still wore fine clothes that, to some Saints, seemed inconsistent with the life-style expected of her husband, who was being supported by the Church and had only the most austere wardrobe. In mid December Joseph Fielding observed that Willard had "gone in his old Coat as long as he is fit to be seen." [^26] In March Jennetta bought a muff to guard her frail health against the cold weather, but even that antagonized some. As Joseph Fielding observed, nothing she wore was purchased by other Church members, but that hardly satisfied the critics. They also censured her for not attending meetings often enough and even criticized Willard for staying home too much to take care of her when she was ailing.

Joseph Fielding admired Willard and continued to support him fully, believing that the Lord had a special reason for keeping him in Preston, but he also observed privately that perhaps Elder Richards was himself a bit too harsh in his judgment of others. [^27] The criticism and petty bickering within the Church disturbed Joseph greatly. "The Saints would not do in Zion," he opined to himself one day in March, "yet I have told them the Lord will perhaps keep them here some time to try them, as they wouldn't agree together." [^28]

Despite the difficulties, Joseph and Willard also recorded times of spiritual uplift, their joy in missionary work, and the love of the faithful Saints, especially those outside Preston. In addition, on June 27, 1839, Hannah Fielding delivered a baby girl. Three weeks later, on July 17, Jennetta Richards gave birth to a boy. He was named Heber John, the first name in honor of Heber C. Kimball and the second after Jennetta's father. To please the grandfather, they called him John. Five months later, however, the previously healthy baby contracted smallpox and, on December 28, he died. When the distraught Willard saw that the child's breath was gone, he threw himself to the floor in prayer, believing for a moment that this simply could not happen. But then, he wrote in his diary, "in an instant I felt to exclaim, the Lord gave & the Lord hath taken away & blessed be the name of the Lord." [^29]

Meanwhile, the mission leaders had to deal with an unfortunate problem created by Isaac Russell, who had returned to America against the wishes of the apostles in 1837. Russell wrote a secret letter to his converts in Alston in which he claimed that great judgments were to befall the Church, that it must be purified, and that he was being sent by God into the wilderness to prepare a way for them. It was only with great difficulty that Willard Richards convinced the Saints in Alston that Russell had misled them. [^30]

The mission presidency kept in touch with Elder Kimball, and he continued to comfort an encourage them through the mail. "Feed the hungry, clothe the naked, and visit the widow and the fatherless, and turn not the stranger away empty, feed thine enemy, do good to them that revile you and say all manner of evil if it be false great is your reward in heaven," he wrote in July 1839, [^31] and it was, indeed, in that spirit that they carried out their work.

Although the mission presidency and their associates had considerable success in missionary work, that was almost counterbalanced by apostasy. When the apostles returned to Britain in 1840, the total membership of the Church in England was about sixteen hundred—the same number that Elders Kimball and Hyde had left behind in 1838. That was enough, however, to provide a firm foundation for the remarkable work the Twelve would soon commence.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] In May 1840, for example, after all the apostles had arrived in England, a missionary in Philadelphia wrote to Church headquarters commenting on the generosity of the Saints in that area in helping them: "I must say with feelings of gratitude and respect to the brethren and friends in Chester county, that they have manifested a spirit of generosity, and liberality, worthy of imitation, in assisting the Twelve in their mission to Europe, and also in the late mission to Washington city" (Lorenzo Barnes to Bro's Smith & Robinson, May 5, 1840, in Times and Seasons [June 1, 1840]: 117).
[^2] Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, 109.
[^3] As quoted in Roberts, Life of John Taylor, 67-68. Roberts does not document his quotations, and those cited here are found only in his book. It is known, however, that Roberts had access to John Taylor's journals, but their whereabouts today are apparently not known.
[^4] Ibid., 68-69, says that it was Zebedee Coltrin who took them to Ohio. Woodruff, however, wrote in his journal that they were at "Father John Coltrins" on August 11, and that two days later they decided "to accompany father Coltrin" to Ohio. They did spend some time, however, with Zebedee Coltrin, who was John's son. Woodruff, Journal, August 11-13, 1839, 1:350-51.
[^5] Wilford Woodruff's journal says that fifteen hundred pamphlets were printed, but Roberts says there were two thousand. See Woodruff, Journal, August 16, 1839, 1:351; Roberts, Life of John Taylor, 69. This pamphlet, A Short Account . . . was especially significant to what was going on elsewhere in the Church, for in November Joseph Smith would be in Washington, D.C., seeking redress for the wrongs suffered by the Saints in Missouri, and already the Saints were preparing hundreds of petitions to support the Prophet's case. See D&C 123:1-6 for the revelation that told the Saints to compile the petitions.
[^6] Woodruff, Journal, September 2, 1839, 1:357.
[^7] John Taylor to Leonora Taylor, September 19, 1839, John Taylor Collection (Appendix B, Document 3).
[^8] Discourse by Brigham Young, July 17, 1870, Journal of Discourses 13:211.
[^9] Kimball, President Heber C. Kimball's Journal, 84.
[^10] Smith, "History."
[^11] Smith, "History," October 11, 1839; Kimball, President Heber C. Kimball's Journal, 86-87.
[^12] Kimball, President Heber C. Kimball's Journal, 87.
[^13] Ibid., 88.
[^14] Ibid., 91-92.
[^15] For an examination of Kirtland in the years after Joseph Smith's departure, see Bitton, "Waning of Mormon Kirtland."
[^16] Kimball, President Heber C. Kimball's Journal, 92; Smith, "History."
[^17] See D&C 110.
[^18] Smith, "History," not dated, but entries for November 1839; Kimball, President Heber C. Kimball's Journal, 92-93; Turley, "Mission Journal," 22.
[^19] Smith, "History," November 27, 1839.
[^20] Ibid., not dated, but entry covering December 1839.
[^21] Smith, Journal, January 15, 1840; see Smith, "History," January 15, 1840.
[^22] Smith, "History," January 9, 1840.
[^23] England, Orson Pratt, 59-60.
[^24] Mary Ann Frost, widow of Nathan Stearns, was Parley P. Pratt's second wife, and she brought one daughter to the marriage. The other children were Parley Parker Pratt, son of Thankful Halsey Pratt, who had died in childbirth on March 25, 1837, and Nathan Pratt, the son of Parley and Mary Ann. P. Pratt, Autobiography, 172, 462. The following story is based on ibid., 294-301; O. Pratt, Journals, 105-7, 513; Woodruff, Journal, November 13, 1839, 1:368-69.
[^25] See Woodruff, Journal, October 25 and November 13, 1839, 1:365, 368-69.
[^26] Woodruff, Journal, October 8-November 1, 1839, 1:363-67; O. Pratt, Journals, 106 (citing Hiram Clark in Millennial Star 4:145). Clark adds the detail concerning Parley P. Pratt's influence on Wilford Woodruff's decision to remain in New York.
[^27] Roberts, Life of John Taylor, 72-74.
[^28] John Taylor to Leonora Taylor, January 30, 1840, John Taylor Collection (Appendix B, Document 6). John Taylor indicates that there were sixty-three people in steerage, and Wilford Woodruff says there were sixty-four.
[^29] For accounts of the voyage, see Roberts, Life of John Taylor, 72-74; Woodruff, Journal, December 16, 1839-January 11, 1840, 373-403; Turley, "Mission Journal," 28-29.
[^30] P. Pratt, Autobiography, 297-98; O. Pratt, Journals, 108-10.
[^31] Smith, "History."
