David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

Chapter 4

PATHWAYS TO LIVERPOOL

Circumstances could not have been less encouraging as the seven apostles prepared for their departure from Commerce, Illinois. Undernourished and ill as they were, it seemed doubtful that some would make it even to New York, let alone across the ocean. But Church members far outside Commerce, aware of what was happening, were anxious to provide whatever assistance they could. Everywhere the apostles went, from the Mississippi to New York City, sympathetic Latter-day Saints cared for them in illness, provided lodging and transportation, and gave whatever financial aid they could. There seemed to be a spirit in the Church affirming that this mission was of unique importance, and even the poorest among the Saints were eager to support it. [^1] The story of their journeys from Commerce to New York City, which took from two to more than four months, and then on to Liverpool is a story of remarkable faith in the face of incredible hardships.

Mission of the TwelveHCTO NEW YORK CITY BY ANY MEANS POSSIBLE

Wilford Woodruff and John Taylor were the first to start out. Wilford, in Montrose, had been suffering for days from chills and fever. His infant daughter, Sarah Emma, also seriously ill, was being cared for by friends with more suitable accommodations. On August 8 he finally bade Phoebe a tender farewell and walked to the banks of the Mississippi. Brigham Young paddled him across the river in a canoe. When Joseph Smith found him resting by the post office, Wilford told the Prophet that he felt and looked more like a subject for the dissecting room than a missionary. [^2]

John Taylor left Montrose the same day, his family also in pathetic circumstances and living in a single room. He lamented "the prevalence of disease, the poverty of the brethren, their insecurity from mobs, together with the uncertainty of what might take place during my absence." But despite the difficulties, he said, "the thought of going forth at the command of the God of Israel to revisit my native land, to unfold the principles of eternal truth and make known the things that God had revealed for the salvation of the world, overcame every other feeling." [^3]

It took Elders Woodruff and Taylor, traveling together, the rest of the month to make it as far as Germantown, Indiana. They frequently stopped with Church members, preached the gospel, conducted Church business, and received assistance from the Saints. On August 13 they were near Macomb, Illinois, at the home of John Coltrin, who was going to visit his family in Ohio and who invited them to accompany him in his wagon. [^4] George Miller gave them a horse. On August 16 they were in Springfield, where John Taylor arranged to have printed some two thousand copies of a pamphlet on the persecutions of the Saints in Missouri. He paid for it, in part, by selling the horse they had just been given. [^5] They took some of the pamphlets with them and left others with the Coltrins, asking them to send the proceeds to Leonora and Phoebe.

By the time they arrived at Germantown John Taylor was so desperately ill that it was impossible for him to continue. Wilford Woodruff was also ill, but at Taylor's urging he reluctantly went on with Coltrin on September 2, leaving his companion "in the hands of a merciful God & a kind & benevolent family, who promised to do evry thing in their power to make him Comfortable untill his recovery." [^6]

It was another month before Wilford reached his destination. He crossed Lake Erie in a severe snow storm, by steamer, took a boat down the Erie Canal, and then made his way to Farmington, Connecticut, where he spent about two weeks with his family. From there he took a stage to Hartford and then a steamer to New York City, where he arrived at 6 A.M. on October 6.

John Taylor remained ill, sometimes near death, for about three weeks. His optimism was tenacious, however, as suggested in a tender letter to Leonora, dated September 19:

You may ask me how I am going to prosecute my journey, with my trunk a distance of 300 miles or upwards by land, without means. I do not know but one thing I do know, that there is a being who clothes the lillies of the valley & feeds the ravens & he has given me to understand that all these things shall be added & that is all I want to know. He laid me on a bed of sickness & I was satisfied, he has raised me from it again & I am thankful. He stopped me on my road & I am content. . . . If he took me I felt that it would be well. He has spared me, & it is better. [^7]

As he began to recover, Elder Taylor could not refrain from preaching. He obtained the use of a courthouse and began holding meetings, even though weakness forced him to remain seated part of the time while delivering his sermons.

As soon as he was able, Taylor went on to Dayton, Ohio, where, about November 1, he met George A. Smith, who had left Commerce more than six weeks after he did. On November 3, they both joined up with Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball in Cleveland.

Elders Young and Kimball were the third and fourth apostles to strike out for New York City. On September 14 Brigham crossed the river from Montrose to Commerce, leaving his little family so ill that none could go to the well for a pail of water, and so destitute that they had no change of clothes. He, too, was sick, and immediately went to bed at the home of Heber C. Kimball. On September 17 his wife, Mary Ann, arrived to nurse and comfort him, and the next day the two apostles, both deathly ill and practically penniless, left Commerce in a wagon: "I was determined to go to England or to die trying," Brigham recalled later. [^8] Heber's wife, Vilate, and two of their three children were in bed with the ague and, he said, "It seemed to me as though my very inmost parts would melt within me at the thought of leaving my family in such a condition." On impulse he told the teamster to stop and, turning to Brigham, proposed that they give a cheer to those they were leaving behind. The two apostles stood up in the wagon and swung their hats over their heads three times, crying, "Hurrah, hurrah, hurrah for Israel!" The shout brought Vilate from her bed, and the two wives stood in the doorway bravely crying back to their husbands, "Good bye; God bless you!" [^9] The men returned the heartfelt prayer and continued on. By the second day they had gone only as far as Quincy, where, too feeble to continue, they stayed with helpful Saints for five more days.

On September 21 George A. Smith, still not recovered from his illness, started out on horseback for New York. Stopping at Joseph Smith's home to rest, he walked into the room where his uncle, Joseph Smith, Sr., lay sick, propped up in a huge chair with pillows. His uncle immediately burst out laughing. "Who has been robbing the burying yard?" he asked. He then gave the young apostle a blessing, promising that he should not only go on his mission but also be restored to health, accomplish a great deal of good, and return safely home. [^10] He continued on his way, accompanied by Theodore Turley and Reuben Hedlock. The trio survived an overturned wagon without serious injury and arrived in Quincy two days later. By then George A.'s illness had so affected his eyes that he was nearly blind, unable even to distinguish colors. He continued to have eye trouble through most of his mission.

Elders Young and Kimball were also in Quincy, but after spending a short time preaching and recuperating, the two parties continued on separately. Elder Smith and his group reached Springfield on October 2, followed by Young and Kimball three days later.

The five missionaries had made it that far only by the generous, though meager, support of faithful Saints. As they considered how they might continue, they and Elder Kimball's father-in-law, Roswell Murray, "put our mites together," as George A. Smith described it, "and rigged up a two-horse wagon and attached three horses to it." The wagon was donated by the Saints, who had paid fifty-five dollars for it and who also gave the missionaries another thirty-five dollars in cash. The women prepared a bed in the wagon for Brigham Young, the most seriously ill, and on October 11, the missionaries left the city. [^11]

Even while the Saints were giving of their means to help the missionaries along the way, some were also scrutinizing them. Eight miles out of Springfield, for example, they stopped for the night at the home of a Father Draper. Some Saints in Springfield had prepared "tonic bitters" for George A. Smith. This bitter, aromatic, sometimes alcoholic solution concocted from various plant products was a popular folk medicine for the feverish illness plaguing him. As he stooped to warm himself by the fire, Elder Smith's flask of bitters slipped out of his pocket and broke on the hearth. "You are a pretty set of Apostles," exclaimed the astonished Father Draper, "to be carrying a bottle of whisky with you!" The elders quickly explained who had prepared it and what it was for and, reported Elder Kimball, "this appeased his righteous soul, so that he consented to allow us to stay through the night." [^12]

On the evening of October 17 the sickly group arrived in Terre Haute, Indiana. Heber C. Kimball and Brigham Young spent the night at the home of a Church member who was also a physician. Heber's report of the evening was less than complimentary to the doctor who, he said, after visiting George A. Smith and company, wept at their circumstances but "did not have quite sympathy enough to buy them a chicken to make them some broth or even give them a shilling," although he was relatively wealthy. [^13] Perhaps Elder Kimball had a right to be cynical, for that evening when his own illness intensified, the doctor, by this time drunk, overdosed him with morphine. Heber spent the night in nauseated agony, with Brigham sitting up all night to nurse him.

The next morning the other missionaries came to the house and blessed Elder Kimball. Elders Young and Kimball then urged them to go on to Kirtland, Ohio. They complied only after Heber chided them by predicting that he and Brigham would arrive in Kirtland before they did. About an hour later, Heber was able to get out of bed. He and Brigham arrived in Cleveland on the night of November 2, having passed a tavern in Strongsville, about twenty miles from Cleveland, where George A. Smith's party and Elder John Taylor were spending the night.

On the afternoon of November 3, Elders Young, Kimball, Taylor, and Hedlock reached Kirtland, followed the next day by Elders Smith and Turley. George A. Smith, meanwhile, had found cause for celebration when he discovered that by putting his nose close to the paper he was able to read an advertisement in large print—the first words he had been able to read since the onset of his illness.

At this point Heber noted one of the many financial miracles that kept them solvent as they made their way toward New York City. Examining their record of expenditures, they found that they had spent "over eighty-seven dollars out of the thirteen dollars and fifty cents we had at Pleasant Garden." They had traveled four hundred miles by stage, paid eight to ten cents per mile, eaten three meals per day at fifty cents per meal, and paid fifty cents a day for lodging. Brigham Young suspected that Heber had a secret purse of money but, noted Heber, "this was not so; the money could only have been put in the trunk by some heavenly messenger, who thus administered to our necessities daily as he knew we needed." [^14]

Kirtland, Ohio, held a special place in the hearts of the Latter-day Saints, and the missionaries must have been filled with nostalgia as they rode into town and gazed upon their beloved temple and recalled both the trials and the spiritual highlights associated with it. But as the memories flowed through the visitors' minds, they must have been accompanied by a depressing realization that Kirtland would never again be the prominent Mormon center they had loved. [^15]

Neither could the apostles resist commenting on their discouragement with some of the Saints who were still in Kirtland. When Heber Kimball preached at a meeting in the temple on Sunday, November 10, he ruffled the feathers of several by comparing them "to a parcel of old earthen pots that were cracked in burning, for they were mostly apostates who were living there." The Saints in Kirtland seemed much less willing to help than those elsewhere, and George A. Smith noted that before they could be on their way they had to sell their horse and wagon for "what little we could get." [^16]

The apostles nevertheless enjoyed a spiritual uplift as they revisited the Kirtland Temple, and on the evening of Sunday, November 17, they held a deeply moving meeting with some of the local elders. They no doubt remembered that it had been less than four years since the Savior, Elijah, Elias, and Moses had appeared in that sacred hall to restore certain ancient keys and authority to Joseph Smith. [^17] Toward the end of the meeting, some "pure sweet oil" was consecrated by Elders Young, Kimball, and Smith, then Brigham Young anointed John Taylor and gave him a special blessing. He was the only member of the Quorum who had not previously received such a blessing in the temple. After that Theodore Turley received a similar anointing at the hands of Daniel S. Miles, and Taylor and Turley each poured out the desires of their hearts in special prayers. The congregation then "sealed" the anointings with shouts of "hosannah!" All this was followed by the simple ordinance often performed in those early days to promote humility and unity: Brigham Young washed the feet of John Taylor, and Daniel Miles washed Turley's John Taylor then delivered a prophecy, and Brigham Young closed the meeting with prayer. [^18] Despite their concerns about the Saints in Kirtland, that day the apostles and their companions were spiritually rejuvenated.

The group left Kirtland on November 22 but was detained for four days at Fairport, on Lake Erie, by a heavy snowstorm. The delay provided time for intimate discussions, and Brigham Young gave George A. Smith some pointed suggestions about a few things he had observed in his young colleague during the past two months. As George A. himself reported it: "President Young reproved me for some of my unwise speeches in which I had hurt the feelings of some of my brethren previous to leaving Nauvoo, upon which I made satisfaction and felt thankful for the timely reproof." [^19]

When the snow subsided, the group took a lake steamer to Buffalo and then, on November 27, a train to Batavia, New York. The next day most of the missionaries took the train to Rochester, but Heber C. Kimball left the others to do missionary work among family members and friends in and around his home town of Mendon, New York. On New Year's Day 1840, he baptized Vilate's brother, William Murray, and his wife. On February 10, he left for New York City, traveling some distance by sleigh, but by the time he reached Jersey City, he had no money for a ticket to cross the river into New York City. An unknown passenger heard him discussing the problem with the captain of the ferry and simply gave him the necessary twenty-five cents.

The other members of the group arrived in New York City ahead of Elder Kimball, but not without continuing difficulties. By the time they reached Auburn, Brigham Young and George A. Smith were out of funds, so they persuaded John Taylor and Theodore Turley to go on while they worked their way more slowly. Reuben Hedlock remained for a time in Batavia. After taking a boat down the Hudson River, Taylor and Turley arrived in New York City on December 13.

Elders Young and Smith preached in the Auburn area, walked to Moravia, where they stayed among the Saints for about a week, and then went to East Hamilton with a Church member who offered to take them in his wagon. The weather was cold, there was considerable snow, and by this time George A. was ill again. For seventeen days he lay in bed at the Joseph Murdock home, being nursed with great care by Hannah Tinkam. Even in severe illness, however, he retained his sense of humor. "I vomited phlegm by the wholesale," he wrote, "and it altogether reduced me to a more reasonable size." [^20]

On January 7 the two apostles took a stage for West Stockbridge, Massachusetts. Elder Smith's eyesight was so impaired by the new illness that he could not distinguish one dish from another when they were eating, and Brigham Young had to select his food and put it on his plate for him. It probably made the twenty-two-year-old apostle feel even worse when he heard someone ask who that old gentleman was who was being waited on by the young man!

They arrived at West Stockbridge later that day, and Brigham went on to Richmond alone and sent a horse and sleigh back for Elder Smith. They preached in the area for a while, even though George A. continued to suffer from the fever and shakes. "Slow[?] going to England," he wrote laboriously. "Sick [and] poor but good courage. Truth will Prevail. Lord Remember thy servant. Give him wisdom." [^21] But his good humor never failed him. As he preached on January 9, for example, the mischievous sons of some local sectarians threw sulphur on the stove, disrupting the meeting. After things calmed down, Elder Smith lectured his listeners on their lack of etiquette. His first impression, he told them, was that some sectarian preacher, "a wholesale dealer in fire and brimstone," had got so near hell that he had been unable to take all the brimstone away with him. But at least, he said, knowing that sulphur was considered a cure for the itch, he considered himself in no danger of catching that malady in Massachusetts. [^22]

On January 27 a Brother French took the two apostles in his sleigh to New Haven, Connecticut, where, four days later, they caught a boat bound for New York City. They had to land at Frog Point because of the icy weather and take a stage the rest of the way, but by this time they were again out of money and could not pay the fare. Taking the same stage, however, was the captain of the steamer they had just left, and when Brigham Young boldly asked him if he would pay their fare, the good captain obliged! The two apostles then found their way to 58 Mott Street, where Parley P. Pratt and his wife, Mary Ann, welcomed them.

THE PRATT BROTHERS

Parley P. and Orson Pratt were not in as desperate financial straits as the other five apostles, nor did they suffer the same problems with ill health. Nevertheless, they had their share of distress before they left Illinois. The malaria plague that ravaged the settlers along the swampy Mississippi river bottoms did not bypass them, but, "by the power of God," the two brothers were able to arise and accompany Joseph Smith as he went among the Saints, laying on hands and healing many. One of the casualties, however, was Orson's eight-month-old daughter, Lydia, who died on August 18. [^23]

Eleven days later the two brothers drove away from Commerce, accompanied by Parley's wife and three children [^24] as well as Hiram Clark, another missionary called to England. They traveled in a private carriage, visited with various Church members along the way, preached frequently and, after five enjoyable weeks, arrived at the home of their parents in Detroit. There they found their father, Jared, nearly seventy, on his deathbed, and visited with him one last time. He died shortly after they went on to New York.

In Detroit the brothers did missionary work, and Parley spent time working on publications. They sold the horse and carriage, at some sacrifice, to raise funds to continue, and Orson, accompanied by Hiram Clark, left earlier than Parley to do more preaching in Ohio and New York. After about two weeks Parley and his family took a Lake Erie steamer to Buffalo, a boat down the Erie Canal, the railroad to Albany, and a steamer down the Hudson to New York City. They arrived on October 25, nearly three weeks before Orson, who arrived about November 13. [^25] Nearly two years earlier Parley had been instrumental in establishing a branch of the Church in that city. "We were received by the Saints in New York almost as one of the old saints risen from the dead," he later recalled.

ON TO ENGLAND: WILFORD AND JOHN

After Wilford Woodruff arrived in New York on October 8, he spent the next several weeks preaching and trying to decide what to do about sailing for England. He had heard nothing from the rest of the Twelve, but other missionaries waiting to go to England booked passage for three, including Elder Woodruff, on the packet ship Tarolinta. When Parley P. Pratt arrived with word that the others were expected soon, Wilford decided to wait so the Twelve could hold a council meeting before any of them left. Hiram Clark took Wilford's place on the packet, which sailed for England on November 1. [^26]

Wilford Woodruff spent the next month and a half doing missionary work and trying to raise enough money to pay his way to England. On December 13 John Taylor and Theodore Turley arrived, both completely without means. Elder Woodruff, however, had raised the fifteen dollars necessary to book passage in the steerage compartment of the ship Oxford, and on December 16 he did so. He was impatient to be on his way, even though all his colleagues were still not there.

John Taylor arrived in New York penniless but optimistic. He stayed in Parley P. Pratt's home, and when anyone asked him about his financial situation, he simply replied that he had plenty of money. Elder Pratt, who needed money to publish his Voice of Warning and several other items, asked him for two or three hundred dollars to help with publication. "You are welcome to all I have," Elder Taylor responded, reaching into his pocket and handing Parley a copper cent. When Parley reminded him of his statements that he had "plenty of money," Taylor simply replied that he did, for he was well clothed, Parley was providing him with good lodging and plenty to eat and drink, and "with all these things and a penny over, as I owe nothing, is not that plenty?" When Wilford Woodruff later insisted that Taylor should sail with him on the Oxford, he simply replied, "Well, Brother Woodruff, if you think it best for me to go, I will accompany you," assuring him that there would be no difficulty with money. Overhearing all this and assuming that Elder Taylor had some hidden resources, Theodore Turley urged the two apostles to take him along, too, and let him cook and do other tasks for them. Taylor confidently told Wilford to arrange passage for both himself and Turley, and it was not long before unsolicited, voluntary donations resulted in enough money to secure passage for both of them. [^27]

On December 20 the Oxford sailed from New York harbor carrying sixty-four passengers in steerage (including the two apostles and Turley), fifteen in cabins, and thirty crewmen. The unfortunate steerage passengers soon found that they were victims not only of the usual discomforts of that less-than-desirable compartment (crowded bunks, no ventilation, no privacy, etc.), but also of overbooking. Agents had sold tickets with berth numbers marked, saying that there would be two people in each berth. The passengers discovered, however, that as many as five people had been promised the same bunk and some had no berth at all. The crew put up a few extra bunks in a storage compartment, but even at that there were sometimes four people to a bunk and at least two ended up sleeping on boxes and on the floor. [^28]

The passage itself was fairly rough. The ship rolled and pitched so badly on the night of December 30, for example, that "trunks, Boxes & barrels were tumbling about the cabin," and it was only with great difficulty that the passengers stayed in their bunks. The missionaries arrived in Liverpool on January 11, 1840, and began proselyting nearly three weeks before Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and George A. Smith reached New York City. [^29]

THE REMAINING FIVE JOIN THEIR BRETHREN

The rest of the apostles remained in New York City and vicinity until their departure as a group on March 9. The Pratt brothers spent most of their time preaching in the area and baptized several new converts. Parley also published several items that became important doctrinal expositions and missionary tools. On December 21 Orson went to Philadelphia, encountered Joseph Smith there, and immediately sent for his brother. The two spent several days with the Prophet and received instruction from him in important and far-reaching new doctrines, including the principles of eternal marriage and eternal family relationships, as well as an enhanced understanding of the "true dignity and destiny" of men and women.

Parley later went to Washington, D.C., apparently at the request of Joseph Smith, where he did considerable preaching. This excursion depleted his resources so much that it put his ability to depart for England with the others in serious doubt. Nonetheless, the apostles felt gratified that he had preached in Washington, "for by so doing we can go from America feeling our duty to this Government for the present more fully done." [^30]

The other three apostles also preached in the New York area while gathering sufficient means to cross the ocean. Still suffering from chills and fevers, early in February George A. Smith went to Philadelphia, accompanied by Benjamin Winchester. There he was invited to preach at a seminary in Yellow Springs, Chester County, and when he had finished, the people, mostly non-Mormons, gave him twenty-six dollars toward his forthcoming trip, in addition to his travel expenses from Philadelphia. [^31] On February 24 Elder Smith returned to New York City, where Elders Young and Kimball finally booked steerage passage on the Patrick Henry, at the rate of eighteen dollars apiece. George A. Smith, it turned out, had enough money to pay the fare for two of them. [^32]

The five apostles held a conference on March 4 with the New York Saints, many of whom had made donations to help them. Parley P. Pratt had written a song especially for the occasion, and it must have touched everyone deeply as they sang:

When shall we all meet again?

When shall we our rest obtain?

When our pilgrimage be o'er-

Parting sighs be known no more;

When Mount Zion we regain,

There may we all meet again.

We to foreign climes repair;

Truth, the message which we bear;

Truth, which angels oft have borne;

Truth to comfort those who mourn.

Truth eternal will remain,

On its rock we'll meet again.

Now the bright and morning star

Spreads its glorious light afar,

Kindles up the rising dawn

Of that bright Millennial morn;

When the Saints shall rise and reign,

Then may we all meet again. [^33]

Shortly before 11:00 A.M. on Monday, March 9, 1840, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, the Pratt brothers, George A. Smith, and Reuben Hedlock climbed into a small boat that took them out to the Patrick Henry, a packet ship of the Black Ball Line, lying at anchor a short distance offshore. They carried with them straw beds, pillows, and blankets, all donated by the New York Saints, for the Black Ball Line provided no such comforts with the plain wooden bunks in steerage. In addition, as Heber wrote to his wife, "The brethren put up evry thing that was good to eat. I will tell you what we had. Potatoes gren Aples, dried Aples, dride Prunes dried Plumes; Preserves quince, Plum, Peach; dride Beef, Ham, Pork, Cod fish, swet bread, bakers Bread, common bread, Crackers, Wrice, Chogar [sugar], Buter, Peper, mustard Salt, Horsh Redish Pickles lemmons Rasons, Pies." [^34] As the boat moved out into the water, the missionaries returned the farewells of the Saints, many of whom, in tears, were waving with hats and handkerchiefs. Saints on ship and shore joined in singing "The Gallant Ship Is under Way" until the sounds of each other's voices were lost in the distance. About noon the Patrick Henry was towed out to sea, where its sails were unfurled before a fair Atlantic breeze. The last of the apostles were finally on their way.

Unlike the smooth passage enjoyed by Heber C. Kimball three years earlier, and as if to underscore the difficulties associated with this mission, the crossing of the Patrick Henry was rough and difficult. Brigham Young was sick and confined to his bunk for nearly the whole twenty-eight days. In addition to his ague and malaria, George A. Smith was so seasick much of the time that he could not eat. As Heber later described the voyage to his wife, the waves rolled "mountains high" making it seem as if the sea "would swallow us up some times." They experienced rain, hail, snow, thunder, and lightening worse than the crew had seen in fifteen years, and there were few days that the sea did not beat over the bulwarks and run in torrents down the hatch into the steerage compartment where the missionaries lay on their bunks. On one occasion Orson Pratt was sitting on a bale of cotton when a huge wave swept over the deck and threw the cotton "S[w]iming with him on it." The trip seemed twice as long to Heber as it had on his first ocean crossing. "We could not have gon in a worse time in the whole year for head winds." [^35]

Finally, on April 6, 1840, the missionaries celebrated the tenth anniversary of the organization of the Church by setting foot on the docks at Liverpool. It had been eight long, arduous months since the first apostles left Commerce, and the emotions of Heber and his companions ran high. Brigham Young later recalled that after he got both feet firmly planted, "I gave a loud shout of hosannah . . . I felt that the chains were broken, and the bands that were upon me were burst asunder." They found lodging at No. 8 Union Street and that evening held a prayer meeting, blessed each other, partook of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and thanked their Heavenly Father for preserving them. [^36] Their mission was about to begin.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Luke 10:4. The word scrip, in the scriptural context, refers to a small bag or satchel used for carrying personal provisions.
[^2] Fielding, Diary, 54.
[^3] Ibid., 60.
[^4] Ibid.
[^5] Reuben Hedlock to George A. Smith, January 12, 1841, George A. Smith Collection.
[^6] John Taylor to the Editor, n.d., Millennial Star 2 (May 1841): 12-16.
[^7] For a discussion of early Mormon millennialism and its broader context, see Underwood, "Millenarian World."
[^8] Wilford Woodruff to the Editors, October 7, 1840, Times and Seasons 2 (February 15, 1841): 311-14 and (March 1, 1841): 327-31.
[^9] Millennial Star 1 (August 1840): 100.
[^10] Woodruff, Journal, August 18, 1840, 1:493-94.
[^11] Woodruff used a similar expression in writing about Willard Richards in Herefordshire in May and June 1840: "Elder Richards laboured in this part of the vineyard about two months, during which time he travelled extensively, preached night and day, gave much instruction to the Saints generally, and had many souls as seals of his ministry" (Wilford Woodruff to the Editor, July 9, 1840, Millennial Star 1 [July 1840]: 71-72 and [August 1840]: 81-84).
[^12] Orson Pratt, giving excerpts from a letter received from Parley, to George A. Smith, January 21, 1841, George A. Smith Collection. See also Jessee, "Joseph Smith's 19 July 1840 Discourses."
[^13] Woodruff, Journal, January 19, 1840, 1:408-9.
[^14] Willard Richards to Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, October 24, 1840, Brigham Young Papers.
[^15] Woodruff, Journal, February 17, 1840, 1:419.
[^16] Ibid., February 11, 1840, 1:418.
[^17] Orson Pratt to Parley P. Pratt, October 17, 1840, Millennial Star 1 (December 1840): 214.
[^18] Woodruff, Journal, August 30, 1840, 1:502-4.
[^19] Ibid., January 19, 1840, 1:408-9.
[^20] Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, 115. See also Allen and Alexander, Manchester Mormons, 71.
[^21] On June 23, 1840, for example, while Woodruff was visiting a church member in West Bromich, two men suddenly burst into the house, "full of wrath & anger," bringing with them a blind girl and demanding that Woodruff perform a miracle and heal her, as a sign to make them believe. He informed the intruders of "the character of those that sought signs," but the anger continued and his testimony was rejected. Woodruff, Journal, June 23, 1840, 1:470-71.
[^22] On occasion, it appears, the enemies of the Church attempted to discredit it by circulating stories of failed attempts at speaking in tongues. James Mahon, a young priest in the Manchester branch, was apparently one of those who seemed especially receptive to the gift. On June 14, 1840, he and five other people spoke in tongues at a Sunday evening meeting (Allen and Alexander, Manchester Mormons, 162). On October 12, according to Wilford Woodruff, some of the opponents of the Church sent for Mahon to come and speak to them in Hebrew, and "if he did not speak to them correctly in Hebrew they would rise up against the work & try to overthrow it. They are watching for iniquity & trying to stir up the people against the work of God" (Woodruff, Journal, October 12, 1840, 1:527-28). Woodruff said nothing more about the incident in his journal, but it may be that the whole affair proved embarrassing. According to a non-Mormon report, Mahon accepted the challenge and went to the meeting. There someone read some Hebrew to him, but he could not understand it. Then he spoke in what he said was the Hebrew language, but none of the teachers of Hebrew in the audience recognized any Hebrew in what he said (Axon, Annals of Manchester, 211). Whether the meeting was rigged, the report distorted, or Mahon and his critics simply misunderstood the gift may never be known. But certainly the publication and circulation of such stories could be used as evidence by the Saints that the Lord would not allow them to flaunt spiritual gifts simply as a means of persuading the unconverted.
[^23] Fielding, Diary, 80.
[^24] He also reported, however, that there were not many interpretations. Millennial Star 1 (March 1841): 283.
[^25] Woodruff, Journal, July 2, 1840, 1:475-77.
[^26] Ibid., March 27 and 28, 1841, 2:73-76. See also Cordon, Journal; George A. Smith to D. C. Smith, March 29, 1841, Times and Seasons 2 (June 1, 1841): 434.
[^27] D&C 4:1-2, 5-6.
[^28] Joseph Smith to the Twelve, December 15, 1840, Joseph Smith Collection (Appendix B, Document 21). The letter was mistakenly printed in Joseph Smith's history (which was not actually published until some years later) as if it had been written on October 19, 1840. Smith, History of the Church 4:226-32. A long extract was printed in the Times and Seasons 2 (January 1, 1841): 258-61 and reprinted in the Millennial Star 1 (March 1841): 265-69 without an exact date. The best version is the transcription from the original in Jessee, Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, 480-87. Our quotations are based on that source.
[^29] Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, May 27, 1840, Heber C. Kimball Collection.
[^30] See George A. Smith to Lyman Smith, January 8[?], 1841, George A. Smith Collection, for the young apostle's comments on his own inadequacies (Appendix B, Document 22).
[^31] Woodruff, Journal, April 16, 1840, 1:439-40.
[^32] The Prophet's address to the Twelve, July 2, 1839, Smith, History of the Church 3:383-85 (Appendix B, Document 2).
[^33] D&C 93:53.
[^34] Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith to Brothers Robinson & Smith, October 28, 1840, Times and Seasons 2 (January 1841): 261-64.
[^35] Smith, History of the Church 4:234.
[^36] Brigham Young to Joseph A. Young, February 3, 1855, in Jessee, Brigham Young to His Sons, 14.
