David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

Chapter 5

WHAT IT MEANT TO BE MISSIONARIES

The apostles' enthusiasm seemed boundless as they looked forward to sharing with the people of Britain their vision of God's plan for the salvation of the world. They believed their task was to bring as many as possible to Christ and to lay the foundation for the gathering of Zion. In seeking to accomplish this they became exemplary missionaries, both individually and as a united quorum.

WITHOUT PURSE OR SCRIP

The missionary apostles in early Victorian Britain subsisted in much the same way as their New Testament predecessors, who were sent out carrying "neither purse, nor scrip." [^1] Though they had some luggage with them, they generally lacked means to sustain themselves, and they relied largely on financial donations and other help from faithful Saints and friends. Small cash contributions mounted up to help pay for living quarters, though the apostles often slept at the homes of Church members and others, ate with them, and wore clothes donated by them. Many of the Saints were eager to help—so eager, in fact, that at times the missionaries simply could not refuse the proffered aid, even if they wanted to. John Taylor and Joseph Fielding, for example, spent their first several months in Liverpool living with Taylor's brother-in-law, George Cannon. On one occasion they were sitting in their upstairs room discussing how they could pay the Cannons for their hospitality when George came in and presented a sovereign to Elder Taylor. The apostle objected, but Cannon insisted, telling him that his old hat was getting shabby and he needed a new one. Taylor had no choice but to accept the money graciously. [^2]

At times, however, it became necessary to remind the Saints of their duty to help. On Sunday, March 1, for example, James Whitehead preached to the Preston congregation on the need to take care of the wives and children of the local missionaries. Some, he said, were in want, and if the Saints allowed that situation to continue they would lose the blessings of the Lord. Mission president Joseph Fielding assured the Saints that such a request for funds was not "priestcraft," for he knew the temporal circumstances of the elders and they clearly needed help. Thomas Walmsley then spoke briefly, reminding the group that it was not only the missionaries who had come from America who needed help but also that more local missionaries were ready to go out and their families must be taken care of. Fielding noted that a good collection was taken up that day. [^3]

The missionaries were acutely aware that most of the Saints could hardly meet their own needs, and they were reluctant to accept more than absolute necessities. Joseph Fielding refused to take any of the money raised by the March 1 collection, telling the deacons that it should be used instead to care for the children of the other missionaries. He confided in his journal that his purpose was to free his conscience as he pleaded the cause of others. The result, however, was that sometimes his wife did not have enough food and, though she never complained, he believed that was the cause of her illness. [^4]

Something of what it meant to the missionaries to rely on the Saints for sustenance is revealed in a January 1841 letter from Reuben Hedlock to George A. Smith. It was the coldest time of the year, and, working in Glasgow, Scotland, Hedlock had not been well. His destitution, along with that of the recent converts, only made matters worse. "I know how to Pity you," he wrote to his friend, who had also been ill.

I know what it is to be very Sick with Sore lungs and be obliged to preach and travel from place to place Among the poor [brethren] to get my food. Some times I got very Cours food I'll assure you but it was the best the Saints could give me and I partook with them with a thankfull hart. I have some times walked a mile and a half when I was Sick to get my breakfast but through the Blesings of God I was able to Eduer it and my health is some better. [^5]

Despite such problems and privations, the apostles bore witness that relying on the Lord and on the Saints for all their needs was a blessing. As John Taylor noted in his final communication to the Saints in England before his departure in April 1841:

I feel to rejoice before God that he has blessed my humble endeavours to promote his cause and kingdom and for all the blessings that I have received from this island; for although I have travelled 5,000 miles without purse or scrip, besides travelling so far in this country on railroads, coaches, steamboats, waggons, on horseback, and almost every way, and been amongst strangers and in strange lands, I have never for once been at a loss for either money, clothes, friends, or a home, from that day until now; neither have I ever asked a person for a farthing. Thus I have proved the Lord, and I know that he is according to his word. [^6]

THE MILLENNIAL MESSAGE

The imminence of the Millennium weighed heavily upon the early Latter-day Saints. For them the Restoration itself was a sign that they lived in the last days, adding urgency to the task of taking their message to the world. [^7] All the "signs of the times," and particularly natural disasters, were often interpreted as foreshadowing the calamities that would befall the nations before the Second Coming. The apostles, then, felt responsible not only to gather the honest in heart into the gospel fold but also to warn all others of the impending apocalypse. In a letter to the Times and Seasons, Wilford Woodruff noted the outstanding missionary success in Herefordshire and then, reflecting the millennial expectations of all the apostles, observed:

If any one asks why these things are so, I answer because the Lord is about to make a short work in England, and not only in England, but upon the face of the whole earth, for the wickedness of the earth is great, and the cry of the widow, the orphan, and the poor, and oppressed, are entering into the care of the Lord of Saboaoth, who is about to call down his indignation upon the heads of the Gentile world. [^8]

The Millennial Star amply lived up to its name by regularly reporting the "signs of the times" and calling upon the world to repent. Four pages of the August 1840 issue, for example, were devoted to describing disasters in America and Europe, including the results of the devastating potato famine in Ireland. The editor then cried:

O ye inhabitants of the earth, when will ye learn wisdom? Now that the judgments of the Most High are going forth in the midst of the nations, and by earthquake, and volcano, and tornado, and whirlwind, and floods, and hail, and devouring fire, and plague, and pestilence, and famine, God is pleading with all flesh, will you not awake from your long night of sleep, and put your sins far from you by repenting of your iniquities, and seeking forgiveness for your multiplied transgressions . . . through the blood of Jesus, and by obedience to all his commandments. [^9]

These millennial expectations weighed heavily on Elder Woodruff. He pondered his prophetic responsibility, while he was in London, and he cried out for help in delivering the warning and bringing the "honest in heart" out of Babylon. "O Mighty God of Jacob," he prayed, "cloth us with thy power. Let the power of the Priesthood rest upon us . . . & enable us to warn the inhabitants of this city in such manner that our garments will be clean of their Blood & that we may seek out the honest in heart & the meek from among men & have many souls as seals of our ministry." [^10] The last phrase of that heartfelt prayer suggests another element of the apostles' view of their ministry. Like a crest, emblem, or stamp, each new convert served as both a symbol of the missionaries' dedication and a sign of God's acceptance of their labor. [^11]

The apostles believed that one prelude to the Millennium was the process of gathering the Saints from the nations of the earth to the center of Zion, in North America, and it was not long before they began to preach and implement that doctrine throughout the British mission. The importance of this idea was reinforced in the mind of Parley P. Pratt when he returned to New York in August 1840 to pick up his family and he learned that Joseph Smith had defined Zion as "all of North and South America." This announcement was so momentous to Parley that when he wrote Orson about it, he punctuated the sentence with seven exclamation points. Parley also reported that Joseph Smith had said the American government was "guilty of Blood" (apparently for failing to protect the rights and lives of the Latter-day Saints in Missouri) and therefore needed redeeming. "The government," he said, "cannot stand as it now is but will come so near dessolation as to hang as it were by a single hair!!!!!!" However, the servants of the God would go to the nations of the earth and gather the strength of the Lord's house, "a mighty army!!!!!!" That would be the redemption of Zion, making America "an asylum for the remnant of all nations. . . . Hence you see it brings the saints continually in unison with the constitution, & their enemies are against it, & [their enemies] will be traitors to the constitution. Glory!!!" [^12]

Much of this information came to Parley secondhand, and no doubt it was colored also by his personal interpretation, but clearly he saw it as giving an added dimension to the doctrine of the gathering and the gravity of the mission of the Twelve.

British converts shared the apostles' apocalyptic fervor and saw the gospel as a preparation for what was to come. When Wilford Woodruff first visited Manchester, for example, he heard one Latter-day Saint declare that she had seen a vision of "Jesus pleading with the Father to spare England one year more that the reapers might gather the grain for the harvest was fully ripe." [^13]

Because the mission of the apostles was to preach and to warn, if people rejected their warning after having ample opportunity to understand and accept it, the missionaries sometimes bore witness against them before the Lord. Whether they shook the dust off their feet against a city or a household or washed their feet as a testimony against offenders, such actions symbolized their belief that they had done their duty and the fate of the unbelievers was now in the hands of the Lord.

Mission of the TwelveHCTHE APOSTLES ORGANIZE AND DIRECT THE MISSIONARY WORK

The apostles set the tone and generally directed the activities of all the missionaries, but they worked closely with those who were more experienced in the country, and they supported and built up local leaders. Wilford Woodruff and John Taylor were the first to arrive, and instead of assuming the direction of everything immediately, they worked in cooperation with the mission presidency that had been functioning since Heber C. Kimball left in 1838.

In their first quorum meeting in England, in April 1840, the Twelve formally and unanimously sustained Brigham Young as their president, though he had assumed that role in the fall of 1838. Final decisions on assignments were up to him, policy matters were referred to him, and through correspondence he was constantly aware of what each of them was doing. He did not dictate, however, but conscientiously made decisions in council with the others, and when a council was not possible, he at least kept his colleagues informed. He received regular reports from them, and spent much of his administrative time writing to them. He exercised his authority with both firmness and kindness as he strove to build unity in his quorum.

Working under Brigham's direction, the apostles became extremely close. Usually separated by many miles, they communicated frequently by mail, and their letters reveal mutual love and support that would be exemplary under any conditions. They were even comfortable opening each other's mail, particularly if they felt the messages inside would be of value to all of them. "I thought I would do as I would be done unto," Willard Richards wrote to Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, who were in Preston, just after he opened some letters for them that had arrived in Manchester. He summarized the news and promised the letters would be waiting for them when they returned. [^14]

WAYS OF MAKING CONTACT

Since nearly everywhere the Twelve went was unworked territory, they tried to find the best and fastest way possible to share their message with large groups of people. They sought out local ministers, attempted to secure speaking engagements before their congregations, and often succeeded in doing so. In 1837, as we have seen, Heber C. Kimball opened missionary work in England by preaching in the Reverend James Fielding's chapel. They also sought out special groups, particularly temperance societies, to preach to. If a temperance society platform was extended to them, they would preach on temperance, a comfortable topic for believers in the Word of Wisdom, and then invite the audience to come listen to a gospel message later, usually in the same hall. Other times they simply hired whatever halls they could and put out notices that missionaries from America would be preaching at a certain time. In Preston it was the Cock Pit, in Manchester it was Carpenter's Hall, and in Liverpool it was the Music Hall.

The elders also used all available means to advertise meetings, including making announcements in other churches, posting handbills, and sending the message by word of mouth through Church members and friends. In Leek, on Saturday, May 2, 1840, for example, George A. Smith hired the town criers to announce that he would preach at 4:00 P.M. on Sunday.

The missionaries also preached regularly in private homes. Members and nonmembers alike invited friends and neighbors into their homes to hear the messengers from America. In the Staffordshire Potteries, for example, on February 17, 1840, Wilford Woodruff, William Hume, and William Mumford spent several hours looking for a place to hold a meeting. They called first on Joseph Harding, a shoemaker, and then on Widow Welch, and, finally, on Widow Gilbert. When Widow Gilbert told them they could preach in her house, they sent out the word, and at seven in the evening a "small congregation" gathered to hear Elder Woodruff preach the first Latter-day Saint sermon in the town of Stone. [^15]

Referrals from members and friends were their most important missionary tool. No matter where they went, they first contacted people with whom they were acquainted or to whom they had some kind of introduction. When Wilford Woodruff and Theodore Turley arrived in the Potteries, they immediately made contact with faithful members already there: William Benbow, George Simpson, William Hume, and others. On the night of January 24 William Hume opened his home to the two missionaries for preaching, and after the meeting two people applied for baptism. Alfred Cordon obliged them the following day. Not long afterwards, on February 11, Wilford Woodruff was preaching in Burslem when a woman whose husband was already a member asked to be baptized. As they went to baptize her they called on her sister, who was also married to a Church member, and she, too, accepted the gospel and joined the procession. Before they got to the water they called on the wife of still another Church member who said she wanted to be baptized but could not do so right then for she had a dead child in the house. "I told her to let the dead bury the Dead," Wilford Woodruff wrote, "but rise & follow Christ & she did & we walked two miles & I baptized the 3 females." [^16] On the other hand, one reason for the early lack of success in London was that Elders Woodruff, Smith, and Kimball simply did not know anyone there. They had to go out "cold," so to speak, and it was a long, hard road even to moderate acceptance.

When they were not preaching in chapels, rented halls, or homes, the apostles might be found preaching in the streets, a most acceptable practice of the time. In October 1840, Orson Pratt wrote that he was preaching every night in the streets of Edinburgh where, when weather permitted, "large congregations gather round us eager to hear." [^17] In London, after spending twelve fruitless days trying to find places to preach and people to listen, even going from door to door, Wilford Woodruff, Heber C. Kimball, and George A. Smith finally went to Tabernacle Square, where street meetings were regularly held and preached. The result was the first conversion to the Church in London. [^18]

Mission of the TwelveHCGIFTS OF THE SPIRIT

Mission of the TwelveHCGifts of the Spirit were abundant during the apostles' mission to England. They were viewed as sacred and deeply personal, not to be touted as part of the missionary message or used as evidence for unbelievers, but diaries and letters recorded many, including miraculous healings in connection with priesthood blessings. When Wilford Woodruff visited Manchester for the first time, he was asked to call on three sick persons and to give them blessings. That same night he administered to six more individuals, and the following day, Sunday, he did the same for twenty people who, he reported, were all healed. "The Saints in England have great Confidence in God & his Servents," he wrote, and so many were applying for the laying on of hands that "we need as much faith as St. Paul had that at the touch of our garments or hankerchefs that they might be healed." [^19]

The apostles tried to avoid making a public show of things they considered sacred. They refused to give blessings if it appeared that the request was some kind of test for the curious or unbelieving. Wilford Woodruff was forcefully reminded of this principle when, in Manchester, he accompanied William Clayton to visit a woman who seemed possessed of a devil. When they arrived at her home, she was raging terribly, trying to tear off her clothes. Among those present were several non-Mormon skeptics who had come to see whether a miracle could be wrought. "Had I acted upon my own judgment," Elder Woodruff recalled later, "I should have refrained from administering to her in the company of those present." He nevertheless deferred to the local leaders and joined Clayton in administering to the woman, but to no avail. Her raging only increased. Elder Woodruff quickly ordered the room cleared. The administration was performed again, and this time "the devil left, and she was entirely healed and fell asleep." The next day, Sunday, she bore testimony of her healing before a large congregation. [^20] Woodruff continued to perform healings but not as spectacles for unbelievers. [^21]

The same was true of speaking in tongues. Most of the apostles had witnessed or experienced this gift, and it was not uncommon among the British Saints. There is no evidence, however, that they encouraged the missionaries to pray for it or use it as a conversion tool. It was a sign that followed belief, not an evidence for unbelievers. [^22]

Gifts of the Spirit, nevertheless, abounded both with the apostles and among the Saints generally. In July 1840 Joseph Fielding noted that the gift of tongues and the gift of the interpretation of tongues were common among the Saints in Manchester. [^23] On February 8, 1841, Elder Levi Richards wrote of the missionaries' continuing success in Herefordshire and Gloucester, telling the readers of the Millennial Star that the gift of healing was manifest extensively and that the gift of tongues was received in most of the branches. [^24]

The gifts of the Spirit enjoyed by the Saints included dreams, visions, and prophesying. On March 12, 1840, for example, Anne Booth, a Manchester Saint, saw a recently martyred American apostle preaching to spirits in prison (those in the spirit world who had not heard the gospel in mortality) and was beginning to baptize them. John Wesley, the eighteenth-century British reformer and founder of Methodism, was among those spirits, and after the apostle baptized him, Wesley proceeded to baptize others. Latter-day Saint doctrine does not suggest that the dead themselves will baptize or be baptized in the spirit world, but Ann Booth's vision clearly anticipated the forthcoming doctrine and practice of baptism in behalf of the dead. Significantly, the apostles had not yet even heard of the doctrine from Joseph Smith, but Wilford Woodruff was so impressed when he heard about the vision that he wrote a full report of it in his journal. [^25] No doubt the description of the martyred American apostle brought to his mind memories of David W. Patten, one of the original members of the Quorum of the Twelve, who was killed in Missouri at the Battle of Crooked River on October 25, 1838.

The gifts of the Spirit did not encompass folk magic. The practice of magic received the apostles' clear denunciation and was prohibited within the Church. On March 27, 1841, Wilford Woodruff met in council with Church leaders in Hanley, where a Brother Mumford had been engaged in magic and fortune-telling. When he was practicing his priesthood properly, Woodruff noted, Mumford was unable to perform with his so-called "magic glasses," but because he persisted in his magical practices even after the council tried to persuade him to stop, his Church fellowship was withdrawn. At a conference in Hanley the next day, that decision was confirmed, and a resolution was passed that the Church would not fellowship "any individual who Practiced Magic fortune Telling, Black art &c for it was not of God." [^26]

SERVICE AND RECIPROCATED LOVE

All these perspectives, techniques, and policies might well have amounted to little, however, if the apostles themselves had not exemplified the qualifications essential for the success of any missionary as described in an early revelation on missionary work: "And faith, hope, charity and love, with an eye single to the glory of God, qualify him for the work. Remember faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, godliness, charity, humility, diligence." [^27] The journals and correspondence of the eight apostles in Great Britain demonstrate that these were the qualities that served them best. Their uncommon love for the people seemed to know no bounds. They willingly sacrificed personal comforts for the greater cause of the mission, and, though not timid, they demonstrated a deep humility that helped many feel the genuineness of their convictions.

Even at a distance Joseph Smith sensed what was happening in England and, especially, the love of the apostles. In a long epistle, which they received early in 1841, he expounded on this trait with eloquence:

Love is one of the leading characteristics of Deity, and ou[gh]t to be manifested by those who aspire to be the sons of God. A man filled with the love of God, is not content with blessing his family alone but ranges through the world, anxious to bless the whole of the human family. This has been your feelings and caused you to forego the pleasures of home, that you might be a blessing to others, who are candidates for immortality but who were strangers to the principals of truth and for so doing I pray that Heavens' choicest blessings may rest upon you. [^28]

The apostles' readily apparent love for the people was just as readily reciprocated. Heber C. Kimball told his wife that he had never before seen a more loving people than the Saints at Ribchester, commenting that he thought if he should ask them even to pluck out their eyes and give them to him they would do so. [^29] The experience of George A. Smith was a striking example of reciprocated love. In Staffordshire he felt totally inadequate before the better-educated people he was trying to teach, but through his deep concern for their spiritual well-being, along with his dedication and humble demeanor, he found his way into the hearts of many who were much older and clearly more sophisticated than he. They sought and took counsel from him, rejoiced whenever he was with them, and loved and revered him as highly as they could any religious leader. [^30]

THE POWER OF THE SPIRIT

Above all, the apostles attributed the success they found to their willingness to follow the dictates of the Spirit. Wilford Woodruff, for example, began a summary of his memorable Herefordshire experiences with the words "I Willford Woodruff being led by the spirit," and he concluded by writing "I feel thankful to God for all his mercy & kindness unto me & all the Saints in opening so many doors." [^31] Indeed, the story of their entire mission suggests that they profited from the counsel of Joseph Smith:

When the Twelve or any other witnesses stand before the congregations of the earth, and they preach in the power and demonstration of the Spirit of God, and the people are astonished and confounded at the doctrine, and say, "That man has preached a powerful discourse, a great sermon," then let that man or those men take care that they do not ascribe the glory unto themselves, but be careful that they are humble, and ascribe the praise and glory to God and the Lamb; for it is by the power of the Holy Priesthood and the Holy Ghost that they have power thus to speak. [^32]

OBSERVERS OF THE WORLD AROUND THEM

The Twelve had a healthy interest in the things around them, and considered it one of their responsibilities as Latter-day Saints to learn everything they could, even if occasionally doing so meant taking some time away from preaching. They took seriously an 1833 revelation through Joseph Smith that concluded, "It is my will that you should hasten to translate my scriptures, and to obtain a knowledge of history, and of countries, and of kingdoms, of laws of God and man, and all this for the salvation of Zion." [^33] As if to demonstrate the practical effect of this revelation, on October 29, 1840, Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith wrote a long letter to the Times and Seasons in Nauvoo with detailed extracts from Elder Woodruff's journal concerning the historic sites and monuments they had recently visited:

As we consider it perfectly consistant with our calling, with reason and revelation, that we should form a knowledge of kingdoms and countries, whether it be at home or abroad, whether it be ancient or modern, or whether it be of things past present or to come, whether it be in heaven, earth or hell, air or seas; or whether we obtain this knowledge by being local or travelling, by study or by faith, by dreams or by visions, by revelation or by prophecy, it mattereth not unto us; if we can but obtain a correct principle and knowledge of things as they are, in their true light, past, present, and to come. It is under such a view of things that we are endeavoring to avail ourselves of every opportunity in our travels among the nations of the earth, to record an account of things as they pass under our observation. [^34]

Joseph Smith agreed. The statement, he said, "refers to the liberty the Elders of the Church incidentally enjoyed while engaged in the ministry; and . . . it breathes that spirit of liberty in the pursuit of knowledge characteristic of the work of God in the last days." [^35]

Several years later, Brigham Young expressed the same feelings to his missionary sons in England. He wrote to Joseph A., who was in Manchester in 1855:

I wish you to lose no opportunity of making yourself familiar with all that is useful and likely to benefit you, for to be able to combat with the world we must make ourselves acquainted with the ways of the world. This can only be done by keeping your mind constantly on the alert and when in society never allow anything to escape your notice. Listen attentively, and observe minutely the manners, customs, and remarks of all, for from the most humble of our fellow creatures an observing man can learn something that will be useful to him in after life. Such has been my course and, from daily and hourly experience of its benefits, I recommend you to pursue the same.

There are many things you can inform your mind upon, the laws of England, her form of government; lose no opportunity in your travels of visiting her manufacturies, her works of art, her grand and spacious buildings, and all that is worthy of note, not from a mere idle curiosity but to store your mind with that which will benefit yourself and your brethren in after years. [^36]

In 1862 he advised Brigham, Jr., who was in Liverpool, to "improve yourself to the utmost in studying good books and in associating with, and listening to, and profiting by, the conversation and experience of good persons," and later he complimented his son on taking such advice seriously.

I am also pleased that you have been privileged to visit the Exhibition and other instructive places you mention, and approve of your plan of buying books descriptive of the noted places you visit, so far as they are to be had, that you may not only learn all you can at the time, but also have the means of refreshing your memory and learning still more when leisure moments permit after your return home. [^37]

As missionaries, then, the Twelve were not reluctant to take time out occasionally to study and enjoy the history, arts, and culture of Great Britain. Wilford Woodruff's journal especially is replete with notes of visit to historic sites and museums, including detailed descriptions of everything he saw. Many of these visits, as well as those of his colleagues, are noted elsewhere in this volume.

The missionaries were interested in public affairs, as well. On March 13, 1840, John Taylor went with Joseph Fielding to hear a lecture on the so-called Opium War with China. The war had begun as a result of China's efforts to keep opium out of the country and to expel British merchants who persisted in importing it. Fiercely opposed to the war, the irate speaker proclaimed that China had a right to keep the drug out and that the British were guilty of all manner of corruption. Fielding and Taylor were "well satisfied with the Lecture." The spirit of the address, wrote Fielding, "is that the Pagan Chinese have far more noble Principles than the Christians, so called, who will grow or sell anything, even [the] Souls of Men for Gain. . . . The Americans have protested against the Conduct of the British in attempting to blockade, etc. I pray God to turn all these things to his own Glory & that Truth may triumph." [^38] Three weeks later the two missionaries went to hear a lecture on socialism, another controversial topic of the day.

The apostles also appreciated the skills of the English in arts and crafts. Some of them had portraits painted before they left for home, and Brigham Young, himself a fine craftsman, ordered a handmade watch from Henry Connor, a watchmaker and the first LDS convert in London. He had the twelve letters of his name placed around the face of the watch instead of the twelve numerals. [^39]

EXTERNAL CONCERNS: FAMILIES

Amidst all their concerns and activities as missionaries, the apostles did not forget their families. Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, and John Taylor left their wives and children in pitiable conditions, and they could do little but worry, pray, and trust in the fulfillment of Joseph Smith's promise that they would be cared for. The families bore their burdens with extraordinary faith, [^40] as seen in the letters the wives wrote to their far-off missionary husbands.

The apostles' poignant letters show that they longed for home as much as they longed for success as emissaries of the Lord. Two letters written by Heber C. Kimball to Vilate in May 1840, for example, reflect his deep concerns, especially with where she would be living while he was gone. At first it seemed as if she would move to Kirtland, but he was relieved to find that she had decided to stay in Commerce. Friends were watching out for her, and he reminded her that the Lord had said that she would be blessed with friends as well as with the good things of the earth. He remembered her in all his prayers, and he was so delighted with her letters that he read them to the Saints with whom he met and even had one read in a public meeting. It made the people both laugh and cry, he said. [^41]

On June 12, 1840, Brigham Young wrote to his wife from Manchester and, in a choice expression of his values and mixed emotions, he said: "my soul says sweet home sweet home. . . . You might think that I am verry anxious to get home, but it is not so. When the Brethern [emigrant Saints] started from Liverpool I tried myself to see if I wanted to goe. I could not bare the thought of going, but when the time has fully com, and the Lord says goe home my hart then will leap for joy." [^42]

When they could, the apostles sent presents home and sometimes even a little money. When the John Moon company left for America in June, Brigham Young sent along a little box containing a few small presents and two letters. [^43] In September he sent some money with Theodore Turley, who, he later wrote Mary Ann, would pay her thirty dollars whenever she wanted it. "Glory to God in the highest for his goodness to me in putting it in my power to help my poor wife and Children to a little to by them a morsel of bread," he wrote with deep emotion. "It is not me but the Lord that has don it th[r]ough me." He hoped he could send even more soon, and he instructed his wife to purchase a "first rate" cow so they would have plenty of milk and butter when he got home so they could feed the poor, "for I shall have a grate menny to visit me." [^44] Such a request must have astounded Mary Ann, who was still wondering where her next meal was coming from.

George A. Smith, the only unmarried apostle, left behind a young woman, Bathsheba W. Bigler, with whom he corresponded regularly. On December 5, 1840, for example, he wrote longingly:

I keep you Still in Memory and the Pleasante hours which I have Spent in your Society are also Remembered. . . . And the Lord willing We Shall See Each other again & talk Over Matters. I am Determined Never to take another Mission across the Ocean without Leaveing a Rib at home unless the Lord So orders it.

On January 18, just three days before they had originally been scheduled to be married, he wrote her from Staffordshire, saying: "I am thinking the time will come When We Shall be One. The Lord knows and Will mak known in Due time. . . . if I could Enjoy your Society I Should be Well Satisfied but the Lord called and I have to Obey." [^45] He also confided his loneliness to Orson Pratt, his colleague and friend with whom he had much good-natured correspondence, who replied with a realistic though tough kind of comfort. "She will get a little annured to disappointments," he wrote, "so that it will not be entirely new for you to leave her thereafter." [^46]

George A. worked as hard as any of his colleagues, made many friends, and had outstanding success as a missionary, but Bathsheba never left his mind. In March 1841, as he prepared to return home, he penned a love poem:

While I am abroad I spend my Breath

in Prayer for her I Love in truth

In a Distant Land I call to Mind

my true and faithful friend So kind

When I Return From this Distant Land

I will take her by the Lovely hand

and Raise my voice in Humble Prayer

that God Would Make us A Heavenly Pair. [^47]

A NOTE ON CHURCH POLICY AND PRACTICE

In many ways the Church of 1840 was different from the Church today, and those familiar with present policies, practices, and perspectives should not be surprised to find that some things have changed.

Doctrinal essentials were the same as those taught today: the "first principles," the atonement of Christ, the apostasy and restoration, modern revelation, priesthood authority, the Second Coming and the Millennium, and so on. Joseph Smith's Articles of Faith were not yet written, but most of the ideas in them were fairly widely taught. In addition, the idea that the Saints were a "covenant people" and that in being baptized, they had accepted a "new and an everlasting covenant," [^48] was very much on their minds. For example, many of the early Saints closed their letters with a phrase such as "Yours in the Everlasting Covenant," or "Yours in the E.C." [^49]

What was not being taught in Great Britain by the missionary apostles was the wide range of doctrine opened up by Joseph Smith during the pivotal four years in Nauvoo, including "eternal progression," salvation for the dead, eternal marriage, and all the doctrines and practices relating to the temple ordinances. These and other refinements would come "line upon line" as the Saints were better prepared to receive them and as the need for additional light became apparent. [^50] The doctrine of baptism for the dead, for example, was introduced in Nauvoo while the apostles were in England. Joseph Smith first preached it on August 15, 1840, at the funeral of Seymor Brunson and elaborated on it again at a conference on October 4. [^51] Word of the new doctrine did not reach England until November or December, when Vilate Kimball reported the October sermon in a letter to her husband, who in turn wrote about it to Joseph Fielding. [^52]

Some aspects of Church organization were also different. The stake was the basic unit, but there were no "wards" until later in Nauvoo. In England there was a mission presidency, and each local "church," or "branch," had a president. Several branches were organized into "conferences." Whenever the organized conferences met, their meetings were also called conferences, and usually a member of the Twelve was present. It was the practice for the senior apostle present to call the meeting to order and then nominate someone else to be the president of that particular conference gathering. That president would then conduct the rest of the conference sessions. The same pattern was followed at the general conferences of the Church in England. [^53]

In addition to these minor differences in organization, there were some interesting differences in Church practice. There were no regular sacrament meetings as Latter-day Saints know them today. Rather, there were prayer or preaching meetings, sometimes in homes and sometimes in rented halls or chapels, where the sacrament of the Lord's Supper was often administered. Collection boxes frequently were passed in such Church meetings to raise money for the poor or for missionaries, a practice unheard of in Latter-day Saint services today. There were also public preaching meetings, scheduled by the missionaries strictly for missionary purposes. In these gatherings the elders were not reluctant to take up collections, partly because money was needed to pay for hired halls. [^54] When illness struck, the elders were called upon, as they are today, to administer to the sick by anointing them with oil as part of a priesthood blessing. What may seem peculiar to us, however, is that often the consecrated oil was applied to the affected part of the body, rather than simply to the crown of the head, and sometimes it was even taken internally. Church discipline was often more public, as members were asked to confess their transgressions in open meeting, and disciplinary actions were decided upon and announced in the conferences as well as in local branch meetings. Today such matters are taken care of in very private disciplinary councils.

An interesting variation between the attitudes of Church members in 1840 and those of today relates to the Word of Wisdom. Today this revelation enjoins upon Latter-day Saints the obligation not only to eat wisely and generally take care of their health but specifically to abstain from tea, coffee, alcohol, and tobacco. In the 1840s, however, total abstinence was not yet required. The Word of Wisdom, revealed through Joseph Smith in 1833, came "not by commandment or constraint, but by revelation and the word of wisdom, showing forth the order and will of God in the temporal salvation of all saints." [^55] Adherence was always encouraged, and drunkenness was forbidden, but it took many years for the present interpretation and practice to mature. [^56]

The apostles, nevertheless, preached the Word of Wisdom strongly, and because of their reputation for opposing the use of alcoholic beverages, they were regularly invited to speak at temperance meetings. They were most concerned with the avoidance of excess, and particularly drunkenness, and it seems that they personally avoided hard liquors of any sort, but they were not teetotalers. An occasional glass of wine on a special occasion was deemed appropriate, and at times they drank porter (a light beer) with their meals. [^57] In January 1841, on one of their frequent sightseeing tours, Wilford Woodruff and Heber Kimball visited what was said to be the largest wine vault in the world. They participated in the traditional tasting ritual, "found the wine a good article," but thought it "dreadful to see such vast sums of mony expended for intoxicating drinks when there are thousands nearly starving for bread in the streets." [^58] The missionaries also took tea, an important British tradition, when invited by gracious hosts and hostesses. [^59]

Finally, there were other subtle differences between missionary work today and missionary work in the 1840s. Modern missionary work is highly structured and closely supervised, complete with detailed weekly reports. In 1840 the Twelve only loosely supervised the missionaries under them. Even though they regularly received reports through the mail, there were no forms to fill out or report meetings to attend. Modern missionaries must remain within their assigned areas, but the missionaries of the 1840s paid little attention to boundaries.

Missionaries today usually get from one place to another by bicycle, automobile, or public conveyance, but the Twelve in Britain thought nothing of walking many miles a day to meet their various appointments. This fact suggests that their pace and timing, perhaps even their sense of time, were significantly different from those of missionaries in today's fast-paced world. In the countryside, especially, they spent literally hours, and sometimes all day, walking from one appointment to another, yet they usually seemed unhurried and unharried as they methodically went about their work. Heber C. Kimball, for example, spent the second week of May 1840 with Joseph Fielding walking from town to town outside Preston. On Sunday he preached to a full house in a large barn in Chatburn, and the next evening he preached at nearby Clitheroe, where five people were baptized. From there the two missionaries hiked to Waddington for an evening preaching engagement, and the next day, Wednesday, they crossed the river to the village of Chaigley. There they visited Jennetta Richards, heard her read a letter from Willard, and conducted a preaching meeting. Two days later they walked to Ribchester and then to Preston. By modern standards, spending so many hours simply walking between towns might seem wasteful of precious time, but they knew how to turn it into time well spent. As Joseph Fielding wrote, "our Hearts burned within us while we talked by the Way." [^60]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] John Taylor to Leonora Taylor, January 30, 1840, John Taylor Collection (Appendix B, Document 6) See the context of this statement in the discussion below. Although dated January 30, this letter was finished several days later.
[^2] See ibid., and note from George Cannon to Leonora Taylor penned at the end of this letter.
[^3] John Taylor to Leonora Taylor, January 30, 1840 (Appendix B, Document 6).
[^4] Woodruff, Journal, January 14, 1840, 1:405.
[^5] John Taylor to Leonora Taylor, January 30, 1840 (Appendix B, Document 6).
[^6] Ibid.
[^7] Woodruff, Journal, January 18, 1840, 1:407-8.
[^8] The chronology for these few days, and the days immediately following, is found in John Taylor to Leonora Taylor, January 30, 1840 (Appendix B, Document 6); Fielding, Diary; Woodruff, Journal. The dates, however, are one day wrong in both Taylor and Fielding, for the day they list as Sunday is dated wrong; Woodruff's dating corresponds correctly with the calendar.
[^9] Fielding, Diary, 50. Curiously, in his letter to Leonora, John Taylor made no mention of speaking in tongues.
[^10] D&C 60:15; see also D&C 99:4.
[^11] John Taylor to Leonora Taylor, January 30, 1840 (Appendix B, Document 6); Fielding, Diary, 50-51.
[^12] See the discussion of the Aitkenites in Appendix A.
[^13] John Taylor to Leonora Taylor, January 30, 1840 (Appendix B, Document 6).
[^14] Fielding, Diary, 52.
[^15] John Taylor to Leonora Taylor, January 30, 1840 (Appendix B, Document 6).
[^16] Fielding, Diary, 53-54.
[^17] As quoted in Evans, Century of "Mormonism," 101.
[^18] As she wrote to her husband: "I went over the river yesterday, and I got a letter from you, dated 15th Feb.; I never received a letter that gave me so much real comfort as it has done. I do rejoice, and praise God for what he has done in bringing my dear brother George, and sister Ann, into the Church, (the only Church with which the Lord is well pleased.) I do hope that the rest of our dear scattered ones may yet be gathered into the fold, and yet live and reign with our blessed Lord and Saviour." This was penned on April 14. See Leonora Taylor to John Taylor, April 12, 1840, and continued on April 14, Millennial Star 1 (July 1840): 63-65.
[^19] John Taylor to Leonora Taylor, January 30, 1840 (Appendix B, Document 6). See also Fielding, Diary, 53, and Roberts, Life of John Taylor, 79-80.
[^20] Fielding, Diary, 55-56.
[^21] Ibid., 56.
[^22] Ibid., 56.
[^23] Ibid., 59, 64.
[^24] Ibid., March 31, 1840, 68.
[^25] Ibid., 58, 67.
[^26] John Taylor to Joseph Smith, February 3, 1841, Times and Seasons 2 (May 1, 1841): 400-402.
[^27] Fielding, Diary, March 31, 1840, 68.
[^28] As extracted in Times and Seasons 1 (May 1840): 110.
[^29] Wilford Woodruff to Willard Richards, February 3, 1840, Willard Richards Collection.
[^30] Wilford Woodruff to Willard Richards, February 8, 1840, Willard Richards Collection.
[^31] For insight into the lives of at least some farmers in this era, see Fussell and Fussell, English Countrywoman, chapter 6, "Regency and Early Victorian Countrywomen," and Fussell and Fussell, English Countryman, chapter 6, "The Victorian Farmer."
[^32] There are several slightly differing accounts of what happened. The traditional one is found in Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, 116. Much of this work, including the part dealing with this episode, is based on Woodruff, Leaves, originally published in 1881. In preparing Leaves, Wilford Woodruff added details and interpretations not included in the original journal. The quotation above is often cited as the "most traditional" account because Cowley's work is the most well known and widely distributed book to date on Wilford Woodruff.
[^33] Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, 116.
[^34] Wilford Woodruff to Elders Robinson and Smith, October 7, 1840.
[^35] Wilford Woodruff to Elders Robinson and Smith, October 7, 1840, Times and Seasons 2 (February 15, 1841): 311-14 and (March 1, 1841): 327-31. Although the various accounts of this story are not consistent with each other, we have here put together what seems to be the most reasonable synthesis. See also Wilford Woodruff to Willard Richards, March 11, 1840, Willard Richards Collection; "Manuscript History of the British Mission;" Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, 116; Woodruff, Leaves, 77-78; Woodruff, Journal, March 2-4, 1840, 1:423. He noted in his diary on March 2 simply that "the Lord warned me to go to the South." Woodruff, Journal, March 2, 1840, 1:423.
[^36] Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, 118; Woodruff, Journal, March 8, 1840, 1:424.
[^37] Ibid., 118-19.
[^38] Wilford Woodruff, however, referred to this in his journal as a dark and sorrowful day for both of them, evidently because they enjoyed each other's company so much they hated to part.
[^39] Woodruff, Journal, April 16, 1840, 1:440. The statistics given here differ slightly from those in Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, 119, where he says that he had baptized forty-five preachers and 160 members of the United Brethren and had obtained one chapel and forty-five houses. Also, in the journal entry, he says forty-eight preachers in one place but forty-six in the next paragraph.
[^40] Woodruff, Journal, March 21, 22, and June 14, 1840, 1:426-27, 457-60.
[^41] Wilford Woodruff to Willard Richards, March 31, 1840, Willard Richards Collection.
[^42] Wilford Woodruff to Willard Richards, April 3, 1840, Willard Richards Collection.
[^43] Woodruff, Journal, April 5, 1840, 1:431-32.
[^44] Ibid., April 9, 1840, 1:433.
[^45] See Turley, "Mission Journal," 40-49, for the story of Turley's time in jail. This excellent reproduction of the Turley journal, edited by Richard E. Turley, Jr., includes some carefully researched notes and excerpts from various diaries that relate to parts of Turley's experience.
[^46] Wilford Woodruff to Willard Richards, March 31, 1840, and April 3, 1840. Richards noted on April 5 that he received a letter from Woodruff "desiring me to come down to Hereford immediately. & call for collections for bro Turley." Richards, Diary, expanded version, April 5, 1840.
[^47] Richards, Diary, February 21-23, 1840.
[^48] Buchanan, "Church in Scotland," 10.
[^49] Alexander Wright to Willard Richards, April 6, 1840, Willard Richards Collection.
[^50] Richards, Diary (expanded), February 17, 1840.
[^51] Richards, Diary, March 25, 1840.
[^52] Ibid., April 8, 1840.
[^53] For example, see the minutes of the Bran Green and Gadfield Elm Conference, September 14, 1840, where Brigham Young called the meeting together and then Thomas Kington, who was already president of this organized conference, was chosen, by nomination and vote, to be president of the immediate conference (i.e., meeting) (Woodruff, Journal, September 14, 1840, 1:513-15). See also minutes of the general conference in Manchester, October 6, 1840, in which Brigham Young called the conference to order and then Orson Pratt was chosen to be conference president (Millennial Star 1 [October 1840] 165-68). A misprint in the Star identifies this as the July conference, but it is clearly the October conference minutes that are being reported.
[^54] See, for example, Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, October 7, 1841, George A. Smith Collection. Here Orson tells George A. about the hall he had hired in Edinburgh, where he was preaching regularly but to very small congregations. The contributions at first scarcely averaged enough to pay the rent, though by the time the letter was written they were becoming more substantial.
[^55] D&C 89:2.
[^56] See Alexander, "Word of Wisdom"; Bush, "Word of Wisdom in Early Nineteenth-Century Perspective"; Peterson, "Historical Analysis of the Word of Wisdom." In the twentieth century the Word of Wisdom has taken on added significance as a test of faithfulness and obedience. In the nineteenth century, plural marriage and standing steadfast against persecution served a similar role.
[^57] On the morning of May 27, 1840, for example, Heber C. Kimball ordered a quart of porter, and on Christmas eve of that year Elders Kimball and Woodruff, in London, made themselves a supper of bread and cheese and a pint of beer (probably porter). Allen and Alexander, Manchester Mormons, 157; Woodruff. Journal, December 24, 1840, 1:582. See also Smith, "History," September 2, 1840, where a Campbellite minister invited Elder Smith to take some bread and cheese and beer with him, "the only minister that ever had good feelings enough to ask me to eat or drink with him in London."
[^58] Woodruff, Journal, January 23, 1841, 2:31-32; Kimball, Journal, January 23, 1841.
[^59] For example, see Woodruff, Journal, February 16, 1841, 2:47-48. Unfortunately for accurate historical perceptions, later summaries of the mission tended to recall incidents in light of later interpretations of the Word of Wisdom. One, for example, commented that "as soon as they obeyed the Gospel they abandoned their excess drinking; none of us drank any kind of spirits, porter, small beer, or even wine, neither did we drink tea, coffee, or chocolate" (Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 152).
[^60] Fielding, Diary, 73-74.
