David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

Chapter 6

LIKE FIRE IN THEIR BONES: THE FIRST CONTINGENT BEGINS WORK

The enthusiasm for missionary work could hardly have been greater than it was among the first contingent of apostles who set foot in England in 1840. "I feel the word of the Lord like fire in my bones," John Taylor told a group of interested listeners in Liverpool, [^1] and with that fervor the apostles were ready to make any sacrifice to deliver their message.

John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and Theodore Turley arrived in Liverpool on January 11, 1840. They landed at the Prince's Dock and found lodging at the Birmingham Arms, a most distasteful inn on Church Street. "May the Lord henceforth deliver me from such a place," Wilford Woodruff wrote in his journal.

The next day was the Sabbath, and the three missionaries attended religious services at two different Anglican churches. John Taylor began his mission by seeking out his wife's brother, George Cannon. Much surprised to see him, the Cannons invited him to dinner, treated him most cordially and, inevitably, made him homesick for Leonora. He briefly unfolded the gospel to them and left a copy of the Book of Mormon and Parley P. Pratt's Voice of Warning. Cannon was soon convinced that the Lord had a hand in sending his brother-in-law to England to show him the "dangerous state I lived in without even the form of religion." [^2]

On Monday, after clearing customs, the missionaries took their trunks and boxes to the Cannon home, left some of their belongings there, and about 6:00 in the evening departed for Preston. When they arrived two hours later, they found several Saints eagerly waiting at the station. Wilford Woodruff enjoyed an especially satisfying reunion with Willard Richards, whom he had last seen in Kirtland in 1837. They went to Richards's home and conversed late into the night. John Taylor, meeting Willard Richards for the first time, was warmly impressed with him and with the rest of the Saints who crowded around to see them. Their kindness and love as well as "their simple unadorned manner" appealed to him.

Though John Taylor had lived in England from the time of his birth in 1808 until 1830, economic conditions were far worse in 1840 than anything he remembered. On his first night in Preston, he had dinner at the home of John Parkman, a member of the Church and a shoemaker, but immediately afterward Mrs. Parkman had to leave home to go to work in a factory. Taylor wrote to Leonora that he was dismayed at seeing Mrs. Parkman leave her husband and the children to go to work, "thus breaking up those social endearments that unite the family. It makes my heart bleed to see these things. When will the earth cease to mourn?" [^3] Wilford Woodruff, too, was appalled at the general poverty and privation he observed, noting that the streets were crowded with the poor, both male and female, going to and from the factories in their wooden shoes and making "a great ratling over the pavement." It seemed to him that "the poor are in as great Bondage as the children of Israel in Egypt." [^4]

As in Liverpool, John Taylor's arrival in Preston was also a time of reunion, this time with old friends as well as family. One of the first people he met was Canadian Hiram Clark, who had been serving as a missionary in England since December. "He rejoiced to see me & I to see him," he reported to Leonora. "It gives us peculiar feelings to meet our friends in another country." He also had two uncles in Preston, George and James Hodgson. George and his son John were partners in a plumbing, painting, and glazing firm, and James's son, Robert, was their foreman. The first thing Taylor did was look them up and tell them of his mission. Before leaving he promised George and his family that if they would gather all his friends together when he returned, he would preach the gospel to them. [^5]

John Taylor's reunion with Joseph Fielding, on January 16, was especially warmhearted. The two were close because of their earlier experiences together in Canada, where they were both converted. "I thank God that he has preserved him & given him wisdom for the arduous duties devolving upon him," Taylor wrote to his wife. "We felt something like Jonathan & David after an absence of 3 years." [^6]

On Friday, January 17, the missionaries held a special council meeting at the Richards home. Interestingly enough, in light of later Church protocol, no one found it unusual for Joseph Fielding, president of the mission, to preside at the council meeting, even though two apostles were present. The apostles received the respect due their office, but Wilford Woodruff and John Taylor deferred to the authority of the mission president. They continued to do so until the Quorum of the Twelve itself assumed the mission presidency nearly six months later.

During the meeting, it was decided that John Taylor and Joseph Fielding would open missionary work in Liverpool, Hiram Clark would go to Manchester, and Wilford Woodruff and Theodore Turley would go to the Staffordshire Potteries and there seek the mind of the Lord about their going to Birmingham. Willard Richards was to go where the Spirit directed him. The next day they met again at the Richards home for "a season of prayer & fasting" [^7] and to give blessings to each other, after which Elders Woodruff, Turley, and Clark left by rail for Manchester. [^8]

Mission of the TwelveHCJOHN TAYLOR IN LIVERPOOL

John Taylor, working with Joseph Fielding, had a busy four days even before he got to Liverpool. Sunday morning began with a street meeting in Preston, which somewhat surprised Elder Taylor, but he was assured that the Saints had been holding such meetings for some time. He and Joseph Fielding also attended several other meetings that day, and at one of them a group from Longton persuaded them to stop there on Wednesday, on their way to Liverpool.

On Monday Elders Fielding and Richards took Elder Taylor across the river to Penwortham, where several people from surrounding towns were gathered to hear him. That evening he obliged them, taking as his text Romans 1:16: "For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth." Finally, on Wednesday, Taylor and Fielding left for Liverpool, stopping, as promised, in Longton, where they enjoyed an evening filled with spiritual delight. At a meeting in the home of William Blackhurst, John Taylor preached on the restoration of the gospel, taking as his text Revelation 14:6. The audience, including some who had begun to belittle the Church, was very attentive. Afterwards, during a visit with the Blackhurst family, Elder Taylor spoke in tongues, and still later, at the home of Deacon Rawcliff, he did so again. His message, upon interpretation, told Joseph Fielding that he had been faithful in his office, that the Lord would continue to bless him in ways he had not even imagined, and that he would bring many to Zion. Such a blessing left the steadfast mission president weeping for joy. [^9]

The next day the missionaries walked thirteen miles to Ormskirk, failed to find an opportunity to preach, hired a gig (a light, two-wheeled, two-passenger, one-horse carriage) to carry them the next five miles, and then took a coach to Liverpool. Fielding spent the night at a tavern, while John Taylor went again to the Cannon home, which soon became the permanent Liverpool residence for both missionaries.

On their first day in Liverpool, the elders found themselves in an ardent discussion with two learned religious leaders. One, a Mr. Kent, seemed at first to consider their message seriously, but then a Mr. Stewart arrived. Once a priest in the Church of England, Stewart now led a dissenting Staffordshire congregation. He rejected their testimony outright, apparently after hardly listening, whereupon the missionaries warned him in a straightforward manner that if he persisted in this way, he would lose whatever light he had and his own work would never prosper.

As early as 1831 a revelation instructed missionaries that if the "congregations of the wicked" rejected them, they should "shake off the dust of thy feet against those who receive thee not, not in their presence, lest thou provoke them, but in secret; and wash thy feet, as a testimony against them in the day of judgment." [^10] Stewart's blunt rejection was so harsh that the two elders felt duty-bound to do what the revelation said. Accordingly, they found a private place and washed their feet against their antagonist to symbolize that they believed they had done all they could to warn him of the consequences of rejecting their message. As they "bore testimony before the Lord," they also uttered a prayer in Stewart's behalf, asking their Father in Heaven that he be forgiven and led to the truth. They felt better about Mr. Kent and had some hope that he would continue to listen. So ended John Taylor's first full day of missionary work in Liverpool. [^11]

The next day, Sunday, was especially notable because it marked the beginning of missionary success among the Aitkenites. [^12] The missionaries began the day by attending services at an Aitkenite chapel where Timothy R. Matthews, Joseph Fielding's brother-in-law, was the minister. The brethren were probably relieved that Matthews, who had already rejected the gospel, was not there, especially when they heard a sermon by a devout young preacher who deplored the state of the existing church, prayed for the Holy Ghost, and looked forward to the establishment of the kingdom of Christ. That this kingdom had been established was John Taylor's message, and he longed to proclaim it to the congregation. Afterward, he and Joseph Fielding met in the vestry with several class leaders and preachers, who immediately began to inquire about their beliefs. Elder Taylor complimented them on their many correct principles and practices, including baptism by immersion and the laying on of hands, and then announced to his listeners that he and Fielding had traveled two thousand miles without purse or scrip to testify to them that the Lord had revealed himself from heaven and restored the things for which they were so anxiously looking and praying. "Glory be to God," he heard several people shout in great emotion. "Brethren & Friends," he continued, "I feel an anxious desire to deliver this testimony. I feel the word of the Lord like fire in my bones," and he asked for further opportunity to present his entire message.

John Taylor's impromptu sermon was followed by considerable discussion. Some of his hearers were delighted, but others were upset. They asked if the two were Mormons. No, Taylor explained, they belonged to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, sometimes known by the term Mormons. "We have heard an unfavorable opinion of you by our Pastor Mr. Matthews & Aitken," commented one listener. "Mr. Matthews says that the thing is from Hell." The missionaries then asked for an appointment to come back and preach to them, but even though some apparently were disposed to agree, the group decided that that would not be proper without permission from the Reverend Timothy Matthews. They parted, though, with friendly handshakes.

Next they went to a Baptist meeting at the Music Hall, apparently still looking for an opportunity to preach. The Baptist gathering was only a prayer meeting, however, so preaching was not appropriate, but the leader, Mr. Bennett, invited them to his home. Bennett told them that even if they were allowed to preach, the people were so unyielding that they would not hear them out. "I am afraid that the religion of this Generation will sink them to hell," John Taylor wrote to his wife. "They have so much religion that they have no time to listen to the truths of God." [^13]

That evening they were back at the Aitkenite chapel. After the sermon William Mitchell, one of the preachers, invited them to spend the night at his home. There, late into the night, they taught the gospel to Mitchell and his wife, who were delighted with their message. "This was just what we hoped for," Fielding noted in his journal, "that the Lord [would] open the heart of one or 2 to converse with us." [^14]

When the elders got up the next morning, Monday, Mitchell had gone to work, but they were invited to come back on Tuesday evening. When they arrived, they found that their host had taken a great deal of criticism from his fellow preachers, who had even made him promise that he would not allow missionaries to preach in his home. He told them, however, that they could not stop him from talking with the Mormons. His wife, meanwhile, had invited several friends and neighbors to hear the missionaries preach, but because of Mitchell's promise she had to tell them not to come. Nevertheless, about a dozen people showed up at the house, anxious to hear what the elders had to say. Taylor and Fielding talked with them, carefully trying to avoid the charge that they were preaching, and by the end of the evening several accepted an invitation to hear them preach on Sunday evening. Mitchell was so pleased that he got no sleep that night. Both he and his wife had decided to become Latter-day Saints.

Church responsibilities, meanwhile, included more than missionary work, and Joseph Fielding, still president of the mission, was burdened with other concerns. During this week, for example, he received letters from his counselors William Clayton in Manchester and Willard Richards in Preston, both detailing problems within their branches. Fielding thus had to take considerable time from missionary work to write to his coworkers with suggestions and instructions.

On February 2 Taylor and Fielding began holding regular Sunday evening preaching meetings in a rented hall on Preston Street that held more than three hundred people. That night John Taylor preached the first public LDS sermon in Liverpool to a near capacity crowd. Taking as his text Jude 3, "It was needful for me to . . . exhort you, that ye should earnestly contend for the faith," he gave a powerful sermon on the restoration of the gospel. He concluded by saying, "This is glorious intelligence & asked is it not. Yes was responded by many & praise the Lord." After Joseph Fielding bore testimony of the truth of what Elder Taylor had said, Taylor told the congregation that the Lord had sent them there to baptize and invited any who wanted to repent and be baptized to make it known. "The spirit of the Lord indeed was with us," he reported to Leonora, and several weeping and rejoicing people gathered round and told of their conversions and of special spiritual manifestations that had come to them. [^15] William Mitchell testified to several of his Aitkenite class members that these things were of God and told them of his own decision to be baptized.

The following Tuesday, February 4, at 3:00 in the afternoon at the seashore was the time and place set for the first baptisms in Liverpool. Even then, questions continued to plague some who had been baptized by the Reverend Mr. Matthews in the same spot not long before and whose friends among the Aitkenites were still trying to dissuade them by telling them that there was no need for rebaptism. Not yet fully comprehending the principle of priesthood authority, they worried that being baptized again would be an affront to their friends. William Mitchell, on the other hand, had no such reservations. Ten people, including the Mitchells, were baptized that day in the chilly waters of the Irish Sea, and by the end of the service, all reservations had disappeared. "We left them rejoicing," said Joseph Fielding, and as they returned to their homes, the warmth of the Spirit abundantly compensated for the cold of the atmosphere. [^16]

More people soon were baptized, among them George and Ann Cannon. George had read the Book of Mormon twice, and concluded that "no wicked man could write such a book as this; and no good man would write it, unless it were true and he were commanded of God to do so." [^17] Leonora was overwhelmed with joy when she heard the news. [^18]

These converts became the seed of the Church in Liverpool as they broadcast their conversion to friends and neighbors. "I hope that more of your friends may yet embrace the gospel," John wrote to Leonora. "Your sister [i.e., sister-in-law] Ann has introduced us to many of them. She is a complete missionary & happy in the Lord." [^19]

Elders Taylor and Fielding, meanwhile, continued to contend with the Aitkenites. On the evening of February 11, for instance, Timothy Matthews visited the Mitchell home, evidently trying to persuade the newly baptized converts that they had made a mistake. Several other people also were there, including the two missionaries, and the sometimes heated exchange included discussions of the Book of Mormon, the Holy Ghost, and authority in the ministry. Matthews commented that he and Aitken had been wrong when they once said that they had no authority, for, he believed, they were called of God, by the Spirit, to preach the gospel, and that was authority enough. The debate continued until 10:00 that night, after which Taylor and Fielding remained for a while to visit with the Mitchells. Suddenly, perhaps as a faith-bolstering sign to the dedicated new converts, Elder Taylor began speaking in tongues. When interpreted, the message was another blessing to Joseph Fielding for his faithfulness. [^20]

The two missionaries were deeply concerned with the continuing activities of the Reverend Mr. Matthews and his colleague, a Mr. Bradford, and, because Matthews and Bradford had been given ample opportunity to accept the gospel as well as their warnings, the missionaries felt they must now bear witness against them. Consequently, the next day they found a private spot, washed their feet as a testimony against their antagonists and, kneeling down in the cleft of a rock, "bore witness of it unto the Lord, according to the Commandment." As Joseph Fielding explained in his journal, "We felt that we had done as God would have us do." [^21]

Their worries about the possible effect of their Aitkenite adversaries seemed confirmed when they visited William Mitchell that afternoon and found him greatly troubled, "almost in the Dust," because of the pressures received from his former colleagues. "There is a mighty Struggle against the Work here & we need great Power to resist it; Lord grant it for Christ's sake," the anxious Fielding wrote in his journal. Matthews continued his intensive efforts to get his flock back, and the missionaries unhappily saw some of them begin to waver. [^22]

Though Fielding occasionally went to Preston or Manchester on Church business, he continued to work closely with John Taylor in Liverpool. They worked through Church members, relatives, and other acquaintances, and slowly the message spread. By the end of February, William Mitchell's brother and sister-in-law were listening, and on March 17 both of them were baptized. [^23]

The newly baptized Saints were as generous in helping the two missionaries as their poor circumstances would permit. The Saints mended their clothes, gave them food and money, and provided lodging. Just as Joseph Fielding was leaving Liverpool on February 27, for example, George Cannon insisted that he take a sovereign, as a loan to be repaid whenever he could do it. Sister Chandler, who often fed the missionaries, also gave him money. A Sister Arrington let them use her home as a place to hold preaching services and often gave them other assistance. The grateful Fielding expressed his feelings in his journal on March 31:

The Saints are very kind; we want for nothing temporal. Sis. Arrington in particular has been so always even when most others were cast down, almost like the Disciples at the time our Lord was betrayed, she still stood by us, believed our Words, gave us Money in time of need & fed us liberally at all times. Her Sister Mary Dixon is of the same Stamp, or much like her; not that we find fault with any of them. I feel to love the Saints. [^24]

Various preachers, including Aitkenites, continued to be their greatest antagonists. On February 21 John Taylor attempted to convince one of them that rebaptism with proper authority was necessary, but the preacher became quite insulting. Though combative in nature, Elder Taylor held his temper well. Fielding, however, had to utter a silent prayer to God for patience. [^25] Perhaps it was preachers such as these who led John Taylor to comment scornfully to Joseph Smith that some ministers in Liverpool "were so good in general, and so pure, that they had no room for the gospel, they were too holy to be righteous, too good to be pure, and had too much religion to enter into the kingdom of heaven." [^26]

Taylor and Fielding continued preaching on Sunday evenings in the hall on Preston Street, in addition to holding regular meetings in the homes of the Saints, until the end of March, when they moved to a hall on Renshaw Street, closer to the center of town. The new hall cost them four shillings per week, but it also held between three and four hundred people, and there they were able to hold two meetings a day. [^27]

By the time the other apostles arrived, there were twenty-eight members of the Church in Liverpool. That was a modest number for three months' work, but John Taylor nevertheless felt elated at the progress. He had baptized several of Leonora's relatives, they had begun to make inroads into the Aitkenite stronghold, and large crowds were gathering to hear him preach. "The little stone is rolling forth," he wrote to Leonora on March 16. "One of the brethren dreamed he saw two men come to Liverpool, they cast a net into the Sea and pulled it out full of fishes, he was surprised to see them pick the small fish out first and then the large; well if we get all the fish I shall be satisfied." [^28]

Mission of the TwelveHCWILFORD WOODRUFF IN THE POTTERIES

On January 18 Wilford Woodruff, Theodore Turley, and Hiram Clark set out from Preston for the Staffordshire Potteries. They stopped that night at Manchester, where they found the Saints eager to greet them and quick to seek healing and other blessings from Elder Woodruff. Before the day was over, he had cast the devil from one sister and administered to five people who were ill. Three days later he and Turley went to Burslem, in the heart of the Potteries, but on January 29, evidently believing that Elder Turley could be especially effective in his old hometown, Woodruff sent him on to Birmingham, about fifty miles further south. "We are determind by the assistance of God to open a Door in every town from the Potteries to Birmingham & erect a Standard in it," he wrote Willard Richards. Reflecting the urgency felt by all the apostles, he added, "I feel as though it will be a day of warning & not of many words to England. I think that what we do we shall do quickly." [^29]

Located some thirty miles south of Manchester, the Potteries centered on six towns: Tunstall, Burslem, Hanley, Stoke-on-Trent, Fenton, and Longton (also known as Lane End). The towns were dominated by the famous bottle ovens where the precious earthenware and stoneware were fired. Mixing, molding, decorating, glazing, and firing all required special skills, and the products of the Potteries became known the world over. By the 1840s the towns were becoming crowded as out-of-work migrants from the countryside sought employment, and children were often employed for long hours in the factories. As in Manchester, the smoke from the bottle ovens darkened the air. The pollution was local, however, and the rolling countryside around the towns still provided delightful, unspoiled scenery for those passing through.

Wilford Woodruff remained in the Potteries for about six weeks, working with Alfred Cordon and other local Church members. He walked from village to village, getting to know the Saints. He became especially well acquainted with two recent converts in Hanley: William Benbow, a grocer, and his wife, Ann.

As in Preston and Manchester, the Saints in the Potteries were both honored and awed at the presence of a modern apostle. On January 26, for example, a sister in Burslem wanted to wash his feet, evidently as a sign of her own humility and sense of service, and Elder Woodruff consented. Then, he noted in his journal, the spirit of prophecy came over him, and he delivered to her a comforting message about the future in the gospel of her sons and daughters.

In the Potteries, as elsewhere, Mormonism had its adversaries, and it was not long before Wilford Woodruff met some of them. One confrontation came on the night of February 6, while he was preaching to approximately four hundred people in Hanley. He described the encounter to Willard Richards in words that conveyed his image of himself as a warrior in the cause of truth. While he was preaching, he said, several priests arrived,

armed with i[n]visible weapons to give me dreadful battle upon the Book of Mormon. The Lord showed it to me & I preached to them upon the Book of Mormon & disarmed them of every weapon that they had chosen to fight me with & it flung them into confusion & they did not wish to leave without doing sumthing & so they jumped upon a Bench & roared & hallowed like mad men untill they were not only checked up but pulled off from the Bench by the people.

Elder Woodruff answered questions as long as he thought proper and then left the hall "all in an uproar." Such opposition pleased him, for, he said, "I like to see some excitement & things are working about right now in the potteries to have the people hear the word whether they embrace it or not. The priests are quite mad because we are getting a hold in Hanly." [^30]

He was encouraged by his work in the Potteries, for in a short time he had baptized about forty converts. Apparently he had planned to stay much longer, but a combination of circumstances, including the strong impression of the Spirit, sent him elsewhere.

Mission of the TwelveHCWILFORD WOODRUFF AND THE HEREFORDSHIRE CONVERSIONS

Herefordshire, a beautiful farming country dominated by the lovely Malvern Hills, lies about seventy miles south of the Potteries. In contrast to the crowded poverty of the cities, the region offered the missionaries exceptionally pleasant conditions, and they found it delightful to wander through the unpolluted countryside. There were, of course, both rich and poor among the Herefordshire farmers, and some were landowners whereas others were tenants, but in general life was good for those fortunate enough to be able to stay on the farm during these trying times. [^31] More importantly, however, in Herefordshire Wilford Woodruff found a people singularly well prepared to receive the gospel.

The remarkable story of Wilford Woodruff's Herefordshire mission actually began in Staffordshire with William Benbow. [^32] Elder Woodruff worked closely with Benbow, preached in his home, and spent at least thirteen nights there. William told him about his brother, John, a prosperous farmer in Herefordshire, and his wife, Jane, who were members of the United Brethren and openly seeking for a restoration of the ancient gospel.

Theodore Turley, meanwhile, returned from Birmingham on February 28 and began urging Wilford Woodruff to take up missionary work in that city. Elder Woodruff seemed persuaded and decided to leave Turley in charge of the Potteries, presumably so he himself could go to Birmingham, not far distant. But on Sunday, March 1, during the opening hymn at a meeting of the Saints in Hanley, the Spirit whispered to Elder Woodruff, "This is the last meeting that you will hold with this people for many days." Though surprised, he was so sure of what he felt that he made the announcement to the congregation. [^33] He also discussed his impression with William Benbow, who immediately offered to take him to meet John and Jane Benbow in Herefordshire and even to pay his way there. [^34]

Mission of the TwelveHCThe next morning Elder Woodruff "went in secret before the Lord" to seek His will. "As I asked," he later reported, "the Lord gave, and showed me that it was his will that I should go immediately to the south of England." [^35] Birmingham, to be sure, was south of the Potteries, but it was clear that he was not to stop there. About forty miles beyond was Herefordshire, where, though they did not yet know it, William Benbow's brother and a host of friends were waiting for what Wilford Woodruff would bring.

Mission of the TwelveHCOn Tuesday, accompanied by William Benbow and William's eight-year-old son, Wilford was on his way by omnibus. They spent the night at Wolverhampton and the following day took a coach as far as Worcester and then walked about fourteen miles to John Benbow's farm at Castle Froome, Ledbury, Herefordshire. They were immediately welcomed and invited to spend the night, though it was two o'clock in the morning, after a lengthy discussion of the gospel, before anyone retired.

Mission of the TwelveHCJohn and Jane Benbow immediately opened their home for friends and neighbors to hear Elder Woodruff, and within a few days he began to reap a harvest that he had scarcely dared dream of. On the evenings of March 5 and 6, Benbow invited the people of the neighborhood to meet at his home, in which there was a room licensed for preaching, to hear the American missionary, and on the second day, the Benbows and four friends were baptized. Woodruff spent most of the following day, Saturday, clearing out a pond on the Benbow farm in preparation for more anticipated baptisms on Sunday. On the Sabbath he preached three sermons in three different locations to an estimated one thousand people. (The local Anglican parish church reportedly had a congregation of only fifteen that day.) The last sermon of the day was at the Benbow farm, where one of the audience turned out to be a constable sent by the local parish rector with a warrant for Woodruff's arrest. The American missionary pointed out that he, like the rector, had a license to preach, but that if the constable would wait until after the meeting he would talk with him. "The power of God rested upon me, the spirit filled the house, and the people were convinced," Elder Woodruff later recalled. When the meeting was over, seven people asked for baptism, including, ironically, the constable and four preachers. After being immersed in the newly prepared pond, these seven, along with the six previously baptized, were all confirmed members of the Church. Wilford Woodruff administered the sacrament of the Lord's supper, and the rest of the evening was spent rejoicing. "I praise God for his goodness in opening my way," [^36] he wrote in his journal that night.

Mission of the TwelveHCThe parish rector, however, was not through with Elder Woodruff. He sent two people to listen to his next sermon, but they, too, were "pricked in their hearts," believed what they heard, and were baptized. Understandably alarmed, the rector stopped sending people to hear the Mormon preacher. Several months later ministers in the area petitioned the Archbishop of Canterbury to request of Parliament a law prohibiting the Mormons from preaching for, they said, in seven months they had baptized fifteen hundred people. The archbishop and his council rejected the request, and, according to Wilford Woodruff, even chided the ministers by telling them that "if they had the worth of souls at heart as much as they valued ground where hares, foxes, and hounds ran, they would not lose so many of their flock." [^37]

One March 11, a very pleased William Benbow left for home, [^38] after two weeks that had demonstrated some important elements of successful missionary work. William had fulfilled an obligation as a Church member by being concerned for his family and leading Elder Woodruff to a people primed for baptism. Wilford, at the same time, had listened to William, prayed for guidance, and followed the dictates of divine inspiration. The result was the beginning of a most dramatic harvest in LDS missionary history.

Wilford Woodruff continued to preach daily and to baptize almost as often. By the time he left for the mid-April conference in Preston, he had baptized 158 people, including forty-eight United Brethren preachers, a clerk of the Church of England, a constable, and "a number of wealthy farmers." In addition, another two hundred people were ready to be baptized. These converts brought with them forty-two places already legally licensed for preaching, including one chapel. "This," Woodruff wrote with enthusiasm as well as thanksgiving, "has opened the largest field for labour & increase of numbers of any door that has been opened in the same length of time since the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints has been esstablished.... I feel thankful to God for all his mercy & kindness unto me & all the Saints in opening so many doors that the kingdom of God may roll forth that there may be a people prepared for the coming of Jesus Christ." [^39]

Especially important among the newly baptized converts was Thomas Kington, superintendent of the United Brethren organization, who, with his wife, Hannah, was baptized on March 21. Ordained to the office of elder the following day, this effective leader was called within three months to preside over the Gadfield Elm Conference, which consisted of twelve branches. [^40] "Glory Hallaluyah the work of God rolls on," Wilford Woodruff wrote in his journal the day Kington was baptized, and little wonder. With Benbow, Kington, and fifteen other preachers already in the Church, the harvest in Herefordshire could hardly fail to continue.

Wilford Woodruff received another unexpected boon with the conversion of Kington and other United Brethren preachers. They gave him their Preacher's Plan, a printed schedule of meetings to be held during the next three months for all their congregations in Herefordshire, Gloustershire, and Worcestershire. With all the baptisms, most of the names on the March 1840 plan could simply be left in place and the converted preachers could be sent out to preach as Latter-day Saints to the same congregations.

Woodruff's success and the potential that lay ahead so overwhelmed him that he pleaded with Willard Richards to leave his wife, Jennetta, with friends so that he could come and help. "I cannot do the work alone," he wrote on March 31. "I am called to Baptize 4 or 5 times a day. I want no better man than yourself to council and labor with me here & help me reep this mighty harvest." [^41] Three days later he wrote again, still pleading with him to come to Herefordshire. "Their is no field at present in England, where your labour & council is more needed or would be of more benefit than to join me in this field a season."

Success itself presented problems, including the possibility that the recently converted preachers would soon find the doors of their former congregations closed to Mormon preaching. Woodruff told them to continue to meet their appointments and prepare the people for the gospel but not to administer any gospel ordinances until he could get some help in organizing the Church and ordaining "such persons as God shall call." "It has put me at times to my wits end," he explained to Willard Richards, "to know what to do with so many places of preaching & preachers." Then he added, in wistful frustration, "I wonder why the Twelve do not come from America." [^42]

Mission of the TwelveHCAnglican ministers warned their congregations against Wilford Woodruff and his followers. Other people also were wrought up, including rowdies who did what they could to stop the continuing baptisms. On Sunday, April 5, for example, Wilford Woodruff obtained permission from Daniel Browetts, a member of the Church, to use his pool in the village of Leigh to baptize ten people. But, as the preparatory services came to a close, a mob of about one hundred people gathered, and the owner, fearing what might happen to his property, withdrew permission. "You American whare are you going to wash your sheep?" the rowdies jeered as they followed the missionary while he searched for another place. Late in the afternoon, the crowd finally dispersed, Browetts renewed his permission, and Woodruff began the baptisms. The mob showed up again, but amid the jeers he was able to baptize nine with no injury except, perhaps, to the pride of a dog thrown into the pool. [^43] Four days later a similar mob broke up a preaching service, preventing several people from being baptized. Some wanted baptism so badly that they waited until midnight, but when they went back to the pool, the troublemakers were still there. Nevertheless, Woodruff went into the water and baptized five people while the mob showered them with stones. One stone hit him on the top of the head, nearly knocking him under the water. Concentrating on the work at hand was difficult, to say the least, but, wrote the apostle, "the Lord saved me from falling & I continued untill I had closed my Baptizing & my mind was stayed on God." [^44]

That same day, April 9, Wilford Woodruff received the news he had been waiting for since January: the five other apostles had arrived in England and a conference had been called for the fifteenth in Preston. The next afternoon he spent several hours with John Benbow, and then, with two pounds in his pocket—Benbow's gift to take care of his expenses to and from the conference—he set out for Preston.

On the way he stopped in Staffordshire to visit the Saints and Elder Turley, who had been jailed on March 16. Seventeen years earlier Turley had emigrated to Canada, but he allegedly still owed money in England that, because of financial misdealings by his business partner, he simply could not pay. John Jones claimed to be one of Turley's long-standing creditors, but he was also a bitter enemy of the Church, and it was Jones who swore out the warrant that landed Turley in jail, where he languished until May 8. All his colleagues believed, and apparently with good cause, that he was in jail unlawfully and that the primary reason for the warrant was to hinder the missionaries. [^45]

With no funds of his own, Turley could hardly have survived in jail without the largess of the local Saints, who provided him with food and other necessities. When Wilford Woodruff was pleading by mail with Willard Richards to come to Herefordshire, he also asked him to help collect what funds he could from Preston, Manchester, and the Potteries and deliver them to Elder Turley. [^46] Woodruff also took him some provisions when he stopped by on April 11. He visited for an hour and then traveled on, arriving in Preston on the night of April 13 for what he termed a "happy interview" with some of the Twelve.

WILLARD RICHARDS: THREE MONTHS OF TRIAL AND PREPARATION

The first quarter of 1840 was a time of heavy trial for Willard Richards, the thirty-five-year-old counselor in the British Mission presidency. First, he was assigned at the January council to correspond regularly with all the brethren laboring as missionaries in both England and Scotland. That alone took a substantial amount of time. In addition, he had the affairs of the branch in Preston to deal with, including a number of heart-wrenching problems among the Saints and the need, at times, to conduct Church disciplinary action. He further kept himself busy visiting Church members in Preston and surrounding towns, preaching and setting the affairs of the Church in order. He also had his own financial problems, his father-in-law still rejected him, and the frail Jennetta, pregnant with their second son, was almost constantly ill. These three months were a time of testing for the man who would soon be ordained to the apostleship.

One particularly difficult challenge came his way on February 21, when he made his first visit to the town of Burnley. There he discovered some unfortunate difficulties among the members so serious that they had held no meetings for several weeks. On Sunday, February 23, he called them together, somehow settled their problems, and got them to promise they would henceforth hold and attend their meetings. Then, after preaching a sermon, he returned to Preston. [^47]

Richards corresponded regularly with the missionaries in Great Britain, giving them both comfort and advice. On April 6, for example, Elder Alexander Wright reported on the work in Scotland, and he thanked Richards for the "fatherly advice" that helped remove the "downcast" feelings of his companion, Samuel Mulliner. Wright and Mulliner, converts from Canada, were the first two Mormon missionaries in Scotland, having arrived in Glasgow on December 20, 1839. By the end of March, they had baptized only ten people [^48] and were discouraged. "We feil our selves but children," Wright wrote to Richards, "and feil the need of some of our fathers to be with us yet we have no need to complain for our hevenly father is with us and through our meek instrumentality the work is moving on in this place." He reported on their latest baptism and indicated that he hoped to baptize two preachers from Paisley—a Baptist and a Methodist—both of whom had stopped preaching and were coming to Mormon meetings. "The wheel is now started in Scotland and t[h]rough the prayers and asistance of our brethren and the lord being our helpers we are determened to keep it roling." [^49] Such letters must have returned comfort to Elder Richards.

Though he spent precious little time with her, Richards's deepest concern was always with Jennetta. Her father still did not accept him, but the relationship seemed to improve a little and he was received somewhat kindly when he visited Walkerfold on February 17. [^50] Jennetta's pregnancy was hard on her naturally frail body, and her continual illness was a constant worry to her husband. All her hardships affected her feelings, too, and at times they caused her faith to waver, which also worried Willard. On March 12 she received a blessing through the laying on of hands and, Willard gratefully noted in his journal, "her faith began to revive." Her sickness continued, however, and finally, on March 15, she left Preston with her sister to go to her father's place in Walkerfold. Willard hoped that this would lead to an improvement of her health and also, as he put it, "that she might be released from the grasp of the power of evil which had long been striving to overcome her & me." [^51]

During the next two weeks Jennetta kept in touch with her husband by mail. On April 7, and again the following day, he stopped at Walkerfold to visit her. Exhausted when he arrived on April 8, he was delighted when, for the first time since their marriage, Jennetta's father invited him to spend the night. The weary missionary gratefully accepted. He was also grateful for another blessing that day: the brethren of the Church had given him money to buy some clothes. [^52]

The following day, refreshed after his stay at Walkerfold, Willard returned to a stunning surprise in Preston. As he walked into his room about 4:00 P.M., he found waiting for him none other than his old friends and mentors, Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. The rest of the apostles had arrived from America on April 6, 1840, and were ready to take up the work as a quorum. Five days later Willard would be counted among their number.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Parley P. Pratt to Mary Ann Pratt, April 6, 1840, Parley P. Pratt Collection (Appendix B, Document 9). Pratt had left his wife in charge of his book business to collect all the current debts, sell as many books as she could, and then leave the business in charge of a friend who, Pratt promised, would be given a good percentage of the profits for his trouble.
[^2] Smith, Journal, April 6, 1840.
[^3] Young, Manuscript History, 69; Smith, Journal, April 6, 1840.
[^4] Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, May 2, 1840, Heber C. Kimball Collection. In this letter Kimball indicates that the date was April 9, but the journals of George A. Smith and Brigham Young both make it clear that it was on Wednesday, April 8, that they all went to Preston by rail.
[^5] Heber C. Kimball and Joseph Fielding to the Editors, May 6, 1840, Times and Seasons 1 (July 1840): 138-39.
[^6] Richards, Diary (expanded), April 14, 1840.
[^7] Woodruff, Journal, April 15, 1840, 1:435-38.
[^8] Young, Manuscript History, 71.
[^9] As cited in Willard Richards to Brigham Young, August 22, 1840, Brigham Young Papers. Brigham was in Preston when the letter arrived in Manchester. Willard Richards decided not to send it on and chance losing it in the mails, for Brigham was returning to Manchester soon anyway. He opened it, however, reported that it was a "very affectionate letter," and quoted this much. Mary Ann had begun the letter in April but did not get it finished or mailed until July 10.
[^10] Fielding, Diary, 65.
[^11] Joseph Fielding to Willard Richards, March 25, 1840, Joseph Fielding Collection.
[^12] This decision is not noted in the minutes but it is noted in Fielding, Diary, 71.
[^13] For an account of the Moon emigration, see Allen, "'We Had a Very Hard Voyage,'" 339-41.
[^14] Times and Seasons 1 (October 1840): 177-79. See also Smith, History of the Church 4:185-86. In the History of the Church the letter appears under the date of August 31, 1840, whereas the Times and Seasons dates it "Sept. 1840." We have followed the dating in the History of the Church.
[^15] Young, Manuscript History, 71-72.
[^16] Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, May 27, 1840, Heber C. Kimball Collection.
[^17] Fielding, Diary, 71-72.
[^18] Richards, Diary (expanded), April 20, 1840.
[^19] Richards, Diary (expanded), implies that he arrived at 8:00 the following morning, but the smaller holograph diary indicates that he arrived at 8:00 in the evening. Because of the distances involved, the latter seems correct, and we assume that whoever prepared the expanded diary simply made an error.
[^20] Again, there is some discrepancy in the record. Richards, Diary, May 1, 1840, leaves the impression that Young and Woodruff did not arrive until the evening of May 1, but Woodruff, Journal, April 30, 1840, 1:444, indicates that they were there on the night of April 30. We suspect, however, that Richards actually meant to say that they arrived the evening before.
[^21] Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 280-83; Fielding, Diary, 72-76; Heber C. Kimball to the Editor, June 6, 1840, Millennial Star 1 (June 1840): 37-40; Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, May 27, 1840.
[^22] Heber C. Kimball to the Editor, Millennial Star 1 (June 1840): 37-40; Fielding, Diary, 76. It is only from Fielding's journal entry dated June 7 that we learn who actually composed this letter.
[^23] Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, May 2, 1840.
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] Ibid.
[^26] Jennetta Richards to Willard Richards, May 15, 1840, Willard Richards Collection.
[^27] Fielding, Diary, 73, 74. One barn was in Downham, and another was a Brother Blackhurst's barn in Longton.
[^28] Heber C. Kimball to the Editor, Millennial Star 1 (June 1840): 37-40; Fielding, Diary, 73-74.
[^29] Ibid.; Fielding, Diary, 74.
[^30] Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, May 27, 1840; Fielding, Diary, 74-75.
[^31] Fielding, Diary, 75; Allen and Alexander, Manchester Mormons, 156; Heber C. Kimball to the Editor, June 6, 1840.
[^32] Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 283; Allen and Alexander, Manchester Mormons, 157.
[^33] Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, May 27, 1840.
[^34] Heber C. Kimball to the Editor, Millennial Star 1 (June 1840): 37-40. Back in Herefordshire, curiously, Willard Richards was not so sure that it was right for Moon to leave. Not fully aware that the company had already gone, he wrote Brigham Young on June 8 of his impression that the Lord wanted Elder Moon to be a missionary in Herefordshire. When Willard finally heard that Moon had left, he wrote: "I am sorry to hear that John Moon has gone to America. He has lost a blessing." Willard Richards to Brigham Young, June 8, 1840, Brigham Young Papers; Willard Richards to Brigham Young, June 15, 1840, Brigham Young Papers (Appendix B, Document 10).
[^35] Fielding, Diary, 76.
[^36] Curiously, no one recorded this blessing at the time, so three weeks later, on July 17, Elder Kimball repeated it while Fielding wrote it down, then laid his hands on Fielding's head again in order to confirm it. Fielding, meanwhile, had left room to insert it in his journal on the correct day. Fielding, Diary, 79, 82.
[^37] Ibid., 80.
[^38] See chapter 11 for a summary of this letter.
[^39] John Taylor to Brigham Young, April 19, 1840, Brigham Young Papers. Note that the letter is actually dated April 19, 1839, but this would have been impossible because Taylor did not arrive in Liverpool until 1840. The only logical year is 1840, but the mere fact that he made such a mistake in dating his letter suggests that John Taylor had a lot of other things on his mind, including his longing for Leonora and the children.
[^40] Roberts, Life of John Taylor, 83-84.
[^41] John Taylor to Willard Richards, May 4, 1841, Willard Richards Papers; Evans, Century of "Mormonism," 133; Bloxham, "Apostolic Foundations," 127.
[^42] Wilford Woodruff to the Editor, July 9, 1840, Millennial Star 1 (July 1840): 71-72 and (August 1840): 81-84.
[^43] Woodruff, Journal, June 22, 1840, 1:469-70.
[^44] Brigham Young to George A. Smith, May 4, 1840, Brigham Young Papers.
[^45] Woodruff, Journal, May 9, 1840, 1:445-46. The hill he climbed that day could have been the Malvern Beacon, though he identified it in his journal simply as Malvern Hill. Technically, the major range in the area is referred to as the Malvern Hills, and there are several prominences, each with its own name. It is often not clear from Woodruff's account just which hill he climbed.
[^46] Ibid., May 11, 1840, 1:446-48. See photograph, p. 122.
[^47] Ibid., May 12, 1840, 1:448.
[^48] Ibid., May 15, 1840, 1:449.
[^49] Willard Richards to the Editor, May 15, 1840, Millennial Star 1 (May 1840): 23.
[^50] Young, Manuscript History, 75; Woodruff, Journal, May 17, 1840, 1:449-50.
[^51] More than two weeks later, Elder Woodruff noted in his journal, she was still walking "without the aid of crutch or staff" (Woodruff, Journal, May 18, 1840, 1:450-51, and June 3, 1840, 1:455).
[^52] Ibid., May 18, 1840, 1:450-51.
