David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

Chapter 7

"OF ONE HEART AND ONE MIND": APRIL THROUGH JULY 1840

Even before Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith, and Parley and Orson Pratt heard of Wilford Woodruff's amazing harvest in Herefordshire, possibilities for their own success seemed limitless. Parley P. Pratt was convinced that the work would keep him there for years: "Here is a boundless harvest for the next 15 or 20 years," he wrote to Mary Ann the day he landed in Liverpool, "and here if the Lord will I expect to spend five or ten years at least." But he could not be apart from his family that long, and "time . . . is to precious, money to scarce, and comfort to dear, to be thrown away in crossing the ocean every few months." He told her, therefore, to sell everything except their clothes and bedding, fill two chests and a trunk, and come to England at the first opportunity. [^1]

On their first day in England George A. Smith and Heber C. Kimball walked through a Liverpool marketplace filled with numerous varieties of fruits and vegetables from many parts of the world. George A. had never seen anything like it, and Heber offered to buy him whatever he wanted. "No accounting for taste," George A. later noted, for he chose a large onion, which he ate "with a craving appetite" and "shed many tears over it." The apostles also celebrated their arrival by each purchasing a new black hat. [^2]

The other apostles did not expect to remain in England as long as Parley did, but they were equally enthusiastic about the prospects of their mission. That evening they held a prayer meeting in which they partook of the sacrament, thanked God for his protection on the high seas, gave each other blessings, and prayed "that our way might be opened before us to accomplish our missions successfully." [^3]

The next day the new arrivals had a happy reunion with John Taylor, and the following day, April 8, 1840, they went by rail to Preston, where they planned to hold an all-important conference. Aware that they were coming, the Saints turned out in force to meet them. They were especially anxious to greet Heber C. Kimball, to whom they had grown close two years earlier. As the train pulled in at the Penwortham station, across the River Ribble from Preston, he put his head out the window and waved his hat. The delighted crowd raised a red flag announcing his arrival, and it was an emotional, affectionate reunion for all of them. [^4]

On Sunday, April 12, they preached in Preston's Temperance Hall, often still called the Cock Pit, to some seven hundred people who had come as far as sixty miles to hear them. They "bore testimony to the work, and spoke with power, for the Lord was with them." [^5] The following day Wilford Woodruff arrived from Herefordshire.

APRIL CONFERENCE

On Tuesday, April 14, all the apostles were in Preston, and the Quorum of the Twelve held its first official council meeting in England. The first order of business was to ordain Willard Richards to the apostleship and receive him into the Quorum. Coming on the heels of so many personal and family problems, the weight of his new responsibilities pierced Willard's soul deeply. "O my God," he prayed, "I ask Thee to enable me to execute the duties of this office in righteousness even unto the end, with my Brethren the Twelve, that we may even be of one heart and one mind in all things to be formed of thee in thy kingdom, in the name of Jesus Christ, Amen." [^6] At the same meeting, the apostles formally sustained Brigham Young as their president. They also agreed to send to America for at least twenty additional missionaries.

The next day was devoted to a general conference of the Church, held in the Temperance Hall. The apostles chose Hiram Clark to replace Willard Richards in the mission presidency, made some important decisions with regard to forthcoming Church publications in Britain, performed various priesthood ordinations, and agreed to choose and ordain a patriarch "to bestow patriarchal Blessings on the fatherless." [^7] On April 16, in a private quorum meeting, they selected Peter Melling, a native of Preston, to be the patriarch, made more decisions regarding Church publications, and discussed in some detail the all-important subject of emigration.

At the end of the conference, Brigham Young sent a copy of the minutes to Joseph Smith. "If you see anything in or about the whole affair that is not right," he wrote, "I ask, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you would make known unto us the mind of the Lord and his will concerning us." [^8] He had little need to worry, however. Sometime after the Prophet received the report, he told Mary Ann Young that he approved of all they were doing. "J. Smith said he received nothing in [the] letter you had written that he disapproved of. But he wanted you to go ahead, he gloried in your resolutions to go ahead." [^9]

ANNOUNCING THE GATHERING

One matter of far-reaching consequence, both for the Saints in Europe and for the destiny of the Church in America, was the gathering to Zion. Creating a desire to emigrate was not difficult, for many Saints were suffering the same economic privations that had already persuaded tens of thousands of other Britons to migrate. Even more important to them, however, were the spiritual attractions of Nauvoo, Illinois. America, after all, was identified by revelation as the land of Zion, where the New Jerusalem would be built, and from where Christ himself would soon conduct his millennial reign. In addition, the Prophet was there, and under his direction the Saints were building a new city in the American West. The British converts could think of nothing more desirable than joining with them.

The British Mission presidency understood all this, but they were reluctant to allow emigration without authorization from the Twelve. Joseph Fielding feared that approving even one request could touch off a rash of hasty and premature efforts to leave. Equally important in Fielding's mind was the need to maintain a strong presence in Britain, rather than decimating the Church population through emigration just when the apostles were arriving to build it up. In March 1840, for example, Francis Moon, who had been in the Church approximately two years, wrote to Fielding asking for his consent to emigrate. The mission president reminded Moon of the sacrifices the American missionaries, including the apostles, were making to preach the gospel in England and asked if the Saints should run away and leave them to bear the burden and heat of the day themselves. "No! No!" he exclaimed. The field was widening, laborers were wanted, and now that they had reinforcements from America, surely it was no time to quit the work. [^10] As he explained in a letter to Willard Richards, until clearly instructed otherwise "I will not be responsible for any thing that is or may be done about it. If any go they will not Say that Brother or President Fielding gave his Sanction to it." [^11]

Technically, of course, no one needed permission to emigrate, but the British Saints recognized the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles as their divinely appointed leaders and looked to them for guidance. Thus it was that emigration became one of the first items of business in their April 16 meeting. No doubt aware of the difficulty of stemming the eager tide, they decided that the Saints who were ready could leave, though they should do it with as little public notice as possible. [^12] In addition, they established the policy that those who wished to go should first receive recommends to the Church in America, and no one with means should leave without also assisting the poor. Two days later, at Preston, Parley P. Pratt gave what was probably the first general discussion of the gathering to a group of Saints. He talked for about an hour, telling them about America, how they should act there, and of the need for those who had means to help those who did not. Joseph Fielding could not have been more pleased with the policy once it was announced.

This, then, was the official beginning of Mormon emigration, and in June, John Moon led the first organized group to the New World. [^13] In August the First Presidency of the Church issued a general address inviting all Saints everywhere to participate in the gathering, [^14] but the decision of the apostles in April first opened the door to what eventually became a torrent of migration.

THE GATHERERS SCATTER

On April 17, Good Friday, the apostles spent one more day together before scattering to their assignments. This time they met at the home of Alice Moon, in Penwortham, who was so thrilled that she produced a bottle of wine she had kept for forty years. She had first planned to serve it on her wedding day, she explained, but in the rush of things it was forgotten, just as it was on several subsequent special occasions. There must have been "something providential in its preservation," she said, for now she had the privilege of presenting it to the members of the Quorum of the Twelve. The apostles blessed and and drank it, [^15] and then spent the day discussing the affairs of the kingdom. In the evening they met again in the Moon home and ordained Peter Melling to the office of patriarch.

The next day the apostles separated for their various assignments: Heber C. Kimball to visit the branches he had founded in 1837-38, Orson Pratt to proselyte in Scotland, John Taylor to continue his work in Liverpool, Parley P. Pratt to begin work on publications in Manchester, George A. Smith to preach in the Staffordshire Potteries, and Brigham Young and Willard Richards to join Wilford Woodruff in Herefordshire. Their next official quorum meeting would be in Manchester in July.

Already the British mission was having a marked effect upon the Twelve as a quorum. In England, their assignment required them to work more closely as a unit than they had ever done before. In these first few days together in April, 1840, they not only made decisions that would affect the future of the Church but also began the process that would mold them into a smoothly working administrative unit. They felt themselves growing in unity and confidence almost daily, as Heber C. Kimball explained to his wife in May: "Thare never was beter feelings among the twelve then at this time. All things go on well. We are some what feeble as yet. We are increasing in strength fast." [^16]

As the Twelve prepared to go their various ways, most needed means for travel and necessities. On Sunday, April 19, at the urging of Willard Richards, Joseph Fielding made a special appeal during a meeting at the Cock Pit. After the regular collection was taken up, Fielding stood and reminded the Saints that the brethren were going on long journeys, and if anyone had anything more to contribute to their expenses, please give it to the deacons. Those who were able contributed again, and, said Fielding, "I think Preston is honored by sending out the Servants of God to all Parts, though it be at some little Expense." All the apostles were supplied with means, and funds were raised also to help Elder Theodore Turley, who was still in jail. As it turned out, however, Turley had received help from other sources, and so that money, too, was given to the Twelve. [^17]

Willard Richards had a most difficult time leaving Preston, for Jennetta was still suffering from illness and pain. On Sunday, April 19, he asked Heber C. Kimball to join him in giving her a blessing. Her pain subsided, but she remained ill. The next day Willard anointed her with consecrated oil, also with spirits and myrrh; Heber sealed the anointing and gave her a blessing. The next morning she was better than she had been for years. "Praise the Lord, O my soul, for Thou hast wrought wonders in my home," the grateful apostle exclaimed. [^18] Jennetta's ordeal was not over, but Willard could put off fulfilling his assignment no longer, and by the weekend he was on his way to Herefordshire. He arrived penniless at a Sister Pullen's home in Ledbury on the evening of April 29. [^19] The next day he went on to Thomas Kington's home in Dymock, where he was joined by Brigham Young and Wilford Woodruff, who had left Preston several days earlier. [^20]

Mission of the TwelveHCHEBER C. KIMBALL

Heber C. Kimball could not have been more pleased with his assignment to build up the branches he had established in 1837-38, and he spent most of the next three months doing just that. Following the pattern of his earlier mission, he worked out of Preston, preaching and baptizing there and in such nearby communities as Chatburn, Downham, Clitheroe, Waddington, Ribchester, Longton, Southport, and Churchtown, frequently accompanied by Joseph Fielding. [^21] The two got along famously, and Fielding wrote an account of their mission together for the Star. [^22] They often baptized several people each day, and after the first two weeks Heber was convinced that their preaching was causing a great stir among both the people and the ministers. [^23]

Depending upon the Saints for his livelihood, however, was emotionally draining, and Heber cried inwardly at the poverty he saw among his friends. His heart melted when those who treated him so well on his first mission felt hurt because now they could not even feed him. [^24]

He also continued to show concern for Jennetta Richards, whose illness lingered and whose father was still angry with the Mormons. When Heber visited the family at Walkerfold on May 1, the Reverend Mr. Richards ordered him out of the house, and as he walked down the road he could hear Jennetta and her mother crying. [^25] According to Jennetta, her mother was so distraught that she was "not right" for several days. Her father, however, was also ill, and the gentle Jennetta blamed his outburst on that as well as on the fact that he could not hear well and therefore probably did not understand much of what Heber said. [^26]

Heber and Joseph held meetings everywhere—in public buildings, in private homes, even in barns, [^27]—and interest ran high. On Sunday, May 10, at Chatburn, they could not find a house large enough for the crowd, so Heber preached in a barn. Many wanted to be baptized, including some who had joined the Church earlier but had fallen away. Just as in 1837, Heber felt a special spirit in Chatburn. "There appears to be something peculiar in the people of this place," he wrote to the Millennial Star. "We have never received any thing like an insult all the time we visited the place, and we feel bound to bless them." [^28]

On May 20 Kimball and Fielding received an unusual display of kindness as Robert Roscough accompanied them from Longton to Southport, a resort town on the coast. To get there they either had to ford the River Aston, and thus get wet, or walk several extra miles to find a bridge. They were saved the trouble of doing either, however, when Roscough volunteered to carry them across the river on his shoulders. [^29]

At Southport they met people with all sorts of debilitating diseases and handicaps who came to this famous bathing area for relief, but they also noted how pleasant a place it was for the rich and noble. They held a meeting with the small branch of the Church and met a sister who was not expected to live. Through faith she was healed, and the next day she walked two miles with them. Such experiences were commonplace, but so were times like those in Churchtown, where the missionaries found that the Saints had too little faith and were having trouble among themselves. "But we hope to preserve a few," Fielding noted. "We were plain with them." [^30]

As an apostle, Elder Kimball was responsible to encourage and instruct many newly called Church leaders. A particularly important opportunity came on Monday, May 25, during a meeting at Thomas Moon's home in Penwortham. For the first time in the history of the Church outside America, a group of Saints met to receive patriarchal blessings, and there Peter Melling gave his first blessings. To encourage and support the new patriarch, Elder Kimball stood with him and laid his hands, too, on the heads of Thomas Moon and his wife, Lydia, the first English converts to receive such blessings. Then, in accord with the principle that the father is the patriarch of his family, Thomas Moon gave blessings to his children, as well as to his son-in-law, William Clayton, who had come from Manchester. Melling then blessed Joseph Fielding's wife, Hannah, after which Elder Kimball gave further instruction. [^31]

Heber C. Kimball was also part of the publications committee, and on Wednesday, May 27, he accompanied William Clayton back to Manchester to work on the new hymnal with Brigham Young, John Taylor, and Parley P. Pratt. He spent his nights at the Hardman boarding house, where Clayton lived, and on Friday evening, during a visit by Brigham Young, they all joined in singing and had the experience of speaking in tongues. [^32]

While in Manchester, Heber was overwhelmed again with the scope of what they were doing collectively as missionaries. There were around three hundred Saints in this city, and their numbers were growing rapidly. He heard from Brigham of the success in Herefordshire, he learned that there were sixty or seventy members in Scotland, and he thought of his own successes in Preston and vicinity. Oh that the Lord would send more faithful laborers into the field, he lamented, for the wheat was falling to the ground for want of harvesting. The new converts were among the choice people of England, he wrote Vilate, and the gathering to Zion would never stop until the salt was drained out of the nations. He also observed that the rich among the Saints loved the poor so well they could not leave them behind. "This is a Celestial Spirrit," he wrote. "I would to God that all the Saints had it." [^33]

On June 1 Heber and Brigham organized the first official company of emigrating Saints, and on June 6 they joined John Taylor at the dock in Liverpool to see the beginning of the gathering. That afternoon they blessed and said farewell to the group, under the leadership of John Moon, as the emigrants set sail aboard the ship Britannia. [^34] It was a momentous symbol of what was to come.

Monday, June 8, was a holiday, Whit Monday, commemorating the day of Pentecost. Joseph Fielding was offended at the way it was celebrated, however, for it appeared to be a day of revelry, vanity, and folly, punctuated by drunkenness, rather than a day of piety. By contrast, the Saints met together in an open-air meeting and then went to the Melling home in Penwortham for an afternoon meeting and for blessings. There Elder Kimball spoke in tongues and baptized two people. "So," noted Fielding at the end of Whit Monday, "we had our Pleasure as well as Babylon." [^35]

Heber C. Kimball and Joseph Fielding worked well together, and on June 26 Heber fulfilled an earlier promise to give Joseph a special blessing. It was both tender and powerful, as he promised him success as a missionary, power to heal the sick and the handicapped, and the blessing of bringing kinfolk into the kingdom. Heber also promised him that his wife would share all his blessings and that he would "become a Prophet, a Priest and a King, to administer for ever and ever." Joseph was told, further, that he and his family would soon go to America where, if he were faithful, he would "see the Saints that have been driven restored to their own Lands and their Enemies brought Low." The blessing concluded with a gentle admonition that elegantly reflected the advice Kimball frequently gave: support and honor the brethren, resist the temptations of the devil, and you will be blessed. "Hold the Character of thy Brethren sacred . . . and nothing shall be withheld from thee, and thou shalt see greater things than have entered into thy Heart. Satan has tempted thee to be rebellious, but the Spirit of God has said Be still, and thou shalt overcome all evil Propensities and become pure. All these blessings I seal upon thee in the Name of Jesus Christ, Amen and Amen." [^36]

In contrast to Heber C. Kimball's ability to give inspiring, tender blessings, his capacity to show righteous indignation was demonstrated two days later while he presided at a conference in Thornley. There he scolded a congregation of about 150 people for shirking their responsibilities as Saints. Shaking his cloak at them, he told them he would preach no more in that area and declared himself free of their blood. "It affected the Saints much," observed Fielding. [^37]

Willard Richards was also at the Thornley conference, for he had returned to the Preston area several days earlier than planned because of the illness of Jennetta. That night he walked back to Preston with Kimball and Fielding, and the next day they went on to Penwortham, where several Saints spent another deeply spiritual evening at the home of Thomas Moon. About fifteen spoke in tongues, others interpreted, and many had the gift of prophecy. The next day the two apostles took the train to Manchester, looking forward to the forthcoming conference with their colleagues.

JOHN TAYLOR STAYS IN LIVERPOOL

John Taylor returned to Liverpool immediately after the April conference to find himself faced with an emotional crisis. There could have been many reasons: seeing the brethren from home, knowing that Parley P. Pratt had already sent for his wife and children, his own overwhelming loneliness after eight months away from his family, and the reception of a long letter written by Leonora on March 12. The letter itself must have created in him feelings of both exhilaration and despondency as he learned not only of what was happening among the Saints but also of Leonora's continuing economic trials, and, most of all, of her longing for him. [^38] Perhaps it was a combination of all these things that caused him suddenly to write to Brigham Young on April 19 asking for permission to send for his family. Leonora was in delicate health, he wrote, but she desperately wanted to see her family and friends in England, and they were anxious that she should come. Apparently he felt that they could nurse her back to health, but he also asked Brigham Young to send him the name and address of someone in Albany who might allow her to rest there after the fatiguing trip from Nauvoo. Like Parley P. Pratt, he reasoned that having his wife with him would keep him from frequently leaving England and then returning, and, also like Pratt, he hoped that one of the missionaries for whom Brigham Young was sending would take charge of getting Leonora across the ocean. He was optimistic enough to believe that she could somehow obtain her own financing, so he assured Brigham that bringing her would be no burden on the Saints. [^39] The records reveal no action on this ardent request, but presumably the practical-minded Brigham Young simply turned it down as gently as he could.

John Taylor's loneliness was partly palliated, however, as he found increased opportunities for preaching the gospel. People listened, baptisms came frequently, and the members were anxious to help spread the word. In May he ordained several priests and elders, who in turn took to the streets, the parks, and the fields proclaiming the message of the Restoration. When opposition increased and antagonists began disturbing their meetings, Taylor simply sent his co-workers out into the major thoroughfares of Liverpool just before preaching meetings, where they announced the time and place that a discourse would be delivered. The result, despite the opposition, was more interest among the people and well-attended meetings. [^40]

John Taylor also helped select and arrange the hymns for the new hymnal and read proofs of the Book of Mormon. Since he was not in Manchester, on May 4 he wrote to Willard Richards expressing concern that the final selection not be made without him. Three weeks later he went to Manchester to assist in the work and stayed there four days. [^41] For the most part, however, Elder Taylor's time between the April and July conferences was spent preaching and working with the Saints in and around Liverpool.

THREE APOSTLES GO TO HEREFORDSHIRE

Wilford Woodruff was pleased with the assignments made at the conference in Preston, for both Willard Richards and Brigham Young were to work with him in Herefordshire. Wilford and Brigham left Preston on Saturday, April 18, and spent Easter Sunday with the Saints in the Potteries. They arrived in Ledbury on the night of April 21 and the next day went to Froome's Hill, where Wilford introduced the president of the Twelve to John Benbow and Thomas Kington. They attended an important meeting that day, during which Benbow was ordained to the office of teacher in the Aaronic Priesthood.

The two apostles immediately began to build on Wilford Woodruff's earlier success. On April 26, for example, Wilford baptized ten individuals, including one minister, and Brigham baptized four. On April 30 they were joined by Willard Richards.

Wilford was delighted with the work of his new companions. The hearts of the Saints were "made glad with the teaching and instruction by Elder Young," he later wrote to the Millennial Star. "I also obtained much benefit myself by enjoying his society, sitting under his instruction, and sharing in his council." [^42] Richards, he observed, "was a great Blessing unto me as well as many Saints for he has passed through a great school of experiance and learned much wisdom & sound Judjment which is readily manifest in all Councils & conferences in which we have set together." [^43]

Even as the Church continued to grow in Herefordshire, Brigham was somewhat critical of religious leaders who refused to listen. On one occasion he had an interview with two ministers, one a Baptist and the other a Methodist. They impressed him as "jest like the rest of the Priest[s]. They have jest relegon enough to damb them," but no inclination to inquire after the truth. "This is a wicked place," he opined, "but there is a fue that want to be saved." [^44]

Converts poured in, however, and Wilford Woodruff continued to be humbled by it. Given to introspection anyway, he frequently retreated to the heights of the Malvern Hills to meditate and pray. On May 9 he hiked to the top of one of them and was awed at the grand panorama below: Worcester on the north, the village of Gloucester on the south, Ledbury and other villages to the west, and "a fine beautiful cultivated vale upon evry hand." As he stood there exulting in the view, clouds rolled in below him, thunder rumbled, and lightning danced through the clouds beneath his feet. To him it was a wondrous and awe-inspiring scene that provided "a grand survey of the works of nature & the power of God." [^45]

Two days later, on May 11, he decided to hike to the top of Herefordshire Beacon, one of the most prominent of the Malvern Hills, for a time of solitary contemplation. After preparing his mind "for a lonely walk & meditation" by reading Parley P. Pratt's remarks on the "'eternal duration of matter,'" he began his climb. On the way he noted several entrenchments, which he surmised were artifacts of Roman activities more than a thousand years before. Standing atop the hill with its magnificent view of the surrounding countryside, he could not help but reflect upon where he stood, in time as well as in space, and what it all meant for him. He also knelt in a private prayer of thanksgiving. He wrote later in his journal:

But I soon drew my thoughts from the busy rabit, sheep, & asses to the solumn reflections which the ravages of time presented before me. O! Malvern thy lofty Hill bares up my feet while mine eyes take a survey of thy deep intrenchments. Thy mighty bulwarks, which have trembled by the roar of cannon, the clash of arms, & din of war has reeched around thy brow & died away in the vale beneath, while the blood of many a roman & Englishman to, have washed thy brow & soaked thy soil while they have fallen to rise no more. They sleep in death & time has earth'd them all & they are forgotten & blotted from the history & memory of man. Notwithstanding O! Malvern thou hast been the Ark or refuge for thousands in the time of trouble or war.

Yet Willford is the ownly solitary soul that treads thy soil this day & he alone bends his knee upon [thee] on the highth of thy summer in the midst of the Clouds to offer up the gratitude of his heart unto that God who will soon level all hills exhalt all valies & redeem the earth from the curse of sin & prepare it for the abode of the Saints of the MOST HIGH.

I retired from the hill into the vale reflecting upon the rise, progress, decline, & fall of the empires of the earth, & the revolutions which must still transpire before the winding up scene & the comeing of Christ. [^46]

The next day Wilford baptized three women, each of whom was converted after only one discussion, but such spontaneity disquieted him. Could it be himself more than the Spirit, he worried, that was affecting the people? "It seemed as though some would worship me while they cried out here is a man of Zion the man of God that we have so long looked for. Who is worthy to receive him into our house? I told them to worship God for I was ownly a servant of God." [^47]

Willard Richards spent his first two weeks in Herefordshire working with Thomas Kington, and by May 15 the two of them had baptized fifty people and confirmed one hundred as members of the Church. [^48] The new apostle's own reaction to what he found in Herefordshire was much like Wilford Woodruff's earlier emotions: delight at their success but an overwhelming sense of urgency at the need for more laborers in the field. All the elders, he wrote to the Millennial Star, were "preaching daily, talking night and day, and administering the ordinances of the gospel as directed by the Spirit." Nevertheless, he said,

The branches are small, the brethren much scattered, consequently the field is so large that the reapers cannot call to each other from side to side; neither can they often see each other without a telescope. There are many doors open which we cannot fill; calls for preaching on almost every hand which we cannot answer. Oh! that the saints would pray to the Lord of the harvest to send forth labourers. [^49]

On May 17 the three apostles met with the Saints at the Gadfield Elm chapel, where Brigham Young demonstrated his refusal to be intimidated no matter what the distraction. As he preached in the afternoon, several antagonists, including some preachers, began making loud disturbances, determined to break up the meeting. Brigham, however, rising to full stature in both body and authority, commanded peace and order in the name of the Lord. Willard Richards and another man then went to the door, and peace was restored. [^50]

The next day must have been especially interesting for the American elders. A traditional United Brethren feast day, it began for them at 5:00 in the morning at Joseph Hill's home in Dymock with the baptism of two Anglican churchmen and a Wesleyan. The missionaries and their friends then walked to William Hart's home where Thomas Kington baptized seven people, Wilford Woodruff baptized five, and Brigham Young and Willard Richards confirmed them as they came out of the water. Then, while on the way to Kington's home, a woman met them on the road, insisting that she be baptized, and Thomas Kington readily obliged.

About 2:00 in the afternoon nearly one hundred former United Brethren gathered at Thomas Kington's home to partake of the feast he had prepared. After a powerful sermon from Brigham Young, which he concluded with a blessing on the food, they all sat down at the table and, with "glad hearts & cheerful Countenances," ate and drank and enjoyed each other's company to their heart's content. Brigham then gave another short sermon, three people were confirmed, several men were ordained to priesthood offices, and the Saints witnessed one of the miraculous healings that frequently rewarded their faith. Because of problems in her spine, Mary Pitt had been confined to her bed for six years and had not walked without crutches for eleven. The three apostles laid hands on her, rebuked the infirmity, and she was healed. [^51] After this meeting James Morgan, who had been baptized and ordained a priest just that day, baptized three more converts. [^52] There could hardly have been a more exhilarating day for the missionaries.

Publication Efforts in EnglandHCOn May 20 Wilford took his colleagues to the top of Herefordshire Beacon for quiet meditation, prayer, and counsel. There they felt inspired that it was God's will that Brigham Young should leave immediately for Manchester to work on publishing the Book of Mormon and the new hymnbook. Already they had collected a substantial amount of money toward publication, including l 100 from Thomas and Hannah Kington and l 250 from John and Jane Benbow. As soon as they hiked down from the hill, Brigham was on his way, carrying the precious funds with him. [^53] It was the end of one of his most memorable months as a missionary. "I shall never forget my little mision in that contry with Brother Woodruff and with Br Richards," he wrote back to Willard. [^54]

Wilford and Willard remained in Herefordshire until it was time to leave for the July conference in Manchester, working at times with Thomas Kington, who was also spending full time in the ministry. Wilford was ecstatic about their continued success and wrote in his journal that "new doors were opening on every hand—a multiplicity of calls constantly reached our ears, many of which we could not answer for the want of laborers." [^55] On June 18, for example, they baptized and confirmed six people, blessed thirteen children, healed two people who were ill, ordained two men to the office of priest, and preached at the home of a Church member. Elder Woodruff noted that almost everyone he conversed with that day expressed a desire to be baptized. [^56]

On May 30, amidst all his success, Wilford Woodruff received good news. "Glory Hallelujah," he exulted in his journal, "I have now got a letter from Phebe." It was the first he had received from her since his arrival in England, and it announced the birth of a son, Wilford Woodruff, Jr., on March 20. [^57]

During the first part of June, Willard Richards went for several days to the southern part of Herefordshire, where he baptized eleven people and ordained one of them to the office of teacher. [^58] With such rapid growth, clearly the Church required further organization, and the apostles decided to arrange all the new groups into branches and conferences. Among other things, this improved administrative structure would allow the branches to be properly represented at the coming general conference in Manchester. Therefore, at a conference held on June 14 in the Gadfield Elm Chapel, Worcestershire, twelve former United Brethren congregations were organized into the Bran Green and Gadfield Elm Conference of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, with Thomas Kington as the presiding elder. A week later at Stanley Hill, the Froome's Hill Circuit of the United Brethren became the Froome's Hill Conference of the LDS Church. Thomas Kington also became presiding elder over that conference, which included twenty branches. The organization of these two conferences was a significant milestone in the progress of the Church, for they represented a grand culmination of all Wilford Woodruff had begun in February. Within four months, he noted with a sense of fulfillment, the Church had grown in that area from nothing to thirty-three congregations (including one small congregation not attached to either conference) and 534 members: proof, he declared, "that God is beginning to make a short work in these last days." [^59]

Not unexpectedly, the missionaries continued to be challenged by boisterous and sometimes violent opposition. Two days before the Froome's Hill conference, Wilford Woodruff rose early in the morning for a baptism and confirmation, and soon several more people came asking for the same thing. As they walked to the river looking for a suitable place, suddenly a mob led by an angry man named Pitt began to threaten them. Boldly, but to no avail, Willard Richards warned Pitt to repent and be baptized himself, but when the ugly threats continued, the missionaries decided that the better part of valor was to retire. Pitt and his mob followed, jeering and yelling, said Woodruff, "as though a part of hell at least had broke loose." Later the elders made a point of stopping along the way to wash their feet "as a testimony against Mr Pitt for rejecting our testimony, & forbiding, & hindering, others from Entering into the kingdom of God." [^60]

Willard Richard's two months in Herefordshire were troubled by his continuing worry over the frail and ailing Jennetta, who was staying with her parents in Walkerfold. Sensitive to such things, Brigham Young wrote to him on May 24, suggesting that he cut his work a little short and have his wife meet him in Manchester. Willard readily agreed and wrote to Jennetta that she should meet him in Manchester on June 29 or 30. He also wrote to Brigham on June 2 that "you must help us with all the faith you can to get her out." He felt a pressing need, apparently, to get her away from the chiding of her father, who still could not accept her conversion to the LDS Church. Adding to his consternation was the fact that his former landlady in Preston had been turned out of the house by her husband, and Willard's belongings left in her keeping had been moved out of the apartment. [^61]

Willard nevertheless continued faithfully to toil away in Herefordshire. On Sunday, June 14, he attended the Gadfield Elm conference where, he said, the chapel was full of "men women & Devils." Apparently he gave an unusually exhilarating sermon, for, he reported, "the Lord helped me to scare the Devil pretty well till after conference." In the middle of the meeting, however, he received a letter from Jennetta, dated June 9, and when he read it he was devastated. She was doing very poorly, she wrote, "never free from pain a moment. No not one moment. I can assure you that Death would be a friend at present. Would my heavenly father take me to himself. But his will be done." With respect to going to Manchester, she said, it was almost impossible, but she sent her love to Brigham with thanks for his "kind invitation."

Shocked and distraught, Willard wrote immediately to Brigham Young. He reminded him of all that must be done before the Manchester conference, but he was bewildered about his own situation and what course of action he should take. "Now is not the Lord willing to hear prayers in her behalf," he asked, "& let me stay in the vineyard till conference?" Although Willard and his brethren in Herefordshire had prayed mightily, no dream, vision, or revelation had given them an answer. Why must her life be a continual burden, and why must he be taken from the vineyard to care for her? "The heavens are brass here," he said in frustration, and "I wish you would get an answer from the Lord to these things & write me at Ledbury. . . . What the Lord says I will do." [^62]

Willard's perplexity was a serious matter to the senior apostle, and in a letter of June 17 he responded with his typical wisdom and good-natured pragmatism:

Now as to the other question about Jennet, thus saith the scripter[:] he that provideth not fore his own house hold [^63] has—but perhaps he has no hous, well has he got a famely[?] Yes, he has got a wife. Then let him see that she is taken care of and her hart comforted. But stop say som, why doe you not takcare of your famely[?] I doe when circumstances doe not renderit otherwise. There is a difference betwene 3 months jorny and afue [h]ours ride. Now I say to ancer my own feelings com as soon as you can leve things there. This is not by revelation nor by commandment so put it not with the anapistles of the new testement but Brigham sayes come and see your wife. [^64]

Six days later Willard was on the train. [^65]

Wilford Woodruff also left Herefordshire the same day as Willard in order to attend the July conference in Manchester. "We felt constrained to offer up the gratitude of our hearts unto our heavenly Father for so abundantly blessing our labours in the vineyard of the Lord," he wrote of the harvest he and Richards had shared. [^66] On July 1 he arrived in Manchester in the company of George A. Smith and Theodore Turley.

Publication Efforts in EnglandHCBRIGHAM BEARS THE ADMINISTRATIVE BURDEN

Publication Efforts in EnglandHCAt this time, Manchester was the headquarters of the Church in England. The apostles decided to locate the office of the Millennial Star on Oldham Road, one of the city's wider thoroughfares, in a building that would also serve as Parley P. Pratt's home. Though the rent was expensive, Elder Pratt found the building to his liking. [^67]

Publication Efforts in EnglandHCBrigham Young arrived in Manchester on May 23, and from that time on, as leader of the Twelve, he was so involved in publishing and general administrative work that, compared to the other apostles, he had little time for extended preaching. He worked largely in the Manchester and Liverpool areas, where he preached, visited the Saints, and wrote letters to keep in touch with the rest of the Twelve. He rented Carpenter's Hall for the use of the Church, and on June 14 he preached there for the first time. As frequently as possible he visited and worked briefly with his brethren in other parts of Britain, but long, sustained periods of missionary work in one place necessarily eluded him. He traveled so much that he told Mary Ann to direct his mail to John Taylor in Liverpool, who would always know his whereabouts. [^68]

Publication Efforts in EnglandHCBrigham also worked closely with Parley P. Pratt, who spent nearly all his time in Manchester working on the Millennial Star and other publications. After the hymnal was published in mid June, Brigham told his wife that he had done most of the work himself, for John Taylor had been ill and Pratt had as much as he could do to publish the Star and read proof for both the Star and the hymnbook. But Brigham, too, was ailing, and he told Mary Ann that his work was so hard that it seemed impossible that he would ever regain his health. The climate would agree with him, he said, if there were good air, but there was so much black coal dust in the atmosphere that when it settled it made "the waters look like strong sut tea." He emphasized, nonetheless, that he was as happy in this country as he could be any place in the world, for the people were as loving as he had ever seen, even more than in America. [^69]

Publication Efforts in EnglandHCIt is interesting to contemplate Brigham Young as editor and publisher, for he was very much aware of his weaknesses, including his meager "book learning" and phonetic spelling, and recognized them with good humor. "Now my Dear Brother," he once wrote to Willard Richards, "you must forgive all my noncense and over look erours." A week later he wrote: "excuse erours and mestakes you must remember its from me." His sense of humor carried even further, as he realized that his letters to the other apostles might well be preserved for posterity. "Be careful not to lay this letter with the new testment wrightings," he told Willard Richards, for "if you doe som body will take it for a text after the Malineum a[nd] contend about it." [^70]

THE YOUNGEST APOSTLE MINISTERS IN STAFFORDSHIRE

On April 18 George A. Smith took the train from Preston to Manchester, where he stopped for a few days on his way to Staffordshire. There he had an experience that not only tested his sense of humor but also revealed a potential problem. Several Church members met him at the station and took him to Alice Hardman's boardinghouse. Blithely unaware that the Saints in Manchester took literally Paul's biblical comments about greeting one another "with an holy kiss," [^71] he seated himself comfortably on a sofa. Almost immediately several young ladies filled the room, evidently anxious to see the only bachelor among the apostles. One of them, "decidedly a little beauty," he reported, suddenly shocked him by saying, "Brother Smith, we want a kiss of you!" while the eyes of the others flashed like "stars on a clear night." "I never felt so foolish in my life," he wrote later, but he summoned up resolution enough to tell them that kissing was no part of his mission to England. The young women were obviously disappointed, and thereafter he was regarded in Manchester as no lady's man. The idea that there was no harm in such a greeting was being perpetuated by some of the elders in Manchester and, wrote the apostle, "it required a very decided course, both in Manchester and other places to prevent evil corruption growing out of this custom, which might have been firmly established had not the Twelve put it down." [^72]

Five days later George A. Smith was in the Potteries, where he was met in Burslem by Alfred Cordon, and immediately went to work. Before long he had completely won the hearts of the hundred or so members in the area. During the next ten weeks, his main place of residence was the home of one of them, Samuel Johnson, but he frequently walked to other towns, spending his nights with Saints and prospective Saints. On his first day he preached at a flea-infested building, evidently recently used as a chicken house but rented by the Saints in Hanley for their meetings. Later he also preached in the homes of the Saints, in public buildings, in marketplaces, in a temperance hall in Longton, in a field near Stoke-upon-Trent, in a silk-twisting shed in Leek, and in any other place where he could find an audience. On the evening of April 29, Mrs. Elizabeth Allblasters became the first person in England to be baptized by Elder Smith.

Willard Richards, en route to Herefordshire, spent a few days with George A. Smith, and on April 29 the two visited Theodore Turley in the Stafford jail, warmly shaking hands through a large iron grate. It seemed to George that this was a fulfillment of a prophecy by Joseph Smith, who had blessed them as they were leaving Nauvoo, saying, "Keep up good courage, boys, some of you will look through the grates before you come back." [^73]

The two apostles visited with Turley for about an hour and learned from him about the charity of the Saints of Staffordshire. The state did not provide food for prisoners like Turley, and, having no money of his own, he had fasted for about four days. When the sisters in the Potteries learned of his plight, several walked fourteen miles to take him some money. Johnathan Locket, an elderly and poverty-stricken Saint from Hanley, walked to Stafford several times, using a staff, to take Elder Turley some food.

Slightly over a month later, Johnathan Locket was dead, leaving behind not even sufficient means to bury his body. Dismayed at the thought of this poor but generous Saint suffering the indignity of burial in a pauper's grave, George A. Smith made a contribution and then enlisted others to do the same in order to give him a respectable burial. On June 4 some twenty Saints, including Elder Smith, followed Brother Locket's body to the grave, where, according to custom, a clergyman of the Church of England gave a sermon. It created a great deal of interest on the part of onlookers that "so poor a man should have so many friends." [^74]

Walking from town to town, preaching wherever and whenever he could, sometimes hiring town criers to announce his meetings, holding conversations with preachers, and baptizing people regularly: these were the things that took up Elder Smith's time. On Sunday, May 31, he preached at one place in the morning, at another in the afternoon, confirmed seven people after the afternoon meeting, and walked back to where he had been earlier to baptize two people. Then, still wet because he had no change of clothes, he preached in the evening and, clothes still drying on his body, walked ten miles to Burslem to spend the night. "I did not stay at Leek fearing the army of fleas which would attack me in every house where I stayed," he commented wryly in his history. [^75] He became so involved in his work that for two and a half weeks he did not even write in his journal. He finally described his hectic schedule on June 26:

For the last twenty days I have been so busy with preaching, counselling, baptizing, confirming, and teaching the people that I had not time to journalize any; and have seldom gone to bed before 2 o'clock in the morning, as people were constantly in my room enquiring about the work of the Lord. [^76]

Perhaps he took a few minutes out that day to write in his journal because it was his birthday: he was twenty-three years old.

While in the Potteries George A. Smith experienced a rude awakening to the difficulties of working men and women. He was much impressed with the earthenware industry as such, but he noticed immediately that large numbers of people were out of work. He saw more beggars than he had seen in all his life and was dismayed when he observed "delicate females" gathering manure as a way of earning a living for their starving children. He was also amazed at the high cost of living. "I never before realized the value of American institutions," he wrote to a cousin in Ohio. [^77] But it was his keen sensitivity to the problems of those around him that helped endear George A. to the people of Staffordshire.

He also possessed a kind of practical wisdom that may have helped, as suggested by an assignment he gave to Daniel Bowers. Bowers, a large, strong man living in Hanley, attended one of George A.'s preaching meetings that was rudely interrupted by John Jones, a Methodist preacher who was in the habit of disturbing Mormon meetings. The indignant Bowers picked up Jones bodily and carried him out of the house, saying, "These people pay the rent here, and you must not disturb them." He was baptized not long after that, whereupon George A. ordained him a deacon and assigned him to keep order in the meetings. [^78]

William W. Player, a Methodist preacher in Longton, was profoundly affected by the apostle's humility and lack of pretension. He first visited Elder Smith on May 18 and asked him to explain such things as the beast in the book of Revelation and "leviathan" in Job. "What?" he responded when the missionary told him he did not know. "Do you profess to be a preacher of the Gospel and not understand the Bible?" Never one to avoid a challenge, George A. answered with his characteristic, if not always diplomatic, directness. "That's the difficulty with you preachers; you are not willing to acknowledge your ignorance, and consequently undertake to explain to the people things which you do not understand yourselves, and as blind leaders of the blind, you lead the blind, giving your own ignorant opinions instead of teaching the principles of truth." George A. went on to inform him that "I teach what I do know. What I do not know, I let alone," [^79] and that if Player would obey the first principles of the gospel and let the Holy Spirit guide, he would understand the passages in question as the men who wrote them did. Touched by the spirit Elder Smith carried, Player invited him to give a lecture on total abstinence in the Temperance Society's hall. Smith consented, the meeting was advertised by town criers, and after he gave an address that greatly pleased the audience, the Mormons were able to use the hall for three meetings each Sunday and three meetings during the week merely for the cost of cleaning. Player was soon baptized and became the presiding elder of a branch of one hundred Saints in Longton.

ORSON PRATT IN SCOTLAND

Immediately after the April 1840, conference, Orson Pratt and Reuben Hedlock, who had accompanied the last group of apostles to England, went north to Alston, in Northumberland just south of the Scottish border. A branch of some forty Saints was already established there, and Hedlock remained for about a month. [^80] After a few days, however, Elder Pratt moved on to Scotland and there spent his entire mission cultivating the gospel seeds already planted by two Scottish-born Latter-day Saints from Canada. [^81]

In 1839, while Orson was making his own way to New York and preparing to cross the Atlantic, Alexander Wright and Samuel Mulliner, who had emigrated to Canada and been converted, were on their way back to their homeland as missionaries. They arrived in Glasgow on December 20 and began working among friends and relatives in nearby cities. The first baptisms came at Bishopton on January 9, 1840, when Mulliner took Jessie and Alexander Hay into the icy waters of the River Clyde. They attracted a great deal of attention, including criticism and rock-throwing persecution, but by the time Orson Pratt arrived on May 3, they had baptized eighty new Latter-day Saints. Five days later the American apostle organized the first Scottish branch of the church at Paisley. [^82] At Pratt's invitation, Reuben Hedlock soon joined the modest missionary force in Scotland.

On May 18 Orson Pratt and Samuel Mulliner made their way to Edinburgh, sometimes called the "Athens of the North," and Elder Pratt quickly fell in love with it. At the end of his mission, he extolled this city, inhabited by the gentry and the nobility and known for the splendor and magnificence of its buildings, as "one of the most renouned cities of the world." His description was as much as any modern-day chamber of commerce could ask for:

Its streets, gardens, and walks are extremely beautiful and pleasant, while the surrounding country, for the most part, presents an aspect delightfully variegated with gently rising hills and pleasant vales. As you emerge from the city on the east, the mountains or hills rise suddenly to the height of several hundred feet, which throws a romantic and sublime appearance over the whole scenery. From their summits there is a beautiful prospect, not only of the city but for miles around. [^83]

One of the summits was Arthur's Seat, a particularly prominent rocky peak that provides an extraordinary view of the city and of the sea. Frequently Orson climbed to its top, where he contemplated the magnificent scene before him and "lifted my desires to heaven in behalf of the people of the city." [^84] Since then this spot has been known among the Latter-day Saints as "Pratt's Hill." On his first climb, it is said, he pleaded with the Lord for two hundred converts. [^85] By the time he left Scotland, that prayer had been more than answered.

Like the other apostles, Orson preached wherever and to whomever he could, at times held public debates, and, with his co-workers, labored long and hard. He immediately hired a public hall, Whitfield Chapel, for six months, and there, on Sunday, May 24, he preached the first public Latter-day Saint discourse in Edinburgh. He continued to preach there three times every Sabbath and at eight o'clock on Tuesday and Friday evenings. To advertise his meetings he had a thousand handbills printed. The first week he posted two hundred at various places around the city, and then, for the next few weeks, about a hundred a week, after which he tapered off to a dozen or so. He also had flyers posted on heavy pasteboard, which he hung in conspicuous places, including two in front of the chapel every Sunday. The results were discouraging, for even though the first meeting was well attended, he attracted fewer than twenty people after that. For weeks, he wrote to George A. Smith, "I had to preach almost to empty walls." [^86] A few, however, began to listen, and before long some were baptized, including Samuel Mulliner's parents, with whom the apostle lived at first. By the end of July, there were still only eighteen members in Edinburgh, though the Church was growing rapidly elsewhere. Orson wrote to Reuben Hedlock that he had "not given up all hopes of that place yet," and by fall the Edinburgh Conference was organized. [^87]

Among the delights of Edinburgh was that some of the great philosophical contributions to the western world had come from there, and important work in philosophy, physics, and astronomy was still going on. Such an intellectual climate was made to order for Orson Pratt, who later became an accomplished mathematician and philosopher, and the ideas he came across there had important influence on his later publications. [^88] The intellectual climate may also have provided incentive for his own writing. Sometime in 1840, possibly during those discouraging early months, he began to prepare for publication his important thirty-one-page pamphlet, Interesting Account of Several Remarkable Visions.

Publication Efforts in EnglandHCPARLEY P. PRATT IN MANCHESTER

Publication Efforts in EnglandHCAppointed editor of the Millennial Star, Parley P. Pratt remained in Manchester and immediately went to work. Though he did considerable preaching in and around the city, he spent most of his time publishing. It was a natural assignment, for he exulted in writing in defense of the kingdom. He also loved to compose hymns, and on the wrapper of the first issue of the Star was printed one he wrote especially for the occasion. [^89] Portraying in powerful verse the spirit of what the apostles were doing, it was placed first in their new hymnbook and soon became one of Mormonism's best-loved anthems.

The morning breaks, the shadows flee;

Lo! Zion's standard is unfurled!

The dawning of a brighter day

Majestic rises on the world.

The clouds of error disappear

Before the rays of truth divine;

The glory, bursting from afar,

Wide o'er the nations soon will shine.

The Gentile fulness now comes in,

And Israel's blessings are at hand;

Lo! Judah's remnant, cleans'd from sin,

Shall in their promised Canaan stand.

Jehovah speaks! Let earth give ear,

And Gentile nations turn and live!

His mighty arm is making bare,

His covenant people to receive.

Angels from heaven, and truth from earth

Have met, and both have record borne;

Thus Zion's light is bursting forth,

To bring her ransomed children home.

Some fifty of his hymns were included in the hymnbook he and his colleagues published in England.

Parley expressed lofty hopes for the Star in the first issue:

We trust this paper will prove a welcome visitor to the palaces of the noble, the mansions of the rich, the towers of the brave, and the cottages of the poor: that the sublimity of its truths, the splendour of its light, and the easy simplicity of its style and language, may, at once, interest and edify the learned, and instruct and enlighten those in the humbler walks of life.

No doubt his readers included more people in the "cottages of the poor" than in the heights he described. The Star proved invaluable to the Saints, but it was not long before the hard-working apostle found himself in deep financial difficulty. The "cottages of the poor" could provide little money for the support of the Star and it survived as a shoestring operation. Parley's remarkable achievement in keeping the Millennial Star in print and managing other LDS publications in Britain will be considered in more detail later.

THE MANCHESTER CONFERENCE, JULY 6-7

During the first week in July, all the apostles except Orson Pratt, who remained in Scotland, arrived in Manchester for the second general conference of the Church in England. It was held in Carpenter's Hall at 10:00 A.M. on Sunday, July 6. Reports from the various branches revealed that 842 Saints had been added to the Church since the last conference and that there were forty-one congregations in England and Scotland with a membership of 2,513, including 256 priesthood holders. The apostles presented the new hymnbook, which the conference unanimously accepted, and several people were approved for ordination to priesthood offices. One of them was Thomas Kington, to be ordained to the office of high priest. It was also agreed to release the British Mission presidency, so Fielding, Clayton, and Clark could "have the privilege of more fully entering into the field of labour." [^90] The practical result of this move was that the Twelve, and particularly Brigham Young, were even more directly involved in managing the affairs of the Church in the British Isles.

The Twelve selected Parley P. Pratt to preside at this all-day conference, but between the morning and afternoon sessions, he received a shock that so dazed him that he could hardly function. During the morning meeting a letter arrived from his wife, who, he thought, was in New York, planning to sail to England. This was the first word from home since he had sailed four months earlier, so he put the letter in his pocket, planning to read it during the noon hour. When the rest of the Twelve went to dine, he shut himself in a private room, eagerly anticipating that the letter would give him some idea of when Mary Ann would arrive. He read, instead, that she was ill and could not travel. Stunned, he went back to the conference fasting, stayed in meetings until 7:00 P.M., and then walked two miles home, still without eating. "My feelings are Such that my Stomach will not bear it," he noted as he sat down that same night and wrote a heartbroken letter back to Mary Ann. How could he go on without her, he wondered, especially since he did not expect to leave England for years. Besides, he thought, the family would be of considerable help in the office, and it would be less costly if they were with him. [^91] In a private council late Monday afternoon, the Quorum agreed that he could return to New York City to bring his family back to England. He left almost immediately.

In a Monday council with other Church officers at the Star office, the apostles assigned several full-time missionaries to new fields of labor. Joseph Fielding, for example, was sent to Bedford, Charles Price was told to "give up his business" and work under the direction of Thomas Kington, and John Parkinson was given "a roving commission, so long as he keeps busy, and doing good." [^92]

At the same council meeting, Brigham Young discussed the custom of greeting by kissing, which, despite George A. Smith's effort in April, still had not been rooted out from among the Manchester Mormons. Brigham condemned no one but urged again that the habit be set aside before it led to evil. [^93]

Later in the day the Twelve visited the warehouse where the paper for five thousand copies of the Book of Mormon was stored. They watched it being weighed and paid for it. They also decided to open new areas for missionary work and agreed that Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith should go to London. [^94]

After the Twelve separated again, Wilford Woodruff reflected upon his six months in England and wrote for publication a long epistle on what had happened in Herefordshire. His conclusion capsulized the message of all the missionaries and set the tone for what they would be doing for the next six months:

I now take the liberty, through the channel of the press, to invite all . . . into whose hands these lines may fall, that have not already obeyed the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, to repent of all their sins, and be baptized in water for the remission of their sins, that they may receive the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands,—that they may have upon them the wedding garment, that their lamps may be trimmed and burning, and be prepared to go forth and meet the Bridegroom, who is at the door—for the day when the Lord Jesus shall cleans the earth, by the spirit of judgment and the spirit of burning, from sin, wickedness, and pollution, until it becomes a fit abode for the Saviour to dwell upon, and reign one thousand years with his Saints. [^95]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Richards, Diary, July 5-21, 1840.
[^2] Brigham Young and Willard Richards to the First Presidency, September 5, 1840, Brigham Young Papers (Appendix B, Document 12).
[^3] The address side of this letter to Joseph Smith included the note "By Turly or Benbow."
[^4] Smith, History of the Church 4:188; Young, Manuscript History, 79; Allen and Alexander, Manchester Mormons, 43, 172-73.
[^5] Brigham Young to Willard Richards and Wilford Woodruff, May 24, 1840.
[^6] Brigham Young to Willard Richards, June 10, 1840, and June 17, 1840 (Appendix B, Document 11), Brigham Young Papers.
[^7] The agreement, signed by Brigham Young, Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff, and John Benbow, is in the Brigham Young Papers. See also Young, Manuscript History, 79-80.
[^8] One source says that the reason the reception was poor was that McGuffie, in a misguided effort to show his good feelings toward his former friends and neighbors, began drinking with them and became intoxicated. The situation deeply embarrassed John Taylor, but he made the best of it; see "Missionary Sketches," Juvenile Instructor 5 (October 15, 1870): 166-67.
[^9] Ibid.; Roberts, Life of John Taylor, 84-87; Barlow, "Irish Experience," 300-2; John Taylor to Editor, n.d., Millennial Star 2 (May 1841): 12-16. There are slightly different versions of the details of the baptism of Tait. Roberts says that John Taylor suggested to Tait that since they had come to water there was nothing to keep him from being baptized, while the Instructor, in a piece presumably based on an interview with John Taylor, gives the version reported here. Unfortunately, no primary sources are extant to help resolve the conflict.
[^10] Roberts, Life of John Taylor, 87.
[^11] Ibid., 81-82; Fielding, Diary, 66-67.
[^12] As quoted in Roberts, Life of John Taylor, 90.
[^13] John Taylor's account of the debate is found in his letter to the Editor, February 27, 1841, Millennial Star 1 (March 1841): 276-80. See also Roberts, Life of John Taylor, 93. Roberts's account is apparently based partly on sources not presently available. In the Church Archives there is also a scrapbook of newspaper clippings relating to this mission. An account by a non-Mormon, G. W. Gee, was printed in the Manx Liberal [Douglas, Isle of Man], October 4, 1840; also in Times and Seasons 2 (March 1, 1841): 331-32. This was reprinted as "Public Discussion on the Isle of Man," Millennial Star 1 (November 1840): 178-80. For an account of John Taylor's work on the Isle of Man by convert Ann Pitchforth, see Millennial Star 8 (July 15, 1846): 12-15.
[^14] John Taylor to Brigham Young, October 2, 1840, Brigham Young Papers.
[^15] John Taylor to the Editor, February 27, 1841, Millennial Star 1 (March 1841): 277-80.
[^16] See chapter 10 for a discussion of these publications.
[^17] John Taylor to Brigham Young, October 2, 1840, and October 6, 1840, Brigham Young Papers.
[^18] Orson Pratt to George A. Smith and Wilford Woodruff, November 2, 1840, George A. Smith Collection. "The Editor of the Manx Liberal has published several lengthy communications for Elder Taylor in defense of the truth" (George A. Smith to the Editor, November 18, 1840, Times and Seasons 2 [February 1, 1841]: 307-8); and "Er Taylor is writing a reply to Mr. Hey's 'Third Address.' He says Mr. Hey is on his last legs." (Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, November 23, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.)
[^19] John Taylor to Joseph Smith, February 3, 1841, Times and Seasons 2 (May 1, 1841): 400-2.
[^20] Bloxham, "Apostolic Foundations," 130. According to this account, however, the Cowleys and Quayles were baptized the next day, so there is some question as to whether they were the same people who could not wait until morning about whom John Taylor was writing.
[^21] Roberts, Life of John Taylor, 95. Young, Manuscript History, 83, indicates that he was in Manchester November 16-20, when, presumably, he went back to Liverpool.
[^22] Smith, "History," July 20, 1840.
[^23] Samuel Johnson to George A. Smith and Heber C. Kimball, September 17, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^24] Wilford Woodruff to the Editor, August 5, 1840, Millennial Star 1 (August 1840): 93; Woodruff, Journal, August 11, 1840, 1:490-91.
[^25] Woodruff, Journal, August 2, 1840, 1:488-89 and August 11, 1840, 1:490-91.
[^26] Heber C. Kimball said in his letter to Vilate, August 19, 1840, Heber C. Kimball Collection, that they baptized fifteen. The total recorded in Wilford Woodruff's diary during those few days was eleven.
[^27] On August 28 and 29, however, they visited with a "Brother" John Hulme, but he must have been a member of the Church who was just visiting London, for he brought them some papers and a letter from Willard Richards. Woodruff, Journal, August 28 and 29, 1840, 1:501-2.
[^28] Omnibuses ran from Paddington to the Bank of England. These box-like vehicles, drawn by three horses, held twenty passengers facing each other on two parallel benches, and the fare ranged from sixpence for an intermediate journey to a shilling for a trip to one of the outlying areas. Sheppard, London, 120-21. In 1841 the Blackwall line was able to extend the railroad into the city, with a permanent terminus at Fenchurch Church. Ibid., 128.
[^29] Now known as Newcombe Street. Bloxham, "Apostolic Foundations," 151.
[^30] Woodruff, Journal, August 19, 1840, 1:494-95; Smith, "History," August 19, 1840.
[^31] Woodruff, Journal, August 18, 1840, 1:493-94.
[^32] Mitchell, British Historical Statistics, 20 lists the 1841 population as 2,073,000. In his journal entry of August 18, 1840, Wilford Woodruff estimated the London population at 1,500,000.
[^33] Petrie, Victorians, 71.
[^34] London, in fact, consumed 25 percent of all the coal produced in Britain, and it took some seven hundred colliers sailing regularly between that city and the coal fields to keep the vast metropolitan area supplied. Sheppard, London, 193.
[^35] Woodruff, Journal, August 21, 1840, 1:496-97.
[^36] Ibid., January 8, 1841, 2:25.
[^37] Ibid., September 2, 1840, 1:506.
[^38] Sheppard, London, 46.
[^39] Ibid., 22.
[^40] Woodruff, Journal, September 4, 1840, 1:507.
[^41] Sheppard, London, 356. For a comment on when these and other parks were opened to the public, see Hammond and Hammond, Age of the Chartists, 346n.
[^42] Sheppard, London, 366.
[^43] As quoted in ibid., 348.
[^44] Woodruff, Journal, February 2, 1841, 2:36.
[^45] Wilford Woodruff to the Editor, October 7, 1840, Times and Seasons 2 (February 15, 1841): 311-14; and (March 1, 1841): 327-31.
[^46] Smith, "History," August 23, 1840.
[^47] Woodruff, Journal, August 23, 1840, 1:498.
[^48] Ibid., August 28, 1840, 1:501-2.
[^49] Ibid., August 30, 1840, 1:502-4. See also Smith, History of the Church, 4:183-84.
[^50] Woodruff, Journal, August 31, 1840, 1:505; Smith, "History," August 31, 1840.
[^51] Woodruff, Journal, September 2, 1840, 1:506.
[^52] Hastings, Encyclopedia 9:756. See also Hopkins, Woman to Deliver Her People, for a biography of Southcott.
[^53] Hastings, Encyclopedia 7:423-27; Eliade, Encyclopedia of Religion 7:287. See also Lively, "Catholic Apostolic Church."
[^54] Note the clever play on the number "six hundred three score and six" which, according to Revelation 13:18, was the number of the Beast.
[^55] Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith to the Editors, October 12, 1840, Times and Seasons 2 (December 15, 1840): 257.
[^56] Heber C. Kimball to Edward Martin, typescript, September 11, 1840, Heber C. Kimball Collection.
[^57] Smith, "History," September 7, 1840. See also Heber C. Kimball to Edward Martin, September 11, 1840.
[^58] Woodruff, Journal, September 6, 1840, 1:508. Many of the historical sites they visited at this time and later were described in detail in a letter to the Times and Seasons. See Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith to the Editors, October 28, 1840, Times and Seasons 2 (January 1, 1841): 261-64.
[^59] Woodruff, Journal, September 9, 1840, 1:511-12; Bloxham, "Apostolic Foundations," 155.
[^60] Smith, "History," September 9, 1840.
[^61] Woodruff, Journal, September 10, 1840, 1:512.
[^62] Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, September 19, 1840, Heber C. Kimball Collection.
[^63] Alexander Neibaur to George A. Smith and Heber C. Kimball, September 21, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^64] Smith, "History," September 19 and 27, 1840.
[^65] Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, September 19, 1840.
[^66] Smith, "History," October 5, 1840.
[^67] Woodruff, Journal, September 10, 1840, 1:512.
[^68] Ibid., September 21, 1840, 1:517-20.
[^69] Ibid., September 16, 1840, 1:516-17.
[^70] Reuben Hedlock to George A. Smith, September 17, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^71] Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, September 24, 1840, George A. Smith Collection (Appendix B, Document 13). He repeated the admonition in another letter: Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, October 17, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^72] "Minutes of the General Conference," Millennial Star 1 (October 1840): 166. Note that these minutes are identified in the Star as the minutes of the July conference, but this is clearly a misprint.
[^73] Woodruff, Journal, October 2, 1840, 1:524-25.
[^74] "I am very sory that I am prevented from coming but think that it would not be prudent at the present time," he explained to Brigham Young (John Taylor to Brigham Young, October 2, 1840, Brigham Young Papers).
[^75] They also said that if they decided not to have another conference for six months, and then meet in London, this would be the last Manchester conference, but, they added, "we say 'if,' which costs nothing" (Brigham Young and Willard Richards to Heber C. Kimball and George A. Smith, September 28, 1840, Brigham Young Papers).
[^76] Notes, October 6, 1840, Brigham Young Papers.
[^77] Millennial Star 1 (October 1840): 165-68.
[^78] Memorandum of intent to hold a debate, September 4, 1840, Brigham Young Papers.
[^79] Smith, "History," October 7, 1840; Woodruff, Journal, October 7, 1840, 1:526-27.
[^80] Woodruff, Journal, October 7-12, 1841, 1:526-28. The cloaks were purchased on October 12, and the apostles who bought them, according to this account, were Elders Young, Kimball, Richards, Woodruff, and Smith. The latter, however, was already back in London, so the others must have purchased it for him.
[^81] Unfortunately, the record of Orson Pratt's activities in Britain is sketchy, because his personal journals are not extant, but there is enough to provide an extensive outline. We have used what documents are available in the Church Archives, as well as O. Pratt, Journals, which is a compilation of various original sources related to Pratt. See also England, Orson Pratt, 61-71; England, "Gospel Seeds"; Buchanan, "Church in Scotland"; Buchanan, "Mormonism in Scotland"; Orson Pratt to Parley P. Pratt, April 16, 1841, Millennial Star 2 (May 1841): 10-12, where Orson briefly summarizes the mission and his attitude toward it.
[^82] Buchanan, "Church in Scotland," 269-70.
[^83] Orson Pratt to Parley P. Pratt, April 16, 1841.
[^84] Ibid.
[^85] Buchanan, "Church in Scotland," 270. We have found no evidence to support the popular assumptions that Pratt here dedicated Scotland for the preaching of the gospel.
[^86] Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, October 17, 1840, George A. Smith Collection. See also Reuben Hedlock to George A. Smith, June 15, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^87] Orson Pratt to Brigham Young, August 28, 1840, Brigham Young Papers; excerpts of letter from Reuben Hedlock in Millennial Star 1 (August 1840): 92; O. Pratt, Journals, 487.
[^88] England, Orson Pratt, 66-67.
[^89] P. Pratt, Autobiography, 303.
[^90] Millennial Star 1 (July 1840): 67-71.
[^91] Parley P. Pratt to Mary Ann Pratt, July 6, 1840, Parley P. Pratt Collection.
[^92] Millennial Star 1 (July 1840): 71.
[^93] Fielding, Diary, 81.
[^94] Woodruff, Journal, July 7, 1840, 1:482; Smith, "History," July 8, 1840. It is unclear whether the decision to go to London was made on the seventh or the eighth. Wilford Woodruff's journal lists a meeting on July 7 where the decision regarding Pratt was made, though it does not mention the London decision. Smith's history for July 8 mentions both decisions. We tend to accept Woodruff's dating of the meeting, though it could have happened on the eighth when he was also in Manchester. Later, Woodruff wrote that the decision to go to London wass made just by the three of them, but it seems unlikely that such a decision would be made without the consent of the rest of his quorum. Wilford Woodruff to the Editor, October 7, 1840, Times and Seasons 2 (March 1, 1841): 330.
[^95] Wilford Woodruff to the Editor, July 9, 1840, Millennial Star 1 (August 1840): 84.
