David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

Chapter 8

EXPANDING THE HARVEST: JULY THROUGH OCTOBER 1840

Rejuvenated by the conference, the apostles eagerly returned to their work. All, that is, except Parley P. Pratt, who lost no time in taking a ship for America. Brigham Young and Willard Richards remained in Manchester, taking over Parley's publishing duties, preaching when they could, and visiting other places. John Taylor went back to Liverpool and from there expanded his activity to Ireland and the Isle of Man. Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith repaired to London, where they became the first LDS missionaries in England's greatest metropolis. The harvest was enlarging geographically, though none of the newly opened fields produced the abundance of converts the missionaries had enjoyed elsewhere.

BRIGHAM AND WILLARD: MORE TIME IN MANCHESTER

Willard's family problems persisted, and Jennetta's chronic illness was complicated by pregnancy. Because her husband would be in Manchester more or less permanently, it was not difficult for her to decide to move there with him. She arrived from Walkerfold on July 5 and, during the next ten days, Willard went to Walkerfold, packed her belongings, and moved them to Manchester. He also moved his own possessions that had been stored in Preston. By July 21 they had somehow obtained enough money to pay three months' advance rent on a house on Chapman Street, [^1] where they continued living until they moved to Regent Road the following December.

In September Brigham and Willard wrote to the First Presidency of the Church, asking a number of specific questions, including whether they were doing right in printing the Book of Mormon and the hymnbook and how long they were expected to stay in England. During all this time they had received no direct communication from the Prophet, and they had no choice but to proceed on the assumption that he would either approve all they did or let them know if he thought they were wrong. "We desire not to council you in any, but to be counseled by you," they said with deference, "for it is the desire of our hearts to do the will of God in all things, & we feel our own weekness & insufficiency for the great work which is committed to us." Until such direction came they were determined to go ahead without hesitation: "Our motto is go ahead. Go ahead—& ahead we are determined to go—till we have conquered every foe. So come life or come death we'll go ahead, but tell us if we are going wrong & we will right it." [^2]

On September 5, the same day their letter was dated, the two apostles traveled to Liverpool and organized the second official company of Saints, two hundred strong, to sail for America. They handed the letter to one of the emigrants, probably either Theodore Turley, who was in charge of the group, or John Benbow, with instructions to deliver it to Joseph Smith when they arrived in Nauvoo. [^3]

Brigham and Willard spent the night of September 7 aboard the ship North America and the next day, along with John Taylor, accompanied the departing Saints fifteen or twenty miles out to sea. [^4] The gathering was seriously underway, for with these Saints, the Moon company that had left in June, some fifty Scottish Saints who went in October, and a few who went on their own, more than three hundred British converts sailed in 1840.

Just before the North America departed, the generosity of the Benbows was demonstrated once again. For months Brigham Young had worried about repaying the 250 pounds borrowed from the Benbows for printing the Book of Mormon. "Tell Br. John and Sister Jane Benbow all is well and the Lord will bless them. Nothing shall fall to the ground unnot[i]sed," he had written to Elders Richards and Woodruff in May. [^5] But he remained concerned, for the Benbows were planning to emigrate and apparently expected to be repaid before they left. In June Brigham asked Willard to talk to them about the possibility of going to America without all their money and whether the balance could be sent later after they had time to sell books. "If Brother and Sister Benbow are amind to doe so, it would favor us for we can not get the Hym Book out till in to July and then they will have to be bound before they can be sold." [^6] By September there was still no money available, but on September 7, the day before sailing, John Benbow signed an agreement relinquishing all claim to the debt, except for that needed to assist certain family members and friends the next season. The agreement left all the remaining money as well as any money realized from the sale of the Gadfield Elm chapel at the disposal of Brigham Young, Wilford Woodruff, and Willard Richards. [^7]

JOHN TAYLOR: LIVERPOOL, IRELAND, AND THE ISLE OF MAN

John Taylor remained in Liverpool, still longing for Leonora but reconciled to the fact that she would not be joining him. He compensated with hard work, and particularly delighted in giving public lectures to large audiences. In July he arranged to give a series of lectures in the Music Hall, on Bold Street, which held some fifteen hundred people. Before he gave them, however, he took a whirlwind preaching tour of Ireland.

With one in every seven people in Liverpool an Irish emigrant, it was only natural that several Mormon converts there were Irish. One of these was James McGuffie, an elder, who introduced Elder Taylor to Thomas Tait, a friend visiting from Ireland. The apostle felt impressed to prophesy that Tait would become the first person to be baptized there. William Black, also a native Irishman, was officially called as a missionary to Ireland on July 7 during the Manchester conference. On July 27, John Taylor, James McGuffie, and William Black set sail together for the Emerald Isle.

The next day the missionaries arrived at the beautiful little village of Newry where McGuffie, who had once resided there, arranged for the use of the Session House for a meeting. There, before six or seven hundred people, John Taylor preached the first Latter-day Saint sermon in Ireland. The effect, however, was not great, for only a handful of people came to the follow-up meeting the next evening, which turned into a rather informal question-and-answer session. [^8]

McGuffie remained in Newry, while John Taylor and Black went on to the Four Towns of Bellinacrat, accompanied by Thomas Tait, who was showing interest in the Mormon message. There John Taylor preached in a large barn, though again with little apparent effect, and the next morning, with Tait helping to carry their luggage, the missionaries started walking toward the town of Lisburn. Along the way Taylor preached to Tait from the scriptures, and, when they came to Loch Brickland, the believing farmer asked, in a manner reminiscent of that of the eunuch in the book of Acts, "See, here is water; what doth hinder me to be baptized?" (Acts 8:36.) The group stopped, Taylor took him down into the water, and Thomas Tait became the first person baptized in Ireland. [^9]

In Lisburn John Taylor preached four times to large crowds in the marketplace and then wound down his trip by going to Belfast where, on August 6, he caught a steamer for Glasgow, Scotland, leaving behind another new field opened by an apostle. McGuffie and Black remained in Ireland as missionaries and soon began harvesting a few souls.

After meeting briefly with the missionaries in Glasgow, Elder Taylor went on to Paisley. The Saints recognized the apostleship as something of remarkable value and took every opportunity to benefit from the presence of an apostle in their midst. He ended his ten-day trip with the Saints flocking about him for his blessing, not allowing him to retire until early in the morning. [^10]

Back in Liverpool, John Taylor delivered his series of lectures in the Music Hall, where he attracted large crowds as well as continuing opposition, particularly from Timothy Matthews and his followers. Because local Church leaders and missionaries seemed capable of dealing with the situation, however, the apostle saw no reason why he should not carry on with his plan of opening up missionary work on the Isle of Man.

Mission of the TwelveHCElder Taylor had been thinking for months of going to the Isle of Man, and let it be known at least as early as March 25. That day he and Joseph Fielding were visiting with a Mr. Radcliff, a Bible Society agent, and a Miss Brannon, a resident of the Isle and an old acquaintance of Leonora Taylor's. Radcliff was deeply interested in what Taylor had to say, but not Miss Brannon, who expressed concerns when he announced that he was thinking of going to the Isle. He was going there anyway, he told her. [^11] Nearly six months later, on September 16, accompanied by Hiram Clark and William Mitchell, he sailed from Liverpool. They arrived in Douglas the following day.

Mission of the TwelveHCAs he set foot on the Isle of Man, John Taylor's lonesomeness for Leonora came flooding back, for it was here, he knew, that she had spent her youth. He allowed himself to think also of her privations and suffering and the ordeal of separation they both endured, but he comforted himself by crying inwardly: "A few more struggles and the battle will be fought, the victory will be ours." [^12]

Mission of the TwelveHCWhile his companions went on to the town of Ramsey, Taylor remained in Douglas, where he began work by contacting some of Leonora's girlhood friends, visiting a local Primitive Methodist preacher, and hiring the largest hall in town, the Wellington Rooms, capable of holding a thousand people. There he began giving lectures which, as usual, generated both interest and opposition.

Mission of the TwelveHCOn Friday, September 25, one of John Taylor's lectures was interrupted by a disorderly party of Primitive Methodist preachers and others. They were so furious at him that, according to the Manx Liberal, they seemed ready to fight. The disorder subsided when the person in charge proposed that if they believed Taylor had said anything contrary to the word of God, they should agree to a public debate with him. The intruders readily accepted the idea, and the next day one of their number, Thomas Hamilton, challenged him to a debate, charging him with misquoting, mutilating, taking from, and adding to the Bible. The apostle accepted the challenge, he later reported, not because he felt he could teach Hamilton anything but "merely to remove public prejudice, and to let it be known that I courted publicity and light, and was not afraid of bringing my principles to the touchstone of truth." [^13]

Mission of the TwelveHCThe debate was held the following Monday, September 28. Each side was given an hour to present its case, and then each had another half-hour for final responses. Speaking first, Thomas Hamilton conducted himself so irresponsibly that the Manx Liberal described him as "a mere braggadocia, possessing no qualifications save ignorance and presumption." His arguments were so far from responsible, in fact, that John Taylor had nothing to refute, so he spent his hour giving his regular missionary message. During the rebuttal period Hamilton performed much as he had previously, whereupon John Taylor, as the Liberal described it, inflicted

Mission of the TwelveHCdeserved chastisement on the arrogant simpleton, who had given the challenge without being able to utter a single sentence against his opponent; and this he did right well, for while poor Mr. Hamilton writhed beneath his heavy flagellation, it was truly heart-rending to see his (Mr. H.'s) agony. There he sat biting his lips, and shaking his head, and every muscle of his distorted countenance seemed to implore the mercy of the meeting.

Mission of the TwelveHCAt the end, Elder Taylor "affectionately" urged Hamilton to repent and be baptized for the remission of his sins.

Mission of the TwelveHCTime finally expired and the meeting was ready to vote, as was customary in public debates, on the proposition that Hamilton had proved none of his charges. According to the Liberal, the vote would have gone overwhelmingly against him, but suddenly some of his boisterous supporters began again to make charges against Taylor and demand time to prove them. The audience, however, hissed, groaned, and shouted them down. Finally, John Taylor himself gave the doxology and a closing prayer, and the meeting was over. His summary of the whole affair to Brigham Young was no more terse than it deserved: "I have had a controversy with a Primitive Methodest Preacher but of all the lame attempts to oppose the truth that ever I heard I think his was the weakest & the worst & the people were disgusted with him." [^14]

As Elder Taylor reported to the Millennial Star, Mr. Hamilton was so well acquainted with history that he could declare

that in some countries where there was no water they baptized with oil!!! about which opinion I had the hardihood to be a little sceptical despite of his great proficiency in historical lore; for I was foolish enough to wonder (as any old woman would do who did not possess the same knowledge of history as himself,) what they made use of as a beverage in that country!! as oil would not be very palatable to drink at all times, and also what they cooked their victuals with. It was the same individual, sir, who on being asked his authority to preach answered "I sent myself," I was led to tell him that I was of that opinion before, but that he had confirmed my impressions; that I had thought from the beginning that God had nothing to do with sending him out. Yet foolish, ignorant, and untaught as he was, there are those, sir, (who think that because the Scriptures says "God has chosen the weak things of this world to confound the wise," that any and every person is qualified to preach the gospel merely because they are fools, whether God calls them or not;) who had it not been for this exposure, might have mistaken him for a wise man, and have thought that he was called of God. [^15]

The dauntless Taylor confronted every challenge head on. He replied in print to a series of newspaper articles against the Mormons by a Mr. J. Curran, and to each of three pamphlets published by the Reverend Robert Heys, a Wesleyan minister. [^16] So important was his battle with Heys, in fact, that he missed the October conference because of it. On October 2, 1840, he wrote Brigham Young: "A methodist publication has come out in opposition to [the gospel] & the fire is begenning to rage & I do not wish to leave the field untill my enemies & the enemies of God lay down their arms or till there is a sufficient army to contend with theirs." Four days later Taylor reported to Young that he had "got into the wars" and that as "I have got into the scrape I shall have to fight through." [^17] His fellow apostles followed his war of words with delight. "Elder Taylor's letters in the 'Manx Liberal' are superlative, Methodist Priests stand no chance at all," exulted Orson Pratt to Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith, and later he laughed that "Taylor [in his 2nd address] has cut Hey into fine fodder. . . . Taylor understands weilding the weapons of truth to a very good advantage & he has a very good good opportunity of doing it. I presume we could do more good in Edinburgh & London if we could bring the enemy into open combat." [^18]

John Taylor gathered around him a small and faithful nucleus for his army of Saints. Once he went into the countryside, sat in a chimney corner talking to a few neighbors who came into the house where he was, and baptized and confirmed eight people the same night. They simply would not wait until morning. [^19] This "country place" may have been the home of Charles Cowley, who lived near the village of Kirk German and who, according to his own account, had been "seeking and praying for correct information concerning the Will of God." He and his wife, Ann, read in the newspaper about the minister from America who was to preach in Douglas, and Ann's brother-in-law, John Quayle, went to hear him. Deeply impressed, he brought Elder Taylor to Cowley's farmhouse where, in the course of the evening, Quayle and his wife, Catherine, along with the Cowleys, were convinced that the apostle's message was the truth. [^20]

John Taylor soon organized a branch of the Church on the Isle of Man and left it in good hands when he departed in mid November. [^21] He spent the rest of his mission mostly in and around Liverpool, preaching, working with publications, and helping to organize the emigration program. He also visited Manchester, Birmingham, Sheffield, and several other cities and briefly returned to the Isle of Man in March.

ON THE WAY TO LONDON

One of the decisions made at the Manchester conference was that Elders Kimball, Woodruff, and Smith should introduce the gospel in London. First, however, Woodruff and Smith spent more than three weeks in the Staffordshire Potteries before going on to Herefordshire. During his brief return to the Potteries, Elder Smith continued to be rewarded for his missionary zeal and to experience the unfeigned love of the Saints. He baptized several people, including, on July 19, Richard Rushton, Sr., a sixty-year-old silk manufacturer in Leek who considered the unsophisticated young man from America a spiritual giant. Elder Smith stayed at the home of the Samuel Johnson family, where his room was constantly crowded with "Saints and strangers," all seeking instruction. Nearly every night someone would be baptized after leaving his room, and George A. seldom could retire before 2:00 A.M. When it came time to leave, he poured out his heart in thanksgiving. "Sister Johnson," he said, "attended me with all the care and kindness of a mother," taking pains to keep him in good health and to keep his clothes in order. As he left, she cried as if her only son were departing. [^22] The continuing affection between the Johnsons and Elder Smith was exemplified in the first letter Samuel Johnson ever wrote which was addressed to George A. Smith and Heber C. Kimball in London. [^23]

In Herefordshire Wilford Woodruff found many things to warm his soul, but at least two stood out. For one thing, missionary work continued unabated, and, with the forty baptized on Sunday, August 2, approximately 250 people had joined the Church since the July conference. "Elder Kington is labouring constantly in this wide field which is under his care," he wrote to the readers of the Star, "and he, with the Elders and Priests generally through this region, are blessed with many souls as seals of their ministry." [^24]

The other source of satisfaction was the continuing faith of John and Jane Benbow. True to the admonition of the apostles that those with means should help the poor to emigrate to Zion, the Benbows were "willing to make every sacrifice in their power for the gathering of the Saints" before they themselves departed in September. About fifty Herefordshire converts were preparing to go to America with several other Saints, and the generous Benbows willingly paid the way of forty, at a total cost of about one hundred pounds. On August 11 Woodruff warmly shook hands with Theodore Turley, who would lead this company to America, and the Benbows, "to see them No more untill I meet them in NAUVOO U.S.A." "Let the blessings of Almighty God rest upon [John Benbow] forever & ever," he prayed. The faithful and generous Benbows had also given Wilford Woodruff fifteen pounds to help him and his companions on their mission to London. [^25]

Heber C. Kimball finally arrived in the Herefordshire village of Ledbury on August 11 but had difficulty locating the Latter-day Saints. Finally some of the Saints discovered his identity and, delighted with his presence, escorted him to the home of Thomas Kington in nearby Dymock. The next morning Heber was joined there by the other two apostles, and during the next few days they baptized several people. [^26] On Sunday, August 16, they held their final meetings, outdoors in a field at Leigh. A large crowd attended and four people were baptized, including two men who had walked twelve miles for the occasion and who were also ordained to the office of priest that same afternoon.

LONDON: "WHAT AM I AND MY BRETHREN HERE FOR?"

On August 17 the three apostles set out by train for London, arriving at Paddington Station, some five miles northwest of the City of London, about 4:00 P.M. the next day. They knew no one in this giant metropolis, [^27] but Theodore Turley had suggested that they begin by contacting Mrs. Mary Ann Allgood, his wife's sister. They took an omnibus [^28] into the City, walked south across London Bridge, and found Mrs. Allgood at her home, 19 King Street. [^29] She received them kindly, gave them some refreshment, and directed them to the nearby Kings Arms Inn where they spent their first two nights in London. But the Kings Arms was in one of London's busiest districts. The constant singing and yelling in the streets and the noisy passing of horses and carts was hardly conducive to sleep, and they soon moved elsewhere. [^30]

The missionaries were struck, perhaps even awed, with the size of London, its teeming population, its many magnificent homes and public buildings, and its poverty. The spectacle also seemed to give them a renewed sense of solemnity as they thought of the challenges ahead. "O London," Wilford Woodruff soliloquized,

as I walk thy street & behold the mass of human beings passing through thee & view thy mighty pallaces, thy splended mansions, the costly merchantdize wharewith thou art adorned even as the capital of great Babylon, I am ready to ask myself, what am I & my Brethren here for? & as the spirit answers to warn thee of thine abominations & to exhort the[e] to repent of thy wickedness & prepare for the day of thy visitation thy mourning thy calamity & thy wo, I am ready to cry out Lord who is sufficient for these things? [^31]

He ended his musing with a fervent prayer for success.

Metropolitan London had a growing population of around two million people [^32] and boasted the most elegant architecture and lavish life-style in all of England. The River Thames meandered through the middle of this sprawling urban complex, and on the east side a series of huge docks made the Port of London larger even than that of Liverpool. [^33] Several major thoroughfares ran in every direction, but most of London's streets were short, narrow, and crowded. Dotted with lovely parks, both public and private, the city was also becoming soiled by industrial discharge. The increasing number of gasworks, the furnaces of the ever-growing coal-burning factories, and the coal-burning locomotives of the rapidly prolif-erating railroad lines belched black, tar-filled smoke into the air. In cold weather, the chimneys of the coal-burning fireplaces that heated almost every house must have doubled the pall. [^34]

Mission of the TwelveHCFour days after their arrival, Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, and George A. Smith climbed to the top of Sir Christopher Wren's magnificent monument commemorating the great London fire of 1666. It was a clear day and, standing two hundred feet above the street, they had an extraordinary view of what Wilford Woodruff described as

Mission of the TwelveHCthe largest most noted, populous & splendid City upon the face of the whole earth. . . .& such a splendid prospect & grand scenery I never before beheld. . . .

Mission of the TwelveHCEast of us lay the splended tower of London & the Mint, North the Mansion of the Lord Mayor of London, North West St Pauls Church West, Westminster Abbey & the house of Parliment. South lies the river Thames with five large arched bridges acrossed it in full view, & another which is not seen from the pillar making six. . . .

Mission of the TwelveHCSouth of the River lies London Borough & in addition to this were hundreds of Churches, chapels, & Spires standing in the midst of one universal dens mass of brick & Stone buildings, covering about six miles squair of ground.

Mission of the TwelveHCWhile viewing this scenery in a Clear day we were conversing with a Prussian traveller (citizen of Berlin) who had traveled much over Europe & Asia & other parts of the world, & he declaired we could not find another spot upon the face of the earth that would present to our view as grand a scenery as the one before us. [^35]

Mission of the TwelveHCCloser acquaintance with London, however, modified this initial idyllic image. Five months later, in the midst of a bitterly cold winter, Wilford Woodruff found himself in a London so filled with smoke that he could see no more than a few yards. [^36] The apostles were concerned also with more than the atmosphere, and not long after they arrived they characterized the giant metropolis as a place of sin and corruption, "full of every thing but righteousness." [^37]

There was a clear distinction between metropolitan London and the central, mile-square City of London, located on the north bank of the Thames. Ruled by a city corporation, with the Lord Mayor at its head, the City had a population of fewer than 130,000 and was politically independent from the rest of the metropolis. At its heart was the Bank of England, standing like a fortress within high, windowless walls, and the Mansion House, official residence of the Lord Mayor. The City was the financial center of London and most of its residents were shopkeepers and tradesmen. [^38] It was a tightly knit community whose economic and political influence extended far beyond its bounds.

At the same time, the City had serious problems: almost no sewers; one hundred fifty slaughterhouses, most of them underground; and the worst prisons in all of England. A most distressing area was the Smithfield meat market on the north side. This "vile nuisance," as one historian has called it, [^39] was the location of several slaughterhouses, and was often filled with an odious milieu of livestock and raucous human beings. On September 4, Wilford Woodruff visited the market during a fair. He wrote in his journal not only of the cattle headed for slaughter but also of the numerous exotic animals exhibited and the vast array of goods and side-shows crammed into the tight space: "men women, & children of almost every grade & rank," prostitutes, a giant woman exhibiting a seven-foot high sheep weighing six hundred pounds, and a female snake charmer. Disgusted with such an amazing mass of beasts and revelling humanity, the American apostle could not help but compare it with something more familiar to him:

Should a Missourian from the western wiles of America whose knowledge extends ownly to his gun, Corn Crib & hog pen behold such a Scenery he would think he was in another world. What affect it would have upon him I know not but one thing is certain that any man that loved virtue peace & retirement would turn from such a scenery with his heart sicken within him knowing that virtue peace nor righteousness Could not long dwell in such a sink of confusion & iniquity. [^40]

Economically and socially, London's population was a study in remarkable contrasts. At the top was the landed aristocracy, consisting of slightly more than three hundred families. With annual incomes of l 5,000, such a family often owned a mansion in the countryside in addition to a mansion, or large townhouse, in one of London's exclusive residential areas. Next on the social scale were another seven thousand people who belonged to almost equally wealthy families and who, in combination with the aristocracy, owned 80 percent of all the land in Britain. Then came the rest of the upper class: bankers, merchants, and the most successful businessmen whose living was extremely comfortable.

Next came the vast middle class, with its wide range of gradations in wealth and living standards, including almost anyone with an annual income of l 150 or more. The more affluent could often afford servants and enjoy a profusion of activities and pleasures that bespoke a good life, including grand shopping boulevards and bazaars, gardens and parks, art galleries, museums, concerts, and theaters. The shops were closed on Sunday, which became the day for family excursions to such places as Kensington Gardens, Hyde Park, and Regent's Park. [^41]There were not many such open spaces left, however, and by the 1840s private pleasure gardens, open to the public for an admission fee and catering to the tastes of the middle class, were becoming popular. Often these parks offered such entertainment as fireworks, acrobatics, and balloon rides. London had much to offer those who had the time and money to take advantage of it.

Finally there was the "sunken sixth," as contemporaries dubbed London's lower classes: the poverty stricken who constituted some 16 percent of the population. Their growing numbers were largely a result of immigration from other parts of Britain, and many of the immigrants found nothing but unemployment, poverty, and squalor almost unheard of even in Manchester. Children born in the slums seemingly had no chance to learn about the world beyond them and seek a better life. With little opportunity for education and needing some way to help their families obtain the necessities of life, they turned to the trades of the streets: shoe-blacking, sweeping, and, at the very bottom of the scale of respectability, collecting from the streets cigar butts and animal manure, which they sold by the bucketful to tanneries. [^42] Too often, they also turned to crime.

Mission of the TwelveHCThe contrast between rich and poor in London of the 1840s was incredible to the American Henry Coleman, who observed it with stunned disbelief: "In the midst of the most extraordinary abundance, here are men, women, and children dying of starvation; and running alongside of the splendid chariot, with its gilded equipages, its silken linings, and its liveried footmen, are poor, forlorn, friendless, almost naked wretches, looking like the mere fragments of humanity." [^43] The American apostles had similar reactions. "It gave me pain," wrote Wilford Woodruff on February 2, 1841, "while passing through the streets of London this cold day to see poor women & esspecially children freezing nearly to death without food, fire, & but little cloathing but begging for a morsel to eat." [^44]

Mission of the TwelveHCLondon's masses were not as ready for the Mormon message as were the people of Herefordshire, Staffordshire, or Lancashire, and the three apostles found their time in London to be the most frustrating of their entire mission. When Wilford Woodruff later said that the London experience was "as profitable a school to me as any I have met with in my travels," [^45] he probably had in mind not only all he learned at the museums and historic sites but also what he learned about patience in the face of indifference, adversity, and relatively meager success.

Mission of the TwelveHCFor ten days the missionaries walked the streets of London, sometimes together and sometimes separately. They contacted individuals, visited established churches, talked to preachers, and spoke at temperance meetings, all in an effort to find someone who would listen to their message. On the first Sunday, August 23, they went twice to hear the celebrated Robert Aitken, who, George A. Smith said, "preached a regularly built hellfire and damnation sermon" comparable to those of American revivalists Charles G. Finney and Jedediah Burchard. [^46] Wilford Woodruff was impressed with some of the "sublime truths" he heard from Aitken and also with the way he lashed out at the ministers of the day. Nevertheless, he observed, Aitken was building a house with no foundation, for he rejected the first principles of the gospel. [^47]

Mission of the TwelveHCDuring all that week and a half the apostles were neither invited into a home nor given an opportunity to preach, except when George A. Smith lectured at a temperance meeting on August 25. They carried with them Parley P. Pratt's Address . . . to the People of England, sometimes leaving copies with people they visited, but they found no serious interest anywhere. Such total indifference was a new experience for all of them.

Mission of the TwelveHCOn August 28 they saw a small ray of hope when, after "we all started out in the morning to go through the city of London to see if we could find any man that had the spirit of God," they came across a Mr. Manning, who seemed to have a "good spirit" and was actually willing to talk to them. They soon discovered that Manning had recently lost a child and another lay near death, whereupon Heber C. Kimball felt inspired to tell him that his child should live. Manning gave them some information on where they might preach. That afternoon they stopped by his home and found that the child had recovered, but that was apparently the last they saw of Manning or his family. [^48]

Mission of the TwelveHCFinally, on August 29, they were invited into the home of Henry Connor, a watchmaker, on Ironmonger Row. He was so receptive that Woodruff was impressed that he would be baptized soon. He opened his house for preaching, and the delighted missionaries set up a meeting for the following evening, a Sunday.

On Sunday morning what they had been working and praying for finally began to happen. In the morning they went to the Smithfield Market, intending to hold a street meeting, but they were soon notified by the police that the Lord Mayor had prohibited street preaching within the City. Henry Connor immediately took them to Tabernacle Square, on Old Street, not far from his home and just outside the Lord Mayor's jurisdiction. There they found an Aitkenite standing on a chair preaching to about four hundred people. When he finished, another preacher arose, but Heber C. Kimball interrupted, pointing to George A. Smith and telling the first evangelist that an American was there who would like to preach. Interested in what an American would have to say, the preacher invited George A. to speak, which he gladly did for twenty minutes. His subject was the first principles of the gospel, though he did not specifically identify himself as a Latter-day Saint. The missionaries then tried to make an appointment to preach that afternoon, but when the man in charge suddenly discovered what church they represented, he immediately began to berate them. "We have got the gospel," he shouted to his listeners, "and we can save this people, without infidelity, socialism, or Latter-day Saints." Elder Kimball asked to stand on the chair and make an appointment with the people himself, but the irate preacher shouted at him again, jerked the chair from his hands, and ran away. Undaunted, Kimball simply told the people they would be back at 3:00 that afternoon, and when they arrived a large crowd was there. Kimball and Woodruff both spoke, and their listeners included not only the gathered crowd but also people living in buildings around the square who opened their windows, some as high as the fourth floor, to hear.

Elated at this turn of events, when the meeting was over the elders retired to Henry Connor's home. Kimball, however, suddenly felt impressed to go back, and when he did so, he found a large group of people talking about what they had heard. He spoke to them again, and several invited him to their homes. At the Connor home, meanwhile, Woodruff and Smith taught the gospel to Connor and others, and Connor offered himself for baptism. Thus ended their most satisfying day yet, for the three apostles had finally preached to the people of London and had "one soul as a seal of our ministry." [^49] On Monday, August 31, they repaired to a nearby public bath, and, at the hands of Heber C. Kimball, Henry Connor became the first person to be baptized in London. [^50]

Nevertheless, the three apostles were still far from satisfied. Each of them had recently enjoyed extraordinary success elsewhere, and they wondered why it was not so here. Impatience, however, was not discouragement. "London is the hardest place I ever visited for esstablishing the gospel," Wilford Woodruff wrote two days after Henry Connor's baptism. "It is full of every thing but righteousness, but we do not feel discouraged in the least. We are determined in the name of the Lord to set up the Standard of truth in this city & to seek out the honest in heart & the meek from among men & warn all as far as in our power that the world may be left without excuse." [^51]

In some ways the three apostles hardly seemed interesting to Londoners. All the dissenting sects were represented somewhere in the city, including such unusual groups as the Southcottians and the Irvingites. Southcottians believed that Joanna Southcott (1750-1814) was chosen by God to be, in a spiritual sense, the bride of Christ, that the Holy Spirit revealed to her things to come, that they should observe the Jewish Sabbath and certain Jewish dietary laws, and that believers could become "sealed" as "Heirs of God and Joint-Heirs with Jesus Christ." [^52] The Irvingites, or the Catholic Apostolic Church, initially based their teachings on those of Edward Irving (1792-1834). They had strong millennial expectations, believed in the exercise of spiritual gifts, emphasized prophetic authority, had twelve apostles at their head (though the body of twelve was not perpetuated), and believed in a lay ministry. [^53]

In a letter to the Times and Seasons, the three apostles observed how London's diversity of ideas and profusion of religious societies affected them. "We have never before found a people, from whose minds we have had to remove a greater multiplicity of objections, or combination of obstacles," they said. To many Londoners everything they taught seemed but an echo of something else. When they preached baptism, they were accused of being Baptists; when they spoke of the body of Christ being made up of apostles and prophets, they were called Irvingites; when they said that "the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of prophecy," they were called Southcottians; if they preached the second coming of Christ, they were confused with the Aitkenites; if they talked of the priesthood, they were called Catholics; and when they told of the ministering of angels, their detractors replied that even the Duke of Normandy would swear that he had the administration of angels every night. Then, in a humorous summary of their own reaction, the missionaries said:

These salutations in connexion with a multitude of others, of a similar nature, continued to salute our ears from day to day, until we were about ready to conclude that London had been such a perfect depot of the systems of the nineteenth century, that it contained six hundred three score and six [^54] different Gods, gospels, Redeemers, plans of salvations, religions, churches, commandments, essential and non essential, orders of preaching, roads to heaven and to hell; and that this order of things had so affected the minds of the people, that it almost required a trump to be blown from the highest heavens, in order to awaken the attention of the people, and prepare their minds to candidly hear and receive the doctrine of one gospel, one faith, one baptism, one Holy Ghost, one God, and one plan of salvation and that such as Christ and the Apostles preached. [^55]

On September 7 Heber C. Kimball and George A. Smith visited the Reverend Robert Aitken, who remembered meeting Kimball and Orson Hyde during their previous mission to England. [^56] He received them cordially and, after a conversation on gospel principles, even acknowledged that much of what they had to say was valid. By that time Aitken, who had left the movement that bore his name, was doing a great deal of soul searching about what course he should take. "Your doctrines are so near to those of the Gospel that it is impossible to detect you," he told the missionaries, evidently fearing that Mormonism was nothing more than a clever approximation of the truth inspired by the devil. After more conversation he began wringing his hands in agony. "I am sorry that I ever left the Church of England," he said and expressed remorse that he had preached and published so many hard things against it. [^57]

London was first and foremost a mission field for the apostles, but it was also one of the richest historical and cultural spots on earth. The apostles believed that they would have been remiss in their responsibilities if they ignored the important attractions unique to London, and they took the time to see what they could. They visited London Bridge; many famous streets and byways, such as Regent Street, which Woodruff dubbed "one of the most splendid streets in the world," and Picadilly Circus; several cathedrals, including St. Paul's Cathedral and Westminster Abbey, both of which Woodruff described in detail in his journal; historic monuments; the markets; the tunnel under the River Thames; the Tower of London; the houses of Parliament; the parks of London; royal mansions; Buckingham Palace, where, on September 8, Wilford Woodruff saw young Prince Albert; and the National Gallery, with its famous collection of paintings from around the world. "A visit to this ABBEY," wrote Elder Woodruff after they had spent most of a day at Westminster Abbey, "is not ownly worthy of the Attention of all travellors but to occupy A place in the Journal of any Historian fond of British ANTIQUITY." [^58]

On September 9 the missionaries moved to No. 40 Ironmonger Row, about a mile and a half north of the Thames. The move seemed natural, for whatever interest they had received came mostly from this area, Saint Luke's Parish, and the place they moved to was just across the street from Henry Connor's home. The streets were wide and clean, the houses, as George A. Smith described them, "retired and quiet," and the rooms nice though plainly furnished. Elders Kimball and Woodruff shared one bedroom, while George A. slept alone in a room in the back. This choice location remained the permanent headquarters for the London missionaries for the next two and a half years. [^59]

The first night on Ironmonger Row provided Elder Smith with a frightening experience that made him realize that his previous skepticism on the reported experiences of others might have been misplaced. During the night, he wrote, he was "constantly annoyed by visitations from the spirit of darkness, which required all my faith and energy of mind to resist." He said little about it to his companions, however, for he had always felt "somewhat sceptical" with regard to the appearances of evil spirits to Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde in Preston three years earlier. He suffered his own bouts with the forces of evil alone and perhaps learned an important lesson. [^60]

The next day Wilford Woodruff left to attend conferences in Herefordshire and Staffordshire and then go to Manchester for the general conference of October 6. There had been no more baptisms in London, but Woodruff felt a little encouraged because Connor had been ordained a priest, six people had agreed to be baptized, and, he believed, there was a possibility that Robert Aitken might join the Church. [^61] The last, however, proved to be a fruitless hope. Unwilling to risk being deceived, Aitken eventually returned to the Anglican fold.

It was not just missionary work that suffered in London but also the apostles' health, and Elders Kimball and Smith, especially, suffered continuing illness. Shortly after Woodruff left, Kimball had a bout with what he believed to be cholera, with terrible cramps in his legs and bowels. In his pain he thought of home, for, he told Vilate, "I was in a strange place and no one to assist me." Chills came on him so severely that he thought he was freezing to death, so he climbed into bed with George A. Smith just to keep warm. The next day he could hardly walk, and he remained that way for three days. [^62]

The apostles in London were not forgotten by the Saints elsewhere, though they could do little more than encourage them. On September 21, Alexander Neibaur, a Jewish convert living in Preston who later became Joseph Smith's Hebrew teacher, wrote a few words of consolation and advice to Elders Kimball and Smith after he had heard of their continuing struggles and sickness:

Our Dear Brother Kimball said many times that there are no big Men or little men in the Kingdom of our God. This embold[e]nes me to give a Word of consolation to you Respecting London. I feel dear Br. that it is a hard Work for you. Nevertheless I know by the Spirit of our God that a Glorious Work will be wrought there. You know weeping may endure for a Night but joy comet[h] in the Morning, it only wants labourers. . . . My Wife sends her kind love to you, all the Saints greet you. Again I say in the Name of Jesus Christ cheer up and you shall Rejoice yea we will Rejoice in our fathers Kingdom. [^63]

Mission of the TwelveHCBy the time Heber C. Kimball and George A. Smith left for Manchester, a total of eleven people had been baptized in London. In a rather humorous incident, one prospective member backed out. On September 19 a man called Father Biggs came to their rooms asking for baptism. They all repaired to the public bath, paid their entrance fee, and went in. The water, however, was so cold that it scared Biggs off. "Oh," he said as he stepped in, "it will take my breath! I feel it going!" and he refused to be immersed. Not willing to waste their money, however, Elders Kimball and Smith took the occasion to go in swimming. Six days later Father Biggs was finally baptized. [^64]

Despite the comparatively meager harvest in London, Heber C. Kimball refused to be discouraged. He wrote to his wife that the ice was broken and the Church finally was getting such a hold that

the Devle cannot Root it out. But he is very mad and I am glad. I never Shall try to pleas him. . . . You may think I feel discouradg my dear Vilate. I will say unto you I never have Seen the first moment as yet fore I dow not See anny thing to discourag me but Evry thing to the Reverse. I know that I am built on the foundation of Jesus Christ and the Apostles. . . . It maters not to me whather I die or live if I dow the will of my Father which is in heaven. [^65]

George A. Smith left for Manchester on September 29 and Kimball followed a few days later. En route, George A. traveled through the Potteries where he was warmly received by the Saints, who "brought in their mites to furnish me money to pay my passage to Manchester." [^66]

WILFORD WOODRUFF: BACK TO HEREFORDSHIRE

Wilford Woodruff left London on September 10 and arrived among the Saints in Herefordshire about 4:00 P.M. that day. He was delighted to find missionary work in good hands and, in marked contrast with London, the Church growing steadily. "I rejoice," he exclaimed, "to find the work universally progressing with great rapidity upon evry hand. . . . Yea the Lord is making a spedy work & short in the Earth." [^67]

He spent the next several days visiting the Saints, working with local leaders, and, in connection with Thomas Kington and his assistants, conducting two conferences: one at the Gadfield Elm chapel on September 14 and another a week later at Stanley Hill. As he shook hands with the Saints at the end of that day, he was filled "with no ordinary feelings" and silently gave thanks that more than a thousand people had accepted the Gospel within a half year in "one field which God has enabled me to open." That night he summarized in his diary one of the busiest days he had ever spent in Herefordshire. "After standing upon my feet 8 hours in Conference, Conversing much of the time, Ordaining about 30, confirming some, healing many that were Sick, Shaking hands with about 400 Saints, wa[l]king 2 miles, & Preaching 4 hours in the Chimney Corner, I then lay down & dreamed of Ketching fish." [^68]

Woodruff was especially pleased with Thomas Kington, who presided in the area and had built up a congregation of about fifty Saints in his hometown of Dymock. When the apostle visited Dymock on September 16, he also found that there was no let-up in opposition. When the Saints assembled to hear him preach, a mob gathered outside the house, beating drums, pails, pans, and sticks and generally trying to disrupt the meeting. The Saints closed the doors and shutters, but the rowdies threw eggs, bricks, rocks, and anything else they could grab, breaking glass and roof tile. The Saints took it all in stride, however, apparently without bitterness, though after the mob drifted away, they had the task of clearing the rooms of the debris. [^69]

On September 26 Woodruff went to Staffordshire, where he was joined on October 1 by Smith and Kimball, who had just arrived from London. Four days later they and three other apostles were in Manchester.

ORSON PRATT: SLIGHTLY DISCOURAGED

Pushing slowly but doggedly toward his goal of two hundred converts in Edinburgh, by mid September Orson Pratt had built up a congregation of forty. [^70] He showed signs of discouragement, though, especially when he heard of the success of others. "I was not as much favored as you for I could not get the Priests out to hear as you have done," he wrote to George A. Smith, but "I keep hammering & pounding away perhaps the stone will break by and by." He also tried to encourage George A., whose work in London was suffering the same fate as his own. "Hold on to the Londonites for it is an important station. . . . If you cannot turn the London world upside down perhaps you can weaken its foundations." [^71]

The work was prospering a little better elsewhere in Scotland, and by the time Orson Pratt and Samuel Mulliner went to the Manchester conference, there were 193 members in the Glasgow region and 43 in Edinburgh. [^72]

THE MANCHESTER CONFERENCE, OCTOBER 6 AND 7

Taking stock midway through their mission, the Twelve had reason to be pleased—indeed amazed—at what had been accomplished. But the challenge still ahead weighed heavily on their minds, particularly in the face of the calamities they expected soon to come. Perhaps thoughts such as these caused Wilford Woodruff and Heber C. Kimball to awaken on the morning of October 2 feeling that the power of God was resting upon them. "Yea," Wilford wrote, using a familiar metaphor, "the spirit of God is like fire shut up in my bones." Why was this happening, he wondered, and why were his eyes a fountain of tears? "What art thou about to do O my God that causes this thing?" In response, the missionary-apostle received a revelation that forcefully reconfirmed all his feelings about the importance of what he and his brethren were doing:

Thus Saith the Lord God unto thee my servant Willford. This is my spirit that resteth upon thee to enlighten thy mind to show the things to cum not ownly upon thee but upon all my faithful servants upon the face of the whole earth. Therefore lift up thy voice & spare not for I am about to perform a great work upon the face of the earth Saith the Lord. Mine indignation is about to be poured out without mixture upon the heads of this nation & all the nations of the earth & they shall not escape. The cry of the poor, the widow & orphan is assending into mine ears Saith the Lord & I am about to avenge the cry of mine elect by laying low the oppresser & executing the decree of mine heart upon all the ungodly from among men.

Therefore I put my spirit upon the[e] & say unto thee lift up thy voice & spare not & Call upon all men to repent that cume within the sound of thy voice & many souls shall be given unto the[e] & great shall be thy reward & eternal shall be thy glory Saith the Lord. [^73]

No doubt the revelation only added to the fire in Wilford Woodruff's bones, and it was with similar fire in all their bones that six of the eight apostles met for a general conference in Manchester.

The Twelve had originally planned to hold a conference every three months, but as October approached, it appeared difficult to get even a majority of the quorum back to Manchester. Parley P. Pratt was still somewhere on the high seas, accompanying his family to England. John Taylor, on the Isle of Man in the midst of his public debates with the Reverend Heys, felt that he could not leave the field of battle. [^74] Orson Pratt, in Scotland, was also debating whether to attend, and, in London, Heber C. Kimball and George A. Smith considered the possibility that only one of them should leave. Brigham Young and Willard Richards bluntly reminded them that there was business the Twelve should handle collectively and that "we barely have a quorum in Europe." They had written Orson Pratt and left the decision up to him, "as we now leave it with you. We should be glad to see you." [^75] In the end, only John Taylor stayed away, and because Parley had not yet returned to England, six members of the Quorum of the Twelve were in Manchester for the conference that began on October 6.

Brigham Young carried with him a list of problems that he thought should be discussed. Where should the Book of Mormon be published? Who will take charge of the Star if Parley P. Pratt does not return? Should some of the Twelve go home in the fall and come back the next season? When should the next company of emigrants go to America, and how should it be organized? Who should have authority to ordain officers in the Church? Would the Church help Brother Richards financially? Who should make and prepare the index of the Book of Mormon? Not all these issues were aired, but the list suggests the myriad of administrative concerns that occupied the thoughts of the president of the Quorum of the Twelve as he prepared for this conference. [^76]

The first item of business was a membership report from each of the conferences, or branches, represented. The figures showed a total of 3,626 members in Britain—an increase of 1,113, or 44 percent, in just three months. The numbers were satisfying, but rapid growth also brought unexpected irregularities and administrative problems, and it was clear to the Twelve that a few things must be checked before they got out of hand. For one thing, it appeared that there had been some irregularity in ordaining priesthood officers. Perhaps the Twelve discovered that their own practice of ordaining selected men to the priesthood and giving them leadership responsibilities almost overnight had been followed too hastily by some local leaders. In any case, it was decided that henceforth all ordinations would take place by or under the direction of one of the Twelve. It also appeared that local conferences were being held too often, and the time and extra expense incurred by members in order to attend was becoming too heavy. Brigham Young suggested that henceforth they be held only when necessary, as determined by the Twelve. The conference also took care of some disciplinary action.

Ten high priests were in attendance at the conference (including the six apostles), thirteen elders and nineteen priests, all of whom were spending their full time in the ministry. In the evening meeting, several missionaries were assigned to new places of labor, after which Brigham Young, Orson Pratt, Willard Richards, and Heber C. Kimball all spoke on one of the most pressing needs of the moment: providing support and clothing for those missionaries whose circumstances required such help. Orson Pratt made it clear that theirs was nothing like a paid ministry: the missionaries did not make a living from it, but there were certain necessities that had to be taken care of while they were called to labor "without taking thought for the morrow." It was agreed, finally, that two members would be appointed in every branch of the Church to receive weekly voluntary contributions from the members for promoting the spread of the gospel, and that the funds collected would be dispensed by the vote of the Church, in council with the traveling high council (the Twelve). [^77]

The next day the Twelve met with other Church officers, and that night most of them were among the fifteen hundred people who attended a public debate in Carpenter's Hall. A month earlier Brigham Young had signed an agreement for the debate to take place between John Berry, a Methodist preacher, and an elder of Brigham Young's choosing. Berry agreed to "prove" that the Book of Mormon was false and that baptism by immersion was not essential to salvation. The Mormon elder, on the other hand, was to "prove" the opposite. Berry arranged for the hall and for advertising but both sides shared the expense. [^78] Brigham Young chose Alfred Cordon, one of the most energetic missionaries from the Potteries, to represent the Church, and the debate lasted well over two hours. How non-Mormons reacted is not known, but George A. Smith thought that Cordon defended the doctrine of baptism "so clearly that no honest man could go away and say it was not a scriptural doctrine." [^79] "Much good was done," he said, though it does not appear that such public debates usually resulted in many immediate conversions.

The Twelve remained in Manchester for a few days, counseling with each other, writing, preaching, and buying clothing. Wilford Woodruff bought a traveling bag and a hat, and five of the apostles each purchased a broadcloth cloak, all of them just alike. More important, Wilford Woodruff, Willard Richards, and Jennetta Richards each received patriarchal blessings from Peter Melling. [^80]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Brigham Young to Mary Ann Young, November 12, 1840, Phillip Blair Collection, wherein Brigham briefly describes one such debate.
[^2] Heber C. Kimball and Brigham Young to George A. Smith, October 14, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^3] Brigham Young to Mary Ann Young, October 16, 1840 (Appendix B, Document 15).
[^4] Brigham Young to Mary Ann Young, November 12, 1840.
[^5] Brigham Young to Mary Ann Young, October 16, 1840 (Appendix B, Document 15).
[^6] Brigham Young to Mary Ann Young, November 12, 1840.
[^7] Young, Manuscript History, 82-83.
[^8] Brigham Young to Mary Ann Young, October 16, 1840 (Appendix B, Document 15).
[^9] Fielding, Diary, 100-101.
[^10] Millennial Star 1 (February 1841): 263. In the Potteries, George A. Smith noted that the number of baptisms in January was less than the previous month for "Some have had A Disposition to let of[f] Baptism on account of the cold Weather." (George A. Smith to his Father and Mother, in letter to George Gee, January 28, 1841, George A. Smith Collection).
[^11] Parley P. Pratt to Sidney Rigdon, January 8, 1841, Times and Seasons 2 (April 1, 1841): 364-65.
[^12] Ibid.
[^13] Millennial Star 1 (February 1841): 259.
[^14] Ibid., 2 (May 1841): 1-4.
[^15] Parley P. Pratt to Sidney Rigdon, January 8, 1841 (Appendix B, Document 23). See also D&C 35:3-5, in which Sidney Rigdon was told that he had been sent to prepare the way for Joseph Smith.
[^16] Millennial Star 1 (February 1841): 255-56.
[^17] Willard Richards to Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, October 24, 1840, Brigham Young Papers.
[^18] Willard Richards to Heber C. Kimball and Wilford Woodruff, December 21, 1840, Helen Bourne Fleming Collection.
[^19] Willard Richards to Brigham Young, December 10, 1840, as quoted in Noall, Intimate Disciple, 266-67. While this work cannot be relied upon for either its manufactured dialogue or its interpretations, it is nevertheless generally accurate with respect to specific people and locations, and quotations from letters.
[^20] Willard Richards to George A. Smith, December 21, 1840, George A. Smith Collection. See also Willard Richards to Heber C. Kimball and Wilford Woodruff, December 21, 1840.
[^21] "Ernest Young and myself have been very busy lately preparing passengers & ships for Zion" (John Taylor to Leonora Taylor, February 13, 1841, John Taylor Collection).
[^22] John Taylor to George A. Smith, January 14, 1841, George A. Smith Collection, wherein Taylor writes that he has been ill but is somewhat better and will "start to day for the Isle of Man for a few days."
[^23] John Taylor to Mr. Greenow, March 23, 1841, typescript, John Taylor Collection. Apparently he wanted to return in February, rather than March, and tried to persuade Joseph Fielding to accompany him. Fielding was afraid to leave his wife who had just given birth to a baby girl and was still in great pain. "I am still afraid to leave my Wife," Fielding wrote on February 20, "yet I hope to be at liberty soon. I feel thankful that I and my Wife have the good will of the Saints and of the Elders" (Fielding, Diary, 103).
[^24] In Orson Pratt to Parley P. Pratt, October 17, 1840, excerpted in Millennial Star 1 (December 1840): 214, Pratt said there were seventy-four members. There is a discrepancy here, however, for in letters to George A. Smith on October 17 and 24, he reported forty-eight and fifty-four members, respectively. A possible explanation could be that he reported to Smith on Edinburgh alone, while to the Star he was including the larger area around Edinburgh. Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, October 17, 1840, George A. Smith Collection; Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, October 24, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^25] Millennial Star 1 (December 1840): 214.
[^26] Orson Pratt to George A. Smith and Wilford Woodruff, November 2, 1840, George A. Smith Collection (Appendix B, Document 16).
[^27] Orson Pratt to Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith, November 6, 1840, Wilford Woodruff Collection.
[^28] Quotation included in Wilford Woodruff to George A. Smith, November 21, 1840, Wilford Woodruff Collection.
[^29] Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, February 1, 1841, George A. Smith Collection.
[^30] Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, November 23, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^31] George D. Watt and Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, December 4, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^32] George D. Watt and Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, December 11, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^33] Reuben Hedlock to George A. Smith, January 12, 1841, George A. Smith Collection; George D. Watt to George A. Smith, January 16, 1841, George A. Smith Collection.
[^34] George D. Watt to George A. Smith, January 16, 1841, George A. Smith Collection; Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, February 1, 1841.
[^35] Woodruff, Journal, October 14 and 15, 1840, 1:528-31.
[^36] Ibid., October 18, 1840, 1:532. George A. Smith evidently shared the experience, though he did not write about it in his journal. See Bloxham, "Apostolic Foundations," 156-57, citing Deseret News.
[^37] Woodruff, Journal, October 22, 1840, 1:537-40 and October 26, 1840, 1:541-42.
[^38] Ibid., October 25, 1840, 1:540-41. See Matthew 13:47-50.
[^39] George A. Smith to D. C. Smith, November 18, 1840, in Times and Seasons 2 (February 1, 1841): 307-8.
[^40] Wilford Woodruff to Willard Richards, November 1, 1840, Willard Richards Collection.
[^41] Millennial Star 1 (November 1840): 188-90.
[^42] Woodruff, Journal, October 17, 1840, 1:531-32.
[^43] Richard Rushton, Sr., to George A. Smith, October 27, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^44] Wilford Woodruff to Willard Richards, November 1, 1840.
[^45] Woodruff, Journal, November 9, 1840, 1:546-47 and November 25, 1840, 1:551; Wilford Woodruff to Elder D. Browett, November 13, 1840, Wilford Woodruff Collection.
[^46] The term clam was in common usage in the nineteenth century as a derivative of the word clem, meaning to "pinch with hunger." It was a very apt term for Woodruff to use under these circumstances. Simpson and Weiner, Oxford English Dictionary 3:264, 308-9.
[^47] Wilford Woodruff to George A. Smith, November 21, 1840, Wilford Woodruff Collection.
[^48] Perkes, History of Richard Rushton Sr., 7-10.
[^49] Richard Rushton [Jr.] to George A. Smith, September 9, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^50] Richard Rushton [Jr.] to George A. Smith, September 25, 1840, George A. Smith Collection (Appendix B, Document 14).
[^51] Ibid.
[^52] Richard Rushton [Jr.] to George A. Smith, October 15, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^53] Richard Rushton, Sr., to George A. Smith, October 27, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^54] Richard Rushton, Jr., to George A. Smith, November 6, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^55] George A. Smith to the Editor, April 11, 1841, Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 306; Woodruff, Journal, November 9, 1840, 1:546-47. Smith, History of the Church 4:236 assigns George A.'s health as the main reason for his leaving. "Elder George A. Smith received counsel to leave London and go to Staffordshire for his health, as he had injured his lungs by preaching in the streets, so that he discharged considerable blood from them."
[^56] Smith, "History," November 9, 1840.
[^57] Henry Connor, Jr., to George A. Smith, November 11, 1840, George A. Smith Collection (Appendix B, Document 17).
[^58] Woodruff, Journal, November 12, 1840, 1:547-48 and November 17, 1840, 1:550.
[^59] Wilford Woodruff to George A. Smith, November 21, 1840.
[^60] Woodruff, Journal, November 22, 1840, 1:551.
[^61] Wilford Woodruff to George A. Smith, November 21, 1840.
[^62] Some architectural historians have suggested that there is a possible connection between the towers in the front of the cathedral and Brigham Young's ideas for the spires on the Salt Lake Temple.
[^63] Many years later, and clearly with good-natured exaggeration, he chided Wilford Woodruff for all his writing: "When we found them in London, Brother Woodruff was busily engaged in writing his history from morning until evening; and, if a sister called on him, he would say, 'How do you do? take a chair,' and keep on writing and labouring to bring up [to date] the history of the Church and his own. . . . and that was the sum of the conversation. If a brother came it would be the same" (Sermon of Brigham Young, April 6, 1857, Journal of Discourses 4:305).
[^64] Brigham Young to the Editor, December 30, 1840, Millennial Star 1 (January 1841): 239.
[^65] Sermon of Brigham Young, April 6, 1857, Journal of Discourses 4:304. Brigham also recalled that "thirty had been baptized, but brothers Kimball, Woodruff, and Geo. A., the man who owned the small room that we had hired, and, I think, two other persons, comprised the congregation." The reason the congregation enlarged, he went on to explain, was because of the congenial, familiar way Kimball treated the people. Young might have been prone to some slight exaggeration as he recounted such stories nearly seventeen years after they happened. His estimate that thirty people had been baptized, for example, was in error, for when he arrived in London there were actually fewer than twenty members there.
[^66] Heber C. Kimball to George A. Smith, December 12, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^67] Woodruff, Journal, December 16, 1840, 1:578-79. Information on occupations is found in Jorgenson, "First London Mormons," Appendix IX.
[^68] Woodruff, Journal, December 20, 1840; 1:580; Heber C. Kimball to the Editor, December 28, 1840, Millennial Star 1 (January 1841): 240.
[^69] Heber C. Kimball to the Editor, December 28, 1840, Millennial Star 1 (January 1841): 240; Woodruff, Journal, December 27, 1840, 1:583-84.
[^70] Woodruff, Journal, December 25, 1840, 1:582-83.
[^71] Kimball, Diary, 1 January 1841.
[^72] Woodruff, Journal, December 31, 1840, 1:586-87.
[^73] Heber C. Kimball to George A. Smith, January 14, 1841, George A. Smith Collection; Kimball, Diary, January 9-12, 1841; Woodruff, Journal, January 9-12, 1841, 2:25-28.
[^74] Woodruff, Journal, January 25, 1841, 2:32; January 27, 1841, 2:33-34; and January 29, 1841, 2:34.
[^75] Ibid., February 14, 1841, 2:45-47.
[^76] Snow arrived in Liverpool on October 22, and from there apparently went to Preston briefly and then on to Manchester. He was in Manchester when Brigham returned there from his trip to Wales on November 2. See Lorenzo Snow to Charlotte Granger, February 25, 1841, in Lorenzo Snow, Notebook; Brigham Young to Mary Ann Young, October 16, 1840, where Brigham says that he had received a letter from Willard Richards in Preston telling him of Snow's arrival with Joseph's letter; Young, Manuscript History, 82.
[^77] Lorenzo Snow to George A. Smith, December 10, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^78] Lorenzo Snow to George A. Smith, February 17, 1841, George A. Smith Collection.
[^79] Smith, "History," December 2, 1840.
[^80] Ibid., December 20, 1840.
