David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

Chapter 9

CONSOLIDATION: OCTOBER 1840 THROUGH MARCH 1841

The apostles opened no new fields during the final six months of their mission. Instead they worked in familiar places, gleaning all they could to add to the harvest and continuing to direct the gathering. By the first of the year they were planning their return to America, and they spent the next three months organizing the churches, building up the Saints, and winding down their activities.

THE MANCHESTER-LIVERPOOL CONNECTION: BRIGHAM, PARLEY, WILLARD, AND JOHN

Because Manchester and Liverpool were the administrative hubs of the Church in England, Brigham Young spent considerable time in both cities. On October 19 Parley P. Pratt arrived in Manchester with his family. There he resumed editing the Millennial Star, preached when he could, and sometimes entered into public debates. [^1] There, too, lived Willard and Jennetta Richards. Willard assisted Brigham Young, wrote for the Star, counseled with the Saints, and preached. After returning from the Isle of Man on November 16, John Taylor once again made Liverpool his headquarters. Heber C. Kimball also worked closely with his brethren in these cities, especially in Manchester, until he left for London in November.

As Brigham and Heber continued to bring in converts, their success also helped stir up continued opposition in Manchester. "The Devle Rages here most powerfully," Heber wrote to George A. Smith on October 14. "Those five persons that I baptised on Fridy night has Raised the Devle in this place," and the Wesleyans had been meeting every night to try to persuade them to come back. [^2] In the same spirit, Brigham wrote to his wife: "Sence we have ben in Manchester We have don all that we posably could to spead this work. We have succeeded in makeing the priest mad, so that they rave like demonds. We keepe Baptiseing every weak which causes much per[se]cution." [^3] One manifestation of the persecution, as Brigham Young observed in November, was that "Menny of the Bretherin are turned out of worke because of their religion, and those that are instrementle in throwing them out generaly get turned out them selves." The Rigby family, for example, with whom he had lived most of the summer, suffered when Brother Rigby was "turned out of work about 2 or 3 weaks agoe on account of his religon, but the factory stoped in a fue days after, and has not started yet." [^4]

Such problems, along with the general poverty of the members, tore at Brigham's heart and heightened his appreciation for all the Saints did for him. As he told Mary Ann, despite feeling unwell and longing for a warmer climate, "I am duing as well as I can and fare as well as I can ask. The Brotherin and Sisters would pluck out there eyes for me if it ware ne[ce]ssary. They due all they can for my comfort. They feed me and give me close and monny. They wash my feet and wate upon me as they would a little child, and may the Lord bless them for it and he will." [^5]

On the last day of October, Brigham and Heber took a short trip to Harwardin, Wales, where they both preached on Sunday, November 1. They healed a young man with a fever and a woman with bad eyesight, but it was their preaching that created the most interest. "They say," Brigham reported to Mary Ann, "that Elder Kimball has such sharp eyes that he can look wright through them, and Elder Young Preashes so that every Body that heres him must beleve he preaches so plane and powerful." [^6]

Brigham organized the priesthood holders to do missionary work in Manchester similar to the way John Taylor had done in Liverpool. Every Sunday morning they scattered to various parts of the city, preached in the streets at nearly forty different locations, and invited their listeners to the regular meetings at Carpenter's Hall. In November irate sectarian preachers complained to the mayor, who then ordered all street preachers arrested. When Brigham went to priesthood meeting on the morning of November 8, however, he felt impressed to tell the brethren to return to their homes rather than preach. That day the police arrested some twenty Methodist street preachers, but when it was discovered that there were no Mormons among them, they were quickly released. [^7]

Brigham Young had hoped to spend the winter and spring in London, [^8] but administrative responsibilities made that impossible and ultimately he could find time only for a short stay. He left Manchester with Heber C. Kimball on November 25, and after eleven days in London and a quick visit to missionaries in other places, he was back in Manchester the day after Christmas. A few days later he went on to Liverpool, where he remained through most of January and February and where, in January, he completed indexing and publishing the Book of Mormon.

In early January Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt, and Willard Richards held conferences in Liverpool and Preston. One of their concerns was to be sure that local leadership was functioning well before they left. At Preston, for example, they made it clear that new ordinations to the priesthood were the responsibility of the local presidency. In view of the October prohibition on new ordinations without apostolic approval, this step was an important one, for if the Twelve could now trust such matters to local leaders, a great portion of their mission was accomplished.

The three apostles also preached on the subject of the gathering. Parley P. Pratt underscored how reasonable it was for a "dense and hungry" population to look for better conditions elsewhere. The other two apostles provided practical details on how to act when traveling and how much money was needed, even advising the Saints to borrow if they could. "This set the Saints on the move," Joseph Fielding reported, and many were determined to get ready for the first ship to New Orleans. [^9]

By this time England was experiencing the coldest part of the year, and the frigid weather discouraged some prospective Saints from being baptized. Others gritted their teeth and went into the water anyway, and the Church continued to grow. In February, the editor of the Star noted favorable missionary reports from Edinburgh, Glasgow, London, Birmingham, Stockport, Bolton, Oldham, Ashton, Herefordshire, Staffordshire, Wales, and many other places.

Scores are bringing forth fruits of repentance, and are uniting with the Saints in baptism, notwithstanding the weather is so severe. This is a matter of astonishment to the public: some threaten our lives, thinking it will kill those who go into the cold water, and others exclaim that it must be the work of God, or they would die, by being thus exposed in such cold weather. In the mean time the Sectarian priests are raging and lying as usual, and the editors of newspapers are helping them to publish lies against the truth. But all to no purpose; for God works and none can hinder. [^10]

The cold weather, however, brought its share of misery, and in Manchester it was accompanied by scarlet fever and other illnesses. One family of Saints buried three children at the same time. [^11]

Most of Parley P. Pratt's time was consumed by the Millennial Star. He relished the work, for he saw the Star as a vehicle for disseminating Church news and doctrine and also for defending the Church against attack. Anti-Mormon pamphlets seemed to be flooding the country, he wrote to Sidney Rigdon, and "John Bull" was more ingenious even than the Americans when it came to inventing lies. [^12] A master of witty and often biting sarcasm, he frequently used his skill in rapierlike counterattacks. In February 1841, for example, he answered a series of doctrinal questions submitted by Joseph Fielding, the last of which was, "What is meant by that common and popular saying, 'The Canon of scripture is full?'" He simply did not know the meaning of this "sectarian logic," Parley feigned, but if he must venture an opinion on the statement,

we suppose it to apply to some false system, where the people worship a DUMB AND CHANGEABLE GOD; whom they suppose to have been in the habit of talking with man, in olden times; but who has long since lost his SPEECH, either by old age or some other means, so that they should never hear from him any more. At any rate, we are sure of one thing, viz., that the text cannot apply to the true and living God, nor to the HOLY Scriptures, for they every where hold forth the principle of continued REVELATION. [^13]

On April 7, 1840, the Edinburgh Intelligencer published a long attack on the Book of Mormon, which gave Parley another chance to whet his pen and do battle. At the end of an extended reply, he caustically inquired of the editors of the Intelligencer: "Gentlemen will any of you venture to give your readers both sides of the question, by publishing the foregoing reply? We fear you will not." [^14]

Parley also found opportunity for more direct missionary work. On one occasion two Campbellite ministers traveled seventy miles to attend a Latter-day Saint meeting in Manchester. The next morning they called at the office of the Star. One bought a copy of Parley P. Pratt's Voice of Warning, and the other remained in town for three days, asking questions. Parley expressed his delight to Sidney Rigdon, who had been his own pastor when both were Campbellites more than ten years earlier: "Tell friend Campbell to go ahead and prepare the way, the Saints will follow him up and gather the fruits." [^15]

On January 20, while preaching to a small religious group in Bolton, Parley was furiously interrupted by two preachers who demanded that he "prove" the truth of his new doctrine. When the meeting became a near riot the police came, handcuffed the two men, and marched them away. At least one of them, James Pendlebury, was found guilty of breach of the peace, fined ten pounds, and required to pay for damages to the building. [^16]

Willard and Jennetta Richards, meanwhile, continued on in Manchester, and on Sunday, October 11, Jennetta gave birth to a baby boy. They named him Heber John, the same as their first child, who had died only ten months earlier. Both mother and child suffered recurring illnesses of one sort or another almost until the day they left for America.

Twelve days after the baby was born, Willard received what must have seemed a mixed blessing. Susannah Liptrot, his former Preston landlady who had been driven out by her husband, was living with them as their housekeeper. On the evening of October 23, her husband, John, unexpectedly showed up at the house and asked for baptism. "He thinks he has served the Devil long enough," Willard observed, and even though it was "raining like pitchforks," he baptized the repentant husband about 9:00 P.M., confirmed him a member of the Church, and took him home to Susannah. Willard and Jennetta were happy for the reunited couple, but Willard again had the care of his not very healthy family all to himself. With his mission responsibilities already consuming nearly all of his time, that only intensified his long-standing perplexity at trying to find a balance between two competing obligations. [^17]

Sometime in late November or early December Willard spent ten days in Bolton, and upon his return discovered that both Jennetta and the baby were seriously ill. He spent three days and nights almost without sleep, nursing them the best he could, until finally a Sister Muir relieved him for two days. After that a friend by the name of Catherine assisted occasionally, as Willard alternated between Church duties and his family. He tried to get more help, but other people had their own problems. One sister, for example, was "very kind and would be glad to do for us but she has twice too much work of her own for any woman." [^18] Disheartened, he wondered if he would ever find the time he desperately needed to fulfill his apostolic duties: "God knows whether I will ever have the privilege of going into the vineyard or not," he wrote to Brigham Young on December 10. "He knows I desire it." [^19] The apostle and his wife patiently endured their trials. In a poignant letter to George A. Smith, Willard laid bare both his troubles and his faith:

I had half proposed in my heart to have met Brother Young at Conference on the 25th But I see no prospect. I am confined night and day with a Sick family. & I believe few expect the life of Heber John. I want your faith & prayer that the promises & prophecies of his life & his posterity on the earth may be realized—for I have nearly to stand alone in this matter. Sister Richards sends her love, fell down stairs yesterday & is very sore yet God is Kind. [^20]

John Taylor, meanwhile, carried on with his ambitious preaching schedule in Liverpool's Music Hall, the "largest & best hall" in town. He continued to labor closely with Brigham Young on publications and in organizing emigration, [^21] but he also visited other places, including Wales and the Isle of Man. He may have gone to the Isle in January, [^22] but he was also there in March. After a preaching meeting in Douglas on March 17, he baptized twelve people. The next day he baptized another, and several more were ready to join the Church. [^23] He was back in Liverpool by March 23.

"THE PEOPLE HERE WILL GET WAKED UP AFTER AWHILE": ORSON PRATT CONTINUES HIS MISSION IN EDINBURGH

After the October conference, Orson Pratt went directly back to Edinburgh, where he continued to work toward his goal of two hundred converts. More people than ever came to hear him, especially on Sundays, and he baptized a few each week. By the end of October the membership was over seventy. [^24] He reported to the Star on October 17:

We preach about seven times on every Sabbath, and we also preach every night, in the streets. When the weather will permit, large congregations gather round us eager to hear. During our last three meetings in the streets we disposed of something like eighty printed addresses. The people here will get waked up after awhile, and begin to oppose. The work will go ahead, however, opposition or no opposition. [^25]

In the intellectual milieu of Edinburgh, the interest exhibited was often merely a sign of tolerant curiosity, whereas elsewhere confrontation seemed to both attract attention and kindle a desire to know more. Orson longed for the same kind of opportunity in Edinburgh. "I presume we could do more good in Edinburgh & London if we could bring the enemy into open combat but in this place I can hardly get a dog to move his tongue." [^26]

Orson did everything he could, however, to increase the Church's visibility. In Leith, about a mile from Edinburgh, he hired a hall for two Sundays and preached in the streets as well. He also hired a second hall in Edinburgh that held nearly fifty people and also had a good fireplace and a bedroom for the missionaries. There the Saints began to hold their prayer meetings. They wanted to hire a larger hall, but "our means are limited & the saints all poor," Orson observed. [^27] Nonetheless, he wrote to Wilford Woodruff on November 16, "[I] am thankful that I have been enabled to lay the foundation of a church in Edinburgh." [^28]

About the first of November, George D. Watt, the first person baptized in England, arrived in Edinburgh to assist Elder Pratt. He left a family in Preston and, like the other missionaries, relied on the people for his sustenance. Perhaps his wife sent a little money, but she was struggling even to support the family. When he visited her in January he found her unwell, "almost worked to death in those abominable Factories." [^29] Watt persisted in his mission, however, and was left in charge of the work in Scotland when Orson returned to America.

The two preached in the streets every evening, weather permitting, [^30] and by December they finally attracted some of the opposition Orson craved. Their meetings were interrupted almost every night, they wrote with delight to George A. Smith. "The priests are begining to get mad, and warn their congregations not to come and hear us, as it is dangerous to hear us. This we hope will do good, for when ever the priests begin to Bark the sheep gets terrified and runs into the fold, that is kept by the true shephard." [^31] On December 4 and 5 Pratt participated in a debate with an angry Methodist priest, who apparently did little but embarrass himself, and as a result at least three people were baptized and several others began to show serious interest. [^32]

At the end of the year Orson went to Glasgow, where he spent a little over two weeks helping Reuben Hedlock, who was ill. He also visited the Saints in Paisley, Johnston, and Bridge of the Weir. [^33] In his absence, Watt baptized ten people in the icy waters of the North Sea, bringing Edinburgh's membership to 122, and they added fifteen more by the end of the month. [^34] The apostle's goal of two hundred seemed within reach.

BACK TO LONDON: GEORGE A. SMITH AND WILFORD WOODRUFF

Mission of the TwelveHCGeorge A. Smith went directly to London from the October conference, and Wilford Woodruff followed him about a week later. On the way, however, Wilford felt a heavy foreboding that remained with him for days. Convinced that terrible persecution and trials were about to come upon the Saints in Europe and in America, his trepidation intensified when other Saints told of having similar apprehensions. [^35] He arrived in London on Saturday, October 17, and by Sunday night he felt well enough in his mind that he was able to sleep comfortably until midnight. Then he awoke and for three hours meditated upon his mission, renewing his determination to overcome the powers of darkness that seemed to be bridling the work in England's capital city. Suddenly the apprehension of the last several days came to a head when, he said, a person whom he considered the Prince of Darkness appeared to him, fought with him, and nearly choked him to death. "As he was about to overcome me I prayed to the father in the name of Jesus for help. I then had power over him & he left me though much wounded." At that point three more persons appeared, all dressed in white, and "prayed with me & I was immediately healed & delivered me from all my troubles." [^36]

The days of presentiment were over and Wilford Woodruff was soon back to preaching in the streets of London, as optimistic as ever. The days of anguish were not over, however, for just four days later he learned through George A. Smith of the death of his two-year old daughter, Sarah Emma Woodruff, more than three months earlier. It was four more days before he received Phoebe's heartrending letter telling the sad details but also expressing her deep, abiding faith. [^37] The distressing news strengthened Wilford's determination to beat the devil at his own game and find success in London.

On October 24 the missionaries hired a hall, known as Barrett's Academy, at 57 King Square, where they began to hold preaching meetings each Sunday and to give lectures each Tuesday and Thursday. They posted handbills announcing the meetings, each carrying the quotation: "He that judgeth a matter before he heareth is not wise."

They began preaching at the academy on Sunday, October 25, but the turnout was disappointing (about fifty people in the afternoon, a handful in the evening), and no one seemed interested in what they said. Following a five-mile walk, Elder Woodruff finally got a good night's rest and dreamed, as he often did, of catching fish. Such dreams probably had a double meaning for him: a reminder of one of his greatest recreational pleasures and an obvious analogy to missionary work. [^38] They kept the academy open four days a week, but their meetings continued to be sparsely attended. [^39] That hardly meant, however, that the Mormons were unknown in London. Opposition dogged them everywhere, and even the handbills they posted were torn down. As Wilford wrote to Willard Richards, "for some cause or other the devil is dreadful fraid the work will get set up in London." [^40]

An angry article published in the London Dispatch on November 8, 1840 demonstrated the nature of the opposition. It told of twelve Latterday Saints "or Mormonites" from America who had "pitched their tents" in Gloucester "for the purpose of plundering the innocent people in the neighborhood." They were said to have "a new bible of their own, in which it is declared that they are the apostles and prophets of the . . . only true and living church on the face of the earth," and they preached to the people of Gloucester and Bristol the horrifying notion that "God has not revealed in the bible all that is sufficient to salvation." The missionaries were also charged with plundering three families in Herefordshire and leaving them in poverty, obtaining in their perfidy something between two and three hundred pounds. Wilford Woodruff spent a good part of November 12 writing a reply to the Dispatch.

Parley P. Pratt reprinted the offending article in the Star, and added his own response. After demonstrating how ridiculous the charges had to be, he also chided the comparatively well-off ministry of the established church. "But again to this plundering business," he wrote sarcastically,

the Bishop with two or three palaces and l 9000 a year, is a humble shepherd of the true fold, is he not? His scores of non-resident clergy and others, all supported by a salary, are not plunderers, are they? . . . No,—no,—it is this two or three hundred pounds, divided to twelve pernurious missionaries (and this is a falsehood) that is the only plundering known in England, is it not? [^41]

The critics had no idea of what was really happening to the Mormon missionaries who continued to live on faith and whatever the Saints could provide. Expenses were especially high in London, and it was only "with the greatest prudence," Wilford Woodruff noted in October, that they could "get along much short of a pound per week each person & what few saints there are at present in this city are vary poor & not able to assist us at Present." [^42] Most of their support came from Saints elsewhere, particularly in the Potteries and Herefordshire, but many in the Potteries were nearly destitute themselves. "We are extremely sorry to hear of your hard living in London," Richard Rushton, Sr., wrote to George A. Smith on October 27, "but what to say to you with respect to money we do not know as many of the Saints at Leek are destitute of work and others are very poor indeed but we will do all that we possibly can to collect you a little." [^43] Only a money order for l 1 received from Willard Richards at the end of October enabled them to pay their month-end bills. [^44] The next month a letter from Thomas Kington containing a donation of l 2 was lost in the mail or, as Wilford suspected, stolen. [^45]

The apostles were painfully aware that some struggling Saints, especially those in the Potteries, were doing more than they could afford. "You speak of the poverty of the Saints in the potteries," Wilford Woodruff wrote to George A. Smith after the younger apostle had returned to Staffordshire. "I dont want them to starve or clam [feel pinched inside, as one does in fasting] [^46] themselves, to try to keep me from clamming or to send me money. If any body has got to clam it may as well be me as . . . the Lord hath provided for me this far & I have no fears but what he will do it." If they had anything to spare, he said, "let them give it to you." [^47]

The apostles maintained surprisingly good contact with the Saints by mail. While in London, for example, George A. Smith cemented a close relationship with the Richard Rushton family of Staffordshire. In July he baptized Richard Rushton, Sr., a silk merchant in Leek, a town about fifteen miles from Burslem and a center for silk manufacturing. Rushton's wife, Lettie, and one son, Richard, Jr., soon followed him into the Church. [^48] Richard, Jr., quickly took up missionary work himself, probably at the urging of George A., and the apostle kept in close contact by mail with both father and son. Elder Smith wrote first on August 17 and then again ten days after he got to London. Richard, Jr., meanwhile, proselyted throughout the Potteries, where he baptized a young woman at Lane's End but also had dogs turned on him in the Leek Market Place. [^49]

George A. Smith soon found himself giving considerable advice to Richard, Jr., who was four years older than he but who, like many, felt inadequate as a missionary. In one letter Elder Smith counseled him that the more often he stood before the people to warn them, the greater the blessings he would receive. Rushton took the advice seriously, and he wrote to his mentor that "you[r] words have been verified for I receive greater blessings and Power every time I get up to Speak even so as to astonish myself." [^50] Then, in an ardent outpouring of his soul, he again suggested the powerful effect Elder Smith had on the people of the Potteries: "Dear Brother I cannot discribe the Love and gratitude I feel towards you for the great Blessings you have been instrumental in the hands of God of bringing upon our Family and Neibourhood. We can never repay your kindness towards us. But God will Bless you for your Labour. Dear Brother we Should be happy to see you again soon." [^51]

On October 12 George A. wrote, reporting on his own success and improving health, and Richard, Jr., read the letter aloud to the Staffordshire Saints. In his response of October 15, Rushton again poured out a heartfelt expression of gratitude for the great example the apostle was to him: "Dear Brother your kind Letter give me great Encouragement for when I think of your Labours your persecutions your trials your Sufferings in your journeyings . . . it spurs me on to fresh Exertions and makes me every day more diligent in warning the people and exhorting my Brethren to do the same." [^52] Richard, Sr., wrote several days later and commented gratefully on how much his son had improved in preaching, just as Elder Smith had promised. Moreover, the father said, "many come to him to be healed of their sicknesses and thay all return home healed rejoicing in the Lord, praise be unto his Holy name for this great blessing added to the church." [^53]

The final Rushton letter in George A. Smith's papers was written by Richard, Jr., on November 6. It contained the usual report of activities among the Staffordshire Saints and also a profound expression of humility: "Dear Brother your kind advice and instruction is very acceptable to me as I have often needed it since I saw you Last For I feel that when I am strong in myself then am I weak in the Lord and when I am weak in myself then I am strong in the Lord for when I Exalt myself then I am sure to be abased But when I humble myself then do I get Exalted." [^54]

George A., meanwhile, was in poor health, and shortly after his return to London he began suffering with cold and ague. A thick fog on October 14 affected his lungs, and on October 23 he spat blood. On October 27 another cold in his head caused his face to swell so badly that one of his eyes almost closed. He stubbornly continued working until, on November 9, instructions came in a letter from Willard Richards that he should return immediately to the Potteries. His health was a major factor in this decision, but Brigham and the group in Manchester suggested that there was work enough for only one in London anyway. [^55]

As George A. reflected on his time in London, he was not sure he wanted to leave, but he accepted the inevitable:

From the time I continued laboring in London to the present, I used every exertion consistent with my health and strength to plant the Gospel standard; every visit I made, or call, or association was one continued effort to bear testimony; to teach, to warn the people, and thereby fulfill my calling; and, I believe, I can truly testify before the Lord, that my garments are clean of the blood of the inhabitants of the British metropolis, and I can also testify the same of the labors of Elder Kimball, and Woodruff. . . . I regret having to leave Brother Woodruff, but necessity seems to require it. [^56]

George A.'s departure on December 10 was a blow to Henry Connor, Jr., son of the first London convert. The two had spent considerable time together discussing the scriptures and became close friends, even though Connor could not accept Latter-day Saint teachings. The day after George A. left, Henry, Jr., wrote him a poignant letter expressing both his disappointment and his admiration. "I must confess that I was loath to part with you for I feel for you all the affection of A brother," he affirmed. He also said that if George A. was right and he was wrong, he hoped he would soon be convinced. [^57] A little more than a month later young Connor was baptized.

Losing the companionship of George A. Smith was also a shock to Wilford Woodruff, who had no desire to work alone. Even though William Pitt, from Dymock, spent five days with him, [^58] he quickly became extremely lonesome.

Wilford spent the next few weeks visiting the Saints, preaching to small groups, writing letters, and sometimes holding discussions with members of other religious groups, including Southcottians and Irvingites. [^59] Finally, on November 22, four more people offered themselves for baptism. Although the next Sunday he baptized three of these new converts, Woodruff could not help but comment that he and his co-workers had "laboured vary hard & with much expens to accomplish little in London." [^60]

Elder Woodruff kept looking forward to the arrival of Heber C. Kimball, for several people were anxiously waiting for him to return and baptize them. [^61] On November 30, after spending a day with Dr. William Copeland touring the facilities of the College of Surgeons, he returned home to find both Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. He could not have been more delighted.

BRIGHAM YOUNG'S ELEVEN DAYS IN LONDON

Brigham Young's first full day in London consisted of a visit to the City in the company of Wilford Woodruff and Heber C. Kimball, and a meeting with the Saints. Then began several days of sightseeing. On December 3 the three visited the Tower of London, where they seemed especially struck with the magnificent crown jewels as well as the spacious Horse Armory. They also went to the Thames Tunnel, Buckingham Palace, Westminster Abbey, St. Paul's Church (where they attended services on December 6), the College of Surgeons, the National Gallery, the Royal Theater at Covent Garden, St. James Park, and the Queen's stables. On the last day of sight-seeing, December 9, they visited the magnificent St. Paul's Cathedral, [^62] climbed to the top of the 202-foot-high monument commemorating the 1666 London fire, walked across London Bridge and then up to and across the elegant cast-iron Southwark Bridge, stopped for a meal, took a ride to the British Museum, which Wilford estimated covered about five acres, and walked through every room. That day they traveled twelve miles, walked up and down 1,200 steps, and by bedtime were "weary," "sumwhat sore," and more than ready for a good night's rest.

Even more than usual, Woodruff spent long hours writing about their activities in his journal—ten pages on the Tower of London alone—to the point that Brigham, who wrote little, wondered briefly if too much journalizing was interfering with missionary work. [^63]

During his eleven days in London, Brigham spent time with members of the Church, preached a few times, and, on December 7, witnessed a baptism. [^64] As he recalled later, when he arrived, the meetings were sparsely attended but "I preached as well as I could, though it was pretty hard work to pump when there was no water in the well." He credited Heber's warm, friendly way with the people for infusing a new spirit into the branch. "When I left the little meeting-house was crowded to overflowing." [^65]

COLD DAYS, WARM HEARTS: HEBER'S AND WILLARD'S LAST TWO MONTHS IN LONDON

Mission of the TwelveHCNone of the apostles found London conducive to good health, and in December Heber C. Kimball had such a severe cold, along with congestion in his lungs, that he could hardly speak. The weather was frigid, and the thick, black smoke from all the coal-burning stoves, fireplaces, and factories made the air so dense they could hardly see. Lamps were lit even in the daytime, Heber reported, "and we have to write by candle some times in the midle of the day. It makes me like a hors that has got the Heaves." [^66]

Mission of the TwelveHCHeber and Wilford nevertheless found a few more people wanting to be baptized. On a snowy December 16 they baptized Henry Connor, Jr., and Christopher Smith, both apprentice watchmakers, as well as Benjamin Morgan, a bricklayer, and his wife, Elizabeth, whose occupation was listed as a hostess. [^67] They also met frequently with the Reverend James Albion, pastor of an independent church, and Dr. William Copeland, both of whom proved receptive. On December 20 Albion not only offered them his chapel for preaching but also informed the congregation that he was a Latter-day Saint. He was going to be baptized, he said, and they should no longer consider him a member of their body unless they, too, were baptized. Neither Albion nor Copeland was baptized immediately, but the apostles continued to work closely with them. Copeland also delighted in taking them to see the sights of London.

Mission of the TwelveHCBoth Heber C. Kimball and Wilford Woodruff gradually became more optimistic, and both continued to have dreams of catching fish. "I hope we may soon realize it by Baptizing many Souls," Wilford wrote on December 20, "for we have laboured hard in this City for many weeks & with great expens & baptized as yet ownly 19 souls. But we will not despise the Day of Small things but hope for more." [^68] On Sunday, December 27, Wilford preached at Albion's Independent chapel to the largest audience yet in London. When he finished, a Wesleyan minister began to berate his doctrine, at which time most of the people walked out and those who remained became so disgusted with the minister's deportment that their sympathy turned toward the Mormons. Some even invited the apostles to visit them and tell them more. [^69]

Mission of the TwelveHCWhen the year-end holidays arrived the missionaries took time to enjoy themselves with the Saints. On December 23 they spent the evening with Dr. Copeland and his wife at the theater, where they saw Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream. On Christmas morning they met with the Saints at Henry Connor's home to teach them "plain principles" and then had dinner with the Morgans. The menu was probably one of the best they had enjoyed in England: baked mutton, goose, rabbit pie, mince pie, plum pudding, bread, cheese, porter, and water. They then spent the evening at James Albion's home, discussing the "things of God." [^70] New Year's Eve found them preaching and taking supper with the Copelands.

Mission of the TwelveHCThis was also an occasion to reflect on a year that must have seemed to them both the best of times and the worst of times. Heber wrote a poignant prayer thanking his God for his increase in knowledge, recovery from illness, prosperity in the ministry, sustenance, and for never forsaking him in time of trouble. He also prayed mightily for the welfare of his family. [^71] Wilford Woodruff recalled that twelve months earlier he was on the Atlantic, practically penniless, but since landing in England he had traveled 4,469 miles, held 230 meetings, established fifty-three places of preaching, planted forty-seven branches of the Church numbering 1,500 Saints, attended fourteen conferences, personally baptized 336 people (including fifty-seven preachers), confirmed 420 people, ordained eighteen elders, ninety-seven priests, thirty-four teachers, and one deacon, blessed 120 children, and administered to 120 sick persons. In many instances, "the sick were healed, the lame walked & Devils were cast out." He had also raised money for Church publications, assisted two hundred Saints to emigrate, and visited numerous historic sites and other places of interest. These were among the blessings he counted. There were also tribulations: being away from home and family, the loss of his baby daughter, financial sacrifice, rejection, persecution, public humiliation, and all the other challenges related to missionary work, especially in London. Two terse sentences from his summary were full of meaning: "Never have I spent a year with more Interest than 1840. Never have I been called to make greater Sacrifices or enjoyed greater Blessings." [^72]

In January, despite the bitter cold, the frequency of baptisms slowly increased. On Saturday, January 9, moved by the Spirit, Heber C. Kimball went to Woolwich, a few miles down the Thames, and the following day four people asked for baptism. They searched up and down the Thames until 9:00 P.M. trying to find a suitable place, but the ice and mud made it impossible. On Tuesday, therefore, Elder Kimball and his four eager converts showed up in London, picked up Wilford Woodruff, and proceeded to the pool at Tabernacle Square, which they were using so often that Woodruff dubbed it their "private bath."

Kimball also sent for William Copeland, convinced that he could finally persuade the good doctor to go into the water. Just as he finished baptizing the four from Woolwich, Copeland arrived and the persistent Kimball asked him if he was ready. He had not come prepared, the doctor objected, but Heber replied that he could put on the clothes the previously baptized brethren had just taken off. The moment of decision at hand, Copeland resolutely donned the wet clothing, went in to the freezing water, and was baptized. "I must confess it was a cold job," Kimball quipped later. They all then returned to the apartment on Ironmonger Row for tea, confirmed the new members of the Church, and, in the evening, had a prayer meeting. It was, said Kimball, a "glorious time." [^73] Eleven days later Wilford Woodruff baptized the Reverend James Albion.

As elsewhere, the London converts called upon the apostles not only for spiritual sustenance but also for a variety of nonecclesiastical services. Wilford Woodruff spent most of January 27, for example, going from one government office to another, trying unsuccessfully to help a member make arrangements for a military pension. Two days later he spent the evening copying a will for another. [^74] In their minds, no doubt, whatever help they could provide was small recompense for the love and support that came their way from the Saints.

TRANSITION: LORENZO SNOW TAKES THE REINS IN LONDON

On the afternoon of February 14 the apostles organized the London Conference, which comprised the London branch and small branches in Bedford, Ipswich, and Woolwich. After seven months of missionary work, there were forty-six members in London. During the evening meeting, attended by the largest number of people yet to be at a Latter-day Saint gathering in the capital city, one more person asked for baptism. Wilford Woodruff's early pessimism was abated, as he wrote in his journal:

This is a day I have long desired to see, for we have laboured exceding hard to esstablished the work in this city, & in several instances it seemed as though we should have to give it up but by claiming the promises of God & holding on to the word of God, the rod of Iron we have been enabled to overcome, & plant a church & esstablish a conference which we are enabled through the grace of God to leave in a Prosperous Situation which has the appearance of a great increase. [^75]

President of the new London Conference was twenty-four-year-old Lorenzo Snow, who had arrived in Liverpool from America on October 22, carrying with him a letter to the Twelve from Joseph Smith. [^76] He reached London on February 11, but he probably knew at least two months earlier that he was going there. On December 10, while working in Birmingham, he opined to George A. Smith that "I think you exhibited much wisdom in leaving that seat of Satan" but then suggested with good-natured apprehension that he knew what was in store for him:

I suppose you intend keeping me preaching to the spirits in prison untill I have been properly prepared then send me to the great seat of his black Majesty from whence you have so fortunately escaped. Elder Young writes in a letter which I just received from Elder Woodruff "we do not know but we shall be glad for Elder Snow to come to London if he can be spared there and we can provide a place for him here." I wonder where you will send me next. [^77]

Elder Snow's introduction to the work in London began immediately. The day after he arrived, Heber C. Kimball took him on a tour of the city and then to visit the little branch at Woolwich. Humbled at the thought of taking over from the apostles in this vast metropolis, he wrote to George A. Smith: "I want your prayers for the powers of darkness are great in this city; and I shall soon be left alone being assisted only by those who are infants in the kingdom, and at the same time, I can scarcely say that I yet have hardly arived at the state of childhood." [^78] In 1849 Lorenzo became a member of the Quorum of the Twelve himself, and in 1898 he succeeded Wilford Woodruff as president of the Church.

GEORGE A. SMITH'S LAST DAYS IN STAFFORDSHIRE

George A. Smith arrived back in Staffordshire on November 17 and that night held a meeting with the Saints. He preached whenever and wherever possible, including a December 2 meeting in Burslem, where he spoke to "as vile a set of ruffians as I ever saw anywhere." [^79] His health continued intermittently poor, and as winter settled in he continually had serious coughing spells, but there was no let-up in his efforts. "Preached three times today and broke bread," he wrote in his journal on December 20. "My cough is much better today. I confirmed four persons. The Lord seems to have given me strength today, for I have not performed a day's labor so easily for some weeks." [^80] But that night he took cold again, and the next day his lungs were so painful and his throat so sore he could hardly speak. He spent most of that day in bed.

His personal discomfort, however, was almost inconsequential compared to his pain for the Saints, as he sadly observed that there was even less employment among them than when he was there earlier. [^81] He estimated that only a third of the 450 Saints in Staffordshire were fully employed, others worked only two or three days per week, and some worked not at all. He saw Church members suffering from want of food, and was furious when he discovered that some had been fired from their jobs simply because they were Latter-day Saints. Such persecution was little better than murder, he thought. "Hard times for these poor people. I pray daily for the Lord to gather them up and send them to Zion." [^82] There was little he could do personally, however, for he was still dependent upon them, even in their poverty.

Christmas Day 1840 was devoted to a conference of the Saints in Hanley, attended by both George A. Smith and Brigham Young, who was passing through on his way to Manchester. George A. felt better that day, and the two apostles spent an enjoyable evening at the home of a recent convert, John Taylor, a tailor by trade. Three days later George A. went to a holiday "tea meeting" with the Hanley Saints and then attended a preaching service. By New Year's Eve, however, he was ill again.

Like his colleagues elsewhere, the youngest apostle was involved not only in missionary work but also in constantly giving advice and counsel to the many Saints who sought him out. He seldom went to bed before midnight and sometimes lay awake until 2:00 A.M., pondering how it was that such a young, untutored person as he should be called upon to teach so many people with much more learning and experience. He wrote to his younger brother:

you cannot think how foolish it makes me feel to Be Looked up to with So much Earnestness by Persons Who have been Professers of Religion and Preachers of the Different Sects. I thank the Lord for the Wisdom he has given me and the Success I have had in the teaching thes Men for thire is Now in this District No less than 88 official Members in the Church and they all Look to me for instruction as Children to A Father and this Makes me feel vary Small indeed and Causes me to cry unto my father Who is in heaven for Wisdom and Paetence to do my fathers Work and Sound his gospel to the World Which may the Lord grant. [^83]

His health was poor, with severe colds plaguing him continually, and in February he was bothered with rheumatism in his shoulder. His eyesight had improved enough that he could write by a strong light, but not by candlelight, and he could not do much reading. [^84] Nonetheless, he preached and worked with the Saints and helped conduct official Church business.

Heber C. Kimball arrived in Staffordshire from London on March 3 and spent a little time working with George A. before going on to Manchester on March 6. Elder Kimball was also suffering from a bad cold, and for a few days the Saints in Staffordshire cared for two ailing apostles.

Inevitably, as the Church grew, differences in perspective, along with human weaknesses such as envy or jealousy, occasionally caused tension, and at times not even the apostles were immune to criticism. In Hanley, for example, a man named Mason, claiming to have talked with God, began to curse George A., and accused him of lying and hypocrisy. On January 26 Elder Smith received a letter from Mason, accusing him of being no more than a pretending priest and charging that his God was really gold. It seems incredible that anyone who knew George A. could believe such charges. Not that he or his associates were free of failings, but the motives ascribed by Mason were so far from anything of which George A. could have been guilty as he labored among the poverty-stricken Saints that the accusations seemed laughable. In any case, the Saints at Hanley would have none of it and immediately withdrew fellowship from the "nonprophet," as Elder Smith labeled him. [^85]

In another instance, personal jealousy among the Saints also resulted in an attack on Elder Smith. During a conference at Leek on March 18, the apostles proposed that Steven Nixon be ordained an elder. A Brother Jackson objected, registering several complaints that may seem trivial but were serious to this recent convert: Jackson himself was the oldest priest and therefore he should have the office; Elder Smith had never visited him at his home; it had been given in tongues that Nixon should be ordained, but tongues did not govern the Church; and he had been offended by Richard Rushton, who was pressing him about the rent money for the room in which they met. George A. Smith reminded Jackson that, according to the scriptures, he should have taken his grievances first to the brothers who had offended him, and after considerable discussion it was decided that Jackson should be suspended until he publicly acknowledged his error. The next day, however, when they met to perform the ordinations that had been approved, a Brother Clowes also objected, accusing Elder Smith of partiality. "Brother Nixon has taken you to his house, fed and treated you like a gentleman," he said, and "that is the reason you have called him to be an Elder and his calling was not by the spirit of God." At that point the rest of the council unanimously rallied around their young leader, and Alfred Cordon moved that Clowes be suspended for "publicly and falsely" accusing him. The motion carried. [^86] Such unfortunate tensions among the Saints illustrated both the youthfulness of the Church in Britain and the way human foibles inevitably affect any organization, no matter how inspired its principles.

THE GATHERING CONTINUES

One of Brigham Young's chief concerns was the gathering, and he, along with John Taylor and Willard Richards, did much of the work of organizing the emigration. Even before the John Moon company left in June 1840, formally launching the gathering, many Saints were looking ahead to emigrating in 1841. On May 22, for example, Heber C. Kimball was delighted to find that the Saints of Longton were planning to leave the following spring, not just as individuals but as churches. "The Rich love the poor so well that they cant leave them behind," he wrote to his wife, and this, he said, was the celestial spirit. [^87]

Though the yearning to escape poverty was one motivation in their decision to migrate, a more important factor was the Saints' eagerness to participate in building up the kingdom of God in the last days. It was this that the First Presidency stressed when they officially announced the policy in August 1840:

The work which has to be accomplished in the last days is one of vast importance, and will call into action the energy, skill, talent, and ability of the Saints, so that it may roll forth with that glory and majesty described by the prophet; and will consequently require the concentration of the Saints, to accomplish works of such magnitude and grandeur.

The work of the gathering spoken of in the Scriptures will be necessary to bring about the glories of the last dispensation. It is probably unnecessary to press this subject on the Saints, as we believe the spirit of it is manifest, and its necessity obvious. [^88]

It was not enough that this family or that decided to emigrate: the gathering must be organized in such a way that the rich would help the poor, that unskilled workers would not overwhelm skilled workers in the early stages of building up Nauvoo, and that the torrent of emigrants could find passage across the Atlantic with some efficiency and order. In his December letter Joseph Smith cautioned the Twelve on the difficulties that might be faced by the extremely poor, especially those not used to farm work, if they emigrated too soon. He encouraged them to get people who had manufacturing skills as well as those with substance to emigrate first, so they could build factories, foundries, potteries, etc., and prepare the way for the poor to come and have work.

After the initial 1840 emigration, the Star published several pieces designed to encourage the Saints to prepare for the coming season. One was a report from Nauvoo, dated July 28, 1840, of a committee selected to pick a suitable spot in Iowa Territory for establishing a stake of Zion. The committee enthusiastically recommended an area between the Des Moines River and the northern boundary of Missouri, but the real significance of the report was that it opened the eyes of the British Saints to the vision that the Kingdom was indeed expanding in the new world and that they should be a part of it. [^89]

The February Star contained a long letter from Francis Moon, a member of the initial emigrant company. "I know what it is to bid farewell to my native land," he said in an effort to sway those who may hesitate,

to receive the parting tear of my friends, and with a heart heaving with inexpressible emotion, turn my back upon the nearest and dearest relations in this life. . . . But in all these sacrifices and troubles . . . the Lord has helped me and brought me safely through; and now I have the privilege of being acquainted with the mysteries of the kingdom of God, and these things causes me to forget as it were the things that are past.

After giving a radiant description of the Nauvoo area, he told his readers the prices they could expect to pay for goods in America, and advised them to delay no longer. He also told them of Joseph Smith: "I have been acquainted with him for some time, and as far as I can see he is a good man, and I find him to be a prophet of the Lord, and the more I speak with him and the more I hear him, the more I am convinced of the truth of these things." [^90]

Few British Saints needed Moon's encouragement, however, for, as Brigham Young wrote to his brother in October, they were eager to go, no matter what.

The Saints have got a start for to gether to America and goe they will, and and nothing can stop them. . . . They have so much of the spirit of getherin that they would goe if they knew they would die as soon as they got there or if they knew that the mob would be upon and drive them as so[o]n as they got there. They have the spirit of the times here as well as the Church there. [^91]

On February 6 Brigham Young, John Taylor, and Willard Richards organized a company of 235 Saints and placed Hiram Clark in charge. The next day they saw them off on the ship Sheffield. Two days later the same three apostles organized a company of 109 Saints under the leadership of Daniel Browett, who sailed on the Echo on the sixteenth. As the February issue of the Star characterized it, they were on their way to "the colonies of the Saints" in a country that "God has provided for a refuge for all nations." [^92] On March 17 another fifty-four Saints, led by Thomas Smith and William Moss, sailed on the Alesto.

Moving from their homes in England to new homes across the waters was no simple task for the Saints, and it took faith, courage, planning, and preparation. Those who went before wrote back with detailed suggestions about what to bring, what not to bring, and what to expect when they got to the promised land. [^93] In addition, the Twelve tried to follow Joseph Smith's pragmatic advice to send skilled workers first in order to prepare the way for the poor. Their final epistle to the Saints in England explained that "men of capital" should go first and purchase land, erect mills, and produce machinery and manufactured goods "so that the poor who go from this country can find employment." It was not wise, they said, for the poor to flock to Nauvoo until the necessary preparations were made. "Neither is it wisdom for those who feel a spirit of benevolence to expend all their means in helping others to emigrate, and thus all arrive in a new country empty handed." The Saints were admonished not to go in haste but to prepare well and to settle their debts and other affairs before they left. [^94] Finding that delicate balance between the desire to go quickly versus the need for planning, or Christian generosity versus pragmatic saving for necessary investments in Nauvoo, was indeed a complex challenge.

According to Joseph Fielding, most of the Saints who departed in February were poor and began their momentous transatlantic voyage with no more than l 4 each. His wife's brother, G. Greenwood, helped many of them, but, Fielding remarked, "times are bad for the Poor, and we have to live by Faith." The exodus did not make it easy for those who stayed behind, either, for helping the migrants left less money to help the poor who remained or to assist the missionaries. Fielding himself was still trying to prune the vineyard without purse or scrip, and when the emigrants left he was in debt. "I never lived so sparingly in my life," he said, "yet we do not complain of want while so many of even the Saints are lacking." [^95]

Coordinating the migration was complex. Elders Young, Taylor, and Richards contracted for ships, purchased provisions, and arranged for ship's stores. Passengers, especially those in steerage, were furnished nothing but water during the voyage and had to arrange for their own food. Before the February migration, the apostles negotiated contracts with ship owners that allowed the Saints to cross the ocean for l5 each. [^96] They organized each company of emigrants as a Church unit and set apart a presidency. In order to bring together emigrants, money, supplies, and ships all at the correct moment, they also coordinated by mail with the other apostles. On February 13, for example, Brigham wrote to George A. Smith, who was working in Staffordshire:

We wish you to Call the Churches together in your part and ascertaine emeditly how meny of the Bretherin can be reddy to sale by the 10 of March next, as we shall fit out another Company then. . . . Let us know by the 25 of this month. Let us have the names of all, and the ages of all children under 14 years. Children from one to 14 will goe 2 for one. Under one year they goe free.

George A. was also told to appoint an agent to handle the money and the was promised that

as soon as we find out the name of the Ship and the day of Saling we shall wright and let you know what time to send your agent and also what day your famelies must be here. . . . Our advice is for all to goe that can in March, as they will goe by New Orleans. . . . [much cheaper than] by New York—and such as cannot goe then had better stay till the last of August or September and then sale for New Orleans. [^97]

Unfortunately, George A. discovered that the Saints of Leek were so poor that all "were willing but none able to gather at present," and he so reported. [^98] Brigham Young's understanding response to such concerns was simply that the apostles' instructions were not law but advice in anticipation of greater expense in the future. The ships were overflowing already, and cost of passage would be higher later on, "but we say to the Bretherin goe when you can." [^99]

The apostles appointed Amos Fielding as Church emigration agent in Liverpool. His responsibility was to superintend the outfitting of the Saints for the voyage and particularly to help the inexperienced Saints avoid the "pick-pockets" who hovered at the port of embarkation to "take every possible advantage of strangers, in Liverpool." Emigrants were advised that the first thing they should do after arriving in Liverpool was to consult Fielding about the voyage. Some, they were warned, had tried to take care of matters themselves, only to be "robbed and cheated out of nearly all they had." They were also advised to travel in companies rather than alone. [^100] This was the beginning of an emigration system—greatly enhanced as time went on—that would transport tens of thousands of Saints to America. [^101]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Woodruff, Journal, April 16, 1841, 2:89-90.
[^2] A good introduction to early Church literature is Crawley, "Bibliography of the Church." We have also benefited from access to Crawley's unpublished "Descriptive Bibliography."
[^3] See Ellsworth, "History of Mormon Missions."
[^4] A useful introduction is Moore, "History of Mormon Periodicals."
[^5] See the summary in Cook, Law of Consecration, 45-55.
[^6] In addition, it reprinted earlier editions, making some textual changes.
[^7] This broadside was dated August 1836. Its text was published in the Messenger and Advocate 2 (July 1836): 342-46, where it is dated June 16, 1836.
[^8] P. Pratt, Voice of Warning. It appeared in an edition of three thousand about September 1837.
[^9] See Crawley, "Bibliography," 505.
[^10] P. Pratt, Millennium.
[^11] See Crawley, "Bibliography," 497-98.
[^12] Broadsides of D&C 101 and 88 (probably published in 1834) are located in the Archives, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah. A broadside of D&C 59 can be found in the Church Archives.
[^13] See Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, June 27, 1837, Heber C. Kimball Collection: "We did up about one hundred and fifty in letter form and directed to evry priest of evry profession in the city." See also Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 290.
[^14] This actually may have been the third edition, and the second with the new title. The bibliographical details are presented in Crawley and Whittaker, Mormon Imprints, 15-16.
[^15] The other was an eight-page pamphlet published in Oxford-Hill in the later 1840s. All the previous editions apparently were broadsides.
[^16] Early Mormon concern for the printed word is discussed in Whittaker, "Early Mormon Pamphleteering," 1-92. The quotation comes from Joseph Fielding to Hannah Fielding, March 27, 1839, Manchester, photocopy, Joseph Fielding Collection, Brigham Young University.
[^17] See Fielding, Diary, 21.
[^18] A number of early LDS sources refer to this. See letter of Orson Hyde to Willard Richards, October 12, 1837, and February 14, 1838; Fielding, Diary, January 1838; and "Manuscript History of the British Mission," August 15 and October 5, 1837. On June 11, 1837, Joseph Smith had counseled departing English missionaries Heber C. Kimball and Joseph Fielding not to preach on "The Vision" and other doctrines until the new converts were more grounded in the basics. See Smith, History of the Church 2:492.
[^19] The best source on the Thomas Webster episode is the diary of Joseph Fielding. Webster was the first British convert to apostatize and write against the Church. He was baptized in October 1837 by Orson Hyde and then excommunicated on September 30, 1838. Webster's main objections can be seen in Webster, Some Extracts. This work probably appeared in December 1838. Other references to Webster and his anti-Mormon activities include letter of Heber C. Kimball to Saints at Liverpool, April 13, 1838, Millennial Star 2 (May 1841): 8; Thomas Webster to Nehemiah Greenhalgh, October 2, 1838; and entry for October 7, 1838, all in "Manuscript History of the British Mission."
[^20] The Bible, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and, after 1880, the Pearl of Great Price.
[^21] D&C 123 specifically commanded members to gather and publish accounts of their Missouri persecutions.
[^22] See Woodruff, Journal, August 16, 1839, 1:351; August 20, 1839, 1:352-53; and August 30, 1839, 1:356.
[^23] Parley provided a short summary of his early publishing activities in Millennial Star 1 (July 1840): 50-51. P. Pratt's History of the Late Persecution appeared in October 1839 per Parley's October 12, 1839, letter to the Editor, Times and Seasons 1 (January 1840): 43.
[^24] P. Pratt, History of the Late Persecution.
[^25] P. Pratt, Judge Higbee and Parley P. Pratt. Reprinted in Times and Seasons 1 (March 1840): 68-70.
[^26] See Whittaker, "'Articles of Faith'."
[^27] P. Pratt, Millennium.
[^28] Bennett, Few Remarks.
[^29] Winchester, Examination of a Lecture.
[^30] For a full development of this, see Crawley, "Parley P. Pratt."
[^31] Parley P. Pratt to Joseph Smith, November 22, 1839, Joseph Smith Collection. This letter is important as it foreshadows most of the developments in England relating to publishing. Parley was also publishing a second edition of his Voice of Warning as well as his Millennium.
[^32] For Hyrum Smith's letter to Parley P. Pratt, December 22, 1839, see Smith, History of the Church 4:47—48. Hyrum reported this to Joseph Smith on January 3, 1840. See ibid., 4:51.
[^33] Orson Hyde and John E. Page to Joseph Smith, May 1, 1840, Joseph Smith Collection. Also in Smith, History of the Church 4:123-25. This letter focuses on plans for publishing in Germany.
[^34] See Joseph Smith to "Dear Brethren," [Hyde and Page] May 14, 1840, Joseph Smith Collection. See also Smith, History of the Church 4:128-29
[^35] Brigham Young to Joseph Smith, May 7, 1840, Joseph Smith Collection, reproduced in Smith, History of the Church 4:125-27. This letter clearly implies that they had discussed this matter before and had probably concluded then to import books once they were established in England.
[^36] Brigham Young to Mary Ann Young, November 12, 1840.
[^37] Brigham Young and Willard Richards to First Presidency, September 5, 1840, Joseph Smith Collection (Appendix B, Document 12). "Have we done right in Printing a hymn book? Are we doing right in Printing the book of Mormon? . . . Shall we print the Doctrine & Covenants?" Young asked. But with his characteristic pragmatism, he concluded, "Our motto is go ahead."
[^38] See Joseph Smith to the Twelve, December 15, 1840. For information on the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles taking over LDS publications, including information on the revelation justifying such, see Whittaker, "Early Mormon Pamphleteering," 63-65. Compare Woodruff, Journal, February 8, 1842, 2:154 (re: revelation dated January 4, 1842).
[^39] See, for example, Kimball, Journal, 32.
[^40] "I wish Sister Smith would add to the old collection such New ones as is best and republish them immediately." Parley P. Pratt to Joseph Smith, November 22, 1839, Joseph Smith Collection. Parley even offered to oversee the publishing project on the east coast. He had published the first volume of Mormon poems several months before Emma's 1835 hymnal was available. See P. Pratt, Millennium. This volume contained eleven hymns (pp. 31-52), and he included them in his 1840 Millennium.
[^41] Parley P. Pratt, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Orson Pratt to the "Church of the Latter Day Saints in Commerce, Illinois," February 19, 1840, Times and Seasons 1 (March 1840): 71.
[^42] Brigham Young, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, 71. See also Brigham Young to Joseph Smith and Counselors, April 15-16, 1840, Times and Seasons 1 (June 1840): 122.
[^43] See Journal History of the Church, April 17, 1840; see also "History of Brigham Young," Millennial Star 25 (November 14, 1863): 727.
[^44] Before receiving the contract, Thomas gave them a written bid. A printing estimate is noted in Parley P. Pratt to Brigham Young, May 4, 1840, Brigham Young Papers. It did not include binding. A series of bills from Winstanley of Manchester (81 Fountain Street) to Brigham Young indicated that he did the lettering. These are in Brigham Young Papers, Church Archives, as are the receipts for payment to W. R. Thomas for printing.
[^45] Parley P. Pratt to Brigham Young, May 4, 1840.
[^46] The money, l 250 from the Benbows (part of Jane Benbow's inheritance) and l 100 from the Kingtons, was secured by notes signed by Wilford Woodruff and Willard Richards on May 20, 1840, located in the Brigham Young Papers. Brigham Young to Willard Richards, June 10, 1840, Willard Richards Collection, suggested the possibility of borrowing more money from the Benbows. They were to be paid back through the sales of the two volumes, and existing records reveal Brigham Young's concerns to fulfill these obligations. See, for example, Brigham Young to Willard Richards, June 17, 1840, Brigham Young Papers. In September 1840 the Benbows forgave the debt. The Mormons were accused by critics of stealing money later that year, but Parley P. Pratt made it plain they just borrowed money to publish and would repay it through the sale of the works produced. See Millennial Star 1 (November 1840): 189.
[^47] On June 17, 1840, Brigham Young wrote to Willard Richards that "we are getting along finely with the hym Book thou[gh] my labor has been such that I am quite unwell, but I keepe doing with all my might" (Willard Richards Papers). Three days later Brigham Young wrote to his wife Mary Ann that "I have now got through with the hy[m]nbook, I have had prety much the whole of it to doe myself. Brother J. Taylor has been sick, Brother P. P. P[ratt] has had as much as he could doe to attend to the Star preparing matter, reading proof for Star and hyms" (Brigham Young to Mary Ann Young, June 20, 1840, Brigham Young Papers).
[^48] See Millennial Star 1 (July 1840): 69; Wilford Woodruff to Phoebe Woodruff, July 8, 1840, Times and Seasons 1 (September 1840): 169.
[^49] See, for example, John Taylor to Brigham Young, July 23, 1840, Brigham Young Papers, wherein, on the eve of his departure to Ireland, he ordered one hundred hymnbooks to take with him. In the same letter John Taylor complains of the many typographical errors in the hymnbook. Later John Taylor ordered more when he was on the Isle of Man. (John Taylor to Brigham Young, October 2, 1840, Brigham Young Collection.) Joseph Smith's approval of the British hymnbook was conveyed in his epistle, "To the Elders in England," Times and Seasons 2 (January 1, 1841): 259; reprinted in Millennial Star 1 (March 1841): 266-67.
[^50] See Millennial Star 25 (December 26, 1863): 819.
[^51] Crawley and Whittaker, Mormon Imprints, 18-19. For the best study of the history of Mormon music to date, see Hicks, Mormonism and Music.
[^52] Extant records indicate that Goodson had either twenty or two hundred copies of the Book of Mormon in England in October 1837. These seem to be his share for his role in the production of the five thousand copies of the Kirtland edition. The "Manuscript History of the British Mission" reports for October 5, 1837 that Goodson and John Snyder had left their English mission for America, taking "over two hundred copies of the Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants," which they refused to sell to Heber C. Kimball, and that Goodson later burned his books.
[^53] Parley P. Pratt to Joseph Smith, November 22, 1839. The book, he observed, was "not to be had in this part of the vineyard for love or money. Hundreds are waiting in various parts here about but there is truly a famine in that respect."
[^54] Parley P. Pratt to Brigham Young, May 4, 1840.
[^55] Brigham Young to Joseph Smith, May 7, 1840.
[^56] See Young, Manuscript History, April 16, 1840; Woodruff, Journal, April 2, 1841, 2:77, and April 5, 1841, 2:78.
[^57] See Woodruff, Journal, May 14, 1840, 1:449; May 19, 1840, 1:451; and May 20, 1840, 1:451. See also Esplin, "Emergence of Brigham Young," 439—40.
[^58] Many of the original bids are in the Brigham Young Papers.
[^59] The bid, in Brigham Young Papers, Church Archives, estimated the cost for three thousand copies to be l 148 and for five thousand copies l 210. In a letter to Willard Richards dated June 10, 1840, Brigham Young said Tompkins's bid was l 40 less than the next closest bid. (Brigham Young Papers.) Young was to supply the paper for the job as well as make separate arrangements for the binding.
[^60] The contract is in Brigham Young Papers, Church Archives. Receipts in the Brigham Young Papers from J. Tompkins indicated the amount paid (l 110) for printing was paid in installments beginning July 24, 1840, and ending February 12, 1841. The paper was obtained on July 7, 1840, for l 107. See Woodruff, Journal, July 7, 1840, 1:482.
[^61] By July 23 three forms were available for proofing, but the work had not moved much further a month later. John Taylor to Brigham Young, July 23, 1840, and John Taylor to Parley P. Pratt and Brigham Young, August 29, 1840, Brigham Young Papers.
[^62] The index (really an extended table of contents) was compiled between January 18 and January 21, 1841; it was the first index to be published as part of the book and was used until the 1920 edition.
[^63] Woodruff, Journal, January 8, 1841, 2:25. Millennial Star 1 (January 1841): 263.
[^64] Brigham Young learned of the first Nauvoo edition in a letter from Ebenezer Robinson dated December 27, 1840, Brigham Young Papers. The information on the offer of J. Tompkins to print another edition is presented in Stock, "Book of Mormon, 1830-1879," 73-74.
[^65] See Woodruff, Journal, February 8, 1841, 2:40—41. Their report was made to a meeting of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles on April 2, 1841, in Manchester. See Young, Manuscript History, 93. A copy of the English copyright is reproduced in Millennial Star 25 (December 26, 1863): 819.
[^66] The receipt for one placard dated February 11, 1841, is in the Brigham Young Papers.
[^67] See Millennial Star 25 (December 19 1863): 808, and also the letter of Thomas Kington to Brigham Young, March 26, 1841, complaining of mistakes in the edition, particularly as it related to the binding. Brigham Young took these complaints to the J. Tompkins Company but was told they could do nothing about missing pages. See their letter to Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Parley P. Pratt, April 8, 1841, Brigham Young Papers.
[^68] See Young, "History of Brigham Young," April 15 and 16, 1840.
[^69] See discourse by Brigham Young, August 31, 1856, Journal of Discourses 4:35. Earlier, in 1839, Pratt had wanted to begin a periodical in New York City and had written to Joseph Smith asking for permission to do so. Parley P. Pratt to Joseph Smith, November 22, 1839.
[^70] P. Pratt, Prospectus. The only known copy is in Church Archives. Most of the Prospectus was reprinted in the first issue of the Star.
[^71] Joseph Fielding reported in his diary for May 2, 1840: "On Tuesday I received a Packet of the Prospectus of the Millennial Star from Bro. P. P. Pratt, Manchester, which I have distributed, and have now about 45 Subscribers." Fielding, Diary, 73.
[^72] Brigham Young to George A. Smith, May 4, 1840, Brigham Young Papers.
[^73] See also letter of Brigham Young to Willard Richards and Wilford Woodruff, May 24, 1840. Young noted: "The Star is out and about 1300 copies are already gon[e]. If we had on[e] thousand only we should come short of our object."
[^74] Parley P. Pratt to Joseph Smith, November 22, 1839. No doubt Parley was thinking of D&C 72:20-23.
[^75] In his May 4, 1840, letter to Brigham Young, Parley wrote of his finding "a good House and Shop, on the great Oldham Road" in Manchester for l 20 per year. "I think I shall take it for our office and Book Establishment." The memo of agreement signed by Parley P. Pratt for the house and shop at No. 149 Oldham for twelve months for l 17 and signed May 6, 1840, is in the Brigham Young Papers.
[^76] See, for example, Millennial Star 1 (July-September 1840): 76, 113, 119, 123, 129.
[^77] Ibid., 1 (April 1841): 312.
[^78] Livesey, Exposure of Mormonism. A testimonial at the end was dated July 24, 1838. The publisher, Joseph Livesey (1794-1884), was not a close relation of the author. A second edition of Richard Livesey's tract was published in Manchester by Wm. Shackleton and Sons in 1840.
[^79] The comments are in a report entitled "Mission to England, or the First Foreign Mission of the Latter-day Saints," by Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, and Willard Richards dated March 24, 1841, Preston, in Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 288-96. The best source on the initial impact is Fielding, Diary, 24-26 (July-August 1838): and 55 (February 11, 1840).
[^80] As earlier noted, Livesey's anti-Mormon work was a factor in the opposition of the Reverend James Fielding, Joseph Fielding's brother, in Preston. Parley P. Pratt responded to Livesey's charges that the Mormon missionaries were destroying families in "Falsehood Refuted," Millennial Star 1 (November 1840): 187; and more fully to the 1840 edition of Livesey's pamphlet in Reply to Mr. Thomas Taylor, 4-8. Livesey was a Methodist Episcopal minister in Winchendon, Massachusetts.
[^81] For Birmingham in early 1841, see Cotterill, "Midland Saints," 224. Parley wrote from Manchester in January 1841: "The country is flooded with pamphlets, tracts, papers, etc. published against us" (Parley P. Pratt to Sidney Rigdon, January 8, 1841 in Times and Seasons 2 [April 1, 1841]: 364-65).
[^82] In P. Pratt, "Look at Both Sides," Millennial Star 1 (October 1840): 156-58, he suggested ways of reading tracts against the Church and specifically requested that these works be sent to his office. In his "Editors Address to his Patrons," Millennial Star 1 (May 1840): 2-3, he gave advice to those who would be "entering into the field of controversy."
[^83] While no author is identified in the pamphlet, it is clear it was Parley. He so identifies himself in his later Reply to Thomas Taylor's "Complete Failure," 6.
[^84] The Bush pamphlet is dated February 5, 1840. Copies are in the Church Archives and the Mitchell Library, Glasgow, Scotland.
[^85] Parley's tract was advertised on the back wrapper of the August 1840 issue of the Millennial Star. Since he left for America to get his family in August, we must conclude the tract appeared prior to his departure. Copies were still on hand in May 1841, per Millennial Star 2 (May 1841): 5-6.
[^86] See Taylor, Complete Failure.
[^87] See P. Pratt, "Falsehood Refuted," Millennial Star 1 (November 1840): 187. Parley's pamphlet was titled Reply to Mr. Thomas Taylor's "Complete Failure." It would seem that this pamphlet appeared in November 1840.
[^88] Hewitt, Errors and Fallacies. The preface is dated October 1840. George A. Smith reports receiving a copy in London on November 7, 1840. See Smith, "History" and also Woodruff, Journal, November 7, 1840, 1:546. The tone of Parley's February 18, 1840, letter to George A. Smith suggests Smith had earlier requested help in responding to this tract. A copy of Hewitt's tract, with marginal notes by George A. Smith, is in Church Archives. Hewitt's letters to George A. Smith, dated June 2 and 13, 1840, suggesting an ongoing discussion between them, are in the George A. Smith Collection. It is possible that the "Reverend Hewitt" of England mentioned in the April 21, 1835, letter of Thomas Shaw is the same person. See Messenger and Advocate 1 (May 1836): 316-17. This letter says Hewitt was an Irvingite.
[^89] See P. Pratt, Answer to Mr. William Hewitt's Tract. No doubt this tract, issued in an edition of a thousand copies, appeared in December 1840. Parley apparently expected some payment for his work as he so hinted in his February 1841 letter to George A. Smith. Parley P. Pratt to George A. Smith, February 18, 1841, Parley P. Pratt Collection. "I have never Rec'd one penney for the 1,000 replies to Hewitt which I got printed allmost entirely for the poteries."
[^90] See P. Pratt; Truth Defended. These responses had appeared in the Millennial Star 2 (July 1841): 43-48.
[^91] The bibliographical information is in Crawley and Whittaker, Mormon Imprints, 22.
[^92] See P. Pratt, Dialogue. This item first appeared in the Millennial Star 2 (January 1, 1842): 129-32. Parley added a letter of Thomas Smith dated December 30, 1841. Together these pieces attack Methodism, Roman Catholicism, and the Church of England and specifically the evils of infant baptism. Smith's letter describes his conversion from Methodism to Mormonism. Parley had earlier responded to a circular of the Church of England. See Millennial Star 1 (May 1840): 17-18.
[^93] P. Pratt, Address by a Minister. Bibliographical information is in Crawley and Whittaker, Mormon Imprints, 17-18.
[^94] The first address was dated May 18, 1840. The second printing was dated May 28. Orson Pratt told his brother of giving out about eighty copies during one street meeting in Scotland in October 1840. Orson Pratt to Parley P. Pratt, October 17, 1840 in Millennial Star 2 (December 1840): 214.
[^95] [Wilford Woodruff and Heber C. Kimball], Word of the Lord. See Woodruff, Journal, 9, 17, 20. 24 February 1841, 2:41-51. Three thousand copies were printed.
[^96] P. Pratt, Letter to the Queen. There were three editions issued, totaling ten thousand copies. These were issued in June and July 1841. The tract was dated May 28, 1841 and first advertised in the Millennial Star 2 (July 1841): 48. The text was reprinted in the Times and Seasons 3 (November 15, 1841): 593-96 under the slightly modified title Letter to the Queen of England. Peter Crawley suggests that this text was probably taken from a New York imprint and that it is the source for Adams, Letter to His Excellency John Tyler (1844). See Crawley, "Parley P. Pratt."
[^97] George A. Smith, for example, had said that there was a great call for copies of the Voice of Warning in the Potteries in 1840; see Millennial Star 1 (June 1840): 44. This first European edition was taken from the second American edition, published in New York in 1839, and consisted of an edition of 2,500 copies.
[^98] Though no author is listed, it is presumed that this pamphlet was by Parley P. Pratt. It clearly reads like his writing, and he was editor of the Star at the time it appeared.
[^99] This line of thought was more fully developed later by Parley's brother Orson Pratt, in his Absurdities of Immaterialism.
[^100] The essay had first appeared in his 1840 Millennium. This English tract was published in an edition of 3,000 and first advertised in the Millennial Star 3 (May 1842): 16.
[^101] The Manx Liberal issue for 17 October 1840 was reprinted in Millennial Star 1 (November 1840): 180-83 as "Elder Taylor's Reply to Mr. J. Curran." In the same issue Parley P. Pratt editorialized (pp. 185-87) on Curran's attack on John Taylor and the idea of continual revelation. The Manx Sun issue for October 30, 1840 was reprinted in the Millennial Star 1 (December 1840): 197-202 as "Elder J. Taylor's Closing Reply to Mr. Curran." In a letter to Parley P. Pratt, dated February 27, 1841, John Taylor refers to these debates. See Millennial Star 1 (March 1841): 276-78.
