David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

Chapter 11

MEANWHILE, IN NAUVOO

In July 1839, illness stalked the swampy river bottoms of Commerce, soon to be renamed Nauvoo, where the Saints were gathering. Heber C. Kimball's wife, Vilate, about eight months pregnant, and their children were among the sick, and Heber had moved them into a crude log hut he had built onto the back of another Church member's home, about a mile from Commerce. There was no floor and no chinking between the logs. The roof and walls leaked so badly that during a rainstorm, water stood nearly ankle deep on the ground inside. With the help of a few friends and neighbors who were not ill, Heber was anxiously working on a new log home on a five-acre wooded lot, and he hoped to finish it in time for the new baby to be born there. It was not long, however, before he and Vilate were both prostrate with chills and fever, and he could not complete the house. David Patten Kimball was born in the leaky old cabin on the night of August 23, during a heavy thunderstorm. A week or so later the Kimballs moved into the new fourteen- by sixteen-foot cabin where Vilate and the four children would live while her husband was on his mission to England.

Such experiences were commonplace among the Saints during that difficult year of 1839, and as Vilate and the wives of the other apostles looked toward the future, they foresaw not only their loneliness but also the continuing hard work and difficulties they must endure. Their husbands would suffer considerable hardship and privation, but the women who remained behind would face challenges often much more trying than those of the missionaries. Rear the children, earn a livelihood, help build the new community, care for those less fortunate than they, buoy up their husbands through the mails and keep them informed of what was happening at home, and prepare for their eventual return: all that and more would fall on the lonely shoulders of the women while the apostles were out seeking converts to gather to the new community.

Vilate might have complained, but instead she wrote a poem to her husband that exemplified her love, faith, courage, and hope for the future:

Dear Heber, you and I must part,

It seems as though it would brake my heart

But in Gods grace I will confide

Praying him to waft you safely oer the tide.

And when you land on Europes shore,

Where you have labored once before;

May you find favor in the eyes

Of rich and poor, both great and wise.

And when you with your brethren meet,

May all your joys, then be compleet,

And when your labors there are done

May you be wafted swiftly home.

And when our labors all are oer,

And we shall meet to part no more;

May we together in heaven reign,

Where there's nomore sorrow, death nor pain.

There we shall see our children dear,

Who've gone before in infant years, [^1]

And with our children that remain

We'll praise God in the highest strain.

And with our brethren all unite,

To praise Gods son, his souls delight;

While we shall look upon the scenes,

That's brought us to this glorious end.

Now my dear husband, I bid adieu,

To earthly joys while gone from you,

But when we come to meet again,

Our joys will surely be the same.

Heber quickly responded in kind:

My dear Vilate, you are my wife,

The choice companion of my life,

But with you I am called to part

Which sorely grieves my akiing heart.

But I will leave you in God's care,

And pray his blessings you may share

While I am gone acrost the Main,

The gospel tidings to proclaim.

While you are here, and I am there;

Remember me in all your prayers

That I may there, successful prove

In winning souls to truth and love.

And every chance that I can see,

I'll fall upon my bended knee,

And there implore the God of heaven

To protect the wife, to me he's given.

For be assured my dearest girl,

That while I'm in this lower world

I never can forgetful be,

Of the family God has given to me.

Nor neither in the world to come;

For there we ever shall be one:

And our dear saviour we shall see,

With all of our posterity.

May they be numerous as the sand

And dwell upon mount Zions land

When the saviour comes to reign,

And not be found among the slain.

For by the Prophets, we understand

That Zion will be a blessed land,

When from it the curs is moved,

And souls are filled with celestial love.

But cease, my mind, off from this strain

Til you and I shall meet again;

And then we'll talk of what is past

And dwell in Zion with the blesst.

And now Vilate, I can say with you,

To earthly joys I bid adieu;

While you and I are called to part

But when we meet I'll rejoice in heart.

My children all, I bid farewell.

We must be parted for a while

But when we meet to part nomore

Our troubles then, will all be oer. [^2]

No doubt the other apostles had similar feelings, and, even though the focus of this book is on the Quorum of the Twelve, it would be incomplete without some insight into the lives of those the apostles left behind. The records are sketchy at best, and for some, almost nonexistent, which accounts for the unevenness of the following discussion. Those records that remain, however, provide important insights into what the mission meant to the apostles' wives and families back in America.

MARY ANN ANGELL YOUNG

Mary Ann Angell Young and her family were desperately ill when Brigham left, and their economic situation in Iowa was precarious, to say the least. Though the apostles had received a general assurance that their families would be cared for, [^3] neither Joseph Smith himself nor the church could provide much help. From time to time the Nauvoo bishops were able to give Mary Ann, as well as other needy households, a few such provisions as meat, potatoes, and flour, but she was reluctant to accept charity. She worked hard to obtain whatever she could for herself and family, and did not complain to Brigham. For the most part he heard about her difficulties not from her but from others. [^4]

Brigham Young left his family on the Iowa side of the river because there were a few rooms in a deserted military post. Both food and money were scarce, and on several occasions during the winter of 1839-40 Mary Ann's resources were so exhausted that she had to cross the river to see if she could obtain help from friends or from the Church. Though she left the children to be tended by the older girls, she could not leave the baby. On one bitter, cold day in November, she bundled little Emma as warmly as she could and took her across the Mississippi in an open boat. "I shall never forget how she looked," a friend recalled years later, "shivering with cold and thinly clad." Mary Ann left the baby with her friend while she went to the tithing office and was able to obtain a few potatoes and some flour. Then, still suffering from ague and fever, she took the baby and made her way back to the cold and uninviting river. [^5]

Sometime during the summer of 1840 Mary Ann managed to move her family across the river into Nauvoo. Their means were still meager, but they would be closer to friends and other assistance. Brigham forced himself not to worry about them for, he told Mary Ann, "the Lord said by the mouth of Brother Joseph, that they should be provided for, and I believed it." Nevertheless, he let them know in no uncertain terms he longed deeply for them. Also, from time to time, he was able to send them a little money and a few presents. At least some of what he sent arrived. Mary Ann's good friend Vilate Kimball observed in June: "I am glad Brother Brigham has sent some assistance to his family for they are needy." [^6]

Mary Ann resolved to have a house built while her husband was gone and also began to keep a garden. Their lot was in the low, swampy section of Nauvoo. By June 1840 the house was begun. Vilate Kimball wrote Heber that "their house could hardly be called a shelter," but added the expectation that "they will soon have it fixed nice." [^7] Brigham was delighted when he heard that it was begun, and he wrote Mary Ann that he would be glad if she could have it finished by the time he returned home, though she was not to trouble herself if she could not. [^8] When he arrived home on July 1, 1841, it was not complete. As he later described it: "On my return from England I found my family living in a small unfinished log-cabin, situated on a low, wet lot, so swampy that when the first attempt was made to plow it the oxen mired; but after the city was drained it became a very valuable garden spot." [^9]

Toward the end of 1840, Mary Ann wrote a long letter to Brigham, describing her hard work and telling him she had been ill. The family was lonesome for him, and one night little Mary began to cry, saying she did not want to go to bed until she knelt down and prayed for her father. All the children felt the same except for Emma, born only ten days before Brigham left on his mission, who did not know him at all. After reviewing these and other troubles, Mary Ann hastened to add that she hoped her husband would not think her ungrateful. Brigham responded with exemplary love and tenderness. He prayed for her and the children continually, he said, but that was all he could do. He knew how well she supported him in this difficult assignment and thanked her for it. After loving admonitions to the children about helping their mother and each other, like any typical father, he promised them presents upon his return. [^10]

VILATE MURRAY KIMBALL

On September 18, 1839, Vilate Murray Kimball was shaking so severely with the ague that she could do little more than weakly shake hands with her husband, who was also ill, when he came to her sickbed to say goodbye. Tenderly, Heber embraced her and the children and then painfully climbed into the wagon that would take him and Brigham from Nauvoo. No one knows what thoughts ran through Vilate's mind as she watched him go out the doorway, but, in addition to the loneliness she already felt, she must have wondered how she and four children would survive the coming months. Little David was less than four weeks old and only one child, four-year-old Heber Parley, was well enough even to carry water for the ailing family. She was thankful for the little log shanty just completed by her husband, for at least they would have a roof over their heads. Suddenly she heard an unexpected shout, "Hurrah, hurrah, hurrah for Israel," and dragged herself from her sickbed to the door. There she and Mary Ann Young, who had crossed the river for a farewell, saw their ailing husbands standing in the wagon waving their hats. A warm smile came to Vilate's face as she and Mary Ann cried out as strongly as they could, "Good bye! God bless you!" That smile reflected not just her love for Heber but also her determined faith that, despite hardships, the family would survive.

The smile did not reflect how she felt physically. What happened over the next three days might have made Heber wonder if he should have left at all. She was "perfectly reconciled" to his going, she wrote on September 21, "But I must say I have got a trial of my faith as I never had before." The day he left home the pain in her head and back, made worse by her weeping before he left, was nearly intolerable. Young William, also severely ill, cried all day and took a chill in the evening. The only person who could stay with them during the day, a Sister Bently, who was also ill, did all she could, and another friend stayed the night. For a while, however, Vilate was alone, so she crawled out of bed, knelt before the Lord, and prayed for a good night's rest. The next morning she was free from pain, though she could not walk without staggering, and the older children, William and Helen, were too sick to assist. With the help of Heber Parley, Vilate crawled about the house doing her chores, including some washing, but she overdid it and relapsed with chills and fever. Sick all afternoon, she did not rest that night and was unable to do anything the following day. "I was taken early this morning with a shake, and shook about an hour and a half as hard as I ever saw any body in my life," she wrote that night, "and then weltered under a fever and extream pain until almost night." William, too, continued having severe chills, and the medicine left by a friend seemed to do no good. Helen also continued ill but could do a few chores.

As she wrote the letter listing all these troubles, Vilate must have wondered how it would affect Heber, and she hastened to try to comfort him. "I have given you a statement of our situation," she wrote, "not to make you feel bad, but because you requested it of me. . . . But all that I can ask of you is to pray that I may have patience to endure to the end whether it be long or short." The next morning she added her final lines:

Dear Heber we are all alive and tolerable comfortable this morning. Would to God we could remain so through the day. We will hope for the best. Mother Bemon stayed with me last night. She said I [must] tell you she had slept with your little Prophet. I must draw to a close for Br George is waiting. Unless my health should improve I shall not be able to write next week as you requested, for im groing weak every day. You had better enquire for a letter at New York, perhaps I shall direct there. So fare you well my dear Heber. I pray that it may be well with you. [^11]

Though she did improve, like many of the Saints afflicted with "river sickness" Vilate apparently alternated between seasons of illness and health. In May 1840 she was again suffering from the ague and fever. [^12]

Heber left his family with only nine dollars, barely enough for Vilate to pay a debt, leaving nothing for food or shoes needed by their daughter Helen. Like Mary Ann Young, she depended upon the bishops for at least a few provisions during the winter, but by June of 1840 she had a garden and was growing potatoes, turnips, and other produce. She also had a pig, given to her by a Brother Hubbard, and Joseph Young had obtained a cow for the family. "I hope I shal not have to call on the Bishop again while you are gone," she wrote to Heber. [^13]

Vilate was elated when, from time to time, she and the children received presents from her husband. It seemed as if the Spirit had directed him in everything he sent, she wrote gratefully in June 1840, except for the worsted. It was too expensive for her tastes, she reminded him, and she could do with factory cloth or any kind of clothing. "You know I can never enjoy any unnecessary thing while I see so much poverty around me," she wrote. But she stopped short of scolding him. The cloth was beautiful and she knew he was trying to please her, "therefore I thank you for it." He had also made another, less serious mistake: the boots he sent were a size too small for her, but they fit young Heber exactly. [^14]

From time to time other gifts arrived. Brigham Young sent Heber's older children copies of the British edition of the Book of Mormon, with their names printed in gold on the cover, and Heber sent the same gift to Brigham's daughters. Helen, Heber's daughter, also received handkerchiefs, toy china, and dolls. She was a bit perturbed, however, when Joseph Smith called by the house one day and accidentally broke a doll, excusing himself only by saying, "As that has fallen, so shall the heathen gods fall." This was a "rather weak apology for breaking my doll's head off," Helen commented several years later. [^15]

Vilate's life in Nauvoo ran the gamut of experience from the spiritually exhilarating to the depths of economic and physical distress. At one point, early in 1840, Vilate considered selling their property in Nauvoo and moving to Kirtland, where some members of her family were still located, but Heber discouraged her from that. [^16] She was uplifted when she heard the doctrine of baptism for the dead preached for the first time in the summer of 1840, and she was baptized for her mother. She also enjoyed frequent visits with some of the sisters who had come from England and who, no doubt, told her of her husband. On the other hand, expenses were high, she did not have enough money to make regular payments to Hiram Kimball, Heber's distant cousin from whom they were buying their lot, and she had no regular income. To top it off, her father died just as he was planning to come to Nauvoo. "But alass," she wrote on December 8, "how are my fond anticipations blasted? and my joy is turned to mourning."

In the same letter Vilate let Heber know how troubled she was to hear of his illnesses. "O that I could fly to your relief," she wrote, and she penned a touching poem that captured the mixed feelings of love, sorrow, and faith flowing through her heart:

My husband's gone, my Father's dead

But my ever living head;

Always hears my souls complaint

And ever comforts me when faint.

If I could fly to you I would,

But the Lord is very good;

He will care for him that's dead

And you who from your family's fled.

I, here with four children dear,

But I know I need not fear;

For the Lord is always nigh,

And will all my wants supply.

O Lord it is my souls desire

That thou would my heart inspire

With a fore knowledge of thy will,

That I may all thy laws fulfill.

No doubt these lines affected Heber deeply, as did the end of the letter. The children were all impatient to have him come home, she wrote, but, more to the point,

you are losing all the most interesting part of David's life, a child is never so pretty as when they first begin to walk and talk. He goes prattleing about the house, and you may be assured that we think he is cunning. Elizabeth [Young] calls him Heber altogether, and every one that sees him says that ought to be his name, he looks so much like you. [^17]

MARY ANN FROST PRATT

Mary Ann Frost Pratt did not stay in Commerce when her husband, Parley, left. She and her three children traveled with Parley to New York and lived there in relative comfort after he embarked for England on March 9, 1840, though, at one point they all became seriously ill with scarlet fever. Less than six months after he left, Parley was back in New York to take them to England with him. Because she was away from the poverty and sickness of emerging Nauvoo, when compared with the other wives, Mary Ann had a relatively easy time.

SARAH MARINDA BATES PRATT

None of the wives had a more troubled and spiritually confusing time than twenty-two-year-old Sarah Marinda Bates Pratt, wife of Orson Pratt. [^18] She endured poverty, like the others, but she also struggled with the consequences of a twisted interpretation of a new doctrine.

Like her sister-in-law, Sarah could have gone to New York City with Parley and Orson. She chose to remain behind, however, because Orson, Jr., was only two years old, and because of her resolve to support the Church leaders in gathering to Nauvoo. When she said her tearful farewells to Orson on August 29, Sarah was grief stricken over the loss of their baby daughter just eleven days earlier. Moreover, her husband left her nearly impoverished, living in a hastily built log shack on Heber C. Kimball's property. The Church helped some, and she took in sewing to eke out a livelihood. She eventually went to live in the home of Stephen H. and Zeruiah Goddard and, later, the home of Robert D. Foster.

Among those who provided sewing for Sarah were Joseph Smith and John C. Bennett. It was her relationship with these two Nauvoo leaders that eventually resulted in her distress. Joseph was the man she revered as prophet, whose teachings had brought them to this Illinois frontier in the first place, and who had sent her husband on a mission. Bennett, former quartermaster general of Illinois, arrived in Nauvoo in the fall of 1840. Although he quickly became one of its leading citizens, sometime in 1841 Joseph became aware that he was also a charlatan who had joined the Church under false pretenses. Bennett, estranged from his wife and family in Ohio because of adultery, was guilty of additional improper behavior in Nauvoo, including plotting against the Prophet. Following his excommunication from the Church in 1842, he immediately began to publish bitter anti-Mormon exposes.

Just at that time Joseph Smith began introducing some of the far-reaching doctrines that further distinguished Mormonism from contemporary Protestantism. These doctrines included an expanded understanding of God as well as of man's eternal potential, salvation for the dead, eternal marriage, and plural marriage. Understandably, Joseph told those to whom he taught the principle of plural marriage that for the time being it must be a private doctrine, though eventually, when the Church had extracted itself from the problems swirling around it at the time, it would be taught openly and plural wives would be publicly acknowledged. Prematurely and unofficially, John C. Bennett learned of the doctrine of plural marriage and apparently saw in it a way to justify his personal immoral tendencies. Without authorization, he soon began to teach a distorted version, which he used to try to seduce several Nauvoo women. That, in fact, was one of the things that led to his excommunication.

Exactly what happened among Sarah, Joseph Smith, and John C. Bennett may never be clear, for there are numerous conflicting versions. In a society where the doctrine of plural marriage was not yet openly taught and practiced, any woman could have been confused when presented with it. The problem was compounded by Bennett's selfish and distorted interpretation. Bennett later spread the story that Joseph Smith was smitten with Sarah and urged her not only to become one of his "spiritual wives" but also to share his bed. According to Bennett, Sarah angrily refused and threatened to tell her husband if Joseph ever again approached her. More than forty years later Sarah said that she had been so enraged by the proposal that she refused to accept any further help from the tithing house. [^19]

Bennett's charges were countered not only by Joseph Smith but by numerous affidavits from prominent citizens who were disgusted with Bennett himself and who were also witnesses of what was going on between him and several women. From their perspective, the treacherous Bennett made his charges in an attempt to hide his own sins as well as to overthrow the Prophet. If Sarah seemed to agree with him, then she, too, was dishonest. Stephen and Zeruiah Goddard, for example, both said that it was Bennett, not Joseph, who made advances to her. She was living in their home at the time, and they both testified that on several occasions they had found her in compromising situations with Bennett. When Mrs. Goddard confronted Bennett, asking him what Orson would think, he only replied that he could "pull the wool" over Orson's eyes.

It was not until 1842, some months after his return, that Orson learned details of the accusations against his wife, and the discovery threw him into a turmoil. His unrest and confusion eventually led to an estrangement from Joseph and his excommunication from the Church in August 1842. That did not last long, however, for when Bennett tried to enlist his support in an effort to have Joseph arrested, Orson became irate at Bennett's actions and presumptions and made it clear that he and Sarah were still loyal to the Church. He was rebaptized in the icy waters of the Mississippi in January 1843 and was reinstated in the Quorum of the Twelve. At the same time, even though Sarah had not been cut off from the Church, she was rebaptized along with her husband as a symbol of her renewed commitment.

After all his doubts and intense suffering, Orson accepted the doctrine of plural marriage fully, as did all the members of the Twelve who had gone to England. In 1852 he preached the first public sermon in its support and became, in print, its most visible advocate and defender. [^20]

LEONORA CANNON TAYLOR

Leonora Cannon Taylor and her three small children were still living in an abandoned, broken-down barracks in Montrose, Iowa, when John left on August 8. Each child had a birthday the following January: Joseph turned two, Mary Ann four, and George six. So far as their physical circumstances were concerned, their birthdays could hardly have been happy ones, but given the tenderness and remarkable faith of their mother, they likely counted their blessings more than their hardships.

Sickness and death were all around them when Elder Taylor left, and young Joseph and George were both afflicted. The distraught Leonora fully expected Joseph to die on August 19, the day after Sarah Pratt's baby died. Neither was she well, she wrote to her husband, but "I keep upon my Feet grunting about." [^21] Within a few more days, however, they felt better.

At first Leonora lived in the same barracks as Brigham Young's wife and children, who were so ill they could not even go for water and she had to fetch it for them. When crowded conditions, sickness, and poverty led to stress between the two families, Leonora moved in briefly with Sarah Pratt. She had been promised that a house would be built for her, but she planned to move into the Smoot house until it was ready. If not, she said, she would live with Phoebe Woodruff, whose house was also not ready, and "we can croak togather." [^22]

"I never needed more grace patience or your prayers than I do at pressent," she wrote, but, she added, "I do feel thankfull to the Lord my health is as good as it is." She also let her husband know what she needed, in case he could send her anything: red and yellow flannel, a little lace, checked or plain muslin, a little black silk for an apron, a few yards of cheap calico for children's frocks, and some low-priced diaper cloth. Most of all she wanted letters. "Dear John," she wrote, "dont let me have cause to complain for want of them." One night as she walked out with a neighbor looking for a cow, she realized that they were on the same path she and John used to take. Suddenly she felt profoundly alone. "But if we suffer to promote the cause of our Blessed Lord it will end in J[oy] which no Man taketh from us," she wrote. "We are seperated for a short time but I hope we shall yet meet to part no more for ever." [^23] Few lines could capture more poignantly the depth of both her faith and her loneliness.

A few weeks later Leonora, baby Joseph, and George were again afflicted with chills and fever, and again Leonora feared that Joseph was dying. During the first week in October she heard from someone that John, too, had been seriously ill. This news troubled her, because she had not yet received a letter from him. When he recovered, he wrote her a moving description of his sickness as well as his determination and faith to proceed.

On March 12, 1840, Leonora wrote a poignant letter to John that reveals much about her life on the Iowa side of the river during that first desperate winter. [^24] The most immediate problem was that she had to move, for the room she was living in had just been given to a non-Mormon as a result of a lawsuit. She had a lot in Commerce, and Joseph Smith had promised that a house would be built on it without delay, but for the moment she had no idea where she would live.

Still struggling to make ends meet, she had sold one of her two cows during the winter. The other, "Old Bopsy," had calved on March 1, and that would eventually be some help, but at the moment she had to scratch even to find food for the cow, and she was anxiously awaiting the spring grass. Her winter expenses included medical bills, and she had to buy some of her household supplies on credit. She had kept an account of everything she spent, but most of her funds were gone. The bishop had promised to find her money for bread and meat, but at the moment he had none to give her. A friend, a Dr. Patten, kept her supplied with wood and water. With all her privations, however, Leonora confessed to an extravagance: she had purchased six teaspoons made of German silver which, she hastily reminded John, was much cheaper than pewter!

The letter also contains glimpses of what was going on among the Saints. Joseph Smith had returned from his disappointing trip to Washington, D.C., where he was unable to enlist the aid of the national government in getting redress for the losses of the Saints in Missouri, and on Sunday Leonora had gone across the river to hear him tell of his experiences. The name Commerce had been changed to Nauvoo, and the town was growing rapidly, with houses springing up like mushrooms.

There was also news of the children. The family was well again, though little Joseph was teething, five teeth at once. He was also sitting on his mother's lap as she wrote. George and Mary Ann, going to school each day and "learning fast," each sent a hundred kisses to their father. Three marks at the bottom of the last page were each labeled as a kiss from one of the children. Leonora also asked longingly about her family and relatives in England.

Though Leonora's letter is generally optimistic, her loneliness for John is abundantly clear. "I want to hear from you very bad in deed," she said. "I hope you will write often the letters are so long on the way. Wont you come back in the fall. I cant have you stay away longer, do try. I miss you more and more. When I tell Joseph you are coming home he gets vext he has been told so, so often and you never come." "Pray for me my dear John," she wrote as she came to the end of the letter, ". . . that I may have wisdom to walk so as to please my Heavenly Father. . . . this is a trying World . . . but I have a Freind who will neaver leave or forsake me. . . . I hope I shall not Murmer." Almost as a final desperate effort to hold on to thoughts of her absent husband as long as possible, she wrote sideways on the page: "I feel as if I want to get into this Letter and go too."

On July 1, 1841, John Taylor arrived in Nauvoo to find the patient, steadfast Leonora near death. Immediately he called in twenty elders to be sure that all the faith possible was there to heal her. They prayed, anointed her with oil, laid hands on her, and blessed her. Their faith and Leonora's was rewarded, and once again her health was restored. [^25]

PHOEBE CARTER WOODRUFF

Phoebe Carter Woodruff tenderly embraced her husband on the morning of August 8, 1839, and then watched him begin to row across the Mississippi to Commerce. She was about two months pregnant, still living in the uncomfortable abandoned barracks in Montrose, and she had no idea when she would see her husband again. Clearly, however, he would not be there when the new baby was born. She did not even have the comfort of cuddling her little daughter, Sarah Emma, who had been sickly since birth, for Sarah was four miles west with the Abraham O. Smoot family, who had volunteered to take her to try to improve her health. Phoebe was nearly destitute, but as she watched her husband disappear across the river, she no doubt comforted herself for the thousandth time with the assurance that he was on God's errand and that ultimately his mission would be a blessing to them. Wilford understood her pain: "She parted with me with that fortitude that becometh a Saint realizing the call & responsibility of her companion," he wrote in his journal. [^26]

Phoebe did not escape the malarial plague that immobilized so many people that fall. Her chills and fever were severe, and the old barracks were hardly comfortable quarters. Finally, early in September, she moved in with the Smoot family. [^27]

How long Phoebe remained with the Smoots and what she did during the next several months is not clear from the available records. Undoubtedly, she happily watched the settlers pour into Commerce and across into Iowa as the Saints continued to gather. She cared for little Sarah, prepared for the new baby, and hoped for news from Wilford, which usually came at least once a month. Often his letters contained a bit of money to help her.

In mid March 1840 Phoebe was at last ready to deliver the baby. Across the ocean, Wilford realized that her time was near, and prayed mightily for her. On March 20 he wrote in his journal, "Oh Lord comfort Phebe thy handmaid this day in her distress," and the next day he pleaded "Oh Lord bless Phebe this day in need in every time of need I pray." [^28] The next day, at six o'clock in the morning, Phoebe gave birth to a son, Wilford Woodruff, Jr. She wrote her husband as quickly as she could, and he received the letter on May 30. "Yes glory Hallelujah," he exulted, "I have now got a letter from Phebe. It is the first letter I have received from her since I have been in England. . . . She informed me that she was blessed with the birth of a Son. . . . May he be preserved blameless unto the comeing of the Lord Jesus Christ for which I will ever Pray." [^29]

Phoebe crossed the river to attend church services whenever she could, and in April 1840, on the tenth anniversary of the organization of the Church, she was at the conference meeting at which Elders Orson Hyde and John E. Page were set apart for their missions to Palestine. [^30]

On May 4 Phoebe began an especially newsy letter to her husband, though she did not complete it until May 24. Commerce was building up surprisingly fast, she reported, and immigration seemed much greater than it had ever been in Caldwell County, Missouri. The children were in good health, as were the families of Sisters Young, Taylor, and Pratt, but Vilate Kimball was suffering from the ague and fever and so, at times, was Phoebe. She then expressed her anxiety for Wilford and added her usual steadfast feeling of reconciliation with hard reality:

I know that it is the will of God that you should labour in his vineyard; therefore, I feel reconciled to his will in these things. I have not been left to murmer or complain since you left me, but am looking forward to the day when you shall return home once more to the bosom of your family, having fulfilled your mission in the love and fear of God. You are always present with me when I go before the throne of grace, and when I am asking for protection and blessings upon myself and children, I claim the same for my dear companion, who has gone far from me, even to a foreign nation, to preach the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ. [^31]

From time to time Wilford sent packages to his family, containing presents of various sorts, and Phoebe told him of the things she needed. In one letter she asked for some calico dresses as well as some linen to make an everyday dress, for hers were worn out. She also wanted some red flannel for making children's clothes and a muslin cape for herself. [^32]

Great sorrow struck on July 17 when two-year-old Sarah Emma died. [^33] The next day the heartsick Phoebe wrote an anguished and tender letter to the absent father. Its words eloquently reveal the pain and pathos as well as the remarkable faith of these stalwart women who lived without their husbands on the edge of civilization, helping to build a new gathering place for the Saints of God:

My dear Willford, what will be your feelings, when I say that yesterday I was called to witness the departure of our little Sarah Emma from this world. Yes she is gone. The relentless hand of death has snatched her from my embrace. But Ah! She was two lovely, to kind, to affectionate, to live in this wicked world. When looking on her I have often thought how I Should feel to part with her. I thought I could not live without her esspecially in the Absence of my companion. But she has gone. The Lord hath taken her home to himself for some wise purpose.

It is a trial to me, but the Lord hath stood by me in a wonderful manner. I can see & feel & [know] that he has taken her home & will take better care of her than I possibly Could for a little while untill I shall go & meet her. Yes Willford we have one little Angel in heaven & I think it likely her spirit has visited you before this time.

It is hard living without her. She used to call her poor Pa Pa & putty papa many times in a day. She left a kiss for her papa with me just before she died. She eat her dinner as well as usual thursday. Was taken about 4 oclock with a prestness for breath. The Elders lade hands upon her & anointed her a number of times, but the next day her Spirit took its flight from this to another world without a groan.

To day Willford & I with quite a number of friends accompaning us came over to Commerce to pay our last respects to our little darling in seeing her decently buried. She had no relative to follow her to the grave or to Shed a tear for her but her Ma & little Willford. . . . I have just been to take a pleasing melancholy walk to Sarah's grave; She lies alone in peace. I can say that the Lord gave & the Lord hath taken away & blessed be the name of the LORD. [^34]

Margaret Smoot also wrote a letter to Wilford that day, in which she enclosed a poem about Sarah and asked him to accept it "from one who had evry feeling but that of a parent for your departed Sarah." [^35] With the aid of many good friends, Phoebe endured the loss of Sarah Emma.

Her financial situation improved. By the end of the summer, she had moved across the river into the home of William Clark, who wrote to her husband, assuring him that Phoebe was in good health and that she and baby Wilford "shall not want any thing that I can bestow & may God hold it as an everlasting covenant between me & thee." [^36] In the late fall, however, the baby came down with another attack of the ague. [^37]

About that time two friends visited Phoebe and invited her to accompany them back to Scarborough, Maine, to spend the winter at her father's home and then to return to Illinois with Wilford when he arrived in the spring. She happily accepted, and by December 6 she was as far east as New York City. [^38] From there she went on to Scarborough.

Before Wilford left England he purchased several things Phoebe needed, including a clock for the house, shawls, linen, flannel, silk, sewing thread, stockings, handkerchief, a dress pattern, and a trunk. Friends also gave him similar things as gifts, and after he arrived in New York City on May 20, he shipped some of them to her. Nothing could have been more satisfying, however, than what happened in Scarborough on June 2. Wilford had remained in New York for a few days on Church business, but on June 1 he took a train to Boston and then an overnight steamer to Portland, Maine. The next morning he took a stage for Scarborough and that afternoon, he wrote in his journal, "I . . . was once more permitted to embrace my Wife & also a son which I had not before seen. This after being seperated from my family almost two years. It was truly a happy interview not ownly with my wife & Child but with the whole household." [^39]

BATHSHEBA W. BIGLER

Bathsheba W. Bigler met George A. Smith when he was on his first mission, and he was there when she was baptized in Shinnsten, Virginia (now in West Virginia), on August 21, 1837. Her mother was baptized the same day, one sister had been baptized three days earlier, and her father and other family members united with the Church shortly thereafter. The Biglers soon joined the Saints in Missouri, where young Bathsheba and George met again, fell in love, and, on January 21, 1838, agreed to be married exactly three years from then. [^40] The mission of the Twelve, of course, made that impossible.

The tragic Mormon exodus from Missouri took Bathsheba's family to Quincy, Illinois, and there, shortly after George A. left for his mission, her father succumbed to the devastating epidemic of the ague that killed many Saints. In the spring of 1840 the family moved to Nauvoo, where Bathsheba's brother Jacob built a house. [^41]

Bathsheba eagerly awaited every letter from her missionary beau, but, she recalled later, by January 1840 she still "had not heard from the man I loved." She had sent news to him, nevertheless, via Lorenzo Snow. Not long after that a neighbor came to the house with a letter addressed to her and postmarked Liverpool. But the neighbor was a tease and held the letter out of reach as she "danced and sang for joy," knowing who it was from. Her pleading finally softened him, even drawing a few tears, and he gave her the long-awaited communication. Before George A. returned the following year, she had six such letters tucked away among her most "precious belongings." [^42]

On July 25, 1841, about six weeks after he arrived in Nauvoo, Bathsheba and George were married. She was nineteen years old; he was twenty-four.

JENNETTA RICHARDS RICHARDS

Willard Richards, also a bachelor when he went to England, married before returning home. The bittersweet story of his courtship of Jennetta Richards, their marriage, and their subsequent life together in England is such an integral part of the mission that it has already been told.

NANCY MARINDA JOHNSON HYDE

Nancy Marinda Johnson married Orson Hyde in 1834. A year later her husband, along with her brothers Luke and Lyman, became members of the newly formed Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Like Vilate Kimball, Marinda was a "missionary widow" twice while her husband traveled abroad, and the circumstances surrounding the earlier mission proved especially challenging. During the Kirtland crisis of 1837, Marinda saw both her husband and her brothers become disaffected. Orson was quickly reconciled, however, and in June he accompanied Heber C. Kimball on the first mission to England. Marinda remained in Kirtland to care for her three-week-old baby girl and face family turmoil alone. (Although Luke Johnson later returned to the Church, Lyman never did.)

Orson returned to Kirtland, Ohio, in May 1838, just in time to gather up his family and join the general exodus to northern Missouri. Soon after their summer arrival, Marinda once again was forced to assume primary responsibility for the family after Orson became ill with a "bilious fever" that incapacitated him for several months. Still very sick during the dissent and mobbings that erupted in the fall, Orson again became disaffected, further adding to Marinda's burdens. The Hydes remained behind when the Saints were driven from Missouri.

By the time Orson had spiritually and physically recovered enough to move his family to Illinois in mid 1839, his fellow apostles were already preparing to leave for England. His late arrival and renewed illness kept him in Nauvoo when his quorum departed, so Orson was with Marinda in December for the birth of their second daughter. Subsequently, however, Marinda was left to manage alone longer than any of the other apostles' wives. In April 1840, Orson left Nauvoo to fill a special mission to Palestine with John E. Page. He spent nearly ten months traveling to the east coast, preaching, raising money, and waiting for Elder Page until finally, in February 1841, he set sail without Page. After meeting briefly with the other apostles in England, he resumed his journey to Palestine at the same time most of the Twelve sailed for America.

Though details are not known, clearly Marinda faced daunting challenges at home. In December 1841, a few months after the other apostles had returned from their mission, the Prophet Joseph Smith by revelation asked the Ebenezer Robinson family to care for Sister Hyde and her children "that she should have a better place prepared for her . . . in order that her life may be spared." [^43] In December 1842 Elder Hyde finally returned to Marinda and his two daughters in Nauvoo.

CONCLUSION

Too often the lives and struggles of the women of the Church have been left unsung, and that is true of the lives of those who waited, prayed, and suffered while their apostle-husbands were in England. But it was not just their waiting and suffering that mattered, so far as the history of the Church is concerned. These steadfast women were very much a part of the struggling community of Saints, growing daily, who helped turn the uninviting swamplands of Commerce and vicinity into the beginnings of "Nauvoo the Beautiful" that their husbands saw when they returned two years later. While the apostles were building the kingdom of God in Great Britain, their wives and sweethearts were struggling to build a new gathering place and a new temple-city in America. In some ways their task was the more difficult and their success perhaps the more remarkable.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, August 19, 1840, Heber C. Kimball Collection.
[^2] The Book of Mormon reports that three of the twelve Nephite disciples chosen by Christ to lead his Church on the American continent were promised that they would never taste of death but should "behold all the doings of the Father unto the children of men" and finally "be changed in the twinkling of an eye from mortality to immortality" at the Second Coming of Christ (3 Nephi 28:6-8). This has given rise to the belief among the Mormons that, at times, one or more of these prophets have been seen by and given messages to someone in the Church.
[^3] Willard Richards to Brigham Young, October 24, 1840, Brigham Young Papers; Willard Richards to Brigham Young, August 22, 1840. Willard had opened Mary Ann's letter to Brigham because Brigham was in Preston when the letter came to Manchester. The quotation comes from Willard's report to Brigham.
[^4] Orson Pratt to George A. Smith and Wilford Woodruff, November 2, 1840 (Appendix B, Document 16).
[^5] Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, November 23, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^6] George D. Watt and Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, December 22, 1840, George A. Smith Collection.
[^7] Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, February 1, 1841, George A. Smith Collection.
[^8] Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, February 8, 1841, George A. Smith Collection (Appendix B, Document 24).
[^9] Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, March 20, 1841, George A. Smith Collection.
[^10] Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, November 23, 1840. Along the edge of the page, Taylor commented that some of them might start for Nauvoo in April.
[^11] John Taylor to Leonora Taylor, February 13, 1841, John Taylor Collection.
[^12] Quoted in John Taylor to George A. Smith, January 14, 1841, George A. Smith Collection.
[^13] Brigham Young to Mary Ann Young, October 16, 1840.
[^14] Brigham Young to Mary Ann Young, January 15, 1840.
[^15] The letter arrived in London on February 6, but since Brigham Young was not there Elder Woodruff read it. Woodruff, Journal, February 6, 1841, 2:39.
[^16] Ibid., February 6, 1841, 2:39 and February 15, 1841, 2:47.
[^17] Joseph Smith to the Twelve, December 15, 1840, as cited in Millennial Star 1 (March 1841): 266. Wilford Woodruff apparently did not read the letter until March 25, when he saw it published in the Star. Woodruff, Journal, March 25, 1841, 2:72-73.
[^18] Wilford Woodruff to George A. Smith, February 12, 1841, George A. Smith Collection.
[^19] Lorenzo Snow to George A. Smith, February 17, 1841.
[^20] Joseph Smith to the Twelve, December 15, 1840, as cited in Millennial Star 1 (March 1841): 266. See also Times and Seasons 2 (January 1, 1841): 258.
[^21] Parley P. Pratt to Sidney Rigdon, January 8, 1841, Times and Seasons 2 (April 1, 1841): 364-65.
[^22] Woodruff, Journal, February 2, 1841, 2:35-36.
[^23] Heber C. Kimball to Vilate Kimball, March 14, 1841, Heber C. Kimball Collection.
[^24] George A. Smith to Bathsheba W. Bigler, March 6, 1841, George A. Smith Collection.
[^25] Woodruff, Journal, March 28, 1841, 2:74-76; Smith, "History," March 22-28, 1841. George A. Smith's letter read: "This is to certify that Elder G. A. Smith has faithfully laboured among us in all humility and meekness; and that we feel grateful to the Lord for his goodness in sending him among us. And we hereby recommend him as a Faithful Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ and a Shining Ornament to his Profession" (Certificate found in George A. Smith Collection).
[^26] George A. Smith to the Editor, April 11, 1840, Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 306.
[^27] Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, March 20, 1841.
[^28] Reuben Hedlock to George A. Smith, February 12, 1841, George A. Smith Collection.
[^29] Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 302.
[^30] Woodruff, Journal, February 26—March 30, 1841, 2:52-76; Wilford Woodruff to the Editor, April 1, 1841, Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 305-6.
[^31] Fielding, Diary, 104-5.
[^32] Young, Diary, April 1, 1841. When Young was informed in early March of the arrival of Hyde and George J. Adams, his next thought was "but whare is Elder Page." Page never left America. Not certain Hyde would remain in England long, Young asked Richards to let him know where Hyde would be and how long: "let me know for I due not want to mis of him. . . . if nessary I will come emeditly" (Brigham Young to Willard Richards, March 5, 1841, Brigham Young Papers).
[^33] John E. Page and William Smith, it will be remembered, had failed to respond to the call to preach abroad, and the vacancy created by the death of David W. Patten was only then being filled in Nauvoo. Lyman Wight, called to the Quorum in early 1841, was ordained by Joseph Smith in Nauvoo on April 8, 1841.
[^34] Woodruff, Journal, April 2, 1841 (inserted after April 5), 2:78.
[^35] Woodruff, Journal, April 2, 1841, 2:77. As he had in October, Young prepared himself a brief agenda of "busness for the councel of the twelve . . . a peace prapared for the Star for to govern the getherin of the saints from Urop—an agent at L. pool for to conduct the saints—another Patrick [patriarch] ordained. . . . the Elders are not Fathers but midwifes high Preast[s] to be ordained." See Young, Diary, entry just before March 31, 1841, Brigham Young Papers. All of these items were taken care of between April 2 and 15, 1841.
[^36] Ibid., April 5, 1841, 2:78. The "perfect union & harmony" noted here was the ideal, of course, but not always achieved. These were strong-willed and independent men and occasional clashes or tension were to be expected. For example, see the hint of this in Brigham Young to Willard Richards and Wilford Woodruff, May 24, 1840, Brigham Young Papers, or Young's brief reference to Richards, March 1, 1841, Brigham Young Papers, that "br Pratt and famely are well he has got over all his feelings about Books."
[^37] These totals are from the representations in the minutes published in the Star, figures that Young and others include in their published histories. In addition, approximately eight hundred had emigrated and were not counted here for a total membership present and emigrated of 6,614 plus 50 not in branches, or 6,664. Subtracting from that the first representation of 1,541 leaves an increase in one year of 5,133 while the apostles often talked of "between 6 and 7,000." Part of this discrepancy may be accounted for by tallying those substantial numbers baptized by Taylor and Woodruff before April 1840; no doubt there were also many dozens if not hundreds cut off during the year, although no totals are available. It would seem that the total number of converts was closer to 6,000 than 7,000.
[^38] Minutes in Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 301-5.
[^39] Minutes, April 6, 1841, Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 304-5.
[^40] Woodruff, Journal, April 7, 1841, 2:86.
[^41] Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 309-12. No doubt thinking of their own experiences in Kirtland and Missouri, they defined such a spirit as one "which introduces rebellion, confusion, misrule, and disunion, and would, if suffered to exist among us, destroy" the union and spirit and power which are associated with the priesthood and can only exist with the humble and meek.
[^42] William Miller to Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, August 15, 1841, in Times and Seasons 3 (November 15, 1841): 598.
[^43] Woodruff, Journal, April 15-16, 1841, 2:88-90; Willard Richards, Diary, April 20, 1841; Smith, "History," April 16, 1841. Young's later reminiscent account of this has the ship waiting even longer, and Smith says that originally it was to sail on April 12. Young also adds that the "agents of the vessel said such a thing had never been done before, but they were urgent and anxious to oblige us" because of past business and future prospects. See Discourse by Brigham Young, July 17, 1870, Journal of Discourses 13:212.
