David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

Chapter 12

THE APOSTLES RETURN TO AMERICA

The apostles were prepared to stay in Great Britain as long as Joseph Smith deemed necessary, but they also longed for home and, at times, allowed themselves the luxury of thinking they might leave soon. Heber C. Kimball even told Vilate in August 1840 that they might return that fall, if the Lord willed, but hastened to add that he did not yet feel at liberty to do so. "When I dow," he emphasized, "I shall come home as quick as wind and steam will carry me. So be of good cheer my dear Vilate we shall soon see each other." [^1] The apostles wrote to Joseph Smith, asking about returning in the spring, and by early 1841, even before they had an answer, that had become their plan.

In Nauvoo, meanwhile, their wives contended with rumor and heresay that the Twelve would soon return. As early as July 1840, some even heard rumors that Joseph had been visited by a Nephite [^2] who had been in England and told him that the work would be short and successful there, that great troubles were about to commence, and that great things would be accomplished within twelve months. About the same time, Mary Ann Young went to talk to Joseph Smith about a rumor that "the Presidency are about to send for the Elders to come home." He quickly squelched the gossip and, as Mary Ann reported to Brigham Young, "he said there was no such thing as sending for you." As for herself, she told her husband, she felt "as though I would rather do any way than have you come home until you have done the will of God." [^3]

Parley P. Pratt and Willard Richards had their families with them, but as the year 1840 drew to a close, the other six apostles were sometimes cruelly torn between their yearning for home and their urge to continue in Britain, for they truly exulted in the work. "You ask me what I think about going home but I will assure you that it is a hard question," Orson Pratt responded to Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith on November 2. "I hardly know how to answer it for I am in a strait betwixt not only two but many things for I am exceedingly anxious to see my family & I am exceedingly anxious to continue labouring in the vinyard." Musing that he sometimes thought of going to get his family, he turned the question back to his two colleagues by asking what they intended to do. [^4] But whenever they left, he observed later in the month, he thought they should all leave together. [^5]

Orson even joked about his dilemma. He expected to see home sometime that century, he quipped to George A. Smith in December, [^6] and several weeks later he found himself jovial enough to play word tricks in his correspondence. Instead of signing a February 1 letter to Elder Smith with his name or his initials, he playfully spelled out his initials: "I am as ever Oh! Pea." [^7] A week later he wrote again, signing the letter the same way but also telling George A. that he had definitely decided to preach his farewell sermon on March 28, go to Manchester for the April conference, and then "the first good ship that sails from Liverpool for N. York I intend shall carry me & all this if the Lord will." He pressed George A. to make up his mind, too, telling him that without question Brigham Young and others were going. "Come Bro. Geo. put on your thinking cap," he prodded his young colleague. [^8] His letter of March 20 carried more wry humor. "My health is good, and my spirits is up, my mind is much set upon going home, which fills me with a longing disire for the time to come when I shall set sail," he said. He closed with an amusing play on what would have been simply "To G. A. S." from "O. P." Instead, the augmented initials read "Give, All, Some Oatmeal Pancakes." [^9] Thinking seriously of going home clearly put Orson Pratt in a merry mood.

By November John Taylor was thinking he might return to the "western praries" in the spring, [^10] and when he wrote to Leonora in February, he, too, was in a playful mood. After he and his companions arrived in Pittsburgh, he teased, they would not only inquire the way to Nauvoo but also ask if there were any women who wanted husbands. "If we meet with any we shall probably get married for a while." The humor, of course, was an effort to reassure his wife that he would not leave again for some time to come. "You know," he continued, "the law of the Israelites was that when a young man married he was not to leave home or go to war for twelve months & surely the Law of Israel should be as binding as the laws of the Medes and Persians." [^11]

Other missionaries, too, were homesick, and John Taylor must have smiled when he received a letter in January from Elder Reuben Hedlock hinting that he was anxious to go home but still not willing to admit that he was sitting on his trunk. "I expect to spend many months in this City [Glasgow]," Hedlock wrote, "yet I may see home sometime in 1841 but if not I have strong hopes of arriving before the close of the nineteenth century." [^12]

Brigham Young wrote to Mary Ann in October that scarcely a night went by that he did not dream of America and his friends. [^13] On January 15 he wrote her that the Twelve planned to meet with other Church officers on April 6 to arrange the affairs of the Church so they could leave. "I think we shall start for home then," he said, "and make ouer way as fast as we can." [^14] He then wrote his fellow apostles confirming the decision. With many branches established, local leadership firmly in place, dozens of missionaries in the field, the publishing program nearly complete, and Parley P. Pratt returned with his family to oversee the mission, there was little to keep the rest of the Quorum of the Twelve in Britain.

Joseph Smith, meanwhile, after considering the inquiries he had received from the Twelve, wrote a long letter on December 15 calling them home. Though they did not receive the letter for more than two months, they received other confirmation that their plans were in accord with the Prophet's. Early in February they learned from a December 25 letter from Brigham Young's wife that Joseph Smith was writing the Twelve, telling them to hold a conference in the spring, ordain whatever missionaries they thought wise, and then return to Nauvoo. [^15]

Apprehension over a possible war also affected the apostles' thoughts of leaving. On February 15 Heber C. Kimball received a letter from Vilate, dated December 30, saying that Joseph Smith had written for the Twelve to come home immediately for their own safety, for great judgments were at the door. In commenting on Vilate's letter, Wilford Woodruff expressed his own foreboding that troubles might soon arise between England and America. [^16] When Joseph's letter finally arrived the apostles read the following:

I have reflected upon the subject some time, and am of the opinion that it would be wisdom in you to make preparations to leave the scene of your labours in the spring. Having carried the testimony to that land, and numbers having received it; consequently the leaven can now spread without you being obliged to stay—another thing, there has been some whisperings of the spirit that there will be some agitations, some excitements, and some trouble in the land in which you are now labouring. I would therefore say in the mean time, be diligent, organize the churches and let every one stand in his proper place, so that those who cannot come with you in the spring, may not be left as sheep without a shepherd. [^17]

Tension had been brewing between the United States and England for nearly three years. During a small uprising of Canadians against the British in 1837, William Alexander MacKenzie recruited a number of sympathetic Americans and hired an American-owned steamboat, the Caroline, to carry supplies from New York. Canadian authorities decided to prevent such use of the boat and, on December 29, sent out fifty men under the command of a naval officer with orders to destroy it. The Caroline, however, was not in Canadian waters but tied up to a dock on the New York side of the Niagara River. Nevertheless, the Canadians raided it, killed one American and wounded several others, set fire to the boat, and towed it out into the river to sink.

Americans were outraged, and Secretary of State John Forsythe demanded redress. The British government replied that the raiders were merely acting in self-defense, for they had a right to prevent the Caroline from being used against them. The problem smoldered, along with other tensions between the two countries, for more than two years. Then, on November 12, 1840, Alexander McCloud was arrested by New York authorities and charged with the murder of the American on the Caroline. British authorities angrily demanded McCloud's release on the grounds, that those who raided the Caroline did so under orders, recognized in international law, and that as an individual McCloud could not be held responsible. American authorities refused to accept any such argument, and for most of 1841 feelings ran high, with people on both sides of the Atlantic calling for war. McCloud was finally tried and acquitted in a New York court.

The apostles took seriously the possibility of war. In a letter to George A. Smith dated February 12, 1841, Wilford Woodruff referred to "great excitement" in Parliament and throughout London because of McCloud's arrest. The people of New York, he said, were determined to hang McCloud, but if that should happen, then England was determined "to have redress at the cannon mouth." In that case, he opined, "America will learn by experience that it is no Joke to have a war with England." [^18] In London, meanwhile, Lorenzo Snow observed, "It is believed by many in this city that a war is about to break out between England and America." [^19]

Joseph's letter confirmed the plans the apostles already had made for returning home in April, and also reflected his complete satisfaction with all the Twelve had accomplished: "It is, likewise, very satisfactory to my mind that there has been such a good understanding between you, and that the Saints have so cheerfully hearkened to counsel and vied with each other in this labour of love, and in the promotion of truth and righteousness; this is as it should be in the church of Jesus Christ; unity is strength." [^20]

Parley P. Pratt, meanwhile, was delighted at the prospect of remaining in England. As he wrote to Sidney Rigdon in January: "I often feel as though I should like to be in the midst of our old friends in the west, but when it will be my lot I know not. I am resigned to the kind of life I am now living; I can truly say that I was never more contented, or more happy than of late." [^21]

THE LAST FEW WEEKS

Heber C. Kimball and Wilford Woodruff spent their last few weeks in London strengthening the Saints, taking care of last-minute details, and buying gifts and gadgets for home. As noted earlier, they also secured a British copyright for the Book of Mormon and published their Address to the Citizens of London. After they sat several times to have their portraits painted, James Albion made gilt frames for the 20 X 20-1/4-inch canvases and presented them as gifts to the apostles. [^22] On February 16 Heber and Wilford had their last official meeting with the London Saints. "It was a melting time," wrote Woodruff. The next day a group of Saints filled their sitting room, bringing gifts of money and presents for the apostles' wives and children.

Heber left London on February 20. He spent a week in Bedford, preaching every night, and was "thronged all the time" with Saints. There he found the Reverend Timothy Matthews, brother-in-law to Joseph Fielding, stirring up confusion and trouble. His encounter with the elders in 1837 had convinced Matthews of the necessity of baptism by immersion, but he had refused to receive baptism at their hands and eventually simply baptized himself. Now he was calling himself a Latter-day Saint and preaching the "first principles" of the Gospel much as the elders did. Outraged by his "abominations and deceptions," Heber spoke out publicly against him. Leaving the town "in an uproar," he made his way to Birmingham, where he held a conference, and then to Staffordshire, where he worked with George A. Smith. On March 6 he went on to Manchester and, five days later, to Liverpool. [^23]

After Heber C. Kimball left, Wilford Woodruff remained another few days with the London Saints, preached one last time on February 25, and then departed the next day. He traveled 120 miles to Bristol, where he had a pleasant reunion with Thomas Kington and his family.

George A. Smith, preparing to leave the Potteries, wrote to Bathsheba on March 6 of his plans. Still not sure where his financial support would come from, he quipped, "When I get to New York I Expect to have to Preach my pasage home." [^24] He spent the next three weeks writing letters, holding conferences, appointing and ordaining more Church officers, and making final visits to the various towns where he had so many friends. Some of them gave him presents, and when he took leave of the Saints at Leek on March 22, most were in tears. Three days later Elder Woodruff joined him at Hanley, and on March 27 the two met with the local Church council which, among other things, raised l 4 to help George A. get home. The next day the two apostles conducted a conference where they were given letters of recommendation, "manifesting that the Church in this region accept of their labours & considered that they have filled their mission with honour & Dignity." [^25] On March 30 they took a coach to Manchester.

In a final letter to the Saints, dated April 11, George A. Smith no doubt reflected the feeling of all the apostles as they recalled the year gone by:

Although I have suffered much bodily affliction during the past year, the Lord has blessed my labours abundantly, and I can say I never enjoyed myself better in the discharge of my duty, than I have on this mission. Among the greatest blessings I have enjoyed, has been the privilege of attending four general conferences, and meeting in council with the 12. I can assure you that a meeting with those in whose company I have suffered so much tribulation for the gospels sake, both at home and abroad, by land and sea, is to me a privilege indeed. [^26]

In Edinburgh, Orson Pratt looked back with well-deserved satisfaction on all that had happened since the day he knelt on Arthur's Seat and prayed for two hundred converts. "The work of the Lord is rolling on in this City," he happily proclaimed on March 20. A little over a week earlier he had baptized a Campbellite preacher, and during that week he had baptized eight more people, bringing his total to 186. [^27] He preached his farewell sermon to the Scottish Saints on March 28, [^28] and two days later he left. At the Manchester conference on April 6 he reported 203 members in Edinburgh. [^29]

Wilford Woodruff spent the month of March slowly making his way to Manchester via various branches of the Church. In Bristol he discovered that Thomas Kington had founded a branch of some thirteen converts. He stayed there nearly a week, preaching three times and baptizing one person, then went on to Wales, where he preached at Monmouth and attended a meeting of the Garway Conference. On March 9 he arrived in Herefordshire, where generous Saints not only welcomed him warmly but also contributed money to help him along the way.

Leaving Herefordshire was particularly difficult for Wilford Woodruff. After the Gadfield Elm conference on March 15, the Saints crowded around him for hours seeking all kinds of advice and direction, and tears filled their eyes as they parted. The same thing happened a week later at the Standley Hill conference, where "I spent about three hours in shaking hands with the Saints healing the sick, giving council concerning a thousand questions & things that were presented before me by the multitude which surrounded me. Many were in tears as they parted from me." On March 25 he was in the Staffordshire Potteries, where he and George A. Smith attended another conference and baptized seven people. On March 30 the two went on to Manchester. [^30]

On Thursday, March 4, Joseph Fielding left Preston for Liverpool, on his way to the Isle of Man. As he was crossing over into Burlington Street he said to himself, "Now if Br. Hyde were here how pleased I should be." Orson Hyde, Fielding knew, would be passing through England on his way to Jerusalem. It seemed an answer to Fielding's prayers when he stopped at 72 Burlington Street and was told that Elder Hyde indeed had come, along with George J. Adams. They had arrived the day before and were attending a meeting at the Arrington home, where Peter Melling was giving patriarchal blessings. Fielding hurried there and found them, postponed his trip to the Isle of Man, and accompanied them to Preston the next day. The Saints remembered well Elder Hyde's 1837-38 mission among them and were elated at his return. [^31]

CONFERENCE WEEK

April 1, 1841, began a week of both reunion and farewell. That day the apostles converged in Manchester to begin their final councils in England and to say good-bye to the Saints in conference. Brigham was "much rejoiced," he noted in his diary, to see all his brethren, but especially Elder Hyde. [^32] It was a fitting climax to the mission of the Twelve to Britain when, the first week in April, all nine apostles—the largest number to meet together since the days of Kirtland—met in council. [^33] Unified as they had never been before, they no doubt each felt much as Wilford Woodruff felt:

To meet once more in council after a long seperation and having passed through many sore and grieveous trials exposing our lives & our characters to the slander and violence of wicked & murderous men, caused our hearts to swell with gratitude to God for his providential care over us. [^34]

In its broader setting, their year of labor had caused only a little extra turbulence in the agitated waters of British religious history. They had neither overturned the churches nor shocked the nation. From the perspective of Latter-day Saint history, however, their mission had been momentous. Building on a small but solid foundation, in a remarkably short time they had erected an impressive religious structure, including an organization for emigration that would endure for more than fifty years. Some of their converts would desert them, but more would remain. Many would follow them to a new life in the New World. In all this they left an established pattern for more missionaries, more converts, more emigrants.

The apostles met in formal council on April 2, 3, and 5, though Orson Pratt arrived only in time for the second day's meeting. Among other things, they accepted the labors of Brigham Young and the publication committee and agreed that Parley P. Pratt, who would remain in England, should manage the Millennial Star and do additional publishing if needed. They appointed Amos Fielding to superintend emigration and set April 17 as the day to sail for home.

The Twelve also made an important procedural decision with respect to the conference to be held on Tuesday, April 6. Rather than opening the meeting to business from the floor, the Twelve decided that the Quorum itself would make whatever proposals were deemed necessary and then call upon the conference for a sustaining vote. Conference members could vote either way, but this combination of authoritative direction from the Twelve with an opportunity for democratic acceptance or rejection, already tried in previous local conferences in Britain, soon became the general pattern for conducting Church business.

"We had a good time," Wilford Woodruff observed at the end of the first day of Quorum meetings. "Unity prevailed." [^35] By April 5 he was even more delighted with the harmony of his quorum. "Perfect union & harmony prevailed in all the deliberations of our councils for the last four days." [^36]

On Sunday, April 4, the apostles met with the Manchester Saints, and all nine bore fervent testimonies of the authenticity of the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the prophetic calling of Joseph Smith.

The general conference of April 6 was the happy culmination of all the Twelve had worked for since their first official meeting in England just a year before. Conducting and presiding, President Brigham Young organized the conference, opened with prayer, and then called for membership reports from the various representatives of the Church throughout Britain. The tally showed a total of 5,864 members, an increase of nearly 2,200 since the last conference and more than 4,300 since the previous April. [^37] There were also several priesthood ordinations, including that of a second patriarch for England, and the farewell addresses of several of the Twelve. Most important, the Council organized all the churches in Great Britain into conferences and appointed presiding elders over them, [^38] and then placed Parley P. Pratt to preside over the whole.

A large, beautifully decorated cake graced the evening meeting where hymns and "a powerful and general feeling of delight" animated the seven hundred in attendance. Joseph Fielding thought the cake, a gift sent to the Twelve from New York, a fitting symbol "of the good things of that land from whence it came, and from whence they had received the fulness of the gospel." After Brigham Young and William Miller sang the hymn, "Adieu my dear brethren," President Young blessed the congregation and dismissed it. [^39]

HOME AGAIN

The apostles spent another twelve days in Manchester, visiting with the Saints, preaching on the Sabbath, and attending to final matters of business. On April 7 they unitedly blessed Orson Hyde for his mission to Palestine. [^40] They also completed for publication in the Star "An Epistle of the Twelve" to the Saints throughout Great Britain. There they expressed thanks for the diligence of the Saints and warned them to remember "that which we have ever taught . . . both by precept and example . . . to beware of an aspiring spirit." [^41] The epistle also announced the appointments of Levi Richards and Lorenzo Snow as traveling counselors to assist Elder Pratt and instructed the Saints in detail about the gathering and emigration. Their work concluded, the apostles took the train for Liverpool on April 15, arriving just in time to join with two hundred Saints in a "tea meeting" in the Music Hall.

Parting was difficult for the Saints as well as for the apostles. The year had changed all their lives, nurtured their personal development, and forged lasting bonds of love and respect. William Miller expressed the conviction of thousands when he said to Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball: "I know that you are his [God's] servants to minister salvation to the nations of the earth." [^42] The influence of the apostles had been profound, and the throngs that gathered round them as they left smothered them with the tearful farewells reserved only for the most beloved of friends.

The apostles were not the only Latter-day Saints preparing to embark from Liverpool, for some 120 converts were also there, ready to emigrate. Clearly, the Mormon emigration set in motion by the Twelve had the potential of providing a lucrative business for shippers, and the owners of the Rochester, one of the fastest ships plying the Atlantic, had already profited from it. Therefore, when the apostles approached them on April 16 saying that they could not leave for another five days, the owners were happy to oblige. They even gave the Twelve a special rate and reserved for them the use of the aft quarterdeck. [^43]

The apostles spent Sunday and Monday, April 18 and 19, preparing to leave and giving instructions to some of the Saints and priesthood leaders in Liverpool. Grateful Saints continued to shower them with presents. One of Wilford Woodruff's converts, a man who had already helped many British Saints migrate, gave him a purse containing l 50 in gold, or about $250. Characteristically, he shared it, giving l 5 each to Elders Young, Richards, and Smith. [^44] None of the Quorum left England with empty pockets.

Finally, on Tuesday, the apostles and the emigrating Saints loaded their baggage and provisions aboard ship. With them, too, were Jennetta Richards and little Heber John. While Parley P. Pratt, Orson Hyde, Joseph Fielding, and a "multitude of Saints" ashore waved good-bye, the Rochester moved out into the River Mersey and dropped anchor. The ship was like a beehive that afternoon and the next morning, with everyone busily stowing baggage and nailing or lashing it down in preparation for the ocean crossing. At noon on Wednesday the sails were unfurled, and the Rochester glided majestically out to sea. [^45]

To the apostles, the contrast between their arrival in England and their departure was remarkable. A year earlier they were penniless, poorly dressed, and most of them strangers in a foreign land. When they left, Wilford Woodruff wrote by way of comparison, they were with "a ship load of Saints & all that we need of this worlds goods to make us comfortable, & having an influence sufficient to detain a ship a day or two on our account. Truly the Lord hath blessed us in a manner not looked for." [^46]

Any expectation the Saints might have had for a calm and pleasant voyage to America were quickly put to rest. Contrary winds blew daily, and at midnight on April 24 they increased to gale strength and blew off the fore topsail. The next day the sea seemed "mountains high," and as the monstrous waves battered the Rochester, nearly all the passengers became ill. On the 28th, the storm became so severe that bunks crashed down and baggage broke loose, threatening to crush the emigrants before it could be lashed down again. After everyone scurried to put things back in order, the exhausted apostles unitedly sought the intervention of the Lord. The next day they had bright sun and a fair wind for the first time since leaving Liverpool. This was not the last storm they encountered, but after this one passed, the winds at least blew in the right direction. Brigham Young confided in his diary that he could not endure many more such voyages and "ware it not for the power of god & his tendere mercy I should despare." [^47]

The Rochester arrived in New York on May 20, and three days later, on Sunday, the Twelve met with a "large congregation of citizens." There Elders Young, Kimball, Pratt and Woodruff gave an account of their mission.

The apostles then separated to take various routes home. Elders Young, Kimball, and Taylor left New York on June 4 and arrived in Nauvoo on July 1. [^48] Elder Richards, Jennetta, and their baby remained for a time in the East, visiting among the Saints and doing missionary work. They arrived in Nauvoo at dawn on August 16. Elder Woodruff, his wife already in the East with relatives, also preached and visited in the East for several weeks. He and his family returned to Nauvoo on October 6. Orson Pratt remained in New York long enough to reprint Remarkable Visions and then returned to Nauvoo in mid July. George A. Smith proceeded homeward as best he could, but he did not have the means to go to Nauvoo immediately. In Philadelphia he met the two members of his Quorum who, two years earlier, had seen too many obstacles in the way of accepting their foreign mission call. They continued to feel the same. He preached with William Smith for several days, and he urged John E. Page to leave immediately and overtake Orson Hyde in Europe. Even though he apparently had means enough, Page still declined. George A. finally arrived in Nauvoo on July 14 and immediately went to visit Bathsheba. The two were married six weeks later. [^49]

Though no contemporary description of their various Nauvoo reunions is extant, it is easy to imagine tears of joy, long hours of conversation and renewal of acquaintance, and expressions of thanksgiving—all of which soon gave way to labors on house and farm. In later years Brigham Young recounted his feelings to the Saints. He was overjoyed, he said, to be with Mary Ann again and with their young ones—little Emma, the twins Brigham and Mary Ann, his son Joseph A.—and with his two older daughters Vilate and Elizabeth. At last he could do more than pray for their welfare. To the Prophet's inquiry about how he would live, Brigham answered directly: "I will go to work and get a living." But not yet. He had enough money left to buy one barrel of flour. He would work on the cabin, improve the garden, and sit amidst his family eating bread until the barrel was empty. That would be soon enough to go out and find work. [^50]

Joseph Smith visited Brigham Young at his home a few days after his return to Nauvoo. While there, he delivered the word of the Lord:

Dear and well-beloved brother, Brigham Young, verily thus saith the Lord unto you: My servant Brigham, it is no more required at your hand to leave your family as in times past, for your offering is acceptable to me.

I have seen your labor and toil in journeyings for my name.

I therefore command you to send my work abroad, and take especial care of your family from this time, henceforth and forever. Amen. [^51]

From England Brigham had written Mary Ann of his longing to return home and spend a "seson . . . with my famely ocaisonly." [^52] Now he and Mary Ann could take comfort in knowing that their labor and sacrifice was acceptable and that they could enjoy as a family the longed-for season of peace—even if that season was brief.

Orson Hyde, meanwhile, continued on to Palestine and then returned to Nauvoo in December, 1842. In England Parley P. Pratt continued publishing, preaching, and directing emigration. Early in 1842 he moved his office to Liverpool. In October he chartered a ship, the Emerald, for the passage to America of some 250 emigrating Saints, including his family and himself. They embarked October 29, leaving Thomas Ward, Lorenzo Snow, and Hiram Clark as the presidency of the mission. Sometime during the first week in February 1843, after eight days on horseback, Parley arrived in Nauvoo and set about preparing for his family's arrival. By mid April they had joined him in the city of the Saints. He was delighted with the Prophet's welcome: "God bless you, Bro. Parley." The last of the missionary-apostles was home. [^53]

Footnotes

Such things were quickly resolved, however, and all of the Twelve who comment on this period stress the unusual degree of harmony that prevailed. See, for example, John Taylor to Joseph Smith, February 3, 1841, in Times and Seasons 2 (May 1, 1841): 401. For George A. Smith's feelings about his fellow apostles, see his letter of April 11, 1841, in Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 306. For Heber C. Kimball's personal commitment to and desire for unity among the Twelve, see Kimball, Diary, January 1, 1841.

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 107:24,
[^2] Smith, History of the Church 2:193-98; Record of the Twelve, February 27, 1835, Church Archives.
[^3] As quoted in Esplin, "Emergence of Brigham Young," 157.
[^4] Smith, History of the Church 2:195-97.
[^5] For further comment on this, see Esplin, "Development of the Quorum of the Twelve," 72-73.
[^6] John Taylor to Joseph Smith, February 3, 1841, in Times and Seasons 2 (May 1, 1841): 401.
[^7] See Dennis, Welsh Mormon Writings.
[^8] For more detail see Whittaker, "Early Mormon Pamphleteering," 256-320.
[^9] The earliest lists were those Parley included on the last page of various issues of the Star or on the wrappers of each issue. The first such list was published in July 1841. See the Star 2 (July 1841): 48. In his July 6, 1840, letter to his wife Mary Ann, Parley spoke of his total immersion in the publishing business: "I am confined entirely at home as Editor of the 'Star' and publisher of the Hymn Book, B. of Mormon, and all our other Books. . . . [I] employ 3 women in my Back Room as folders." Parley said he had not left his house for more than twenty-four hours in three months! A list of early book agents in England for American LDS publications is in Times and Seasons 2 (April 15, 1841): 390.
[^10] The Star was issued monthly from May 1840 until June 1845 when it became semimonthly. In 1852 it began to appear weekly. In 1943 it became monthly again; and in 1970 it was discontinued when the Church consolidated all magazines. The larger impact is discussed in Crawley and Whittaker, Mormon Imprints, 1-13.
[^11] See Crawley, "Passage of Mormon Primitivism." Much of the discussion here is based on Crawley and Whittaker, Mormon Imprints, 11-13.
[^12] Spencer, Most Prominent Doctrines; O. Pratt, A Series of Pamphlets; O. Pratt, Seer; P. Pratt, Science of Theology; O. Pratt, [Tracts] by Orson Pratt; and Richards, Compendium of the Faith and Doctrines of the Church.
[^13] See Young, "History of Brigham Young"; Smith, History of the Church 4:389. In company with former apostle John F. Boynton, Johnson had traveled to Nauvoo earlier while the Twelve were still in England. See Kimball, Diary, January 28, 1841, where Kimball wrote after receiving a December 8, 1840, letter from his wife: "the tidings was good. and we felt to rejoice much to hear that John Boyington and Lymon [no doubt Lyman Johnson] and menny other pressious things." The entry is imperfect and the letter giving more details has not been located. Presumably these discussions helped heal feelings, although Lyman, unlike his brother Luke, never returned to the Church.
[^14] Smith, History of the Church 4:137.
[^15] Young, "History." Although this is a reminiscent account, contemporary accounts corroborate it.
[^16] Orson Hyde was on his way to the Holy Land, Parley P. Pratt presided in England, and John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff, and William Smith remained in the East. In April Lyman Wight had been selected to fill the vacancy in the Twelve, but there is no mention of his being present this day.
[^17] Smith, History of the Church 4:402-4; Young, "History." This explanation appears only in the published minutes. Compare with Nauvoo Minutes, August 16, 1841.
[^18] Smith, History of the Church 4:403. This is a fleshed out version of the unpublished minutes, which simply say that Joseph Smith indicated "that the twelve should be authorized to assist in managing the affairs of the Kingdom in this place [Nauvoo, church headquarters]. which he said was the duties of their office &c. Motioned seconded and carried that the quorum of the twelve be authorized to act in accordance with the instructions given by president Joseph Smith in regulating and superintending the affairs of the Church." See Nauvoo Minutes, August 16, 1841. This was the order suggested in the March 28, 1835, revelation to the Twelve but by assignment not implemented until this time. See D&C 107, especially verses 21-24.
[^19] Richards, Diary, expanded version, August 16, 1841. After Wilford Woodruff arrived in Nauvoo nearly two months later, he, too, wrote of the new responsibilities, though he emphasized their temporal aspects: "The temporal business of the Church is laid upon the hands of the Twelve" (Woodruff, Journal, October 8, 1841, 2:132-33).
[^20] For an overview of the enlarged role of the Twelve, see Esplin, "Joseph, Brigham and the Twelve," especially pp. 310-20.
[^21] For a review of the public involvements of the Twelve in Nauvoo, see Lyon, "Nauvoo and the Council of the Twelve," 167-205.
[^22] Joseph Smith to Mrs. Norman Buel, March 15, 1839, in Smith, History of the Church 3:286.
[^23] For a discussion of Joseph Smith's private introduction of these sacred things to a select group, see Quinn, "Latter-day Saint Prayer Circles," especially pages 83-96. For a discussion of the relationship of the introduction of temple ordinances to the succession of the Twelve, see Ehat, "Joseph Smith's Introduction of Temple Ordinances." See also letter of Orson Hyde to Ebenezer Robinson, 19 September 1844, in The Return 2 (April 1890): 253.
[^24] P. Pratt, "Proclamation," in Millennial Star 5 (March 1845): 149-53.
[^25] Woodruff, Journal, August 8, 1844, 2:435-36. See also Nauvoo Minutes, August 8, 1844.
[^26] Brigham Young to Vilate Young, August 11, 1844, Brigham Young Papers.
[^27] Orson Pratt to George A. Smith, March 20, 1841.
[^28] Reuben Hedlock to George A. Smith, February 12, 1841, George A. Smith Collection.
[^29] Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 302.
[^30] Woodruff, Journal, February 26—March 30, 1841, 2:52-76; Wilford Woodruff to the Editor, April 1, 1841, Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 305-6.
[^31] Fielding, Diary, 104-5.
[^32] Young, Diary, April 1, 1841. When Young was informed in early March of the arrival of Hyde and George J. Adams, his next thought was "but whare is Elder Page." Page never left America. Not certain Hyde would remain in England long, Young asked Richards to let him know where Hyde would be and how long: "let me know for I due not want to mis of him. . . . if nessary I will come emeditly" (Brigham Young to Willard Richards, March 5, 1841, Brigham Young Papers).
[^33] John E. Page and William Smith, it will be remembered, had failed to respond to the call to preach abroad, and the vacancy created by the death of David W. Patten was only then being filled in Nauvoo. Lyman Wight, called to the Quorum in early 1841, was ordained by Joseph Smith in Nauvoo on April 8, 1841.
[^34] Woodruff, Journal, April 2, 1841 (inserted after April 5), 2:78.
[^35] Woodruff, Journal, April 2, 1841, 2:77. As he had in October, Young prepared himself a brief agenda of "busness for the councel of the twelve . . . a peace prapared for the Star for to govern the getherin of the saints from Urop—an agent at L. pool for to conduct the saints—another Patrick [patriarch] ordained. . . . the Elders are not Fathers but midwifes high Preast[s] to be ordained." See Young, Diary, entry just before March 31, 1841, Brigham Young Papers. All of these items were taken care of between April 2 and 15, 1841.
[^36] Ibid., April 5, 1841, 2:78. The "perfect union & harmony" noted here was the ideal, of course, but not always achieved. These were strong-willed and independent men and occasional clashes or tension were to be expected. For example, see the hint of this in Brigham Young to Willard Richards and Wilford Woodruff, May 24, 1840, Brigham Young Papers, or Young's brief reference to Richards, March 1, 1841, Brigham Young Papers, that "br Pratt and famely are well he has got over all his feelings about Books."
[^37] These totals are from the representations in the minutes published in the Star, figures that Young and others include in their published histories. In addition, approximately eight hundred had emigrated and were not counted here for a total membership present and emigrated of 6,614 plus 50 not in branches, or 6,664. Subtracting from that the first representation of 1,541 leaves an increase in one year of 5,133 while the apostles often talked of "between 6 and 7,000." Part of this discrepancy may be accounted for by tallying those substantial numbers baptized by Taylor and Woodruff before April 1840; no doubt there were also many dozens if not hundreds cut off during the year, although no totals are available. It would seem that the total number of converts was closer to 6,000 than 7,000.
[^38] Minutes in Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 301-5.
[^39] Minutes, April 6, 1841, Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 304-5.
[^40] Woodruff, Journal, April 7, 1841, 2:86.
[^41] Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 309-12. No doubt thinking of their own experiences in Kirtland and Missouri, they defined such a spirit as one "which introduces rebellion, confusion, misrule, and disunion, and would, if suffered to exist among us, destroy" the union and spirit and power which are associated with the priesthood and can only exist with the humble and meek.
[^42] William Miller to Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, August 15, 1841, in Times and Seasons 3 (November 15, 1841): 598.
[^43] Woodruff, Journal, April 15-16, 1841, 2:88-90; Willard Richards, Diary, April 20, 1841; Smith, "History," April 16, 1841. Young's later reminiscent account of this has the ship waiting even longer, and Smith says that originally it was to sail on April 12. Young also adds that the "agents of the vessel said such a thing had never been done before, but they were urgent and anxious to oblige us" because of past business and future prospects. See Discourse by Brigham Young, July 17, 1870, Journal of Discourses 13:212.
[^44] Woodruff, Journal, April 19, 1841, 2:90-92.
[^45] Ibid., April 19-21, 1841 2:90-93; Fielding, Diary, 110. Having labored faithfully in Britain since 1837, Fielding remained several more months and then in the fall emigrated with his wife to Nauvoo.
[^46] Woodruff, Journal, April 16, 1841, 2:89-90. In a discourse of December 12, 1869, Journal of Discourses 13:160, Woodruff said they baptized "something like seven thousand people." For Young's reminiscent overviews of this mission, see discourses of July 17, 1870, Journal of Discourses 13:211-12 and August 31, 1856, Journal of Discourses 4:35-36.
[^47] Woodruff, Journal, April 24-29, 1841, 2:93-96; Young, Diary, entries around May 5, 1841.
[^48] Young, "History of Brigham Young," 2. Less than a week after parting, Young wrote a short letter to Richards telling him the least expensive way to travel on the canal and otherwise providing travel advice and information. He closed with the phrase he and Richards had used in their September 5, 1840, letter to Joseph and which had indeed become something of a motto for them in England: "I am as ever your Br. in the N[ew] Covenets and I say goe ahead" (Brigham Young to Willard Richards, June 9, 1841, Brigham Young Papers, emphasis added).
[^49] Woodruff, Journal, May 23 to June 4, 1841, 2:103-5; Smith, "History"; and Smith, History of the Church 4:372.
[^50] Discourse by Brigham Young, July 24, 1854, Journal of Discourses 2:19.
[^51] D&C 126 (July 9, 1841), emphasis added. Compare Young, "History of Brigham Young," 2.
[^52] Brigham Young to Mary Ann Young, June 12, 1840.
[^53] P. Pratt, Autobiography, 315-29.
