David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

Chapter 13

CONSEQUENCES

Two vital themes ran through the instructions given to the apostles when the Quorum of the Twelve was organized in the year 1835. First, though the Twelve were "equal in authority and power" to the First Presidency of the Church, their specific mission was to "build up the church, and regulate all the affairs of the same in all nations." [^1] Oliver Cowdery advised them to prepare for long periods away from home, for it was their duty to unlock the kingdom of heaven in foreign nations. [^2] "No man can do that thing but yourselves," Joseph Smith told them, and each of them had "the same authority in other nations that I have in this nation." [^3]

The second theme was personal humility and quorum unity. The Twelve must be one, "equal in bearing the keys of the Kingdom to all nations," Oliver Cowdery emphasized, and each must pray for the other. Unity and humility were necessary for their success, and the bonds of brotherhood should prevail above all else. [^4] Until the mission to England, however, the Quorum had seldom fulfilled this charge. [^5] Under Thomas Marsh it had often been contentious and divided and sometimes more concerned about prerogatives than about service. By 1841 that situation had changed dramatically, and the apostles returned from the British Isles stronger, more unified, and better prepared for new responsibilities. They had learned to rely on their God and on each other. They had increased in self-reliance and in confidence in one another. They had proved that they could work together in harmony. It was no coincidence that the nine apostles who first met as a quorum in Manchester in April 1841 soon became Joseph Smith's right hand in Nauvoo and eventually, as his successors, led the Latter-day Saint migration to the Great Basin. Thereafter these men remained unalterably united behind Joseph and his teachings, while those who refused to accept the foreign mission call eventually fell away. Like a refiner's fire, the mission abroad had molded them into a strong, cohesive body, admirably prepared for its new role in general Church leadership and administration. John Taylor, who came into the Quorum after Marsh's departure but knew of the discord and had even seen it during his early visit to Kirtland, was struck by the great harmony of the Twelve in England. "I am happy to state," he wrote to Joseph Smith on February 3, 1841, "that we have been united in our councils to the present time; that there has been no discordant feeling, nor jarring string." [^6]

In addition to this newfound unity, there were many long-range consequences of the mission to the British Isles, but two results of special significance warrant discussion here: (1) the effect of their publishing program, and (2) the effect of the mission on the future of the Quorum of the Twelve and its role in Church administration.

TO THE CORNERS OF THE EARTH: THE PUBLISHING LEGACY OF THE 1840-41 MISSION

Publication Efforts in EnglandHCThe publishing efforts of the Twelve in 1840 and 1841 were vital to their extraordinary success as missionaries. Converts came so rapidly after 1837 that they could not print literature fast enough to keep pace with the demand. One missionary in England wrote that the pamphlets he distributed had to be retrieved a short time later so they could be used again. Beyond that, however, the publishing begun in England had important consequences for the Church. Because they were both effective and the best available, Parley P. Pratt's pamphlets influenced much subsequent Latter-day Saint literature, especially that of his brother Orson, whose own pamphlets were printed in great numbers in the late 1840s and the 1850s. Once a strong foothold was established in England, missionary work spread into Wales, where Dan Jones and John Davis issued more than one hundred items in Welsh, some of which were reprints of items published earlier by the Twelve. [^7] Missionary work also spread onto the European continent and, through the international routes and bases of the British Empire, to South Africa, India, Australia, and Asia—literally, to the four corners of the earth. [^8] Much of the literature taken by the missionaries to these far-flung places originated during the mission of the Twelve to England.

Another consequence of the publishing begun by the apostles was the rise of Liverpool as a center for Latter-day Saint publishing. Since it was the port of embarkation for emigration, in April 1842 Parley P. Pratt moved his office there, so that emigration and publication could be more easily coordinated. The growth of missions outside England after 1845 placed a steady demand on Liverpool to supply printed matter. By 1852 Liverpool was the book supply depot for Mormonism throughout the world, supplying not only the needs of the British mission but also handling orders from missionaries in such places as New York, St. Louis, Salt Lake City, San Francisco, Hawaii, Australia, India, and South Africa.

One reason Liverpool became so important for publications was that publishing costs were much lower in England than in America. Also, as headquarters for the British Mission and, after 1849, for the Perpetual Emigration Fund Company, Liverpool had the leadership and the capital to be the center of LDS publishing. Both the Millennial Star and the British Mission president assumed great influence in the publishing business. The Star announced new publications, and many were first excerpted or printed whole in its pages. The Star also regularly gave details on the value of the press in missionary work. By the 1850s catalogues of LDS publications were being separately printed—a further witness to the standardization and centralization of the Latter-day Saint press in England. [^9]

Another evidence of the significance of the foundation laid by the Twelve in 1840 and 1841 is seen in the great importance of the Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star in Mormon history and thought. It became the longest-running periodical in LDS history, ceasing publication only in 1970. [^10] Without it the history of the LDS British Mission, of other foreign missions in the nineteenth century, or even of the Church itself simply could not be written. It regularly provided the informational and inspirational glue to cement together the Church in Europe and other parts of the world. The spirit of Parley P. Pratt, and especially his missionary fervor, continued in its pages for decades after he left England.

Throughout the nineteenth century, the official editions of the hymnal and the standard works descended from their earlier British editions. The Pearl of Great Price, canonized in 1880 as the fourth of the standard works of the Church, was first published in England in 1851. The first Latter-day Saint biography, Lucy Mack Smith's Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith the Prophet and His Progenitors for Many Generations was published there in 1853, and numerous other important LDS works came from the British press over the years, all attesting to the significance of the foundation the apostles laid.

Another important legacy of early Mormon publications in Britain was in developing a standard way to present distinctive Latter-day Saint beliefs and, ultimately, in establishing a more standard theology. Believing in a revealed religion based on an expanding body of scripture, Latter-day Saints have very little official theology. Certain principles are clearly enunciated in the standard works, and official pronouncements by the First Presidency address a few other doctrinal issues, but there is nothing in the LDS Church comparable to the Westminster Confession of Faith or the Augsburg Confession. Indeed, Mormonism began with a hostility toward formal creeds. The preface of the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, for example, refers to the aversion some members of the Church had even to printing Joseph Smith's revelations for fear they would become too confining theologically, and Joseph Smith himself commented on the importance of avoiding anything like the formal creeds of other churches. When Elders Kimball and Hyde and their fellow missionaries sailed for England in 1837, there were few LDS books and very few discussions in print of what are usually considered the distinctive aspects of Latter-day Saint belief. [^11] This situation changed, however, with the multiplicity of books and pamphlets that appeared under the Twelve in Britain.

Usually a particular concept first appeared in print in some unofficial tract; then, as it was repeatedly attacked and defended, it became cemented in the minds of Latter-day Saints as part of an informal body of belief. In the 1840s and 1850s, prominent LDS leaders began to publish the first great synthetic works, [^12] moving Mormon theology from a folk level to a more formal, though still unofficial, level. There, for the most part, it has remained. Almost none of it has been officially canonized, and little of it has been officially commented upon by the highest quorums of the Church. Subsequent LDS writers have produced their own books that restate and reinterpret the tenets of Mormonism for their particular generations, but the arguments, the defenses, and the ideas themselves remain essentially as they were written by the first generation. And that first generation drew its inspiration, in large part, from the publications of the Twelve in England.

CONSEQUENCES FOR THE QUORUM OF THE TWELVE AND THE CHURCH

On Monday, July 19, 1841, the five apostles then in Nauvoo—Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John Taylor, and George A. Smith—gathered at Brigham Young's home, joined for a time by Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, to meet with former apostle Lyman E. Johnson. There is no record of what happened, but there is reason to believe that Johnson felt remorse for some of his actions and had come to seek resolution. [^13] Apparently they had no other important meetings or Church responsibilities for the rest of the month, and they happily attended to farm and family. The Prophet, however, already had new assignments in mind for them, which made the interlude all too brief.

In the apostles' absence, Joseph Smith's many responsibilities had become even more numerous and increasingly burdensome. Besides all his obligations as Church leader, he shouldered a multitude of temporal responsibilities, including buying and selling land, establishing civil government, promoting a huge building program, preparing for immigrants, and encouraging the Saints in the myriad economic activities necessary to create a new community. This combination of ecclesiastical and civic activity left little time for the more important aspects of his prophetic calling. As early as June 1840, he revealed his frustration in a memorial to the Nauvoo High Council. As a result of all the recent problems, he wrote,

your Memorialist had necessarily to engage in the temporalities of the Church. . . . [But] your Memorialist feels it a duty which he owes to God, as well as to the Church, to give his attention more particularly to those things connected with the spiritual welfare of the Saints. . . . The time has now come, when he should devote himself exclusively to those things which relate to the spiritualities of the Church, and commence the work of translating the Egyptian records, the Bible, and wait upon the Lord for such revelations as may be suited to the conditions and circumstances of the Church. [^14]

He petitioned the council for relief from some of his temporal responsibilities, but relief was not immediately forthcoming.

As a result of the mission to England, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles came of age precisely at the time its support and strength were needed most. Under Brigham Young's direction the Twelve had achieved unprecedented proselyting success and, for the first time, had become an effective agency of ecclesiastical administration. Joseph Smith immediately recognized what had happened, including the fact that with this maturity the Quorum of the Twelve was prepared to take on its full responsibilities.

It seems probable that the Nauvoo Saints, too, looked upon the apostles with more esteem as a result of their English mission. Even while they were away, news of their amazing success circulated in Nauvoo, enhancing their prominence as leading elders in the Church. Nor did it hurt their stature among the Saints to be preceded by several hundred English converts who were devoted to them and singing their praises.

Given these circumstances, it is not surprising that there were dramatic changes in the role of the Twelve soon after their return. These changes began on August 10 when, in a private council meeting, Joseph charged them with the responsibility of supervising "the business of the church in Nauvoo." This was the first time that the Quorum had been given formal administrative authority over a fully organized and functioning stake of Zion. [^15] This new authority to oversee the affairs of the stakes marked an important departure from the earlier division of responsibility between "standing high councils," or stake high councils, and the "traveling high council," or the Twelve. Several of the apostles' new responsibilities were, of course, natural extensions of traditional ones. They were to call and appoint missionaries, for example, and they were responsible for settling the gathered Saints once they arrived in Nauvoo. Nonetheless, the scope of their jurisdiction and responsibility was significantly expanded.

Rather than wait six weeks for general conference, Joseph Smith called a special conference for August 16 to explain this significant change to the Saints. Six apostles were in Nauvoo on the day of the conference: Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, John Taylor, George A. Smith, Orson Pratt, and Willard Richards (who had arrived by riverboat at dawn). [^16] Because of the death of one of his children, Joseph was unable to attend the first session of the conference. Significantly, that left Brigham Young, president of the Twelve, to call the meeting to order. The Prophet had called the conference, he explained, to transact business that could not wait until the October conference: specifically, calling missionaries and providing for immigrants. He explained that the Twelve would have responsibility for these tasks. Brigham seemed uncomfortably aware, however, that the responsibility for directing such affairs within organized stakes had not previously been associated with his own calling as an apostle and that the Saints might feel that the Quorum of the Twelve was overstepping its bounds. Sensitive to such feelings, he made it clear that he did not covet the new responsibilities placed on the Twelve and that he hoped no one would think that he and his brethren were aspiring to anything. Nothing could be further from their minds, he assured the Saints, than to interfere with Church affairs in the stakes. Missionary work was his first love, and he had been in the "vineyard" for so long and become so attached to foreign missions that nothing could induce him to retire but a sense of duty or the revelations of God, "to which he would always submit, be the consequence what it might." "Amen," responded the brethren of his quorum. [^17]

Elder Young then read a list of prospective missionaries and another list of cities needing elders, and "by nomination" the conference began to designate who would go where. At that point Bishop Vinson Knight suggested that to expedite things the Twelve should make the assignments and simply present them to the conference. The conference agreed, which meant, in effect, that the Twelve would conduct the business just as they had done in their last conference in England—as a quorum rather than by the conference.

Helping the Nauvoo Saints understand the expanded assignment of the Twelve was so important to the Prophet that, despite his bereavement, he went to the afternoon meeting and dramatically expanded on Elder Young's cautious remarks. The time had come, he publicly proclaimed, "when the Twelve should be called upon to stand in their place next to the First Presidency, and attend to the settling of emigrants and the business of the Church at the stakes, and assist to bear off the kingdom victoriously to the nations." This arrangement was sustained by the vote of the conference. [^18] Later, a motion that the conference accept the missionary assignments made by the Twelve allowed Joseph Smith to further clarify the implications of the change. Because the conference had already sanctioned the doings of the Twelve, he said, a further vote was unnecessary, and transacting such business with the approval of the Presidency was, in fact, among the apostles' official duties. The Twelve had authority to administer the affairs of the Church wherever and whenever the First Presidency directed. Willard Richards summed up their new authority in a brief but notable diary entry: "Conference: business of the Church given to the Twelve." [^19]

This was only the beginning. From that time on, the Twelve drew even closer to the Prophet, as he carefully prepared them for what was to come. Joseph increasingly relied on them not only to manage the day-to-day affairs of the Church but also to be his private advisers. [^20] Because Brigham Young stood at the head of the Twelve, his appeal to the Saints at the death of Joseph Smith was not a personal one of "follow me" but a plea that the Church recognize the legitimate authority of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, which, by then, had become well established. [^21]

After this shift of assignment in August 1841, the growing significance of the Twelve was underscored not just by their public activities but also by the many ways that the Prophet took them into his personal confidence. In contrast to his Kirtland practice, he now met with them frequently in quorum meetings and invited them to meet with him in important private councils. In 1839 Joseph had written from Liberty Jail that he had never had the opportunity to give to the Saints all that God had revealed to him. [^22] From the perspective of Joseph Smith and the Twelve, the months of private tutoring in Nauvoo finally provided that chance. Instructions to the Twelve included clarification of the doctrines Joseph Smith began to teach while they were away in England: such doctrines as baptism for the dead, eternal marriage, and plural marriage. The apostles accepted the teachings and, as he instructed them, perpetuated them after his death. Also, as they repeatedly affirmed later, the Prophet bestowed upon them additional priesthood keys—the "fulness of the priesthood" they sometimes called it—completing their authority to preside.

While all this was happening, the Saints struggled to complete the Nauvoo Temple. There, the Prophet promised, all the faithful could share in additional sacred ordinances and instructions. In preparation for the presentation of the temple "endowment" to all the Saints, Joseph chose a small group of men and women to receive the ordinances and instructions privately. Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball were among the first to receive the ordinances, in May 1842, and those nine apostles who had fulfilled their foreign missions formed the core of those so honored. Eventually, nearly seventy men and women received the temple endowment before the Prophet's death. Under the direction of the Twelve, the same ordinances were presented to thousands of other faithful Saints in the Nauvoo Temple after the Prophet's death. [^23]

Only three years after the apostles returned from Britain, Joseph Smith died a martyr. During that time he did all he could to teach the apostles more of the kingdom of God and to prepare them to build on the foundation he had begun. "From time to time," Parley P. Pratt explained a few months after the martyrdom, Joseph called the Twelve together to "instruct them in all things pertaining to the kingdom, ordinances and government of God." Once he had committed to the Twelve "all things for the building of the kingdom according to the heavenly vision, and the pattern shown [him] from heaven," he told them that he had finished his work and the labor was theirs. "The chaos of materials prepared by him must now be placed in order in the building," Pratt continued. "The laws revealed by him must now be administered in all their strictness and beauty. The measures commenced by him must now be carried into successful operation." [^24]

This was the setting for the dramatic meeting of August 8, 1844, six weeks after the martyrdom of Joseph, when Brigham Young stood before a special conference in Nauvoo. The Prophet, he affirmed, had given the Twelve all the keys and power he held, and now, for the first time, they could "see the necessity of the Apostleship." "For the first time in my life," he said, "for the first time in the kingdom of God do I step forth to act in my capacity in connexion with the quorum of the Twelve as Apostles of Jesus Christ unto the People and to bear of[f] the keys of the Kingdom of God in all the world." Joseph had laid the foundation for a great work, Brigham assured the Saints that day, "and we will build upon it." [^25]

The eight apostles whose lives and perspectives were refined by the crucible of the British mission, along with Orson Hyde, who had joined them in England and then filled his own mission to Palestine equally well, dedicated themselves to carrying out all of Joseph Smith's plans. They would lead the Church as Joseph would have, Brigham Young reported to his daughter following the vote of the Saints to sustain them, for that was their inescapable duty. [^26] That they could do this successfully as a powerful and united quorum was, in no small measure, a consequence of their mission to Britain in 1840 and 1841.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 107:24,
[^2] Smith, History of the Church 2:193-98; Record of the Twelve, February 27, 1835, Church Archives.
[^3] As quoted in Esplin, "Emergence of Brigham Young," 157.
[^4] Smith, History of the Church 2:195-97.
[^5] For further comment on this, see Esplin, "Development of the Quorum of the Twelve," 72-73.
[^6] John Taylor to Joseph Smith, February 3, 1841, in Times and Seasons 2 (May 1, 1841): 401.
[^7] See Dennis, Welsh Mormon Writings.
[^8] For more detail see Whittaker, "Early Mormon Pamphleteering," 256-320.
[^9] The earliest lists were those Parley included on the last page of various issues of the Star or on the wrappers of each issue. The first such list was published in July 1841. See the Star 2 (July 1841): 48. In his July 6, 1840, letter to his wife Mary Ann, Parley spoke of his total immersion in the publishing business: "I am confined entirely at home as Editor of the 'Star' and publisher of the Hymn Book, B. of Mormon, and all our other Books. . . . [I] employ 3 women in my Back Room as folders." Parley said he had not left his house for more than twenty-four hours in three months! A list of early book agents in England for American LDS publications is in Times and Seasons 2 (April 15, 1841): 390.
[^10] The Star was issued monthly from May 1840 until June 1845 when it became semimonthly. In 1852 it began to appear weekly. In 1943 it became monthly again; and in 1970 it was discontinued when the Church consolidated all magazines. The larger impact is discussed in Crawley and Whittaker, Mormon Imprints, 1-13.
[^11] See Crawley, "Passage of Mormon Primitivism." Much of the discussion here is based on Crawley and Whittaker, Mormon Imprints, 11-13.
[^12] Spencer, Most Prominent Doctrines; O. Pratt, A Series of Pamphlets; O. Pratt, Seer; P. Pratt, Science of Theology; O. Pratt, [Tracts] by Orson Pratt; and Richards, Compendium of the Faith and Doctrines of the Church.
[^13] See Young, "History of Brigham Young"; Smith, History of the Church 4:389. In company with former apostle John F. Boynton, Johnson had traveled to Nauvoo earlier while the Twelve were still in England. See Kimball, Diary, January 28, 1841, where Kimball wrote after receiving a December 8, 1840, letter from his wife: "the tidings was good. and we felt to rejoice much to hear that John Boyington and Lymon [no doubt Lyman Johnson] and menny other pressious things." The entry is imperfect and the letter giving more details has not been located. Presumably these discussions helped heal feelings, although Lyman, unlike his brother Luke, never returned to the Church.
[^14] Smith, History of the Church 4:137.
[^15] Young, "History." Although this is a reminiscent account, contemporary accounts corroborate it.
[^16] Orson Hyde was on his way to the Holy Land, Parley P. Pratt presided in England, and John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff, and William Smith remained in the East. In April Lyman Wight had been selected to fill the vacancy in the Twelve, but there is no mention of his being present this day.
[^17] Smith, History of the Church 4:402-4; Young, "History." This explanation appears only in the published minutes. Compare with Nauvoo Minutes, August 16, 1841.
[^18] Smith, History of the Church 4:403. This is a fleshed out version of the unpublished minutes, which simply say that Joseph Smith indicated "that the twelve should be authorized to assist in managing the affairs of the Kingdom in this place [Nauvoo, church headquarters]. which he said was the duties of their office &c. Motioned seconded and carried that the quorum of the twelve be authorized to act in accordance with the instructions given by president Joseph Smith in regulating and superintending the affairs of the Church." See Nauvoo Minutes, August 16, 1841. This was the order suggested in the March 28, 1835, revelation to the Twelve but by assignment not implemented until this time. See D&C 107, especially verses 21-24.
[^19] Richards, Diary, expanded version, August 16, 1841. After Wilford Woodruff arrived in Nauvoo nearly two months later, he, too, wrote of the new responsibilities, though he emphasized their temporal aspects: "The temporal business of the Church is laid upon the hands of the Twelve" (Woodruff, Journal, October 8, 1841, 2:132-33).
[^20] For an overview of the enlarged role of the Twelve, see Esplin, "Joseph, Brigham and the Twelve," especially pp. 310-20.
[^21] For a review of the public involvements of the Twelve in Nauvoo, see Lyon, "Nauvoo and the Council of the Twelve," 167-205.
[^22] Joseph Smith to Mrs. Norman Buel, March 15, 1839, in Smith, History of the Church 3:286.
[^23] For a discussion of Joseph Smith's private introduction of these sacred things to a select group, see Quinn, "Latter-day Saint Prayer Circles," especially pages 83-96. For a discussion of the relationship of the introduction of temple ordinances to the succession of the Twelve, see Ehat, "Joseph Smith's Introduction of Temple Ordinances." See also letter of Orson Hyde to Ebenezer Robinson, 19 September 1844, in The Return 2 (April 1890): 253.
[^24] P. Pratt, "Proclamation," in Millennial Star 5 (March 1845): 149-53.
[^25] Woodruff, Journal, August 8, 1844, 2:435-36. See also Nauvoo Minutes, August 8, 1844.
[^26] Brigham Young to Vilate Young, August 11, 1844, Brigham Young Papers.
