David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

EPILOGUE

The eight members of the Quorum of the Twelve who served together during the momentous mission to the British Isles and Orson Hyde, who joined them in England en route to Palestine, provided the Church with its top leaders for the next fifty-eight years (sixty-one years, if we include Lorenzo Snow, who served with the apostles but was not yet a member of the Twelve).

It is no coincidence that the apostles who failed to share the mission also failed to achieve further distinction in the Church. Rather, all of them were gone from it within a few years. William B. Smith had been a member of the Twelve since 1835. Volatile and often at odds with his brother Joseph or the Twelve, he pleaded poverty and ill health even after his reconciliation in May 1839. With the death of the Prophet in 1844, William at first accepted the leadership of his quorum and the right of Brigham Young to preside, but, strong-minded and independent as ever, he soon went his own way and was excommunicated in 1845. He died in Iowa in 1893. John E. Page was ordained an apostle in 1838, at the same time as John Taylor. After the Missouri difficulties he, like William Smith, had more excuses than faith. Only irregularly involved with his quorum during the 1840s, he drifted from the Church after Joseph Smith's death and was excommunicated in 1846. He died in Illinois in 1867. Lyman Wight's ordination as an apostle in Nauvoo during the same week in April 1841 that nine of the Twelve met for their last conference in England brought the quorum to its full complement. Elder Wight thus did not serve in Britain with the Twelve, and in Nauvoo, he was very little involved in their work. No doubt his not experiencing the sacrifice and growth that bonded the apostles in Britain was a factor in that. Soon after the death of Joseph Smith in 1844, Elder Wight left the body of the Saints and led a colony to Texas, according to an earlier assignment given him by the Prophet. When he declined to rejoin the Saints by 1848, he was excommunicated. He died in Texas in 1858.

The sequel for the eight who served in England, and for Orson Hyde, was totally different. After the death of Joseph Smith, Brigham Young presided over the Church as president of the Twelve until 1847 and then as the head of a new First Presidency from 1847 to 1877. During that time, the body of the Church moved from Illinois to the Great Basin, and more than four hundred colonies were established there. As president, he saw Church membership nearly triple to reach approximately 115,000 at his death. Much of the growth came from British immigration.

Legendary for his steadfast loyalty to Joseph Smith, Heber C. Kimball was equally faithful to his long-time friend and associate Brigham Young, with whom he served as first counselor in the First Presidency from 1847 until his death in 1868. Elder Kimball was noted for his plainspokenness and common sense and for his gift of prophecy. He was among the first to receive the temple ordinances under the direction of Joseph Smith in 1842, and for many years he had responsibility for ordinance work in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City.

After meeting with his brethren of the Quorum of the Twelve in England in 1841, Orson Hyde went on to Palestine, where he dedicated that land for the return of the Jews. He returned to Nauvoo in December 1842. During the exodus in 1846, he presided over Nauvoo and oversaw the finishing and final dedication of the Nauvoo Temple in May. He then returned to England, in the company of Parley P. Pratt and John Taylor, where he presided for a year. Between 1847 and 1852, he presided over the Saints in the Midwest and in the 1850s presided over settlements in what became Wyoming, in Carson Valley, Nevada, and finally in central Utah. He served as president of the Twelve from 1849 to 1875. Because John Taylor had been brought into the Quorum of the Twelve while Hyde was out of the Church in 1838, in 1875 Brigham Young placed John Taylor ahead of him in seniority. Orson Hyde died in 1878.

Parley P. Pratt continued to write treatises important both for missionary work and for the education of Latter-day Saints. After the death of Joseph Smith, he presided for a time over the branches in the eastern United States, where he published another periodical, The Prophet, and in 1846 he was one of three apostles who returned to manage affairs in England. In the 1850s he published the first LDS tract in Spanish and headed a mission to Chile, the first to Latin America. In 1857 he was murdered while traveling in Arkansas.

Orson Pratt returned to the British Mission in 1848 to serve a two-year term as president. During that time membership in the British Isles increased from 18,000 to about 31,000, and he dispatched twenty ships loaded with emigrants for Utah. He published fifteen pamphlets and increased the circulation of the Millennial Star from less than four thousand to nearly twenty-three thousand. In the 1850s he presided for a time in Washington, D.C., where he published The Seer, and twice more during his lifetime he resided in England to oversee work in Great Britain. Altogether, he crossed the ocean sixteen times in his years of Church service. A skilled surveyor, mathematician, and scholar, he played an important role in colonizing Utah and in its intellectual life. He often defended the Church publicly in speech and in print. Because he was out of the Church briefly in 1843, Brigham Young's rearrangement of seniority in the Twelve in 1875 placed John Taylor ahead of him. When he died in 1881, Elder Pratt was serving as Church historian and general Church recorder.

In 1842 John Taylor became associate editor to Joseph Smith of Nauvoo's important Times and Seasons, and the following year, when the Prophet's duties made it impossible for him to continue, Elder Taylor became the editor. Friend and confidant of Joseph Smith, John Taylor accompanied him to Carthage Jail and was seriously wounded by the mob that killed the Prophet and his brother. In 1846 he accompanied Parley P. Pratt and Orson Hyde back to England. In the 1850s he presided in continental Europe, where he published a periodical in France and another in Germany. He also presided in New York City, where he published The Mormon. John Taylor became president of the Twelve in 1875, and he presided over the Church in that capacity from 1877 to 1880. From 1880 until his death in 1887 he was the head of the First Presidency. Although the Church suffered from the federal government's antipolygamy campaign during the entire decade of his presidency and he himself often administered Church affairs from seclusion, under President Taylor's direction dozens of new colonies were established and Church membership increased from 115,000 to nearly 173,000.

Even before the mission to Great Britain, Wilford Woodruff had established himself as an exemplary missionary and outstanding diarist, activities that distinguished his Church service for more than half a century. Because he recorded so many vital events and preserved so many of Joseph Smith's teachings, his diary was the basis for many entries in Joseph Smith's History of the Church and is a major source of early Church history. After the murder of Joseph Smith, Wilford Woodruff returned to Britain, where he presided over the mission until 1846. Back in Utah, he served as an assistant Church historian after 1856, and as Church historian and general Church recorder from 1883 until 1887. Temple work was close to his heart, and in 1877 he became the first president of the Saint George Temple, the first temple completed after the Saints left Nauvoo. He became president of the Quorum of the Twelve in 1880 and, in that capacity, presided over the Church from 1887 to 1889. In 1889 the First Presidency was reorganized, and Wilford Woodruff served as president of the Church from then until his death in 1898. He received many significant dreams and revelations, including the revelation in 1890 that led the Church to discontinue the practice of plural marriage. He also oversaw the achievement of a goal that had been sought since the exodus to the West: the winning of statehood for Utah. During his administration, Church membership grew from about 173,000 to more than 265,000. President Woodruff was the last living witness of the crucial events experienced by the Quorum of the Twelve during Joseph Smith's lifetime.

George A. Smith continued his devotion to missionary work, and it was said that in 1843 alone he traveled six thousand miles in that capacity. He too continued to be a leader among the Saints. In 1850 and 1851, he led the first colonizing mission to southern Utah and became known as the father of southern Utah settlements: Saint George, Utah, was named in his honor. After the death of Willard Richards in 1854, George A. became Church historian, and, with Wilford Woodruff, he helped complete for publication the history of Joseph Smith. After the death of Heber C. Kimball in 1868, Elder Smith became first counselor to Brigham Young in the First Presidency, an office he held until he died in 1875.

A talented recorder, scribe, and clerk, Willard Richards became Joseph Smith's assistant in Nauvoo, keeping the Prophet's journal, assisting with his history, and drafting his correspondence. He went with Joseph Smith to Carthage in June 1844 and was the only companion not wounded when the mob stormed the jail. After the Prophet's murder, Elder Richards continued as clerk and Church historian, drafting many official communications of Brigham Young and the Quorum of the Twelve. When the First Presidency was reorganized in 1847, Willard Richards was named as second counselor to Brigham Young, which office he filled until his death in 1854.
