David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

Appendix A

"THE FIELD IS WHITE ALREADY TO HARVEST"

By Malcolm R. Thorp

Authors' note: We invited Malcolm R. Thorp, professor of history at Brigham Young University, to write this essay because of his special expertise in British social and religious history. We appreciate his willingness to do so and his thorough, interesting, and scholarly treatment of the subject. Understanding the religious traditions and the religious groups from which the early Latter-day Saints converts came is extremely valuable to understanding those converts themselves and what may have helped attract them to Mormonism. It is also important, we feel, for Latter-day Saints to appreciate how the Spirit may have been operating over many years and in diverse ways to prepare the people for the message of the Restoration when it came. In addition, we see as highly significant the comparisons of the social and economic status of the Mormons with those of the members of other churches.

"For behold, the field is white already to harvest" is the best-known metaphor in Latter-day Saint scripture describing a society ready to receive the gospel. [^1] Many people in Britain were indeed ripe for the harvest not only during the years of the apostolic mission but for many years thereafter, and between 1837 and 1852 the total number of conversions reached 57,000. [^2] As one historian commented, the Mormons reaped the "most spectacular harvest of souls since [John] Wesley's time." [^3] So impressive was Latter-day Saint growth that Horace Mann, editor of the official British religious census for 1851, remarked that the "Mormonite" movement (as it was frequently called) represented a "New Mohammedanism" on the religious scene.

The field was white because ground was prepared and seeds were planted and nurtured long before the missionary-apostles arrived. Changing political, economic, and social conditions contributed toward creating an environment conducive to Mormon missionary work. So, too, did the religious circumstances of the times, and all these elements intertwined to help create definable social and religious groups, or what has been called an "external constituency," among which the remarkable Mormon harvest occurred. [^4] In this essay we attempt to identify and explore just what groups, especially religious groups, Latter-day Saint converts came from. We will also see how conversions were related to favorable conditions in society that allowed for open proselyting.

POLITICS, NONCONFORMITY, AND THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH

When Heber C. Kimball and his companions began their missionary work in Preston in 1837, they experienced their first glimpses of the new industrial society in Britain and became aware of the process of political change as the country was making the transition from the reign of William IV to that of Victoria. No doubt they also learned of the unpopular image of monarchy. The reputations of the two previous kings were tarnished in the popular mind by their social and political conservativism as well as by images of needless extravagance and moral laxity, and at Victoria's accession the popularity of monarchy was at its lowest ebb. To many, who saw it as a bastion of privilege and archconservativism in a country crying for social and political change, monarchy was irrelevant to the common people. There was even a strong republican tradition actively soliciting support for the abolition of this ancient institution. Both Heber C. Kimball and Wilford Woodruff commented, at the occasion of a royal procession, on the extravagance of the pageantry in a country with so much economic distress.

The first Mormon missionaries arrived in Preston at the beginning of a parliamentary election made necessary by the accession of the new queen. This was one of the first elections since the 1832 Reform Bill, a measure that gave the upper middle class men the right to vote. In a town such as Preston this class comprised the prosperous cotton manufacturers, the wealthier shopkeepers, and the professional classes. Because a man had to own real property worth l 10 in order to vote, however, the bill increased the electoral list by only 1 percent, or sixty-one voters. Most Preston citizens still could not vote, and the election of 1837 must have been of only marginal concern to them. Indeed, antipathy for such an exclusive political establishment helped stoke Chartist political dissent in Preston. Most political questions of the early Victorian period had religious implications, and the connection between Chartism and popular evangelism can be seen in the lines of one of the most famous Chartist hymns, "Jesus Christ was the first Chartist." [^5]

Some have asserted that Mormon success was related to the collapse of such popular political movements as the Chartists, a "reflex of despair" triggered by despondency over failures, but there is little evidence to support such a conclusion. The apostles' mission was to the working people, and though a smattering of former Chartists, such as John Freeman, joined the LDS church, [^6] there is a paucity of reflections on political concerns in early Mormon journals, letters, and reminiscences. There are occasional recollections of trade union activities and complaints about low wages and hard times, but there is virtually nothing in these sources that indicates a significant pattern of political involvement.

More important was the economic depression of the late 1830s and early 1840s, a hardship on the common people that produced religious conditions that contributed to LDS successes. Studies of the evangelical Nonconformist congregations [^7] (Protestant groups that did not conform to the Church of England) suggest that these churches were losing members at the same time the Mormon church was experiencing its initial growth. [^8] Significantly, the losses came mainly from the working classes, a pattern that accelerated during hard times. Thus the Baptists, Congregationalists, and Methodists were all affected by significant defections of working-class worshipers. By the end of the 1840s evangelical Nonconformity had lost its earlier working-class appeal and was becoming bourgeois, or middle-class, in membership and social outlook. [^9]

The Methodists were particularly hard hit by defections into reform movements and into other religious sects that perhaps displayed greater social concern for the plight of the laboring classes. Jabez Bunting, leader of the main body of Methodists, adamantly disassociated that church from secular working-class political movements. [^10] Indeed, by the 1830s and 1840s, Methodism had changed its recruiting strategies in such a way that most Methodist denominations no longer made appreciable contact with common people. The mainline Methodist churches, for example, shunned association with the revivalist technique of camp meetings and other forms of popular preaching that in an earlier age had brought them conversions from such occupational groups as miners, iron workers, weavers, skilled artisans, and day laborers in the new industrial towns. At the same time, tension was created between the ministry and the laity as Methodism moved from earlier popular participation in church affairs to ministerial domination over the congregation. The increased professionalization of the ministry combined with diminished opportunities for lay participation further lessened Methodist appeal among the working class. [^11]

These institutional changes also led to a splintering of the Methodists into various bodies, the most important of which, for our study, was the Primitive Methodist movement. From its inception around 1806, this splinter group continued the tradition of the popular religious revival. [^12] The Primitive Methodists recruited successfully among miners, artisans, factory workers, and farm laborers, and the practice of allowing common people to participate in chapels as lay preachers and group leaders as well as missionaries was a strong attraction. In addition, unlike the more middle-class Methodist denominations, the "Ranters," as they were commonly called, often demonstrated sympathy for radical political movements and other forms of social protest. With beliefs in witches, "physical manifestations of the Devil, miraculous healings and special providences," Primitive Methodism also fit better, ideologically, into the prevailing common culture. [^13]

Both obvious differences and important similarities between Primitive Methodist beliefs and those of the Latter-day Saints help account for the rivalry that developed between them. The similarities, especially the appeal of both churches to biblical primitivism (i.e., the idea that they were teaching the same gospel as the primitive Christian church), help explain the significant number of conversions to the Latter-day Saints during the early years of Mormon activity in Britain. [^14] Indeed, many who emerged as local LDS leaders were formerly Primitive Methodist preachers.

Recognizing that the Mormon missionaries were formidable rivals with a message that likewise had popular appeal, Primitive Methodist clergy took a conspicuous part in the various anti-Mormon disturbances during this period. Fear of losing "sheep" motivated such activities, for the ministers knew that in the fluid religious environment of the time, converts from earlier religious revivals could turn to new religious experiences as quickly as they had embraced the old.

While the denominations of evangelical nonconformity were increasingly narrowing their social appeal, the established church was attempting to widen its influence. But the Church of England faced image problems. Until as recently as 1828 it was allied with the state in trying to preserve political and social values and to curb the influence of nonconformity. By the 1830s, however, the secular state had turned on its erstwhile ally, and there were several attempts through parliamentary commissions to bring about far-reaching administrative reforms within the church. [^15] That was only the beginning of a long political battle over church reform—a struggle that resulted in the diminution of Anglican influence. "Gradual disestablishment" was a long process that stretched beyond Victorian Britain. But in the 1830s alone, the Church of England's power was curbed by parliamentary statutes that secularized the registration of vital statistics and legally recognized nonconformist marriages. [^16]

The established church eventually awakened to the realities of the new industrial society. By the late 1830s it demonstrated a renewed vitality by building new parish churches in the industrialized cities and expanding educational facilities throughout the country. [^17] Despite this new vibrancy, however, the social conservativism of the clergy continued to be a barrier to popular appeal. The bishops were vocal opponents of political change during the debates over the Reform Bill of 1832, a point repeatedly emphasized by radicals. The church in the 1830s was in the process of losing the heated battle over the payment of church rates, an obligation often imposed on non-Anglicans in many local communities. [^18] There was likewise much complaint about the system of pew rents in the local parish church.

Working-class criticisms of the established church continued to be commonplace. One newspaper, for example, blamed Mormon successes in the West Midlands in the early 1840s on the negligence of the Bishop of Gloucester and his "tithe-fattened clergy." [^19] An early Mormon convert, John Spiers, said that he left the established church because of the "character of her ministers [rather] than her doctrines." [^20] William Lang, a young farm laborer who joined the Latter-day Saints, asserted that he had attended the Anglican Church "about as much for fashion or form as anything else," but when he first heard a Mormon elder preach, he reflected: "What a contrast! instead of long robed Gentleman preaching sprinkling of Infants, Hell and damnation &c I saw a man [who] looked like a farmer in plain attire quoting from the Holy Scriptures and preaching the Gospel of Christ in its ancient purity." [^21]

Anticlerical hostility can also be seen in the career of John Simons, vicar of Dymock, Gloucestershire, whose bitter opposition to the Latter-day Saints, ironically, only added to the hostility. In 1840 several of his parishioners joined the LDS faith. Simons was so disturbed by their defections that he launched a crusade against Mormonism that included the writing of two pamphlets and the organization of local ruffians who "hooted," howled, and threw rocks at missionaries. But because of his alleged neglect of pastoral cares, Simons had problems retaining the loyalty of his parishioners. Upon his death in 1866, one of them wrote a poem in which he mocked the late clergyman's crusading zeal against the Mormons by juxtaposing it with Simons's frequent absenteeism and neglect of the congregation during his years in service. [^22] In all fairness, however, Simons's misconduct did not represent the norm. Modern research has dispelled rumors of widespread clerical corruption, and there is evidence of improvement in the clergy's performance throughout the Victorian era. [^23] It is also obvious that these changes were too little and too late to ease the popular image of an indifferent clerical establishment that was more concerned with financial remuneration than with the temporal well-being of its flocks. [^24]

PREVIOUS RELIGIOUS AFFILIATION

An interesting question relating to Latter-day Saint success in Britain has to do with the previous religious affiliations of early converts. It has been argued that they tended to come from "splinter groups" who had earlier broken away from mainline nonconformist churches, [^25] and even though, as demonstrated later, most converts actually came from mainline churches, in the early years of the British Mission some of the most dramatic successes did come from among such small defecting congregations. Heber C. Kimball's first conversions in 1837 came from Reverend James Fielding's Primitive Episcopal church in Preston, which was connected with an obscure religious movement in Bedford headed by his brother-in-law, the Reverend Timothy Matthews. [^26] The Mormons were likewise successful in converting a number of Primitive Methodists from the Preston chapels on Vauxhall and Laurel streets as well as in the nearby town of Longton. [^27] Joseph Beecroft, a convert from Bradford, Yorkshire, recorded that prior to his joining Mormonism he had belonged to the Methodist New Connection but had then followed his minister into a "new society." [^28]

At Bedford, the early missionary successes occurred in the church of the Reverend Timothy Matthews, who had earlier separated from the Church of England and taught such doctrines as the restoration of spiritual gifts and premillennialism. [^29] Other such groups represented in the previous religious backgrounds of Mormons include the Wroites, Irvingites, and Swedenborgians, although these groups were not as prominent as splinter Methodist sects. [^30]

The Aitkenites, or the New Christian Society, constituted another splinter group of some significance to early Mormon successes. Founded by Robert Aitken in the 1830s, this group had churches in many of the major towns of the north, including Liverpool, Manchester, and the Staffordshire Potteries. In 1823 Aitken was a deacon in the Church of England, but he became dissatisfied with the established church's position on ecclesiastical polity. He was strongly influenced by Methodism and its emphasis on individual conversion, but he was denied entrance into the Methodist ministry. He then founded his own movement and soon attracted a considerable following. Through his ministerial charisma, Aitken became one of the most popular revivalist preachers of the 1830s. Thomas Whittaker, an important "teetotal" preacher, averred that Aitken was the most powerful preacher he ever heard. [^31] Even Wilford Woodruff, who usually had little positive to say about ministers, was impressed by the power of Aitken's sermons delivered to overflowing crowds at Zion's Chapel, Waterloo Road, in London. [^32]

Aitken's theology was an eclectic synthesis of ideas borrowed from the Methodists and the Church of England (especially the Tractarians). His ideas on personal salvation were similar to those in Methodism, but his notions of sacramental authority were in accordance with the Anglican High Church tradition. Aitken also preached temperance and the doctrine of the millennium. Alfred Cordon, an early convert who became president of the Staffordshire Conference, belonged to the Aitkenites before joining the Latter-day Saints, and it was he who converted a number of Aitkenites in Doncaster, Yorkshire. [^33] Heber Kimball noted that after such successes among the Aitkenites there was

considerable ill feeling and opposition among the ministers belonging to that sect.

Having lost quite a number, and seeing that many more were on the eve of being baptized, one of the ministers [Robert Aitken] came to Preston and announced that he was going to put down "Mormonism," expose the doctrines and overthrow the Book of Mormon. [^34]

In 1840, however, Aitken became disenchanted with his own religious society and he returned to the Church of England, accepting a vicarage in Cornwall. [^35]

The most spectacular success among the defecting Methodist sects was Wilford Woodruff's conversion of United Brethren in the rural regions around Ledbury, Herefordshire, in the spring of 1840. Under the leadership of a dynamic Primitive Methodist circuit preacher, Thomas Kington, the group had separated from Methodism, probably in late 1832. [^36] Kington taught that the dead weight of formal religion was insufficient for salvation, and his favorite text was "except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish." [^37] His successes as a circuit preacher in camp meetings around Froomes Hill, Herefordshire, were recorded in the Primitive Methodist Magazine, and the following year an article appeared describing Kington's role in the faith healing of an elderly woman named Sarah Harding. [^38] But Kington evidently ran into difficulties with fellow preachers, for he "stirred up his hearers and annoyed the more formal and better paid preachers of that denomination." As a result of this dispute (seemingly over institutional formalities), Kington was expelled. [^39] Soon thereafter he was instrumental in forming the United Brethren and became the superintendent of that body. It grew to include thirty-eight meeting places, organized into two circuits, with a membership of about seven hundred believers, mostly recruited from the ranks of the "poor." [^40] The church believed in spiritual gifts, and its members were primitive restorationists awaiting divine direction and further religious insight when Wilford Woodruff began his mission in Herefordshire. [^41] From Woodruff's journal, it would appear that more than half of the United Brethren Church joined the Mormons, including Kington. [^42] The Saints then adopted the intact circuit structure as their own.

During the earliest years of the LDS Church in Britain, chapels of various denominations were often given over to the elders for preaching, the ministers seeing the new religion as but another revivalist movement from America. [^43] As the tenets of Mormonism became better known, however, and as sectarian rivalry developed, chapels were closed to the missionaries. Hence, the number of conversions from the various splinter group sects declined, and the Mormons were forced to rely on street Table I

Last Prior Religious Affiliation

of 280 Mormon Converts

Total %

Methodist 70 25.0

Church of England 58 20.7

Religiously Inclined but Not Specifically Affiliated 41 14.6

"Splinter Groups" and Other Minor Sects 36 12.9

Baptists 31 11.1

Primitive Methodists 31 11.1

Independents 17 6.1

Presbyterians 13 4.6

Not Religiously Inclined 4 1.4

Infidels 3 1.1

Catholics 2 0.1

Teetotallers 2 0.1

Total 280 100

meetings and occasional camp meetings, where there was a wider religious spectrum present. The change in missionary approach undoubtedly brought the Saints into visible contact with more people from the mainline religious movements, and the religious backgrounds of converts tended to reflect the new missionary tactics.

The most comprehensive study yet of the religious backgrounds of Mormon converts between 1837 and 1852 used 280 diaries, journals, reminiscences, and family histories to determine prior religious affiliations. [^44] It was found (see Table I) that the converts tended to come from such major religious denominations as the Methodists, the Church of England, and the congregations of Old Dissent (Presbyterians, Baptists, and Independents).

Many early Mormon converts were religious seekers, that is, individuals who drifted from one denomination to another while searching for absolute authority and for teachings that conformed to their interpretations of the Bible. Of the 280 converts studied, 104, or nearly 37 percent, clearly were in that category. [^45] But because many were vague in their descriptions of previous religious life, it appears likely that 40 percent or more had been seekers before conversion. Some belonged to six or more religious bodies before joining the LDS Church.

The experience of William Lee, who joined the Saints at West Bromwich in 1846, is typical. As a small boy, Lee was apprenticed to a tinsmith at Stourport but, upon completion of the apprenticeship, he moved to West Bromwich and worked in the glass-blowing trade. He attended Sunday school because his father could not send him to day school. At age fourteen William became affiliated with the Methodists, and when he was seventeen he was appointed a local preacher. He later recorded that "great numbers came to hear me." Soon, however, he became dissatisfied with the Methodists and went from one church to another in his search for truth. "In reading the New Testament," he stated, "I perceived the doctrine of Methodists was not in accordance with the teachings of Jesus Christ and his Apostles. Neither in all my search amongst other sects could I find any who taught the true principals of the Gospel." Lee was evidently searching for a pattern of authority that conformed with his interpretation of the scriptures, for he was impressed with the Catholic doctrine of apostolic succession and was about to join that church when he found a copy of Parley P. Pratt's influential pamphlet, Voice of Warning. He later recalled the impression it had on him: "I read the book with much interest. It was a source of light. It was the very thing I was so anxious to find." He then sought out the Saints. "It was noised abroad that an Apostle of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints was in town. This startled me. For I had not learned that Apostles lived in our day." "The first sermon he [William Lee] heard was preached by . . . John Taylor, the text being Revelation, Chap 14, verse 6 'and I saw another angel etc.' This made such an impression." [^46]

The experience of Thomas Day is also instructive because of his experience as a seeker and also for what it reveals about his working-class background. He was born in 1814 at Epnoll Lane, near Wolverhampton. As a young boy, he worked for a "machine company." When Thomas was thirteen his father died, and Thomas helped his mother and three young sisters on a meager wage of four shillings per week, though he soon improved his economic condition by moving to Kidiminster, where he worked in a carpet factory. But the factory owner reduced the workers' wages, precipitating a sixteen-week strike. "At the end of this time, the men returned to work reduced to dire poverty and completely conquered." On another occasion, he worked in the "rope-yards" from three in the morning until late at night. He then moved to Bronsgrove, where he found employment in a button factory and later in a needle factory.

Before moving to Bronsgrove, Day led a life similar to that of most men of his class: he was not affiliated with any denomination, and he probably was not religiously inclined. But then a crisis occurred in his life. "While in Bronsgrove . . . I had taken a turn for a rather wayward life and wild companions," he later recalled. One evening, when he was detained at home, his companions were involved in some prankish mischief that ended in their being sent to prison. "I began to think, deserted my rude companions, forsook whiskey and tobacco entirely and searched among the different religions for something on which to pin my faith." In 1833 he joined the "Arminian Methodists" and soon rose to the position of exhorter and, later, local preacher. When he left that group he became a Primitive Methodist local preacher. In 1838 he changed Methodist denominations yet again, this time becoming an Association Methodist. For four years he was a class leader, but all that time he was disturbed by the disorders in meeting "which they have not the means of preventing." At that point Thomas heard the Mormon elders. He was impressed by "simplicity and unassuming manners and the authority and assurance with which they spoke together with the Plainness in which they proved their principles from the Bible." Despite his favorable initial impression, he still worried that the Saints might only be deceiving the people, and it was some time (September 1842) before he joined them. [^47]

As one commentator on Victorian religion asserted, common people did "not regard public worship as an essential of religion, but only an optional accessory." [^48] Early Victorian working people were religious in that they tended to believe in the ethical dimensions of religion, and most undoubtedly thought themselves to be Christian. But without the compulsion that had typified the earlier centuries of British religious life, they generally shunned membership in organized religious institutions. [^49] Even those churches that conscientiously lowered social barriers in an effort to attract converts were only marginally successful among the common people. That 58 of the 280 Mormon converts studied (20.7 percent) were formerly Church of England members can be explained in part by the fact that many had been baptized in infancy, but their reminiscences seldom reveal deep commitment to that faith. It seems that Anglicanism was often more a family tradition than a source of spiritual satisfaction.

Only 4 of the 280 Mormon converts studied (1.4 percent) claimed that they were not religiously inclined before baptism, and only 3 (1.1 percent) openly professed secularism as their belief. These statistics suggest that LDS missionaries made little headway with the people "of the world." On the other hand, the number of Saints recruited from the religiously inclined but not institutionally affiliated (41 individuals, or 14.6 percent) suggests that the Latter-day Saint message appealed overwhelmingly to the "churched" Christian population rather than to the "unchurched" majority. Indeed, the archetypical Saint was usually young (sixteen to twenty-four years of age), had a background in either the Anglican or the Methodist denominations (sometimes both), and was most impressed by the "primitive simplicity" (conformity to the New Testament pattern) of the Mormon message as well as gifts of the Spirit that were found in Latter-day Saint meetings. [^50] All of this attests to their other-worldly aspirations both before and after baptism.

Of course, beyond all these factors that affected people in their religious choices was a deeply personal element in the conversion experience. Many among the new converts attested, as did John Bennion, that conversion was a matter of right religious reasoning—that the message was "too plain and scriptural for me to reject." [^51] For others, conversion accompanied religious experiences. George Morris, for example, borrowed a copy of the Book of Mormon and, he reported, "I had not read far before the spirit of the Lord bore testimony to me that it was the Truth of heaven." Thus convinced, he walked eight miles to Manchester to attend a fast meeting. He discovered in this meeting "the gift of Tongues, the interpretation of Tongues, and the spirit of prophecy was poured out richly upon the Saints and they sang the sweet songs of Zion." Shortly thereafter, on June 28, 1841, he was baptized. [^52] Charles Miller, a convert of 1839, wrote of his experience:

Long had I served the Lord according to the light Enjoyed by all sects, till truth so dencely bright Shone in my precious soul unfolding to my mind Messiahs only plan to save poor lost mankind. I now saw that the way of truth was plain. . . . Long did I halt in mind, but I decided Even while on my knees. Then I was baptized Rejoicing I remember what [William] Clayton was then teaching Being filled with the spirit while he to us was preaching About Christs second coming and Zions happy land. [^53]

While doctrinal similarities with other Victorian sects existed, the restored gospel was distinctively different from the dogmas of the Saints' religious past. Conversion accounts reveal, whether through the logic of the "plainness of the truth" or through spiritual manifestations, there was conviction that religious illumination had taken place, allowing the converts to see new patterns of harmony in the scriptures and a new vision of the purpose of life.

RELIGION AND SOCIAL CLASS

That most Latter-day Saint converts came from the working classes is significant because of the relationship between social class and religion in British society. [^54] That relationship helped create the "external constituency" prepared to hear the message of the apostles from America.

Most of the early Victorian British converts came from the working class, but, significantly, of the 410 converts in one study, nearly one-third (31.2 percent) were artisans (carpenters, tailors, shoemakers, etc.). [^55] (See Table II.) Generally better off than others of the working class, artisans were the most prominent group of common people in the Victorian non-conformist chapels. Conversely, the number of agricultural laborers among the Saints was insignificant, even though as late as 1850 agriculture was still the largest employer in the country. No doubt many of the United Brethren converted by Wilford Woodruff were either farm laborers or craftsmen connected with West Midlands agriculture, but they were not typical of most British converts. Except for Heber C. Kimball in 1837 and Wilford Woodruff in Herefordshire, Mormon missionaries usually did not do well in rural areas, where old traditions and social allegiances remained strong. Nor were there many converts from the large ranks of Victorian domestic servants—only 14 of 410 converts studied were in this group, and were perhaps as few as 1 percent of all the converts. Farm workers and household servants tended to be dominated by the values of their employers, who may have looked upon conversion to Mormonism as undesirable.

Table II

LDS Occupational Structure

Total %

Artisans 128 31.2

Laborers 85 20.7

Shopkeepers and Professionals 41 10.0

Colliers, Miners, etc. 38 9.3

Laborers (farm) 22 5.4

Domestic Servants 14 3.4

Farmers 12 2.9

Merchants and Manufacturers 1 0.02

Other Occupations 69 16.8

Total 410 100.0

Interesting comparisons can be made between the occupations of the Mormons and those of the members of major British denominations. [^56] The Mormons were appreciably lower in social class than any other denomination except the Primitive Methodists. Mormons and Primitive Methodists were roughly similar in social composition, though the Mormons had a slightly higher proportion of shopkeepers. Perhaps more significant is the higher proportion of artisans in the Primitive Methodist Church than among the Latter-day Saints (47.7 percent to 31.2 percent). This proportion suggests that the LDS Church was rather distinctive in its working-class appeal, a factor that becomes even more significant in light of the diminishing appeal of the churches of New Dissent to the common people in the 1840s.

Historians generally agree that industrialism, the movement of populations into the growing cities, the breakdown of paternalism, and the intensification of class antagonisms all contributed in some measure to the creation of early nineteenth-century evangelical nonconformity. These same ingredients may also have contributed something to Mormon missionary successes, as accelerating class antagonisms continued to drive socially and religiously alienated Christians away from their old congregations and into Mormon meetings. As Hugh McLeod has written about working people of this time, "Conscious of an inferior status in the eyes of his social superiors," individuals would often react against those above them socially by behaving in ways condemned by their superiors. Hence, "If . . . Nonconformity often represented a middle-class rejection of the politics and cultural values of the gentry, working men frequently signalled their rejection of both upper class and middle class values by Secularism or by simple indifference." [^57] Another way of showing alienation would have been to adopt the religion of a group such as the Mormons, a group that was viewed by many social superiors with disdain. Indeed, it was commonly asserted by persons of the middle and upper classes that only the "deluded" and "simple minded" would join such a church as the Latter-day Saints.

If factors such as these helped create interest in Mormonism, they also tested the mettle of those who joined. Fellowship with the Saints was often followed by social ostracism and even dismissal from employment. Robert Campbell, a Mormon missionary, wrote in 1843: "The people here are bound down by their tyrannical employers. . . . They [the laboring people] are afraid of joining for their work's sake as their masters are much endowed with the Spirit of aristocracy and they have to crouch beneath their opinions as semislaves." [^58] The amazing thing about the Mormon converts was that despite such difficulties so many ceased their seeking: at last they had found their permanent religious home.

It was mainly among the working classes, then, that the LDS apostles and their companions thrust in their sickles and reaped their harvest. The message they brought, moreover, could not have appealed more readily to the people among whom they worked. Many religious leaders of the time carefully refrained from criticizing conditions in the new industrial society, [^59] but the Mormons boldly characterized that society as "Babylon," rejected deferential social conventions, and decried the maldistribution of wealth. Instead of making accommodations with it, they preached the building of Zion in America. [^60]

This rejection of the British "Babylon" also applied to many features of working-class popular culture. Latter-day Saints shunned the pub and found much in common with preachers of teetotalism. [^61] They looked upon the use of alcoholic beverages as a major cause of social distress, and teetotalism offered a remedy for the alleviation of social misery. Some Church leaders appeared as speakers on the teetotal platform, for the national movement was ecumenical in spirit and did not prohibit Mormons from appearing as lecturers, so long as they confined their remarks to abolition of strong drink. [^62] The Saints also rejected some forms of popular dancing as well as "black art magic" (crystal ball gazing), and there is no indication from contemporary sources that the Mormons condoned popular amusements and sporting activities. [^63] Church leaders even counseled members against participating in various friendship societies, teaching them instead to live as frugally as possible to save for the goal of emigrating to Zion.

OPPOSITION IN PERSPECTIVE

For decades before the arrival of the first LDS missionaries, the compact between church and state that dominated the eighteenth century was breaking asunder, allowing an almost laissez-faire marketplace for the interchange of religious ideas without fear of legal interference. Landmarks in the breakup of the church-state compact were the repeal of the Five Mile and Conventicle Acts in 1812 and the Test and Corporation Acts in 1828, which eliminated the last remaining disabilities for Protestant Nonconformists. These measures were followed by the Catholic Emancipation Act of 1829, which allowed Catholics the same political freedoms as their Protestant counterparts. In Parliament, from the 1830s onwards, there was little sustained interest in promoting the enforcement of religious dogmas except in the case of atheism. As long as preachers such as Mormon missionaries complied with the law and obtained the required license, there was no state interference.

The removal of legal disabilities was accompanied by a change in the public attitude toward freedom of religion. Although interest in formal concepts of toleration had waned by the 1830s and 1840s, there was a general consensus in favor of making toleration part of ethical Christian practices and a mark of true religion. Such "peace and meekness texts" as "whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so unto them" became the norm. [^64] There were frequent breaches in this norm, but intolerance never reached the excesses of former times.

The arrival of Mormonism was accompanied by bitter sectarian denunciations of the newcomers, but anti-Mormon writers also acknowledged boundaries to these attacks. One of the first pamphleteers, H. Stevenson, warned Anglicans, dissenters, Primitives, and Wesleyans at Alston that a common enemy had appeared in their midst, "one that aims at the destruction of them all." Yet Stevenson spoke against physical violence:

I do not mean that the Mormons should be pelted with stones; they should rather be pitied, and prayed for. . . . I do not mean . . . that the Book of Mormon should be committed to the flames, although it richly deserves such a fate; yet I would preserve it as an ill-written novel, and as a monument of human folly. [^65]

Thomas Taylor, another anti-Mormon pamphleteer, reminded his readers of the public guarantees of freedom to worship:

It cannot but afford unspeakable pleasure to every reflecting mind, to consider that we live at a period, and have our existence in a country, where the right of private judgment in matters both of a civil and religious character, is acknowledged and protected by the laws of our land. But while it is the duty of every man to regard these privileges as sacred, and use all constitutional means to . . . support them, it is equally incumbent upon him to keep a watchful [eye] upon the cunning craftiness of the unprincipled demagogue, and the impious, self-interested religious impostor, whose energies are exerted to beguile the unsuspecting, and ingratiate himself into the confidence of the credulous, in order to raise his own popularity, and enrich himself at the expense of his dupes. [^66]

Although the Mormons were denounced as "vile hypocrites" and deceivers who were engaged in "wicked practices" that were "sufficient to lay half the world in ruins, and to bind the other half in chains," there was an underlying recognition of the need to tolerate even the most unacceptable of religious dogmas. [^67]

Nevertheless, despite the changes in the civil law and theories of toleration that produced a climate more conducive to freedom of religious expression than ever before, tranquillity was often disturbed by bitter denominational rivalry. In the 1830s and 1840s, for example, political and social questions, including the heated debate over the payment of church rates by non-Anglicans, tended to be fought along denominational lines, creating ill-will among various sects. [^68] Often these rivalries produced both verbal and physical abuse. As W. R. Ward has written:

Uniting in-groups by anathematising out-groups converted social tension into the denominational warfare which formed the main substance of politics in the 'thirties and 'forties; it raised controversy to a deplorable level, and provoked a degree of physical violence now difficult to conceive. [^69]

In early Victorian Britain, the habits of public order and obedience to law, virtues often associated with the English character, were not fully developed, and a tradition of violence associated with religious revivals and unpopular movements affected the Mormons as well. At the outset of Heber C. Kimball's mission in Preston, it was necessary for the town corporation to give him police protection. Still, while he experienced modest degrees of opposition from time to time, the first mission to England encountered verbal denunciations rather than physical violence. [^70]

The 1840-41 mission also was occasionally marred by sectarian violence. [^71] It was not uncommon for the missionaries to be "hooted" and shouted down or for services to be interrupted by showers of stones, rotten eggs, vegetables, and manure. Such incidents were perpetrated with the conscious design of heaping ridicule on the Mormons rather than committing bodily harm, which might have brought in the police. Ridicule was a serious matter of public humiliation in the nineteenth-century community, and such mob actions were meant to unify the community against the outsider. [^72]

There is little evidence that early Mormon persecutions in Britain, unlike those in America, were ever intended to go beyond public humiliation. Yet, occasionally, mob activities posed danger to both the victims and the perpetrators. In January 1842, for example, attempts to shout down the Mormon elders at Lightwood Green, Shropshire, led to a fistfight in which a Brother Richard Ashley was struck in the mouth and "4 or 5" of the anti-Mormons had to be physically removed from the Saints' meeting-house. In retaliation for this setback, an angry mob surrounded the building and threw stones (one of which, hurled through the window, injured a sister). The mob then attempted to beat down the door with sticks. The severity of the situation prompted Joseph Horton, a sympathetic non-Mormon, to fire a loaded gun over the heads of the angry crowd as a warning. This action had its desired effect and the mob withdrew. But, Elder Charles Smith reported, that did not end the harassment, for the Saints' meetings in this region were constantly disturbed by mob actions. [^73]

Despite sporadic hostilities, however, there were few recorded instances of serious injuries or loss of life during the early years of the LDS Church in Britain. [^74] Mob violence was not an unusual phenomenon for revivalist preachers of the period, and the experiences encountered by the Mormons were similar to those of the Primitive Methodists, Bible Christians, and even teetotal preachers. [^75] Nor were they as severe as the anti-Mormon activities a decade later (1854-57), when sectarian opposition created a series of violent disturbances in Birmingham, Bath, Bristol, and other towns in the West Midlands. [^76] The missionaries were free to preach the gospel without interference and to travel into remote country regions successfully without purse or scrip. A tradition of public debate on religion allowed for the interchange of religious information and required listeners to remain silent until the message had been delivered, at which time they were free to make inquiries. Oftentimes rabble-rousers intent on disruption would themselves be shouted down by observers who wanted to hear the message and judge for themselves.

Mormonism's impressive successes attest both to the power of the message and to the empathy displayed by the missionaries toward the common people. This message, which included a warning to the faithful to withdraw from "Babylon" and the hope that they could help build Zion in a new land, was a powerful motive that provided converts with a vision of the future not to be found in other Victorian sects. As one missionary cogently stated: "Oh! Lord hasten the day when the poor Saints that are faithful shall be gathered home to Zion and delivered from the power of the Tyrant." [^77]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 4:4. This metaphor is used six more times in the Doctrine and Covenants and it is always used as a message to missionaries, along with the injunction to thrust in their sickles and reap. Cf. John 4:35.
[^2] Evans, Century of "Mormonism," 244.
[^3] Armytage, Heavens Below, 260.
[^4] "A church does not recruit the whole population of a country, but only that external constituency disposed toward membership of it," say sociologists of religion. Currie, Gilbert, and Horsley, Churches and Church Goers, 64.
[^5] Gash, Aristocracy and People, 202. The best study on the religious and anti-clerical elements in Chartism is Yeo, "Christianity."
[^6] Freeman, Journal.
[^7] Evangelicalism was a nondenominational movement that permeated the Established Church, as well as Nonconformity. The main tenets of evangelicalism were emphasis on personal salvation and the vital elements of Christianity that led to a change of heart. There was emphasis on good works, especially philanthropic endeavors. Evangelicals tended to be less interested in organizational modes and ecclesiastical politics. The important element within Nonconformity that is significant to this study is the denominations of New Dissent. Churches such as the Methodists, Congregationalists, and Particular and General Baptist denominations emerged out of the religious awakening of the eighteenth century. Especially in the early history of these movements, there were active attempts to appeal to the unconverted masses through camp meetings and street preaching in the new industrial towns and villages. For New Dissent, see Gilbert, Religion and Society, 37-39. Gilbert's book is a seminal study that is important for social questions of religion. Perhaps the most comprehensive study of religion is Chadwick, Victorian Church. Chadwick, however, writes with little sympathetic understanding for the numerous religious sects, including the Mormons. See pages 436-39.
[^8] Ward, Religion and Society, 266, 276; Gilbert, Religion and Society, 30.
[^9] The pretentiously middle class ethos of the emerging Victorian Nonconformity, the preoccupation with order, respectability, and style, reinforced the external societal pressures cutting Methodist, Congregational, and Baptist communities adrift from the lower sections of the social constituency on which they had relied during the early industrial age. While Walter Wilson had complained early in the nineteenth century that 'large accessions of numbers' had been lowering the social 'quality' of Nonconformity, in 1849 [Edward] Mial was worried about the 'preference of quality over numbers' characteristic of his contemporaries" (Gilbert, Religion and Society, 162).
[^10] Ingliss, Churches and the Working Classes, 16; Davies, George, and Rupp, Methodist Church 2:270-71.
[^11] Gilbert, Religion and Society, 162.
[^12] Werner, Primitive Methodist Connection.
[^13] McLeod, Religion and the Working Class, 27; Obelkevich, Religion and Rural Society.
[^14] Phillips, Sectarian Spirit, 53.
[^15] Thompson, Bureaucracy, 26-55.
[^16] See Gilbert, Religion and Society, 163 for a summary of Victorian "disestablishment" legislation.
[^17] Norman, Church and Society, 123-66.
[^18] Ward, Religion and Society, 178 and passim.
[^19] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 4:236.
[^20] Whitney, History of Utah 4:396.
[^21] Lang, Autobiography, 1-2.
[^22] [Anonymous], He is gone . . . .
[^23] Norman, Church and Society, 123-66.
[^24] Ibid., 135-36. Norman's defense of the clerical establishment, however, does not fully explain the widespread criticism that goes beyond the radicals and the intellectuals. For extreme examples of such hostility, see Yeo, "Christianity," 123-37.
[^25] P. Taylor, Expectations Westward, 37-38.
[^26] The Reverend James Fielding came from a Methodist background in St. Neats, Huntingtonshire. He was a local businessman until he was persuaded by his brother-in-law, the Reverend Timothy Matthews, to go to Preston and establish a Primitive Episcopal congregation. See Fielding, Diary, 88. For a recent discussion that fundamentally alters the traditional story found in LDS accounts concerning Fielding's church in Preston and its connection with Matthews's Primitive Episcopal Church in Bedford, see Thorp, "Early Mormon Confrontations."
[^27] Phillips, Sectarian Spirit, 49.
[^28] Beecroft, Journal, 2-3.
[^29] Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 148; Thorp, "Early Mormon Confrontations," 51-54.
[^30] The Wroites were followers of the millenarian prophet, John Wroe, who claimed heavenly revelations concerning the restoration of Israel and organized his followers according to Judaic customs, including breakdown into Twelve Tribes. They formed a community in Ashton-under-Lyne in the Potteries. A group from this community evidently joined the Mormons. See Harrison, The Second Coming, 138-60. The Swedenborgians originated from the eighteenth-century teachings of Emanuel Swedenborg (1688-1772), who was convinced of fresh revelations coming to him from Jesus Christ. The Swedenborgians were known as the New Church, and they had small congregations scattered throughout the northern industrial towns. Like the Mormons, they preached teetotalism and health codes. The Irvingites were of a higher social class than the Mormons, but they had many similar theological doctrines, especially the emphasis on spiritual gifts (including prophecy), the coming millennium, and the need for a modern group of twelve apostles. Their liturgical practices, based on primitivism, were of special significance and were often emulated. For comparison with Mormonism, see Lively, "Catholic Apostolic Church."
[^31] Whittaker, Life's Battles, 245.
[^32] Woodruff records: "Mr. Akens said in his sermon that the gentiles with all their present glory would soon be glad to take hold of the skirt of a Jew & say let us go with you. He also says that most are ignorant of the meaning & fulfillment of the Bible & will remain so until it is revealed by the spirit of God. But notwithstanding Mr. Akins has sum sublime truths yet he is building a great house without any foundation by rejecting the first principles of the gospel." That evening Woodruff returned to hear Aitken preach a second sermon: "He presented some of the most sublime truths that I ever herd delivered by a sectarian priest. Also he whiped the present religionist of the day at a tremendous rate. He said they would go to Hell as a body for their religion was ownly a cloke to cover adulterers and evry evil work. He said the judgments of God would spedily overtake them . . . . He wept over the present state of things" (Woodruff, Journal, August 23, 1840, 1:498).
[^33] Alfred Cordon to Parley P. Pratt, December 2, 1841, Millennial Star 2 (December 1841): 126.
[^34] Kimball, Journal, 38; Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 163-64.
[^35] The Dictionary of National Biography 1:206.
[^36] Great Britain. Register General's Office [London]. RG 31/2, Places of Religious Worship, Returns, Vol. 2. On December 12, 1832, the house occupied by John Benbow at Castle Froome was licensed, as well as that of Thomas Clark (who also became a prominent United Brethren preacher) at Bromyard. (Hereford Diocese, #519, #567). On April 19, 1833, Kington licensed houses at Brooms Green and Dymock for worship. (Diocese of Gloucester, p. 26. See also pp. 27 and 29 for other houses licensed between 1835-39). The late 1832 date for the organization of the United Brethren fits all the available evidence, although this is only a tentative assertion.
[^37] Smith, "United Brethren," 819.
[^38] Primitive Methodist Magazine (1832): 113; (1833): 64-65.
[^39] Smith, "United Brethren," 819. Smith states that the expulsion occurred before 1830, but this does not fit with the above evidence.
[^40] "United Brethren Preachers' Plan."
[^41] Smith, "United Brethren," 823.
[^42] Woodruff, Journal, August 2, 1840, 1:488-89. Not all of the converts were United Brethren, for Woodruff asserts that they came from "The Church of England & all other Protestant Churches."
[^43] Kimball, Journal, 18, 25, 34-35. For the American influence on revivalism in Britain, see Thistlewaite, Anglo-American Connection; Cardwardine, Trans-Atlantic Revivalism; Wilson, "American Religion."
[^44] Thorp, "Religious Backgrounds."
[^45] Ibid., 54.
[^46] Lee, Diary.
[^47] Day, Journal and Reminiscence.
[^48] Thomas Wright, Our New Masters (1873), as quoted in Kent, "Feelings and Festivals," 860.
[^49] Ingliss, Churches and the Working Classes, 1-2 and passim.
[^50] Thorp, "Religious Backgrounds," 63.
[^51] Barker, "John Bennion."
[^52] Morris, Autobiography.
[^53] Miller, Diary.
[^54] See chapter 1.
[^55] Thorp, "Social and Religious Origins." This study is based on 410 diaries, journals, and other literary sources. The statistical tabulations (pp. 10-12) have been somewhat altered for purposes of this essay. The most complete study of the social composition of Mormonism is that by P. A. M. Taylor, in which he tabulated occupational data of emigrating Saints from ship registers for the years 1841-1869. Taylor's figures reveal that 11.49 percent of the emigrants for this period were middle class, and that over 80 percent were from working-class occupations. Taylor's figures are the best available, and certainly within these broad categories his findings are correct. It must be remembered, though, that while Taylor's sample was 8,491 emigrating Mormons, at least half of the converts who joined the Church stayed behind, either as the remnant of remaining British Saints or as those who eventually left the Church. We might presume that some of the very poor Saints did not have the means to go to America, even with Church programs that provided assistance such as the Perpetual Emigration Fund. Thus, if anything, it would appear that the working-class composition of the Church might have been even slightly higher than indicated by Taylor. One other problem with his figures is that they do not indicate the percentage of Mormons who were skilled artisans. The present study does not significantly modify Taylor's general findings, but it adds some perspectives. See Taylor, Expectations Westward, 149-51.
[^56] See Gilbert, Religion and Society, 63. Gilbert compiled statistics for a slightly earlier period (1800-37), and the categories in Table II were made to parallel his as closely as possible. It must be observed that this sample is not random in the scientific sense but is based on recorded occupational information from Mormon diaries and journals, as well as compiled biographical materials. This table is meant to be an approximate cross-section that is suggestive rather than definitive.
[^57] McLeod, "Class, Community and Region," 34-35.
[^58] Campbell, Diary, 15-16.
[^59] In an earlier study, Paul T. Phillips wrote that Mormons shared with other sect groups the same "withdrawal syndrome": "they made no criticism of the state of industrial society," and they failed to stir up people against the existing order. See Phillips, Sectarian Spirit, 18. The evidence here presented modifies that conclusion.
[^60] One early convert, James Bywater, for example, stated that after a decade of "the hateful labors of factory life," he saw emigration as the only alternative to "white slavery" in English factories. Valentine. Trio's Pilgrimage, 8.
[^61] Billington, "Popular Religion," 272 and passim; Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 152.
[^62] Harrison, Drink and the Victorians, 31.
[^63] Miller, Diary, 12.
[^64] Henriques, Religious Toleration, 268.
[^65] Stevenson, A Lecture on Mormonism, 31, 27-28.
[^66] Taylor, An Account of the Complete Failure, 1.
[^67] Palmer, External Evidence, 27.
[^68] Ward, Religion and Society, 177-92.
[^69] Ibid., 3-4.
[^70] Kimball frequently complained of "opposition," but his journal does not reveal incidence of violence. See Kimball, Journal, 27-47.
[^71] Thorp, "Sectarian Violence."
[^72] Storch, "'Please to Remember,'" 83.
[^73] Charles Smith, Journal, 4-5.
[^74] Mary Ann Weston Maughan claimed that her first husband, John Davis, was badly beaten by a mob at Tirely, Gloucestershire, on December 23, 1840, and that he later died of complications that were related to this attack. The evidence that his death was a result of the internal injuries he received on this occasion is complicated and inconclusive. This appears to be, however, the most serious personal injury received during the anti-Mormon hostility of this period. See Maughan, "Journal of Mary Ann Weston Maughan."
[^75] Billington, "Popular Religion," 268.
[^76] Cotterill, "Midland Saints," 322-31.
[^77] Haight, Biographical Sketch, 100-101.
