David J. Whittaker, Ronald K. Esplin, James B. Allen, Men with a Mission, 1837-1841 ( 1992)

1

Mission of the TwelveHCORSON HYDE TO MARINDA HYDE, SEPTEMBER 14, 1837

I labor in the vineyard night and day and the Lord labors with me

Two months after Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde arrived on the first apostolic mission to England, Elder Hyde penned the following powerful and tender letter to his wife. It reveals his deep feelings about his calling, his views on his new surroundings, his attitude toward the people he was working with, and his longing for home and family—a fitting introduction to this pivotal mission. Midway through the letter, Elder Hyde filled his large sheet of paper then, because he wanted to say more, he began writing perpendicularly across the lines he had already written. Source: Elders' Journal 1 (1838): 19-22.

Preston, Eng. Sept. 14, 1837.

MY DEAR MARINDA:—

I have been and procured a large sheet of paper which will give me ample room to redeem the promise I made to you in a few lines which I addressed to you in Bro. Kimball's letter to his wife. Through the favor of the Lord, I am in good health and spirits, and so are all the brethren. I read your letter with peculiar interest and have but one fault to find, and that is, there was not quite enough of it. I should like to have heard how the brethren are getting along, but I know you could not think of every thing. I never wanted to see you more than I do at this time: But in this I cannot be gratified at present. There are about four thousand and two hundred long miles which separate us, and the mighty ocean rolling between. Since I came to this place I have been down by the water side and looked westward over the surface of the deep as far as the eye could extend, fancy painting to my imagination the prospect of catching a glimpse of my native shore through the glass of great desire and intense anxiety, but, alas! the greatness of the distance blasted the prospect, and the fleet and extended imagination returned within its own native borders. Again I looked as the sun was fast reclining in the western sky, leaving his golden beams in the mirror of waters, and described a proud and lofty billow bending its course towards the shore, as if to say, I have brought tidings from your home, your dear native home: But O! how I was disappointed again on seeing this false messenger sink by its own gravity to rise no more. This much is the result of one view of the sea shore.

I labor in the vineyard night and day and the Lord labors with me. There has been between one and two hundred baptized in this place since we came; and Elder Kimball is now a laboring about 15 miles from this place where he has raised a small church, and I do not know but that it is a large one by this time. The Lord is with him, and he can preach so loud and so fast that the Catholics call him a noisy devil. Bro. Goodson has this day returned from Bedford and says that he left thirteen baptized into the new covenant there, and bro. Richards is left with them. Bro. Goodson will remain in this place with me for a season. Brother Snider has returned from the borders of Scotland where he and bro. Russel went to labor, and Bros. Fielding and Snider left this place yesterday to go out into the country on a mission, and will go from house to house. Bro. Russel has not baptized any as yet but he will soon I think.

Those who have been baptized, are mostly manufacturers and some other mechanics. They know how to do but little else than to spin and weave cotton, and make cambrick, mull and lace, and what they would do in Kirtland or the city "Far West," I cannot say. They are extremely poor, most of them not having a change of clothes decent to be baptized in, but they have open hearts and strong faith. We have taught them nothing about the gathering for they have no means to bring them to America, let alone procuring them a place to live after they get there. We all pay 2 english shillings per week for our lodging which is nearly 50 cents, and then we buy our own provisions at the market and it is cooked for us. The brethren will frequently divide the last loaf with us, and will do all in their power for us. If it had not been for brother Goodson's books, I know not how we should have lived. They are very kind to us where we are, but their circumstances will not allow them to do much for us without pay. I have frequently seen the tender and delicate females with their old pails or baskets in the streets gathering up fresh horse dung with their naked hands, and then go and sell it and get a penny or two's worth of bread for themselves and hungary children. Marinda, how would you like to follow that business? I pray God that such may not be your lot. Tell the brethren if it would be a pleasure to them to see their wives carrying on such or a similar branch of business for a living, to bring them along with them when they come to old England to preach the gospel. Whoever comes here for loaves and fishes will realize their expectations as much as our Kirtland speculators.

If brother Joseph never advised correctly before, he certainly did when he advised the brethren to leave their women at home. My humble advice is, that if they have any compassion on their wives, let them for God's sake and for their wive's sake leave them at home. It is of no use for any to come into this country to preach the gospel unless they are able to defend it like a man of God. For unless they have a pretty powerful gift, they cannot live. Not so at home, if a preacher has but a small gift there, he can get what he wants to eat &c. because there are none so distressedly poor there and they will keep him over night free, but this is not the custom in this country. The people expect pay for what they do; and in fact, that people who will receive the gospel, are not able to do it without pay. Now if there are any elders or preachers in the church of Latter Day Saints in America who have faith to brook all these difficulties, let them come to Old England. We want them. We must have such men, and we say to them "come over into Macedonia and help us." We do believe that Kirtland affords some such men, men who are willing to forsake wife and children for Christ's sake and the gospel's, and look forward for their recompense at the resurrection of the just. It would be altogether better for the brethren to see us before they commence their labors in this country, for we can tell them many things respecting the customs of the people, and the laws of the land respecting preaching the gospel, that will be of great service to them. I understand that brother Pratt has gone East with his wife to spend the winter, and meet some other brethren in N. Y. in May next to come to England: But he had better wait and see us in Kirtland before he starts, or any one else; for we can tell them things that will prove to their advantage and to the advantage of the cause if they will do so. We shall probably sail for N. York about the first of March next, at least some of us, if not all: And we hope to be in Kirtland about the first of May next.

My dear wife, I never wanted to see you more than I do at this time, yet I am glad you are where you are, and that I am where I am. But the time will be when we shall meet again and rejoice before the Lord. I can truly say that I never before preached with that power and Spirit that I have since I come to this place. In fact, I am surprized at myself many times. The priests all fear and tremble and Babel's towers begin to fall. The priests talked of putting me in prison for preaching without a liscence from under this government. I made application to the Clerk of the peace for a liscence, but he informed that I could not obtain one until the court of quarter sessions which would be in October. I thought it would not answer for me to be idle until that time, therefore I continue preaching in houses, and in the streets, and on the public grounds, and in the market places, and am liable to be taken & thrust into prison any day when informed against: But the priests dare not really do this for fear of the people, for all men, almost, consider us to be prophets of God. Thus by the power and goodness of God we still continue to preach Jesus Christ and him crucified.

We are now occupying a large and spacious building in town owned by a general philanthropist, but does not belong to any church. The place will accommodate towards eight hundred people, and we have it free of charge. The priests have been to him telling him that he was encouraging false doctrine by letting us have the house &c. His reply to them is, "You are at liberty to go and contest the point with them; and if you think their doctrine incorrect, go and expose them.—You shall have your turn in the use of the house:" This shuts their mouths and puts them in rather an awkward position. The people here are quite anxious to build a chappel for themselves by laying aside sixpence a week out of their scanty earnings, but we shall advise them upon this subject to do differently.

We have not said a hard word against the priests since we came here, neither have we spoken against any sect, yet they say all manner of evil against us. The people have discovered this difference between us, and they are most agreeably surprised, and it gives us unbounded influence. We tell them that God has not sent us to judge and condemn another man's servant: But he has sent us to preach the kingdom of God. The short experience that I have had here, causes me to regret that all the elders have not observed the same course. I am quite satisfied that the great and frequent anathemas pronounced by many of our elders upon people who do not believe their testimony, are not by the Spirit of God: neither do I think it wisdom to be clubing the sects always: but let them alone, and preach Jesus Christ.

My dear wife:

I take the liberty to write a few more words across the lines which I hope you will be able to read: I feel that I have given myself wholy to the Lord and to the work of the ministry. I feel that I am far from home and no arm to lean upon but the arm of the Almighty. In him do I put my trust; and to him do I look for every blessing that I need. I know that in me there is no goodness, that is, in my flesh, For when I view my past course, I am ready to say, O Lord deliver thy servant from vanity—Cleanse his heart from all unholy desires. Let the virtue of thy blood wash him and make him fit for an inheritance with the Saints in light. Let him be sanctified, a vesel of honor to bare glad tidings to those who sit in darkness, and call upon poor wandering prodigals to return to their father's house. Give him prosperity in the promulgation of thy words; and let the enemies of the cross be confounded and put to shame before the sublimity and power of his arguments. Let him raise the standard of the cross in every land and nation where he shall go; and let the simple and broken hearted flock unto it and rejoice beneath its heavenly banner. Before the light which he shall hold forth, let error, ignorance, and superstition fall like Dagon before the ark of God, or flee like the shades of night before the rising glory of the king of day. Let his heart become the storehouse of charity and good will to men, and his body the temple of the Holy Ghost. Let his tongue be armed with truth supplied from the rich and flowing fountain of the heart.

O Lord, remember the partner of all my joys and sorrows; and when she reads this epistle from her dear and affectionate husband, Bless, O bless her with the same love and joy that now inspire my bosom. Let her enjoy health of body and peace of mind. When she is sick, do thou heal her: When she is cast down, do thou raise her up. When she is sorrowful do thou comfort her, when the tear of deep affection steels down her cheeks, do thou cheer her mind with the prospect of once more seeing the object of her earthly hopes; and with open arms embracing her nearest and dearest friend. And now O Lord, have thou respect unto the little babe which thou hast given us. Take it not from us, but let it remain as a source of comfort unto its parents. Give her health and prosperity and may she grow like thine own plants and let the blessings of heaven rest upon her. Let the babe and her mother be faithfully preserved until thy servant shall return to his home. Let these, the humble petitions of thy servant be answered, for I ask them in the name of Jesus Christ thy Son, Amen.

Now farewell for a little season

Until I come and bring a reason,

Why I left my all behind,

To go and warn all mankind.

For lo! the time is drawing nigh,

When Christ will take us up on high;

No more to part, no more to sorrow,

The time is nigh 'twill be tomorrow.

I am as ever your

affectionate husband

ORSON HYDE.

MARINDA HYDE.

2

THE PROPHET'S ADDRESS TO THE TWELVE, JULY 2, 1839

And let the Twelve be humble

During the summer of 1839, as they were trying to settle their families and at the same time prepare for their mission, the Twelve received many instructions from the Prophet Joseph Smith. On the afternoon of Tuesday, July 2, a particularly important meeting was held in which Joseph gave pointed advice to the Twelve and other missionaries respecting the attitudes they should have and how they should behave. We here reproduce those timeless instructions as they appear in Joseph Smith's History, though that entry is based largely on Wilford Woodruff's journal and the last paragraph is based on Willard Richards's "Pocket Companion." This is an exception to our general policy but since there is no original from Joseph Smith himself, we reproduce the best edited version. Source: Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 3:383-85. Cf. Wilford Woodruff, Journal, July 2, 1839, 1:342-44. See also Ehat and Cook, The Words of Joseph Smith, 6-8, 17, 413-14.

[Wilford Woodruff began his diary account with this preface: "Then Joseph arose & presented some precious things of the kingdom unto us in the power of the Holy Ghost, yea precious principles that ought to be engraven upon our hearts & practiced in our lives, some of which are as follows":]

Ever keep in exercise the principle of mercy, and be ready to forgive our brother on the first intimations of repentance, and asking forgiveness; and should we even forgive our brother, or even our enemy, before he repent or ask forgiveness, our heavenly Father would be equally as merciful unto us.

Again, let the Twelve and all Saints be willing to confess all their sins, and not keep back a part; and let the Twelve be humble, and not be exalted, and beware of pride, and not seek to excel one above another, but act for each other's good, and pray for one another, and honor our brother or make honorable mention of his name, and not backbite and devour our brother. Why will not man learn wisdom by precept at this late age of the world, when we have such a cloud of witnesses and examples before us, and not be obliged to learn by sad experience everything we know? Must the new ones that are chosen to fill the places of those that are fallen, of the quorum of the Twelve, begin to exalt themselves, until they exalt themselves so high that they will soon tumble over and have a great fall, and go wallowing through the mud and mire and darkness, Judas like, to the buffetings of Satan, as several of the quorum have done, or will they learn wisdom and be wise? O God! give them wisdom, and keep them humble, I pray.

When the Twelve or any other witnesses stand before the congregations of the earth, and they preach in the power and demonstration of the Spirit of God, and the people are astonished and confounded at the doctrine, and say, "That man has preached a powerful discourse, a great sermon," then let that man or those men take care that they do not ascribe the glory unto themselves, but be careful that they are humble, and ascribe the praise and glory to God and the Lamb; for it is by the power of the Holy Priesthood and the Holy Ghost that they have power thus to speak. What art thou, O man, but dust? And from whom receivest thou thy power and blessings, but from God?

Then, O ye Twelve! notice this Key, and be wise for Christ's sake, and your own soul's sake. Ye are not sent out to be taught, but to teach. Let every word be seasoned with grace. Be vigilant; be sober. It is a day of warning, and not of many words. Act honestly before God and man. Beware of Gentile sophistry; such as bowing and scraping unto men in whom you have no confidence. Be honest, open, and frank in all your intercourse with mankind.

O ye Twelve! and all Saints! profit by this important Key—that in all your trials, troubles, temptations, afflictions, bonds, imprisonments and death, see to it, that you do not betray heaven; that you do not betray Jesus Christ; that you do not betray the brethren; that you do not betray the revelations of God, whether in the Bible, Book of Mormon, or Doctrine and Covenants, or any other that ever was or ever will be given and revealed unto man in this world or that which is to come. Yea, in all your kicking and flounderings, see to it that you do not this thing, lest innocent blood be found upon your skirts, and you go down to hell. All other sins are not to be compared to sinning against the Holy Ghost, and proving a traitor to the brethren.

I will give you one of the Keys of the mysteries of the Kingdom. It is an eternal principle, that has existed with God from all eternity: That man who rises up to condemn others, finding fault with the Church, saying that they are out of the way, while he himself is righteous, then know assuredly, that that man is in the high road to apostasy; and if he does not repent, will apostatize, as God lives. The principle is as correct as the one that Jesus put forth in saying that he who seeketh a sign is an adulterous person; and that principle is eternal, undeviating, and firm as the pillars of heaven; for whenever you see a man seeking after a sign, you may set it down that he is an adulterous man.

3

JOHN TAYLOR TO LEONORA TAYLOR, SEPTEMBER 19, 1839

If he took me I felt that it would be well. He has spared me, & it is better

When the apostles left Commerce, soon to be Nauvoo, Illinois, most were ill and penniless, making their overland journey to New York City one of the most difficult times of their entire mission. Here, describing a portion of his trip, John Taylor reveals his hardships, his faith, and his deep concern for his family (see photograph, p. 69). Source: John Taylor Collection, Church Archives. Previously published in Ronald K. Esplin, ed., "Sickness and Faith, Nauvoo Letters," BYU Studies 15 (Summer 1975): 431-33.

Germantown Ia

Sept 19, 1839

My George MY DEAR NORA My Mary Ann

My Joseph

To you may grace be added and peace from God

our Father & from Our Lord Jesus Christ Amen

I thank my heavenly Father through our Lord Jesus Christ that I have this oppertunity of addressing you. When I last wrote to you I did not know what was laying before me. You will probably recollect me remarking that I had a slight indisposition. That was a cold which seated in my bones & brought on a violent fever which nearly terminated my existence.

The next day after I wrote the letter I felt very unwell & went to bed as soon as we got to the Tavern that night & took a sweat. We started off early next morning & travelled 14 or 15 miles before breakfast when we stayed I felt unwell & before we started again I fainted away. I however soon recovered & travelled 40 miles that day. In the Evening we got into the neighborhood where we lived in Indianna. (I called upon Esqr. Jenkins saw Dr. Wilson who was very friendly & Mrs. Zimmerman. She is strong in the faith & wanted your address. I gave it to her. She said that she would write. I also saw Eatons people who were glad to see me. I am told they are now doing well & bear a good character. I also saw Mr. Hoffman who was glad to see me. He is living in the house that we did. I did not see Br. Anderson, but am told that he is doing well & preaching around the country.) That night I stayed at Mr. Combs. They were glad to see me & treated us well. I felt middling well & stayed talking with them till ten O Clock at night. I went to bed but took no rest. I was not in pain but my nervous system was in some way affected so that it deprived me of rest.

Next morning I partook very hearty of milk which I think curdled on my stomach. I had not gone above two or three miles before I was very ill. The waggon had to stay near Indianapolis. I got out about a mile on this side & told them to drive on & I would come up. When I got out of the waggon, I was very sick, vomited but with extreme difficulty. I then after some time made out to stagger on to the waggon, & when I got there I fainted away in the road. I took something to refresh me & drove on through Indianapolis about two miles & could go no further. I got onto a bed in a house & had a raging fever & a bilious affection at the same time. Father Coltron learned we were not far from Br. Eldredge, he who wanted me to go into that neighborhood when we lived at Mr. Millers. He gave me a lobelia emetic & I t[ook] medicine by wholesale for near two hours. It produced however a beneficial effect. I purged, vomited & prespired violently & felt myself better but weak in the morning &, as Father Coltron was in a hurry to proceed I started with him next morning & we travelled 40 miles that day but I found it was too much for me. I got no sleep at night & next morning soon after we started, I thought I should have died. I again fainted away. We travelled about 12 miles & I could go no further so we stayed at a tavern. They waited a day & a half for me. When I saw that there was no prospect of me continuing my journey, I told them that they had better proceed. They did so.

I have a very good Tavern to stay at. The Landlord & Landlady treated me as their own. I placed myself under the care of a Docter who did all that he could for me & now, near three weeks after my arrival, I have got clear of my fever & am fast recovering. I[t] brought me however to the gates of death. Several times. It laid hold of me like a strong man armed & I was led to quail beneath the power of the adversary, for I believe his hand was in it.

You may ask me how I am going to prosecute my journey, with my trunk a distance of 300 miles or upwards by land, without means. I do not know but one thing I do know, that there is a being who clothes the lillies of the valley & feeds the ravens & he has given me to understand that all these things shall be added & that is all I want to know. He laid me on a bed of sickness & I was satisfied, he has raised me from it again & I am thankful. He stopped me on my road & I am content. When my way is open to proceed I shall go on my way rejoicing. If he took me I felt that it would be well. He has spared me, & it is better. The Lord does all things well. Bless his holy name Oh my soul & forget not all his mercies.

I left $4 worth of papers for Br. Eldridge to sell. He will let you have the amount of it in boots or shoes. You can tell him that I did not get anything from Father Colt[on] [illegible word] shall I as he is gone on perhaps Br. Eldridge may be there when this reaches you. You can tell him what I say if you see him. When you write if anything particular has taken place in the church let me know. Tell who of the twelve have started &c. If this reaches you in a week from this date send me a few lines directed to Daton Ohio. If I get them well, if not they will do no hurt.

I am as ever your Affectionate husband

John Taylor

A little letter to my Son George A little letter to my Daughter

George your Father has been sick Mary Ann

but God has made him well. Your Mary Ann the Lord has healed your

Father prays for you that you may Father from being sick. your Father

not be sick. George be a good boy. prayes that you & your mother &

Do what your Mother tells you & Baby may not be sick. Mary Ann do

God will love you & I will love not leave your Mother when she

you & your Mother Amen. tells you to stay at home. Be a good

John Taylor girl. God Bless you Amen.

John Taylor

[Written between the above letters:]

A kiss for Joseph & Mother

[Written on the margin:] You can write to Daton. If I get it well if not there is no harm done but I shall expect a letter at New York.

4

VILATE KIMBALL TO HEBER C. KIMBALL, SEPTEMBER 21, 1839

I have got a trial of my faith as I never had before

Heber C. Kimball, like several of the apostles, left his wife both ill and destitute, trusting only in God, and in Joseph Smith's promise that his family would be cared for. This letter, written only three days after Heber left Nauvoo, reflects the suffering and the trials of the women who remained behind. Vilate suggests that unless her health improves, she will be unable to keep the promise Heber exacted from her to write once a week. Source: Heber C. Kimball Collection, Church Archives.

September 21 friday eve [1839]

My very Dear Husband

with a weak and trembleing hand I attempt to write a few lines, agreable to your request to let you know how we do; which is very poorly I can assure you. As to my feelings I dont know but I am perfectly reconciled to your going. But I must say I have got a trial of my faith as I never had before.

The day you left home, was as sick a one as I ever experianced, the pain in my back and head was almost intolerable. No doubt the pain in my head was worse on the account of my much weeping. But I did not weep any after you left, for my distress was so great I could think of not much els. William moaned and cried about all day, and had a chill in the evening. Sister Bently staid with me through the day. She was sick, but she did all she could for me. Fanny Dort came over and stayed all night with me. I was a lone a little while before she came. I then cralled out of bed, and bowed before the Lord and pled with him to give us a good nights rest and he did so, and be assured I did not forget to pray for you.

The next morning I felt free from pain; [but I was so light] headed that I could not walk without staggering. William and Helen was not able to do any thing so I was obliged to crall round and do my chores, and wash a little for the babe; no one to help me but little Heber P. I soon got over done and brought on my chill and fever, so that I had a very sick afternoon, and did not rest but little last night.

To day I have not ben able to do any thing. I was taken early this morning with a shake, and shook about an hour and a half as hard as I ever saw any body in my life, and then weltered under a fever and extream pain until almost night. William has just had the hardest chill that he has had in a number of days. Br Rogors has ben here and left more pills for him, and he has taken them up, but they dont seem to do him any good. He offered to leave some for me, but I told him I would try what virtue there was in bone set first. But it has not done me any good. And what to [do I] dont k[n]ow. I have no one to get any thing for me, or to do any thing for my comfort. Br Bently has moved in here, but sister Ann is very feble hardly able to do her own work. She is very kind and would be glad to doctor us if she was able. Helen is complaining all the time, but is able to do some chores to day.

Now I have given you a statement of our situation, not to make you feel bad, but because you requested it of me. Thus you see I have got a trial of my weak faith as I said before. But all that I can ask of you is to pray that I may have patience to endure to the end whether it be long or short. I feel as though if you ever see your famaly all alive again it will be through your faith.

Saterday morning, dear Heber we are all alive and tolerable comfortable this morning. Would to God we could remain so through the day. We will hope for the best. Mother Bemon stayed with me last night. She said I [must] tell you she had slept with your little Prophet. I must draw to a close for Br George is waiting. Unless my health should improve I shall not be able to write next week as you requested, for im groing weak every day. You had better enquire for a letter at New York, perhaps I shall direct there. So fare you well my dear Heber. I pray that it may be well with you. [Signature clipped out.]

Sister Ann send love to you.

The children all send love to you.

5

HEBER C. KIMBALL TO VILATE KIMBALL, OCTOBER 24, 1839

I have told you the truth. . . . now do the same to me, then we will be even

When Heber C. Kimball wrote the following letter from Pleasant Garden, Illinois, he apparently had not yet received Vilate's letter of September 21. The letters are appropriate companion pieces, for both Heber and Vilate were longing to see each other, worried about each other's health, and having serious illnesses and financial problems. They had promised faithfully to write and, equally important, to be honest with each other about their respective well-being. Like Vilate's letter, Heber's account of his illness and arduous journey reflects that honesty, along with the anxious desire that the troubles it revealed would not worry his companion needlessly. "Don't be concerned about me," he pleaded, "for I am in the hands of God." Heber concludes with an inquiry about a pamphlet—an account of his 1837 mission to Britain, which was published as the Journal of Heber C. Kimball in 1840, while he was on his second British mission. Source: Heber C. Kimball Collection, Church Archives.

Plesant Garden Oct the 24 1839

My verry dear Companion, through the goodness of God I am permited this morning to set down to rite a few lines to you that you may no how I guit a long upon my journey. I will ashure you that it is with trembling limbs that I do it. But to fulfill my word that I made to you, I procede in the name of the Lord.

I left Winchester on the day that I stated to you in my last, with your father & Br. Brigham went six miles to misters Bares. Stade all night. The next day Br Lorenso car[ri]ed us to Jaksonvill stade all night. The next day Brother Babcock got a buggy and careed us to Springfield being 35 miles. Went it in half a day. Stood it well my self; Br B was taken sick. Not able to travel or to set up much, he went threw with a can of medison by Br Cones.

We remained thare one week. I spent my time in going from hous to hous amongst the brethren strengthing and teaching them the things of the kingdom, and preached on the Sabath to them. Thare was a great feeling of love shone to us. They went and got a two hors waggon and harnis for us which they paid 55 dollars, and made up 35 dollars in money for the company. Here was great liberal felings and they shall in no wise lose thare reward seth the Lord. Judge Adams tock me home with him and made welcom to his hous. I stade with him three nits and most part of three days. He was asking questions all the time. When I left him he gave me five dollars. He is judge of the Suprem Cort. He will come in to the Church soon I think.

We put the three horses before the waggon and started on friday Evning went 8 miles and stade at old mister drapers being quite late in the [day] when we got thare then found them sick, our living slim quite. So, next day went on our journey. Travled all day till night when we put up. I went [on] foot part of the way being [all sick]. Got su[p]per. I slept in the waggon with your father and Br Hadlock. I got cold. The next morning they would not guit us anny vitles to eat because we was Mormons. Went on our journey.

Got to a brothers hous about 10 oclock. They got us sumthing to eat about noon and this was corn dodger and transparant pork. By this time I began to fail our waggon began to fail brock down [illegible word] and the chiles came on to me again, about two in the afternoon, and hold me till night. Then the fever hold me all night. This continued for three days. I had lost my apetite not having anny thing betwixt meals to eat. The third chill that I had it seam to me as tho I could not live till night my distress was so great. I got to Doctter Modsett about dusk. I made out to guit in to the hous with helpe. I was made welcom by the Docter and his wife. I throde my self on to the bed laid a short time got up set a spell and began to grow faint. I then told them that I must go to bed. The Docter and B Sprung to helpe me and I fainted and fell my hole length on the flower. Thare was hardly a breth of life in my body. I laid on the flore fore a long time before I could be taken up. When I was put on to the bed it tock the docter and his wife and Br Brigham all nite to keep a breth of life in my body. This continued till about ten in the morning when I felt better. Thare was cold sweat that Rolled out of me all night, which swet the deseas out of me; and I have had no chills since. I got to the Docters thursday night.

The next morning the brethren twock the team and went on and left Br B with me his helth being very power. When they left me they wep like children aspechly your father for he thought I should not live. Mondy nite brother Babbit and Docter Niter came to see me if I was a live. The next morning I felt to start on my journy. The Docter twock his carrage and carred me with in fore miles of Plesent Gardens whare brother Babbet was laboring. Br Babbit tok me into his waggon and car[ri]ed me to Br Crosby. I have made my home thare and at Docter Niter. He is one of B Babbits children. He is [in] a verry eminet pasition a man of great welth. Brother Almon has begun a good work in this place and in the Regions Round about. He has suffered sum percicution, they have ingered his waggon some. His wife is with him. He has baptised five [and there are] some more that have presented them selvs for baptism.

We expect we shall start from here to morrow if the Lord will. Brother Babbit ses he will take us on our journy leven miles. We have sent on our trunk. We expect thare is a brother that will take us to the capital [of] Indiany, then I expect we shall have to take stage to Columbus [if] then we shall have to take the canall, after we leave this plase I dont [object]. My courage is good at this time and has ben [since] I left home. My helth is increasing verry fast at present. Dont be concerned about me for I am in the hands of God.

Now my dear Companion do not feel bad becaus I have told you the truth, for this I agreede to do when I left home, now do the same to me, then w[e] w[ill] b[e] even. I heard from you by the way of Brother [words torn] an [2-3 words torn]. They left thare about [4] days ago sed your helth w[as] [improved, which] was glad tidings to me of great joy. But I [3-4 words torn] when I recieve a leter from your own ha[nd] [2-3 words torn] have under gon more in my feelings in my life [2-3 words torn] I left home, about the Children and your self, I am going to trye to be more of a man than I have been. Tell me all about the children how they guit a long. Tell William and Hellen I think of them all the time that I pray for them, and I wont they should for me. Tell litle F to be a good boy Kiss litle D for me. Take good care of your Self and be prudent my dear Vilate. Give my love to all my friends. Tell me what Brother Thomson is doing with the pamphlet. Now I bid you fare well Vilate for a litle Season

Heber C Kimball

6

JOHN TAYLOR TO LEONORA TAYLOR, JANUARY 30, 1840

O that this people were in possession of the same glorious principles that we possess

This lengthy letter from John Taylor to his wife is especially significant because his diaries are not available. Here, copying from his diary, he reports in detail his voyage, his arrival, and his earliest missionary activities in Preston and Liverpool. (The dates from the diary are often wrong, usually by one day.) He warns future travelers of the impositions practiced by so-called shipping agents in New York and provides interesting information about the postal system. An Englishman returned home, he notes visits with family and friends, including the baptism of George Cannon, brother to his wife Leonora, with whom he lived in Liverpool. He also recounts his warm reunion with Joseph Fielding, a fellow Englishmen who emigrated in the 1830s, joined the Church with him in Canada, and became his first missionary companion in Britain. Source: John Taylor Collection, Church Archives.

Mr. George Cannons No. 43 Norfolk St Liverpool Jany 30, 1840

O My Dear Leonora

After waiting impatiently for a long time in hopes of hearing from you I at length sit down to write to you. I have never received any intelligence from you since your two first letters both of which I received on my arrival at New York, which were wrote I believe before Elders Young & Kimball left Commerce or soon after. How to account for this I know not. I am sure that My Nora never would forget to write to me she knows that I feel anxious about her welfare & that of the children. They must have miscarried. I have peculiar feelings about you my dear. I last night dreamed that I saw you in some difficulty & I am fearful that you are. I have prayed to my heavenly Father to bless you protect & deliver you & I beleive that he will. Do not be afraid of communicating to me all your feelings & all about your situation & perhaps I can administer unto you comfort & relief. Meanwhile I say unto you that others shall. Inasmuch as you are patient humble & faithful you shall be blessed & provided for in the name of Jesus Christ Amen.

I beleive the P. O. regulations are that letters must be paid to the lines c/e to New York, which will be I think 25 cents. If this is not done I think that they will not come. I wish it were otherwise because I know that you have not too much money. When you or any of the Sisters direct to Preston it will be necessary to write on the direction the number of the house, the name of the Street, as well as of the person otherwise the P. O. Regulations are that they keep them eight days & afterwards send them to the dead letter office in London from whence I expect it would be difficult to obtain them. Liverpool however is an exception to that. They have a strangers letter office the same as they have in New York & other parts of the U. S. I have however made some arrangements with the P. O. in Preston so that if letters should come addressed to me at the above named place I might have some prospect of obtaining them, but when you write again direct as on the top of this letter.

I now commence to give you some account of my proceedings & the delings of the Lord with me since I last wrote to you from New York. I extract from my journals.

Dec 19 Left New York Dock on the Ship Oxford a liner in Company with Elder Woodruff & Turley for Liverpool. Paid $15 for our Passage in the Steerage. There was no second cabin in the vessel. I write the following for the benefit of others who may come.

There is a great deal of imposition practised by those who are proffessed Agents for those Vessels but who in reality have no commission. They will advertize certain Vessels the time of their departure together with their names & place of residence, & passengers are frequently deceived by going to these offices as everything is plausible about them. They have bills for shipping passengers with the owners signatures printed. They will receive & give receipts for passengers money on those bills & then if the legalized Agents should not have a sufficient number of passengers to fill the Steerage there may be a chance for those obtaining a berth—but if the Legal Agents have filled the Berths then the passengers shipped by the other have to wait till another boat sails, go with a transient vessel or lose their passage money which is not unfrequently the case.

There is another imposition practised by those Agents or Owners or Captain or All together. When you go to examine the Vessel to choose a berth you are sheon a number of berths standing which you are told by the Agents are all that there will be & if you have your berth regular there will the number of your berth marked on your ticket or receipt. But it was the case on our vessel that there were 5 marked for 1 Berth instead of two & there were numbers shipped that had no berths at all so that instead of 40 passengers, which we were told there would be, there was 63 passengers in the Steerage, which altered the conditions of the passengers very much as there had to be a number of extra berths put up & [illegible word] to contain 4 men. 4 were stuck into the place where the chains are. A woman & a man had no berth at all but were obliged to lay on the Boxes [on] the floor or where they could.

There is also another difficulty. When you arrive on board as soon as you leave the pier you can obtain no redress. You are told by the Captain or Mate that they know nothing of the affairs of the Merchants or Brokers, that you are under their control & must be subject to their government. Therefore it is best for every one fully to understand their own business before they go on board if possible—get their tickets at the boat & their numbers marked on their tickets &c.

We sailed on the 20th at 12 O. Clock fair wind. 21 fair wind. 22 unfavourable. 23 Unfavourable. 24 Stormy unfavourable. 25 Half calm Half of the day stormy. 26 Fair wind rough. 27 Fair wind. 28 2 points of[f] course. 1200 m[ile]s from N.Y. 29—2 Points off Stormy. 30 Very Stormy. 31 Rough near the course. 1 June 1840 Stormy 2 Points of[f] course. Jun 2 calm till 6 O clock then fair wind. 3 Fair wind. 4 wind aft. 5 Fair wind. 6 calm. 7 Calm. 8 Close to the wind. 9 Fair wind. 10 Saw Cape Clear. 11 Passed Hollyhead. Took in a Pilot & were informed that we were before the Steam Ship Liverpool that set sail 5 days before us & the Ship Independence that sailed 11 days before us had only just arrived. Hauled into the Princes Dock the same [day].

12th On Sunday I saw your Br. George, took Dinner with him. I found him to be an inteligent man & a Gentleman. He & his his wife used me well. They made me think of My Nora. I unfolded briefly the first principles of the Gospel to them & left a Book of M & Voice of Warning with them. 13 Cleared the Custom House paid 6 per lb on American Books.

Left Liverpool in the Rail Road Cars. Started from Lime St at 1/4 before 5 O Clock. Your Br. George saw us off. Arrived in Preston Lancashire same night. Saw Br. Richards & many other brethren who crouded in, being rejoiced to see us. It gave me peculiar feelings to meet with the Saints in England. I was much pleased & edified at the kindness & love manifested by the bretheren & Sisters & with their simple unadorned manner. Took dinner with Br. John Parkman & had peculiar feelings at seeing his wife after dinner leave the house, her husband (a shoemaker) & children to work in a factory (a practice very prevalent in this & other manufacturing towns) thus breaking up those social endearments that unite the family. It makes my heart bleed to see these things. When will the earth cease to mourn. In the Evening I had the pleasure of seeing Br. Clark. He rejoiced to see me & I to see him. It gives us peculiar feelings to meet our friends in another country.

(14) I found my Uncle George Hodgson, visited him & family. He is doing a very good business in partnership with his son John who is a very accomplished & intelligent young man. Cousin Betsy had been Dead 3 Years. My Uncle & Aunt look much the same only a little older & more care worn. Uncle & John had upwards of 20 men at work. Their address is—I have forgot the addresses but direct George & John Hodgson Plumbers Painters & Glaziers [Fishergate] Preston, it will find him. 15th Called upon and took dinner with Uncle James Hodgson. He & Aunt Mary were well but he looks much older then he did. I saw Cousins James & Robert Atkinson. James is married & has I think 3 Children. He is following his business, Cabinet Maker. Robert is also married, has I think 3 Children. He is foreman for Uncle George in the Plumbing Glazing & Painting business. I wish my dear that you would communicate this last intelligence to my Father (direct to Mr. James Taylor Mr. Arrowsmiths Springvale in care of J. N. Rust & Co Oquawke Warren Co Ill.) with my kindest love to Father & Mother & all my Friends. Tell them to be faithful & to pray for me as I do for them.

16th I saw my old Friend Elder Fielding & was rejoiced to see him as he was also to see me. I thank God that he has preserved him & given him wisdom for the arduous duties devolving upon him. We felt something like Jonathan & David after an absence of 3 Years. 18th held council with those of the bretheren that had just come about the best way to dispose of ourselves until the rest of the Quorum of the Twelve should come. We did not feel disposed to interfere with any body's business but our own—but were rejoiced to see the order & amity that prevailed in the Church. Er. Feilding Presided. It was Resolved that I should go to Liverpool & Elder Feilding accompany me—that Er. Clark go to Manchester that Elder Wilford Woodruff & Er. Turley go to the Potterries from thence to Birmingham as they should deem prudent.

17—Elders Woodruff Clark & Turley left Preston for the places of their destination. We took the parting hand with them at the railroad after having blessed them & they us. 18 S Preached to the Saints in Preston. 19—Went in Co[mpany] with Ers. Richards & Feilding to Penwortham. Preached at Br. Moons house on Pauls declaration "I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ &c". 20 Visited my uncle Georges, told them about my mission & promised when I came again to visit them get all my friends together & preach the gospel to them. 21 Left Preston in Co[mpany] with Er Feilding Preached in Longton on the Angel Flying in the midst of Heaven &c. 22 we pursued our course to Orms Park but had no opening for preaching so we pursued our course to Liverpool the same night. Called at Wm. Armstrongs Tailors he received us kindly. We took tea with him & I stayed at your Br Georges.

23 Called upon Wm. Batemans. Took tea with him. Called upon a Mr. Kent a Preacher & a beleiver in the personal Reighn of Christ. We told him our mission, he did not reject it. A Gentlemen who had been ordained a Church of England Minister from Plymouth came in while we were conversing with Mr. Kent. We delivered our testimony to him but he rejected it. We warned him in the name of The Lord & told him that if he opposed these things that portion of the spirit which he had received should leave him that he would be brought into darkness & the concerns in which he was engaged would not prosper. Br. Feilding told him this & I sanctioned it & warned him against baptizing any more as he was without authourity. He is connected with a church in Stafford I beleive of the Same order of Mr. Wm. Millerd in Canada, beleives in baptism & the Personal Reighn of Christ. He was a learned & highly polished man, his words were smoother than oil but the poison of asps was under his toungue. He said our work was from hell &c. We washed our feet & bore testimony before the Lord—Saying Oh Lord our Heavenly Father we thy servants have bore testimony of the truth of those things that thou hast revealed to Mr. Steward & he has rejected our testimonys. Oh Father thou knowest that we have no hard feelings towards the man. If thou canst forgive him & lead him to the truth do, we pray the[e] Oh Father. We do this that we may fulfill thy word & bear this testimony before thee according to thy command & now O Father we leave him in Thy hand praying thee to guide us into all truth & fulfill all Righteousness in the name of Jesus Christ Amen.

26th Went in the morning to Mr. Aitkens Chapel, a place where Mr. Matthews Er. Feildings Br. in Law is the preacher. He however was not there but we heard a young man preach who seemed very devoted. Lamented over the state of the professing Church, prayed for the blessing of the Holy Ghost & looked for the coming Kingdom of Christ &c. &c. I had peculiar feelings when I heard him & saw the situation of the people & felt Oh that I could have an opportunity of unfolding to them the glorious things of the Gospel. O that this people were in possession of the same glorious principles that we possess. Br. Feilding felt the same.

After meeting was over I desired an opportunity of speaking a few words saying that I was much interested in the things that I heard. I was told that I had better go into the vestry & that they would there speak to me. Accordingly Br Feilding and I were introduced into the company of from 16 to 20 Class Leaders & Preachers & they then wanted to know what sect I was of or what was my profession? I then addressed them.

"Gentlemen friends & bretheren—I have listened with deep interest to the things that I have heard this morning. I have observed with peculiar emotions the deep anxiety the fervent prayer & the strong solicitude that is manifested by you for the obtaining of the Gift of the Holy Ghost. I have been pleased with the correct veiws that you entertain in regard to the situation of the Church & of the World & as you believe in these things so do we & as we hear that you beleive in baptism & laying on of hands (for Mr. Mathews had not only baptized since our bretheren came & got that from our bretheren but he had asked Br. Feilding how he laid on hands & had attended to that with out authourity. The people however were not to blame for that but were sincere in what they did)—so do we. Bretheren & friends we are the humble followers of Jesus Christ & are from America. I have lately arrived in this place, have come a distance of 2000 miles without purse or scrip & testify to you bretheren that the Lord has revealed himself from Heaven & put us in possession of those things that you are so anxiously looking for & praying that you may receive. (Glory to God was shouted by many present & great emotion manifested.) That thing has taken place which is spoken of by John in the revelations & I saw another angel flying in the midst of Heaven having the everlasting gospel to preach &c. Rev. 14 This gospel has got to be proclaimed to every nation kindred people & tongue & we the Servants of God are come to this City to warn the inhabitants of their approaching danger & to call upon them to repent & be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins & they shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost. Bretheren & Friends I feel an anxious desire to deliver this testimony. I feel the word of the Lord like fire in my bones & am desirous to have an opportunity of proclaiming to you these blessings that you are looking for, that you may rejoice with us in those great & glorious things which God has revealed for the salvation of the world in these last days & if it would be consistent with your feelings I should be glad of an opportunity of speaking in your Chapel this afternoon next week or any time when it would be convenient for you.

Many present rejoiced others wept some were jealous & angry. They then asked what society we belonged to enquired if we did not belong to the Mormons. I said no we belong to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints known in some instances by the name of Mormons. One said we have heard an unfavorable opinon of you by our Pastors Mr. Matthews & Aitkens. Mr. Matthews says that the thing is from Hell. They however had no authourity about the meeting unless Mr. Matthews was here. Some felt anxious about it. Br Feilding told them that he was Mr. Matthews Brother in Law. One of them asked if we could not in a few words put them in the way of obtaining the Holy Ghost. I told them no but if they would wait for two hours as the thing was of importance I would wait & explain it to them.

In the Afternoon we went to a Baptists Meeting, told our errand was invited home by a Gentleman & introduced to the Rev Mr. Creasy, a rigid Calvenistic Baptist. Mr. Creasy however did not love the truth. The Gentleman at whose house we were was very frank & invited us to call again but said as to their people he knew they were so rigid that if we were to preach in their place they would not hear us out. I am afraid that the religion of this Generation will sink them to hell. They have so much religion that they have no time to listen to the truths of God. In the Evening we again went to Mr. Aitkins Chapel. All eyes were upon us. There are many honest hearted among them but like others they are under the influence of Preists. After Meeting one of their Leaders invited us home. His name is Mr. Mitchell. He & his wife received the word with gladness.

27 Went in the Evening to Visit a Captain Gile was introduced by Mrs. Cannon. Captain Gile was not at home but there was another Captain a Cousin of his by the name of Philip Gile (I think you wont know him) A young gentleman a Methodist Mrs Gile a Miss Collister & another Lady. I preached the gospel to them & we delivered our testimony. Mrs. Gile invited us to call again. We have several times since that & Mrs. Gile & Miss Collester are very much beleiving.

28 Attended an appointment that we had at Mr. Mitchells. The Elders of Mr. Aitkins Church had been very much excited in consequence of our being here & would not give him rest till they made him promise that we should not preach in his house. He however said that he would talk with us. His wife had been to tell the neighbours & freinds of the meeting but gave them back word. In spite of this however the house was near full. I talked with them a little on the Scriptures. His heart was overjoyed. Others were pleased with what they heard & thus in spite of all the influence that can be brought to bear they "can do nothing against the truth but for the truth."

29—This morning we were waited upon by a woman who stated that she never had such feelings before as when I arose in the Chapel. She beleived that we were men of God as soon as she saw us. She & some others sent us some money. By this shall ye know that they are my deciples if the[y] feed you & clothe you &c. 31—Met a few at Mr. Mitchells. Br. Feilding spoke. After he had got through a Methodist Preacher wanted to know if we could heal the sick. I told him that we had not come to testify of ourselves but to the truth that if he beleived the scriptures he must beleive these things. He wanted to have a sighn. I gave him to understand in a spirit of meekness that a wicked & adulterous generation seeketh after a sighn. He thought that there was not much error in the churches. After a few remarks I prayed that the matter might drop & that at least we might have no more contention. There were several different orders present. We said no more but they soon fell out among themselves thus proving that they had not the spirit to lead them into all truth.

2 S Went to a Floting Chapel on the Kings Dock heard a preacher of the New Association a sort of Methodists. His Text was "go ye into all the world & preach the gospel to every creature." There was much darkness manifested & I thought Oh that generation would receive the truth & that the servants of God might have an opportunity of proclaiming it to them. After service was over we waited upon the minister who introduced us to Captain Hudson a Gentleman who has the principal charge of & preaches on the floating Chapel. I told him who we were, that I had lately come from America & that I wanted an opportunity of preaching in some place in town & hearing that differrent orders preached on that place I thought that I would make application. He invited us to call upon him at his house. We did so a day or two afterwards but he was too good a man to do anything, too wise to be instructed & too holy to be made righteous.

In the evening we attended a place that we had hired as a preaching room that would hold about 300 people lighted with Gas & although we had been very still & said little the room was nearly full of people who joined in singing & gave good attention. I preached from Jude upon the faith that was once delivered to the Saints. I spoke upon the desire that had been manifested by men in differrent ages to reform—that Luther Malancthon, Calvin Wesley Whitfeild & others since them had tried to bring about the ancient order of things & that however laudible their attempts might have been they had failed—that there was neither the love, unity power nor blessings now in existence that existed among the Ancient Saints, that many had it in their hearts to pray for the ancient order & wished they had ancient Methodism Presbyteranism &c. but we would now see what kind of Gospel the ancients Saints had & be governed by it. I then shewed what the gospel was as presented by Peter Paul Phillip &c. Began at the day of Pentecost &c. Spoke of the Order Spirit Doctrines Ordinances Gifts, Blessings &c. of the gospel & shewed that if it was true then it was true now, that if it was the privilege to enjoy these thing it was ours now to possess as great blessings through the same gospel—that as many of them had been praying for the ancient faith the Lord had answered their prayers & sent us his servants to testify to them that God had restored these things—that he had sent the Angel according to the testimony of John having the everlasting Gospel to preach &c. We were witnesses of it & had come to unfold the same glorious things to them that they might rejoice with us, that I had left my family & come a distance of 2000 miles without purse or scrip for this purpose that they might rejoice in the same glorious things that God had revealed to us. I said this is glorious intelligence & asked is it not. Yes was responded by many & praise the Lord. Br. Feilding then made a few remarks & bore testimony to what I had said. I then said that the Lord had sent us to baptize & called upon them to repent & be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ &c. That we his servants stood ready to administer in this ordinance that if any wanted to be baptized they may make it known to us.

After the congregation was dismissed there was great emotion in the meeting. Many wept others rejoiced & praised the Lord. The spirit of the Lord indeed was with us & bore testimony to what we said & I plainly saw that it was the power of God & not the wisdom of man—that I could do nothing unless the spirit of God bore testimony to that word. After the meeting a young man came to me & told me that the Lord had showed these things to him in a vision. He rejoiced & said that he would be baptized. A young woman come to me & wept & said that she knew it was the truth, the power of God & the word of God. Several said that they beleive we were the Servants of God & wanted to obey the Gospel. It caused our hearts to rejoice. Mr. Mitchell spoke to many of his class who were present & told them that these things were of God & that he could not resist, them that he would obey the gospel & hoped that they would consider seriously about it. We appointed Teusdy at 3 O Clock to baptize & went on our way rejoicing thanking God that he bore Testimony by his spirit to those things that he had comissioned us to impart. On Tuesday ten ca[me] forward in baptism. This was after the first preaching.

I must now pass over many things & hasten to tell you that the week following I baptized 4. Will it not cause the heart of My Leonora to rejoice when I tell her Br. George & his Wife made two of this number & they now stand in a nearer relationship than kindred flesh. They are brother & sister in Jesus Christ. They have manifested to us the greatest kindness since we came & we have made their house our stopping place. I believe the Lord has many people in this town. I pray that he may role on his work.

I have just received a letter from Er. Woodruff. He is well & doing well. Br. Turley is gone to Birmingham. Br. Woodruff expects soon to join him there. I received a letter from Er. Clark two days ago, he had got a letter from Sister Clark. He is well & he begins to get his [mouth of]. He has baptized several. There is nothing in the letter about you or sister Woodruff. Er's Wright & Mulliner are in Scotland & have commenced baptizing. Elder Feilding is well, has a daughter, desires to be remembered to you & his Sisters. He & I are like David & Jonathan. The Latest accounts from Er. Richards were that he was not very well. Ers Kimball Young Smith P.P. Pratt nor Hadlock have not yet arrived. We are looking for some of them daily.

I called upon your old friend Mrs. Porter she was glad to see & asked why I did not bring you along. I saw Mr. Tubman Your Uncle. Your Aunt is dead. He is married again & keeps the railroad tavern. Ann Tubman is married to a man from London. Ann Crawford is married to A Mr. Kidd Clark in the [illegible word]. I saw Mr. & Mrs Clark they are well. I called upon Mrs. Crane Ann Neil. Nora Vale is well. I saw her Stepmother. Your Sister Elleoners Husband is dead & 2 Children. The first Husband freinds keep one since his death. Elleoner is well. I have seen her two or three times. John is with David in Sidney. I have seen one of his letters & some of David's. John Laments Leaving England without seeing you. David is steady & expects to return with something that will do him good in a few years. I saw Mrs Crawford from Ramsy. Thomas is dead. J.T.

[Change of handwriting. The following is a note written by George Cannon, Leonora's brother.] Dear Sister I hope you and your little ones are well. You may imagine how surprized I was to see Mr. Taylor. I should have been happy if you had been along with him, I believe that the Lord had a hand in sending him to England and shewing me in what a dangerous state I lived without even the form of religion but with the assistance of Gods Holy spirit we—that is Ann and I are determined to lead a new life and shew a better example to our children. Dear Sister I wish you were here. There are many things I could talk to you about that I am ashamed to let others know I am ignorant of, but I am in hopes that I shall see you and your dear little ones before I die. Death has taken one little one from us. John was 3 1/2 years old when he died and only eight days illness, a brain fever. I mean to write you a long letter soon dear Sister remember me in your prayers. Seldom as I went on my knees, I always prayed for you and my brothers. God has promised to hear us when we are gathered together in his name. Our prayers may ascend the same time to the throne of grace, for what is distance in the sight of God. G. Cannon

[The remaining section is written by John Taylor.]

I must now my dear bring this communication to a close. Tell George & Mary Ann that Father is going to get a Mansion a glorious inheritance a fortune & that if they are good Father & Mother & George & Mary Anne & Joseph will soon live together with God & with the holy Angels. Accept of the kindest love my Dear from your distant John & 100 kisses each for the Children.

I hope that more of your friends may yet embrace the gospel. Your sister Ann has introduced us to many of them. She is a complete missionary & happy in the Lord. George & Mary want to be baptized. Give my kindest love to all the Brethren Brs. Joseph & Sidney if returned from Washington, Br. & Sister Hyrum Smith Br. & Sister Thompson Father & Mother Smith Bishops Partrige Whitney & Knight Ripley Br. Miller & all the Saints. I pray for you & for them & ask an interest in the prayers of my bretheren & I know that you will not forget me. I should be glad if Georges schooling could be attended to.

I feel thankful my dear that I have never lacked any good thing since I left home. The Lord has been & is with me. I have realized the truth of this, that the God that feeds the ravens & clothes the lillies numbers the hairs of my head. I have nothing to say about myself, my intelligence virtue or perseverance but I have much to say about the goodness of God. I feel that while the Lord takes care of me I am rich. Praise the Lord Oh my soul praise him Nora & my children praise him his saints praise the Lord put your trust in him my dear & he will take care of you till I return. I bless you & the children in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ Amen & remain as ever Your Affectionate Husband for ever & ever Amen——John Taylor

A letter has just come to Er. Hadlock

He has not arrived [two words illegible]

Lean upon the Lord my dear & he will remember you [and] yours. God bless you.

7

WILFORD WOODRUFF TO WILLARD RICHARDS, 25 MARCH 1840

The Lord of Hosts is with me in power & some of the time the Devil to

Written about three weeks after his arrival in Herefordshire, this letter includes fascinating details of his astonishing success in that area. His personality and his deep and abiding faith come through these pages. An avid fisherman, Wilford calls his Herefordshire success "the strongest fishing ever I have done," and notes that such "rapid work" had gathered in some who would not and should not stay. In the last half of the letter, responding to Willard's request for prayers and advice regarding the trials facing him and his ailing wife Jennetta, Wilford offers tender council and inspired blessings. Source: Willard Richards Collection, Church Archives.

Hill farm, Froomes Hill, Ledbury, Herefordshire, March 25th 1840

Elder W. Richards

Dear Brother. May grace, peace, strength, faith & victory rest upon you & Sister Richards from God our father & our Lord Jesus Christ. Dear Brother it is amid peculiar feelings that I take up my pen to address you this morning. I have so many things in my mind at this time that I wish to communicat & so little time & room to do it in that I hardly know where to begin or how to end. I feel that there never was a store House ten story high filled from top to bottom with Merchentdize that canst have more of a variety in it than I have in my mind at this time. & I hardly know how to go to work to give you a description of my situation but I will try to do it by parible, figure, similee or sumthing or other. I am far from feeling vane or like trifling but I take the Liberty of making expressions to you that I would not to the world that you may ketch my view of the situation of things here. In the first place permit me to say that I never before witnessed such a scenery as I am experiencing here neither did I ever expect to in my generation. The Lord of Hosts is with me in power & some of the time the Devil to. I have had some mighty Battles with the devil [several] in [illegible word] since I have been here & God has enabled me to give him a deadly wound and routed him out of his camp & he has fled from me wounded & roaring like a Lion & I can hear the sound of his roar about ten miles off & I expect him to return for another Battle by & by for you are aware that an enemies camp cannot be broak up without some noise & so you can form sumthing of an Idea of it from the following description.

I have been here 21 days preached 20 times & Baptized Mr Thomas Kington the superintendant of the preachers of the United Brethren, a branch of or broke off from the Methodist Church & with Mr Kington I Baptized 23 preachers of the same order that was under his superintendance & also I Baptized 46 of the members of the same Church making 70 in all. This scenery has committed into my hands & charge & my controll mostly 45 established places of preaching most of which are licensed according to Law & also 48 Preachers 24 of which I have already Baptized & most of the rest are ready as soon as they can have an opportunity. As I said before I say again their will be a mighty harvest here, for all the churches which these preachers are over are ready to recieve the word. Should I judge from outward appearances I should think their would spedily be 500 Baptized in this region & probably more still I don't wish to count chickens before they are hatched. I am now Baptizing about 10 daily, day before yesterday 12 & yesterday 9. Some days I have to go to the water 3 time a day. I Baptized 6 preachers yesterday & I have a number to Baptize to day. Yesterday 3 preachers came in a charriot or gig to visit me. They never had herd me preach at all. I had on wet clothes & going to the pool to Baptize. I testified of Jesus Christ unto them. The power of God rested upon us & they kneeled down and weept & prayed & their gig stood still & they all went down into the pool the same hour and I Baptized them & they went their way rejoicing & praising God. Mr. Kington is an humble man. I have Ordained him an Elder & I ordained five priest. Their will be many worthy labourers raised up in this country.

You see by this time Brother Richards I am not Idle but have much to do & need much wisdom from God to do it well, for it is the strongest fishing ever I have done & I don't expect any thing els but while gathering the salmon I will get among them some ells & snakes for their has already been some after they were Baptized that would pitch & Bound like a porpose or jump & roll like a hen with their head cut off manifesting any kind of spirit but that of order & if ever an Elder had any triming to do I expect to have my share of it by & by for in doing such a rapid work as this I have to become all things to all men for I cannot get time to do much triming as yet. In fact some have before I was aware of it bounded into the water to me stark naked excepting a loose cloth around their legs but I put a stop to all disorder as fast as possible. & again I am Having a mighty struggle against this [illegible word] power of falling down like a dead man stiff as a Stake which is in some of the preachers as well as the people. I have to handle all these things in wisdom.

Among the number that I have & are Baptizing are some large farmers having 3 or 400 acres of land. I have Baptized some constables as well as preachers. There is a Merchant in Hanly that we Baptized that trade is so bad that he is winding up business & wants to go to Zion with the Saints. I have Baptized most of his relatives here severel Brothers & Sisters here. He has come down to visit them. He has said sumthing to them about it. & they all want to [illegible word] up business here & move with the Saints in the U.S.A. & in fact most all the Saints are getting the same spirit here without my preaching it. I do wish the Twelve would spedily come to England that we might hold a council somewhere about these & many other things. When you next write to me say a word to me what your mind is about this. The farmers here feel like this that bad times are coming & the sooner they can turn their property into gold the better & in fact with the view I have of the times I cannot advise them as yet to the contrarey.

You begin to see Brother Richards that I must have much to occupy my mind at present considering what I have to do. & in addition to this I have just recieved a Letter from Elder Cordon at Burslem. Stating that Elder Turley is taken with a States warrent & put into Stafferd Jail. It was done by a man in Birmingham for an old Debt that Brother Turley contracted 15 years ago before he left England. Or in other words Turley was in partnership with a man & when they dissolved Turley gave up the Stock into his hands to sell & he supposed it was all Settled but now the man claims that he did not sell the Stock for as much as he expected & that he has still claims on Turley. John Jones in Burslem was connected in taking him. It is merely a trick of the Devil to stop his preaching but I believe the Lord will overturn it for good. How long he will be confined in prison I do not know. The whole Labour at the Potteries is now flung upon Elder Cordon & when he wrote me he was some out of health. & should their be any faithful labourer at liberty would they not do well to go into that part of the vineyard & assist. And again in addition to this care I have a Certain Brother Richards whome I love of a truth for the truths sake that dwelleth in him. & I pray God that it may be with him forever & he asks an interest in my progress in his behalf & his companions that the Lord may manifest his will concerning them.

I will now say Dear Brother I will gladly comply with your request the first leasure moments I can get, in fact I have attempted two or three times since I recieved your two Letters upon the subject to lay the case before the Lord but no sooner than I would begin to pray some one would be wraping at my door for me to go & baptize them or for sumthing els. In fact since I recieved your letters I have had no spare time hardly to pray for any thing, for you see how things are with me & of course can judge how my time is taken up. I scarcely pass a pool of water but what sumbody is waiting there for me to baptize them. & in fact if John had more Baptizing to do when all Judea & Jerrusalem went unto him to be Baptized, than I have had for a few days past he certainly had his hands full. But do not think dear Brother that I shall close this letter without answering the questions you have asked me & expressing my feelings unto you. No God forbid not withstanding I have not had time to lay your case before the Lord as I could wish. Yet I have a word to express upon the subject. In the first place I wish to say I recieved your two letters & have read them over several times. & you speak my mind perfectly with regard to any other persons opening any of our letters excepting our own Quorum. & when I gave permission for a letter to be opened should one come before my returned, I did not then expect to be gone but very few days before my return & it was under the impression that if I had a letter at all during my absence it would be from Brother Clayton in Manchester, & as they wanted to hear from him I gave them that privilege with a charge to say nothing concerning the contents if their was anything that the church should not know. But being gone longer than I expected your letter arived & was opened by Brother Turley. But I have sent orders for no more letters to be opened that are sent to me. And with regard to the question you asked me on the scrap of paper. (I say yes let them eat or drink what they will in such cases). I would be pleased Brother Richards to hear from you often & give me all the news you [hear] from any quarter. I was pleased to hear of doors being opened in Scotland. Tell me where I can direct a Letter to Elder Mullenner in Scotland. Also inform me of any information you get from any of the Twelve. I wonder why they tarry so long in America may the Lord hasten them to this country. Also inform me concerning Sister Richards health from time to time give my love to her & tell her I would be exceding glad to see her but when I shall get out of this part of the vineyard I cannot tell. Pray for me Brother Richards that I may be meek & humble that I may fully overcome any speces of pride & self wrighteousness that I may feel my dependence on God in all things, & that I may know the mind of God concerning me in all things.

A word concerning you & Sister Richards. But what am I that I should teach or instruct thee or inquire the will of the Lord concerning thee. O that I was more worthy that I might speak thee the desire of thy heart in this thing & that I might more fully know the mind of God concerning myself & all things that are required at my hand that I might be more fully prepared to greant thee thy request. But if you can receive it at my hands I say unto you thus saith the Lord let not my servant Willard Richards litely essteam his calling or Station for I have called him & he is a chosen vessel unto me & no man shall ever do his work or take his crown. For he is humble & seeks my will. His afflictions shall work together for his good in the end. Let him be not weary in committing his case unto the Lord or trusting in my name & I will bring it to pass & the darkness shall pass away & the light shall come. & I [shall] breck the bands that bind him & lift him from those under his charge for they [are] not worthy & some are under condemnation for litely essteeming the priesthood & him whome God has set over them. Let him still call upon me in Mighty prayer & be not weary committing his companion & all his ways into my hands & I will work out his deliverance in a way that I have prepared. & he shall yet have many souls as Seals of his ministry, & be mighty in council, & much beloved by his brethern the Twelve.

Thus Dear Brother is the voice of the spirit concerning you & I would say to Sister Richards, by way of council to try not to be discouraged nor desire to die but to live. Though your afflictions may be great for a time yet consider what Jesus has bourn. Commit all yours ways unto the Lord you will ere long enter that rest that remains for the people of God. Then your morning will be turned into joy & will be satisfyed with the goodness of the Lord. I feel as though the Lord will open a door whereby you will be liberated before many days. I will pray for you before God that your faith fail not & that you may have grace & strength according to your day. Whatever is manifested unto me I will endeavour to communicate it unto you from time to time. Write me soon Brother Richards & dont be discouraged God will be your friend. I would be glad to see the second No of the Times & Seasons should you get one please send it to me at Ledbury. Any thing you may have upon your mind pleas communicate freely. It will meet a welcome reception.

W Woodruff

Excuse my scribling I dont have time to write very plain.

8

HEBER C. KIMBALL TO VILATE KIMBALL, APRIL 3, 1840

The waves rolled mountains high . . . it seam[ed] as tho the sea would swallow us up

While the second contingent of apostles was still aboard ship, Heber C. Kimball began a letter to Vilate describing his departure from New York and the unpleasant ocean crossing. Full of interesting detail about provisions and life aboard ship, this account nonetheless emphasizes the difficulties of the voyage—a contrast to the unusually fast and smooth crossing he enjoyed in 1837. Compare this letter with Parley P. Pratt's account of the same voyage, which follows. Source: Heber C. Kimball Collection. Church Archives.

3 April 1840

In the english channel too hundred miles from Liverpoll beeting against the wind. Now my dear Vilate I will begin back at New York. and let you [k]now how things went with us, since I Rote last from York. I stade thare about fore weeks in the time, I was going from hous to hous teaching them the Gospell of Salvation, and also in publick while thare, thare was about forty Baptised in to the Church. menny more that was just Redy to go forward. And beter Saints I never saw before. They fed us and gave us clothes and money and such things as we had need of as much as it was in thare power as they ware verry pooer. Thare was one Georg Adams a Tailor that made me a pare of Pantaloons and a vest. The vest did not suit me and I gaive it to Brigham for it fittid him. This mister Adams was a Medthodist Teacher. He claimed me as his Spiritual Father in the gospell before we left he was ordained an Elder. He had been in the Church only a week.

The Patrick Henry did not sail on 7th of March as she did not guit Redy. We sailed on the 9 about 12 Oclock and before night we was out of sight of land. We had not been out but a short time before we was all sick. It continued so for three or fore days then began to guit ove[r] it. Those that had been sick with the chill fever suffered the most. I was very sick but I could not vomit. This made it still wors for me. I canot describe the seen. Suffise it to say that it was a great deal worse than it was when you and I went up the Lake. Our apitit[e]s did not surve us at first. The brethren put up evry thing that was good to eat. I will tell you what we had. Potatoes gren Aples, dried Aples, dride Prunes dried Plumes; Preserves quince, Plum, Peach; dride Beef, Ham, Pork, Cod fish, swet bread, bakers Bread, common bread, Crackers, Wrice, Chogar [sugar], Buter, Peper, mustard Salt, Horsh Redish Pickles lemmons Rasons, Pies.

We had Straw ticks and two Blankets and Coverled and Pillows. Br. Adams gave us thre[e] pare of sheets but we did not euse them, and twelve or forteen towels and sope. They gave us money to pay our passage, over the Sea. We had to pay 18.00 a peas which was two dollars less then others, the Reasson was becaus, one Mr Cresson came from Pheladelph[i]a. He went and got our pasage, being a quainted with the Agent he got it cheper, and telling him that we was Ministers. Let me tell you that most of the means was made out by those that was converted after I got thare, and some given by those of the world. One man gave ten dollars and a barrel of Bread. So my Dear companion how the Lord works in these Last days. Some of our brethren in Kirtland would not give us, for they did not believe the Lord had not sent us to preach the Gospel becaus we was sick. These ware those that colds them selves Saints. They will have thare Reword. When I see you I will tell you who they are. So you see if one will not an other will, for the Lord has the harts of all men.

Sartaday the 4 this morning sit my self down by our chest, the ship about half turned over, with a hard head wind, about 60 miles from Liverpoll. From N Y to this place we had a head wind. We had a heavy gale yes two of them that lasted sevrel days. The waves rolled mountains high. I am not able to discribe. It seam as tho the sea would swallow us up some times. We ware driven before the wind to the Rate of ten miles an [h]our with all sail taken in, not a peas out as big as your Apron. It Rained and hailed and Snowed and thundered and Litned. The offersers and sailors said they had not seen such a time in fifteen years. The Captain is a verry carfull man so that no accident has hapen to the ship as yet or at anny one bord of it.

I relate one thing that will give you some idea of this storm. When Brigham and my Self lay in our berth we could look out of the Ha[t]ch way and see the Mountains of water. From the place whare we lay to the top of the Bulk works is [116] feet. Now you m[a]y think this to been strang[e]. It would been the sam[e] as to take and cut a hole three feet Square out Ridg of your Hous in the Center and lay in your bed and look out of this hole and see these Mountins. This would bee when we was in the vallies. One night thare was some of the bull works washed a way and much damage. Thare was but a few days but what the sea would beet over the bull works and come down the Ha[t]ch in torrants. Some days the pasengers and Sailors would bee as wet as tho they had been taken out of the sea. This would last sevrel days at a time. Now five to go to we had to lay a beed the most of the time, some times seam as thos I should freeze. I See Br. Orson [Pratt] seting on a bale of Cotten the water came on Deck so that the Cotten S[w]iming with him on it. My helth is quite good this day only I had to lay a beed most of the day. it is so cold.

The brethren all injoy good helth and thare courage is good. We have had perfect peas among our selves. Br. Hadlock has been cheaf coock. I have been coock [and] I have made good menny Pies and turn overs. and menny others good things. Sum times I think the Sea had brocken over its bounds, for it seems as far again as it did when I went before. We could not have gon in [a] worse time in the whole year for head winds. I bid you g[ood] evning. I have more to say to you tomorrow, good night.

[On address page, different hand:]

Have arrived and B Young, PP. Pratt. O. Pratt Hadlock G.A. Smith, H.C. Kimble. When you write always give an account of all the Elders familys as to their health &c. I mean those Elders that are here. & you had better tell the other Sisters to do the same & then we might all of us know about the health of our families &c.

Direct to No. 43 Norfolk St. Liverpool England care of John Taylor

I am as ever your own Heber Kimble

Vilate Kimble

Commerce Hancok Co Ill

United States

9

PARLEY P. PRATT TO MARY ANN PRATT, APRIL 6, 1840

We had fiddling, fluiting, dancing, singing . . . togather with Blasphemy, Swearing, Contending, Laughing, Courting and Vomiting

On April 6, 1840, almost as soon as he stepped ashore in Liverpool, Parley P. Pratt wrote to Mary Ann. Although, like Heber C. Kimball, he provided her a wonderfully descriptive account of the ocean voyage, it is interesting to note the different details the two men decided to report. Parley devoted considerable space to telling Mary Ann how anxious he was to have her and the children join him in England—perhaps the reason that he emphasized the more positive side of the voyage. Source: Parley P. Pratt Collection, Church Archives.

Liverpool, Eng. April 6th, 1840

Mrs. Pratt,

We all arrived in safety this morning, 28 days from N.Y. We are all well, for which we thank God. I will now proceed to give you some account of our passage. There were about 50 or 60 stearage passengers. Some 6 women and 10 children. Some Irish, some English, some Scotch and some Americans, and some of the filthyest, Lousyest caractors I ever saw. But all very generous and kind to us, and mostly to each other. We had fiddling, fluiting, dancing, singing, (mostly Love or war songs, some Religious) togather with Blasphemy, Swearing, Contending, Laughing, Courting and vomiting, as well as Cooking, Eating, drinking, sleeping and reading; and I had like to have said preaching, for the mate sometimes delivered us a Negro Sermon.

After Eld Foster left us in N York Bay, we sailed with a fine breese, till we saw the sun set behind a distant Island, soon after which being rather quamish we went in to our filthy dungeon and retired to rest. By this time the vessel tossed very much and we were all quite sick and some began to vommit. Next morning I arose first and went on deck. The wind was still fare, the sea rough and nothing in sight but the distant Heavens, and the wide expance of ocean. We all continued sea-sick for 3 days mostly confind to our beds, for we did not feel half as sick wen Lying down as when seting up.

It soon came on a heavy gale of wind, mingled with storm, which drove us perhaps ten miles per hour with out having up any sail. This lasted two or 3 days, and the mate said he had not seen such a gale in 13 years. The sea Looked like mountains and vallies. Sometimes the ship would be on the top of a wave as high as a three story building, and the next moment it would plunge into a yawning gulf, where the water would be perhaps thirty feet higher than the vessel on every side, and Every few minits a mountain wave would dash over the deck and drench the sailors and Every thing in sea water. The waves frequently broke over the uper deck where you stood when we viseted the vessel. After five days, the wind turned into the east and Blew against us hard for four days, during which we were exeedingly tost; all the sailors wet to the skin and many of the passengers wet as often as they went upon deck, and even Barrels of water dashed into the hole and wet some of the women in their Births. No one could stand or walk with out holding on, and the dish would frequently run a way with the spoon. Everything had to be Lashed to its place with ropes, and several nights we Lay awake rolling in our births and holding on to keep from being thrown out.

After four days head wind there came a perfect calm and the vessel stood still for some hours. The wind then blew Lightly in our favour, for a few hours, and then turned eastward again, and blew hard for some days, then another calm, and after it a light breese in our favour for a few hours and then more heavy winds against us, and so on till the second of April, when at the seting of the sun we saw land, like a distant Cloud. It was a part of Ireland. The first we had seen for 23 days. We were then 200 miles from Liverpool and the wind still ahead insomuch that it took us four days to get in to port. We wasted, gave away or eat up all our provisions so that we had to buy one or two meals towards the Last. But if we had antisipated so long a passage we could have been more prudent and it would have been sufficient for a much longer voyage. Our passage was 8 or 10 days Longer than usual. There was but little sea sickness after 3 days.

The passage seemed very Dreary for it was so cold and wet that there was no comfort to be taken on Deck, and it was wet and crowded, and Dark and filthy to be below. But much of the suffering would be dispensed with if one would come over in a warm pleasant time in the season; but After all, the Women and Children seemed to stand it very well, the Little ones two or 3 years old were frequently playing on the Deck. One man had 4 children about the age of ours, the youngest a babe, he had no person but himself to take care of them. One woman had a Little babe 3 weeks old. She got a long very well. The Child was not sea sick at all.

On the passage I would allways be dreeming when asleep, and not one night passed in the whole voyage without my seeing you and the children in my dream.

Yesterday we passed the day in plain view of the mountains of Wales besprinkled with houses and farms, and this morning we found the ship at anchor in a view like it was when you saw it last; while on one side was Liverpool, like N York, and on the other it looked like Brooklyn. We 3 of us took a little boat and landed early in the morning. As we jumped ashore Br Young gave a Shout and Br Kimball and myself thought Amen. We took Board and Lodgings at Mrs Beals, No. 8 Union Street, where I now sit writing. 3 Oclock pm, O[rson] P[ratt], R[euben] H[edlock], and G[eorge] S[mith] have just Landed and Sat down to dinner at our Boarding house. G. S. Sais thank God, we all think amen.

So here we are in a new world to us, and yet the very world of our fore fathers, and a world where we hope soon to have thousands of Children in the Gospel. The faces I have seen here look nothin different from Americans. The Buildings more ancient and durible. The houses are more stout, large and Beautiful; the ladies I have seen are not as Beautiful as ours; But the Carts 3 times as large, and Begers more in earnest, Manners some what different, and Little or no timber in any direction; and yet upon the whole it seems much like our own country.

I have now given you a sketch of our journey, and I would now Inform you that when the sun rises here and we arise, it is only a bout 2 oclock in N.Y. and you lye sleeping for four or five hours longer, and when we go to rest here at 9 in the evening it is about half past four in the afternoon with you. As to house rent in this country I am in formed it is not one half as dear as in N.Y. and as to fewel it will not probably cost one third as much as in N.Y. and as to provision it is as cheep, and merchandise of every kind nothing like as dear here as there. Upon the whole I do not think it will cost us much to live in this country as in that.

Here all the kingdoms of Europe are before us on every side. Here is a boundless harvest for the next 15 or 20 years, or as long as God holds forth the arm of mercy: and here if the Lord will I expect to spend five or ten years at least. Time with me is to precious, money to scarce, and comfort to dear, to be thrown away in crossing the ocean every few months. Therefore in view of all these things I wish you as soon as you get this letter, to sell every thing except beding and wearing apparrel, and fill two chests and a trunk, and get ready to come to England the first oppertunity, with Br Hyde, Br John Page, Br Winchester and Lady, or whoever comes first.

Do not Bring a new feather Bed, nor any Books, nor more dishes than you need nor any article unmade up; if you do the duties will be more than to buy them here. Collect all that is due for Books; sell all you can, Pay the seventy five dollars to the printer, Mr Harrison; and Leave the Book Business with Eld Foster [let] him sell them whole sale and retale and Pay the money in, to Mr Shipman as he gets more Bound: and so till they are all Bound: or till I write to him on the subjet. I will allow Eld Foster a good percent For his trouble, if he will take Charge of this Buisiness. And now I say to you and to him in particular Do not let the Books go without the pay in hand, for they have cost me much money and I owe for them; and I need the remainder after the debt is paid, to support my family.

If you are careful in making a bargain you can get yourself and Children a passage to Liverpool. I [count] whole 1 passage and one half. If you can get a passage in the 2d cabbin in stead of the Stearage. It will only Cost a few dollars more, say 4 or 5 and it will not be so crouded with filthy vagrants of the rougher sort. The Cook will Cook your provisions and wash your dishes all the way for a dollar or two, although you will have to prepare it and cary it to him. And as to milk, they had a cow on board and gave the children and women plenty of milk, and very frequently others got it also.

If you get this Letter in one month after date I Shall begin to look for you the Latter part of june. If you think you cannot stand it to come any other way, perhaps some good friend will help you to money by loan or otherwise; if so then take cabbin passage, which by takeing pains can be got for you and the children for 150 dollars. You will then be in a clean, warm, well firnished place, everything foud you, and a Chambermaid to wait upon you. If you take cabbin passage you need not wait for any of the Elders to come with you, for it will be conveniant to come alone, as much so as to go to Boston. Women cros the sea a Lone as often as any other way, Bothe in the sterage and in the cabbin. [two illegible words] passage takes from 18 to 20 days. Then you Land in Liverpool, order a carriage to Mrs Beals, Union Street, No 8, she keeps a boarding house. You can then stay there, and send a line to me, to Preston, Pole St, No 21, which is 30 miles distant or you can take passage and come out to Preston in about 3 hours. And depend upon it, If my life and Liberty is spared I will be found in Preston waiting for you whether in June or July.

Courage, Mrs Pratt, you have performed more difficult journeys than this, and if you will take hold with courage the Lord will bless and prosper you and our Little ones and Bring you over in Safety. I must now close. Bless the Children for me. My Love to all the Saints. God Bless you all Amen. The Brethren send their Love Both to you and all the friends, with many good wishes.

I remain your faithful

Mary Ann Pratt Husband P.P. Pratt

Direct your Letters to Preston, Lancashire, Eng. Pole Street, No. 21.

It may be some of us will be preaching in Liverpool when you land. and perhaps there will be Saints there. If so we will leave written directions with Mrs Beal No. 8 Union Street so that by enquiring for me you will find us.

10

WILLARD RICHARDS TO BRIGHAM YOUNG, JUNE 15, 1840

It seems I ought to see my wife

Though Willard Richards begins and ends this short letter with information about his ministerial labors, the continuing illness of his wife Jennetta weighs heavily upon him. Here a discouraged Willard, writing from Dymock, seeks additional advice from friend and quorum president Brigham Young, Manchester, who had earlier suggested that the Richards family move to Manchester where Willard could help his wife and still serve. Jennetta declined, however, and explained why in a letter that Willard here shares. A Thompsonian or herbal doctor, Willard has used his medical skills on her behalf but to no avail, nor have prayers and faith yet prevailed. What is God's will? Source: Brigham Young Papers, Church Archives.

Dymock June 15 1840

To Bro B. Young,

After walking from Turkey Hall almost melted. I sit down to tell you we had a good meeting yesterday at the chapel, full house, men women & Devils. I have not time to tell you porticulars, only I told them I would never attend another meeting in that place if they did not take take care of those Rascols—though the Lord helped me to scare the Devil pretty well till after conference, but more porticuler hireafter.

In the midst of the meeting I received a letter from Jennetta—Dated June 9th Walkerfold. I will copy a few lines:

"Yours of the first instant I received this morn, which I will attempt to answer if it be only a few words for I am very poorly. Have only just got out of bed, can sit up but little at a time, never free from pain a moment. No not one moment. I can assure you that Death would be a friend at present, would my heavenly father take me to himself, but his will be done. I do not know what he intends doing with me—but let him do as seameth him good only some one in his kingdom with all his chosen ones. Have been very poorly ever since I wrote you last. I have taken the medicine (Thomsonian) while I could take it no longer, & have given it up—& will leave myself in the hands of the Lord, & say with Paul to live is Christ & to die is gain. [Philippians 1:21] With respect to my going to Manchester it will be almost impossible as things are, though I should be very happy to me[e]t you & all the Elders there & when you write to Bro Young give my kind Love to him. Tell him I thank him for his kind invitation." & [etc.] Now you see we have much to do here next sabbath, & all the way to Manchester Conference. & as things are it seems I ought to see my wife. Now is not the Lord willing to hear prayers in her behalf, & let me stay in the vineyard till conference? If so get me an answer from the Lord at Manchester I beseech of you, for I have enquired & we have called upon God here—but no answer either, by dream, or vision, or Revelation. Does God want to Destroy her, or Does the Devil, or why is it her life must be a continual burden—& I be taken from the vineyard to take care of her? The heavens are brass here—& I wish you could get an answer from the Lord to these things & write me at Ledbury, [illegible word] friday next—& what the Lord says I will do.

The work is still progressing—have had no chance yet to enquire about more money—heard from Bro Benbows to day all well. We go to Lugwarden, Marsden Thacknell Hill, Stanley Hill conference & start for Potteries monday next. I am sorry to hear that John Moon has gone to America. He has lost a blessing.

Will it be necessary to return the pay for the Star from this region to Manchester & may it be [appopriated] to the payment of Sister Pitt (Kington)? The Star were between 4 & 5 shilling each bunch & we have not been able to find the Van (baggage waggon) office at Manchester yet. It wont do to pay so much for cartage if we don't [have all] this month.

Bro. Woodruff has gone 9 miles to attend meeting his eve—well—I am in great haste.

Yours forever

Willard R.

I have just written to Sister Richards to encourage her to get faith & come to Manchester yet. [Illegible word] all things are posible for God that [need] to [illegible word]—& I want to know his will in this Matter.

[Written on the side of the address page:]

Shall not be able to distribute all the Stars instantly

Calls keep increasing the only way to sell is to keep them on hand and they will all be wanted hear in time.

11

BRIGHAM YOUNG TO WILLARD RICHARDS, JUNE 17, 1840

I percive more than words in your letter

As senior member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Brigham Young provided the administrative direction and nurtured the brotherly bonds that helped focus and unify the mission. By letter when he could not do it in person, he encouraged, counseled, and kept informed the apostles serving with him. Though usually short, his letters document his wisdom and good humor, along with the friendship and love he shared with his fellow servants. This letter to Willard Richards, answering the urgent pleas in the letter that precedes it in this collection, illustrates the style of leadership that helped make the mission so successful (see photograph of address side of letter, p. 156). Willard and Jennetta did move to Manchester, as Brigham counseled, where Willard was able to assist his wife and still serve as a missionary. Source: Willard Richards Collection, Church Archives.

Manchester June 17 1840

Brother

Beloved Willard Richards,

I now set down to wright a fue lines to you. I have jest recived yours of the 15[th]. I am allways glad to here from my Broth[ren] but I sory to here that Sister Jane is not well. I percive more than words in your letter but how to ancer the dezire manefested I know not. I can ancer concerning the papers; all the monny recived for papers we expected to pay in for the borod monny in that place, ether to Brother Kington or Br. Benbow, after the expences was paid. I said somthing to you in my other letter concerning Br. Benbow's going to America before we pay him his monny, if Brother and Sister Benbow are amind to doe so, it would favor us for we can not get the Hym Book out till in to july and then they will have to be bound before they can be sold. If they goe as soon [as] july which likely they will, they will need to start as soon as the last of july or in augast in order to goe through in the plesent part of the year. There will be a nother company going from here about that time and I think some one of the American Br. will acompany them.

A verry little knews[:] we have agreed for the printing of the Book of Mormon this day have bargaind for the paper (190 reems demi which amounts to l 111 18 03). We have hired the capender's hall for to Preach in, a large fine place for meetings it will hold about 2000 people. Last week was wisen weak. The Brotherin wanted somthing good so we told them to aske fore the blessings of the Lord and get the gifts. On frida[y] night we met together, by sunday there was plenty to rise up in the name of the Lord and speak with other tongues, and provisy in the name of Jesus. There are menny that have the power of God so upon them they can not work—and I tell you the Devel is close by and he has grate power. The second No of the Star is out. We are geting along finely with the hym Book thou[gh] my labor has been such that I am quite unwell, but I keepe doing with all my might.

I want to see the Brothern in that contry [Herefordshire]. I shall never forget my little mision in that contry with Brother Woodruff and with Br. Richards after he arived there. Br. P. P[ratt] has had a letter from O. Pratt. He is in Edenburge in Scotland, he has ben there som time. He hired a hall had perty large congr[eg]ations at first. He now has a bout one doson or 15 herears non[e] Baptized yet but the work is going finely in that contry round about. The Church is in cresing in Liverpool and about here. Give my love to Br. and Sister Kington and all the rest of them.

Now as to the other question about Jennet, thus saith the scripter[:] he that provideth not fore his own house hold [1 Timothy 5:8] has—but perhaps he has no hous, well has he got a famely[?] Yes, he has got a wife. Then let him see that she is taken care of and her hart comforted. But stop say som, why doe you not takcare of your family[?] I doe when circumstances doe not renderit otherwise. There is a difference betwene 3 months jorny and afue [h]ours ride. Now I say to ancer my own feelings com as soon as you can leve things there. This is not by revelation nor by commandment so put it not with the anapistles of the new testement but Brigham sayes come and see your wife.

To W. Richards I am yours in the N[ew] C[ovenant]. Brigham Young.

[Squeezed in upside down at the top of the page:]

A word to Brother Woodruff, I am rejoiced to here from you and of your prosperity in the work. When you are climing over sties remember me. M[a]y the Lord bless you and B[ro]. W[illard]. Give my love to the B[rethre]n that enquire after [me].

I am y[ours] in n[ew] c[ovenant], B. Y[oung]

[Postscript folded inside near address:]

Excuse erours and mestakes you must remember its from me. Elizabeth Havens is maried to J. Barlow.

12

BRIGHAM YOUNG AND WILLARD RICHARDS TO THE FIRST PRESIDENCY, SEPTEMBER 5, 1840

In a land of strangers . . . we feel our own weakness & insufficiency for the great work

Five months after the full contingent of the Twelve arrived in Britain, Brigham Young and Willard Richards, on behalf of their quorum, wrote a lengthy and interesting report to the First Presidency in Nauvoo. Expressions of love and humble appeals for council begin and end the letter, but graphic descriptions of the distressing social conditions fill most of the pages. After describing how economic dislocation and pervasive taxation multiplied the misery of the poor, the apostles revealed that they had obtained credit in their own names so that more of the poor could escape to the land of Zion. Source: Joseph Smith Collection, Church Archives; also published in Ronald Walker, ed., "The Willard Richards and Brigham Young 5 September 1840 Letter from England to Nauvoo," BYU Studies 18 (Spring 1978): 466-75.

Star Office, 149 Oldham Road

Manchester, End.

Sept. 5th 1840

To the first Presidency of the church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, viz, Joseph Smith Jun, Sidney Ridgon & Hyrum Smith,

Beloved of the Lord and of his saints;

We esteem it a great privilege to be permitted to address you on paper, while we are far separated from you in a land of strangers, or perhaps we might say with propriety, the land of our forefathers: but be this as it may, it, is, indeed, a land of strangers to us, only so far as we have began to become acquainted with the inhabitants by a few months or years travels among them. The time of our acquaintance is but Short at the longest, but when we contemplate our absence from our homes & kindred, & especially from the Society of those who are over us in the Lord, whose faces we delight to look upon, & whose councils we are ever glad to receive, & rejoice in following, the time seems to be prolonged; & while we remain in this situation we hope you will not think us burdensome, if we trouble you occasionally to read our thoughts, & answer us a few questions, or many, even as many as is wisdom in God you should answer, for if we ask those which are improper it shall be on account of our ignorance, therefore we pray you forgive us. We desire not to council you in any, but to be counseled by you, for it is the desire of our hearts to do the will of God in all things, & we feel our own weekness & insufficiency for the great work which is committed to us, & feel to place all our hope, strength, & confidence in Israel's God, who is sufficient for all things, & not do as many who profess to love the Lord, & at the same time live in neglect of his commandments & his ordinances & despise the order of his council & government. No. We rejoice that the Church has a Moses in these last days (and an Aaron by his side) of whom the Saints may Enquire, as in days of old, & know the mind of the Lord.

We by no means suppose you ignorant of our situation or the situation of the people here, or our proceedings, & yet as is common among men we presume it will not be unacceptable to you to read something from us also, concerning the circumstances by which we are surrounded. There are some things which we expect to find common amongst men of different nations, such as a disposition to believe error instead of truth, & love Sin instead of holiness; also, a disposition, among a few of the honest in heart to believe the truth & rejoice in it when it is brought within their reach; & yet, such are the attendant circumstances with which people of different nations are surrounded & individuals of the same nations, but of different neighborhoods, that they require very different treatment or address in order to induce them to receive the truth, & even then will require very different degrees of time to accomplish or bring into exercise the same amount of faith. The man who has only read the histories of the people of England, which we had seen before we left America, is liable to meet with some disappointments, at least, when he comes to make his introduction amongst them. This may in part be owing to the historian, for it is generally the case that what we find in history relates more particularly to the higher classes, in the nations, for England, unlike America, is divided into classes; many indeed, but they may all be comprised in three, so far as we need designate at this time, (viz) Lords, Tradesmen, & mechanics or laborers, or, in other words, the highest, middle, & lowest classes, each of which have their particular customs, & manners but the histories we refer to, have more generaly treated of those of the higher order, or, at least, we find on acquaintance that those histories are now more applicable to the higher & middle classes than any other. But, perhaps a part may be owing to the great changes which have taken place in the nation, within a few years, with regard to money matters, which has caused a mighty revolution, in the affairs of the common people.

A few years since, and almost every family had their garden, their cow on the common & their pig in the Stye, which added greatly to the comforts of the household; but now we seldom find either Garden, Cow or Pig.

As we pass around among the country cottages & see the stone walls which are thrown down, but more commonly the hedges in a decaying & mutilated state, it is very naturally for us to inquire what have you here? & what the cause of this destruction? & we generally get but one answer, "A few years ago I had a flourishing garden on the spot you now see, & it was surrounded with this hedge which was planted by my own hand; I had a cow of my own which fed on yonder common. I labored on my masters farm, & had plenty of time, morning and evenings, to till my garden, in which I raised sauce Enough for my family, & every year I had a good pig, plenty to eat, & we were happy. But our Lords & masters have become more avaricious, & are trying to get all they can themselves, & will hardly let the poor live. You see my landlord has made my garden into a meadow, & feeds his own cattle upon it; the Lord of the manner fenced in the common, so that I had no place to keep my cow & I was obliged to sell her; I killed my pig to prevent its starving. The small farms are united & made into large ones, so we could get nothing to do on the land. I have been obliged to go into the factory, with my wife & children, to get a morsel of bread;" or, "I have taken to hand loom weaving, to keep my wife & little one from starvation."

By this brief sketch you will easily discover that the histories, which we refer to, were much more applicable to the times for which they were written, than for the present time, so that it is no wonder foreigners should be disappointed in visiting England at the present time, who may not have seen some very recent histories. It cannot be expected that we should give any thing like a history of all the changes in Old England, in one brief communication, & that in the midst of much confusion, arising from the preparation for the departure of the brethren, the getting up of the Star &c, &c, which is now crowding us, but you will see at a glance that the few changes we have hinted at would prove the cause of a multitude of effects.

Manufacturing is the business of England. The cotton mills are the most numerous, the weevers will get from 6 to 10 shillings per week, the spinners something more. The handloom weevers have to work hard to get 6 shillings per week. Now after paying 2 or 3 shillings rent per week—1 shilling for coal, beside taxes of every kind, we might say, for smoke must not go up chimney in England without a tax, Light must not come in at the window without paying duties, many must pay from 1 penny to 6 pence per week for water, & if we should attempt to tell all we should want a government list. After paying all taxes what think you will a family have left for bread stuff? Add to this the tax on corn, which is a great share of the expense of the article, & what is left but starvation, leaving out of account all seasonings such as Peppers, Spices, &c which by taxation is four times the value it is in the United States. So you may well suppose that the poor are not troubled much with these things. The poor are not able to keep dogs, & if they were they would have to pay from 8 shilling to 1 l per head per annum, tax. There are taxes for living & taxes for dying, insomuch that it is very difficult for the poor to get buried any how, & a man may emigrate to America & find a grave, for less money, than he can get a decent burial for in Old England. We scarce recollect an article without tax except cats, mice & fleas.

After what we have written we scarce need tell you that England is filled with beggars. They call at our doors, from [1/2] a Dozen to a Dozen per day. If we go in the streets they gather round us and it is hard to get rid of them without a penny, indeed, we do not try, so long as we can get a penny by buying or begging, for we remember that the measure we meet shall be measured to us again. Hunger & Rags are no curiousity here, & while things remain as they are what can we expect but theft, robery, murder which now fill the land—Leaving out of the account, both as cause & effect the drunkeness & gambling, sweering & debauching—which are common on every hand?

It will readily be discovered that the people have enough to do, to keep from dying with hunger without taking much thought for the improvement of the mind. Many of the people cannot read, & a great many cannot write, children are admitted into the factories at 8 years old, working a part of the day & attending school a part till they are 14 years old, & then work continually, though as yet we have been able to discover but very little benefit from the factory school, it is by Parliament compulsion on the part of the masters, & not of free will, of course the easier got over the better, the cheaper the master, the more money remains in the pocket.

A few years since the spinners & weavers had "Turn outs" (as they now sometimes have in America) when their masters displeased them—but trade is now so dull, the masters care little for their manufactures, & have reduced their workmens wages to, almost, the lowest extremity, & if their hands should turn out for more wages, they have nothing before them but destruction for there [are] thousands & tens of thousands who cannot get one days work in a month, or six months, so they continue to labor 12 hours in a day for almost nothing rather than starve at once. Their miserable pittance is mostly oatmeal & water boiled together, & they would be quite conten[t]ed if they could get enough of that, with sometimes a little Treacle, which is blood & molasses, or a little rancid butter, or skim milk made of whiting & water to a great extent if we mistake not, although they have to give from 3 to 4 pence per quart for it. Buttermilk is also a treat to the poor people and is easily increased in quantity by whiting & water. There is no scheme which can be devised left unimproved to grind the face of the poor & thus [illegible word] & we feel that the time has nearly come for the words of James to be fulfilled[:] go to now ye rich men weep & howl for the misaries which are come upon you & [et]c. [James 5:1]

Much has been said in history of the learning & neetness of the English people. Of the latter subject we have neither time nor disposition to say much, although we are not short of matter, but simply ask how can it be expected that neatness should be a very prominent trait in the habits of a people who are obliged to improve every moment to get a morsel of bread? And as to learning such a thing as a news-paper is scarcely to be found among the common people, & if it was the English papers are filled with little else than "cold blooded murder," "Horrid Tragedies" "Roberies" "Thefts" "Fires" "Notice of the Que[en]s Dinner" or "Prince Alburts Ride out," or ["]visit to the Theatre," or ["]Rail Road accident;" "Hunting excursions["] &c, &c, &c, which is calculated to harden the heart & prepare it for far still greater wretchedness. Such is the poverty of the people that but few of the Saints can afford to take the Star we are publishing once a month, price 6 pence.

Neither have the priests much more information than the people, indeed there are many of the common people whom they dare not meet in argument, although they have their livings, thousands upon thousands, & some of them own whole townships or parishes, & will tell their parishioners & tenants if they allow any one to preach in their houses they will be turned out of doors, or if they are baptized they will fare no better & thus many simple souls who believe our message dare not be baptized, because they have not faith sufficient to screen them from the threats of an insolent priest or factory master knowing they will worry them to the utmost if they displease him, our hearts mourn for such. It is apparently starvation on one hand & domination on the other. The Lord have mercy upon them—Amen.

We find the people of this land much more ready to receive the gospel than those of America, so far as they do receive it, for they have not that speculative inteligence, or prejudice, or prepossession, or false learning, call it what you please, which they have there. Consequently we have not to labor with a people month after month to break down their old notions, for their Priests have taught them but little, & much of that is so foolish as to be detected at a glance. Viewing the subject in this light we find ignorance a blessing, for the more ignorant of false notions the more readily they sense truth. The greatest opposition we meet with is from the Methodist. The Church of England would fain make themselves believe they are on the rock and cannot be shaken, therefore they trouble themselves little about these things, as yet, the more is to come.

Thus while we have not the learning and prejudice of the people to contend against as in America we have the influence of the monied monopolizing Priests & factory masters, & yet after all their influence, those who have received the word have generally received it very readily & the trouble of keeping up church discipline here has been small compared with our native country. But how those who receive the word so readily will stand in the day of trial remains yet to be proved, as there has been nothing in this land as yet which need try the faith of any one. But of this we confidently hope that many have already received the word which will endure unto the end.

We have many things we would gladly say to you did time permit, & were we not afraid of wearying your patience, but, brethren, bear with us a little further, we beseech of you, for we want to tell you a little of what we have done, & ask a few questions. & for your patience you shall have our feeble prayers that our heavenly father will multiply his blessings unto you.

According to council we have gathered from different parts of England & Scotland a company of the Brethren & sisters who are now in Liverpool ready to sail for America on Monday next. Most of them are very poor; Those who had money have given most of it to help those who had need, & as this was not sufficient; we, seeing the poverty & distress of some families, have made use of our own credit, among the brethren to carry them along with the rest. It was the decision of the Council in July that Elder Turly should lead this company to Zion, & he goes accordingly.

Brethren, our hearts are pained with the poverty & misery of this people, & we have done all we could to help as many off as possible, to a land where they may get a morsel of bread, & serve God according to his appointment; & we have done it cheerfully as unto the Lord. & we desire to ask you have we done right? Or is it a right principle, for us to act upon, to involve ourselves, to help the poor Saints to Zion?

We have heard by the bye that Brothers Joseph & Hyrum are coming to England next season. Is this good news true? May we look for you?

Shall we gather up all the saints we can & come over with them next spring?

Have we done right in Printing a hymn book?

Are we doing right in Printing the book of Mormon?

Are we doing right in staying here & leaving our families to be a burden to the C[hurch]?

We have sent some of our papers to America, is this Right?

When the Book of Mormon is completed, will it be best for any one to carry any of them to America?

Shall we print the Doctrine & Covenants here or not? or will the D. & C. be printed & go to the nations, as it now is or not? or will it be reviewed & printed for the nations?

Shall we send all we can to America next season & stay here ourselves?

What is the Lords will concerning Bro. Richards? Shall he take his family to America next season? or shall he tary here with them awhile longer? what shall he do?

We have lately visited a museum where we saw an E[gyptian] mummy. On the head stone &c are many ancient & curious characters, & we asked the privilege of copying them, but have not received an answer, yet.

Shall we copy them & send them to you for translation?

Finally, Brothers, how long must we be deprived [of] the company of our Dear Brethren whom we Love for this works sake, & we feel that it is our privilege to love those who are willing to lay down their lives for the Brethren.

We need not say we send our love to you for that is always with you. Should you doubt it time & works must declare it. We hope you will favor us with a letter, for we exceedingly desire council in these matters, & all others, which the Lord may have in store for us.

We would rejoice to see you in this country, & although your hearts would be pained with the poverty & wretchedness that prevails—you would see many things which would interest you, such as the ancient & curious workmanship of the churches, cathedrals, monuments &c which have stood, some of them a 1000 years or more & are now in a good state of preservation.

We remember the observation of Bro Joseph, "that we should hardly get over the nation before the Judgments of God would overtake the people," & we fully believe it & are trying to do what we can to send forth the Gospel. One of our elders has gone to South Australia, one to the East Indies, & we expect one to start for Hamburgh in Holland this week. We want council & wisdom, & any thing that is good. Our motto is go ahead. Go ahead—& ahead we are determined to go—till we have conquered every foe. So come life or come death we'll go ahead, but tell us if we are going wrong & we will right it.

Your Brethren in the Everlasting Lord

B. Young

W. Richards

13

ORSON PRATT TO GEORGE A. SMITH, SEPTEMBER 24, 1840

I keep hammering & pounding away perhaps the stone will break by and by

Orson Pratt and George A. Smith enjoyed a particularly warm correspondence with each other. In this letter Elder Pratt tries to encourage his younger colleague, who is having a difficult time in London. Somewhat discouraged with his own work, Pratt seems to be telling George A. that neither one of them should be discouraged or "let go." Note also Orson's description of Interesting Account of Several Remarkable Visions, his pamphlet containing the first published account of Joseph Smith's First Vision. Source: George A. Smith Collection, Church Archives.

Edinburgh Sept 24th 1840

Dear Brother

Yours of the 22nd came to hand this morning. I was happy to hear from you & think that you have been prospered for I laboured a number of weeks faithfully in this city before I could baptise any one. Indeed I was not as much favored as you for I could not get the Priests out to hear as you have done: and notwithstanding I have been here upwards of 4 months & have held 5 or 6 meetings per week yet I cannot awake the attention of the people so as to get them out to hear. Only a very few attends the meeting but I keep hammering & pounding away perhaps the stone will break by and by. I have baptized only 40 & ordained 2 Priests. I think there is nothing like perseverance in any place. Therefore I hope you will hold on to the Londonites for it is an important station & will give us great advantages over the enemy. If you cannot turn the London world upside down perhaps you can weaken its foundations.

I shall be at conference on the 6th of Oct. if the Lord will. I shall bring about 2000 pamphlets with me which are now in the press. It contains 24 pages with a cover & the title page reads as follows "An interesting account of several remarkable visions and the late discovery of Ancient American Records which unfold the history of that continent from the earliest ages after the flood to the beginning of the fifth century of the Christian era; with a sketch of the rise, faith & doctrine of the church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints." Price 4d. single copy or 25 shillings per hundred. Brother Mullener will be at conference after which he will go immediately home. If you wish to send any thing home you can send it by him. Do not fail of being at the conference If you can come conveniently as I want to see how you look for we have been seperated So long that I dont know but we should be strangers almost. I intend to return to Edinburgh immediately after conference if the Lord will & I am in hopes yet to prevail in this city. Elder Hedlock will be at conference. Give my love to Elder Kimball. I hope you will not be so backward about writing hereafter as you have now learned where to direct your letters. I now close by subscribing myself your brother in the bonds of the everlasting Covenant.

O. Pratt

To George A. Smith

14

RICHARD RUSHTON, JR., TO GEORGE A. SMITH, SEPTEMBER 25, 1840

We can never repay your kindness

The Rushton family of Leek were among George A. Smith's greatest admirers and best friends in England. Richard Rushton Jr. began doing missionary work almost immediately after his baptism. Here he reports to George A. Smith, who is preaching in London, on several happenings in Staffordshire, including instances of speaking in tongues. This letter illustrates the warm bonds which developed between the missionary apostles and the British Saints. Source: George A. Smith Collection, Church archives.

Leek 25 Septem 1840

Dear Brother Smith,

I received your kind Letter yesterday, and was happy to hear that you are in good health and Spirits, and that Elder Kimball is recover'd from his Ilness. We are Sorry to hear that the people are so harden'd in their hearts against the truth. We feel Somewhat disappointed that you cannot attend the Pottery Conference yet we Submit to your judgment and to the will of God.

Dear Brother we have had a many blessings in our church at Leek Since Last Sunday. Sister Mary Wych came over from the Potteries and at the meeting the Gifts of tongues fell upon many of our Sisters. Sister Mary and Fanny have the gift of tongues, Sister Plant and her two Daughters, Sister Wardle and Sister Harriet Wardle, Sister Alcock and Sister Maryann Tatton and Sister Mycock have all got the gift of tongues. These things of course cause great opposition from the Sectarians. Our room is crowded every Meeting. We Baptised four Last Wednesday Evening Namly Brother Edwin, and Brother Fredricks wife, Brother Knights wife and Brother Hudsons wife and the Saint[s] are in better Spirits and more united now than I have ever seen them before. Thay all join in Love to you and Brother Kimball. These things took Place when I was at the Potteries warning the people in that region.

Dear Brother you said in your Last Letter that the oftener I Stood up before the people, to warn them the greater Blessings I Should receive and you[r] words have been verified for I receive greater blessings and Power every time I get up to Speak even so as to astonish myself. Sister Wych has visited Several of the hireling Priests in Leek and confound[ed] and caused them to tremble at the Power of the Gospel. She sends her Love to you with her Prayer for your wellfare. We have taken another room more up in the town. My Father and Mother Sister Mary and Fanny and all the rest of our Family Send their Love to you and [are] Praying for the time to come when we Shall all meet together to rejoice in the fulness of Gods Blessings. Their is some more ready to be Baptised and the Spirit of enquiry is very great.

We are happy to hear you have commenced Baptising and ordaining in London. May God Bless your Labours in that great and wicked City, and give you many Souls as Seals of your Ministry. Dear Brother I cannot discribe the Love and gratitude I feel towards you for the great Blessings you have been instrumental in the hands of God of bringing upon our Family and Neibourhood. We can never repay your kindness towards us. But God will Bless you for your Labour. Dear Brother we Shoud be happy to see you again soon, and we hope the time is not far distant when we Shall all meet together to converse on the things of Christ and his kingdom. We continue to keep up good Spirits and warn the people to repent of their Sins and Be Baptized for the remission of them. I am Sorry I cannot write oftener to you But I am not at home Long together. Brother Knight and Brother Jackson are begining to Speak boldly before the people warning them to repent and also Brother John Wardle is doing the duties of his office and now Dear Brother farewell for the present and may the peace of God rest upon you for evermore is the fervent Prayer of your faithfull and affectionate Brother in the Gospel

Rich. Rushton

Canal Street Leek 25th Sept 1840

15

BRIGHAM YOUNG TO MARY ANN YOUNG, OCTOBER 16-30, 1840

How I long to see my wife and children

Brigham Young began this lengthy letter on October 16 in Manchester and continued it on the 20th and the 30th. Here he freely expressed his longings and concern for his family, and also his confidence that they would be alright. Along with news and inquiries for news, he includes a heart-felt testimony of Joseph Smith, "our Moses that the Lord has given us," and an expression of hope that the Church might more faithfully follow his counsel. All this and an interesting note to his brother Joseph Young is written on a single large sheet folded once to provide four writing pages. Source: Luna Young Thatcher Collection, Church Archives; this letter was previously published in Ronald K. Esplin, "Inside Brigham Young: Abrahamic Tests As a Preparation for Leadership," BYU Studies 20 (Spring 1980): 300-10.

Manchester oct 16 1840 No 1 Chapman Street

Once more I take my pen to wright to you. It is about five weaks sence I wrote; it was by Brother Turley who saled from Liverpool the 7 of september with about 200 of the Brethren. We have not hered from them yet, but think we shall before long. Brother P. P. Pratt, that left here the first of July for New York for to bring his famely, we have not hered a word from him. We have hered of O. Hyde & J.E. Pages starting for Jerusalem but have not seene them yet; We hope we shall before we leve England. They doe not apear to progress in there jorny much faster then we did. I am verry ancious to have them arive here for I long to see them. Brother Levi Richards wrote from Richmond July the 18th if I reculect right, he stated in his letter that a bout 10 of the Bretherin would start from New York the first of September. I hope they will be here soon for we want help in the vinyard. The work is grate in this contry—and to all apperence it will be verry short for nothing but destruction awates this Nation. It will spedilly be upon them. I have not herd who is acoming but I trust they will be good men that will be sent, for churely it requires men of strong mind and determined persistence to due all things right, & then due nothing more.

I find I am not in America althou there is [s]carsly a night but what I dreme of being in my own native contry with som of my old frends. Brother O Pratt received a letter from his wife and one from Dr. Foster dated September. They boath stated that the families of the Bretherin ware all well, which gave me feelings of joy, to here from my wife and children while in a far contry; I am rejoiced to here that you are this side the missicippy River, I hope you and the rest of the Bretherin will have the priveledge of staying their till we returne and could wish that we might still have the prevelige of staying their and makeing our selves comfortble. I trust within one year from this time I shall have the priveledge [of] injoying the society of my famely; I feel as though their faceses would look and voices sound better than ever before. How I long to see my wife and children. When I let my mind meditate upon past scenes and the triels we have past through to gether, I feele as thou I could not concent to be so far from them, and whare I cannot administer to their comfort. But so it is, and I must be content. One thing I have to say prase God for it: I have wanted for nothing but what I could get, all of my wants have ben suplied. There has ben an efectual dore opened for us sence we left home. Could I be sure that my famely fared as well as I due, I would be happy. Still I have not ben concerned about them, for the Lord said by the mouth of Brother Joseph, that they should be provided for, and I believed it, and through the goodness of God I have ben anabled to send some little help to you, which I hope you have injoyed the good of in a degree.

We have past through scenes that when I think of it causes my hart [to] greve and morn, your scenes in Kirtland and going up to Mos. [Missouri], your sickness the summer we ware there, and fortugue [fatigue] comming out of the State—I never want you to moove agan unless I am with you, if it can be so, but I trust I shall be reconciled to all things, knowing that all shall worke to gether for good especily to them that love the Lord [Romans 8:28]. and I think we have grate reson to love and serve him. To think that we have the priveledge of seeing and knowing what we doe in these last days, while thousands are in midnight darkeness.

Sence we have ben in Manchester We have don all that we posably could to spread this work. We have succeeded in makeing the priest mad,. so that they rave like demonds. We keepe Baptiseing every weak which causes much per[se]cution. We have Baptised som of the old Westl[y]ans, which makes they feele verry uneasy.

I am with Brother Richards at Present. His wife sister Jennette has got a fine Boy. His name is Hebor John. He was born last Sabath the 11 of oct about 10 c-a.m. Brother and Sister Richards talks much about you. He thinks he has got the best woman for his wife that there is in the world, excep you. Their is non better in his eye then coson Mary Ann. Brother Kimball is with me. We are agoing to leve here soon for Preston and Liverpool on som buysness concerning the Book of Mormon. When we get through with our busyness in this part of contry we expect to g[o] to London to [spend] the Winter or the most of it their. I think it will be an advantage to my helth. I doe not enjoy good heth in this place though my helth is much better then it was. I trust I shall regain my heth agan by a nother year if [I] could be in a warm country it would be better for me.

I som expect som to goe in to Hamburgh Germany befor I return home. We have one Elder there, I hope there will be a church there before we leve this contry; their is a smal branch in Ireland. Brother Theodoah Curtis from New York is laboring their. Brothers Taylor and Clark is on the Ile is man, the work takes grate hold their.

[October] 20—yesterday about 2 oclock in after noon Brother P.P. Pratt. his wife, wife['s] sister and children arived here in Manchester. Brothers Kimball & Richards and my self had jest recieved two letters, one from Orson Hyde. He was in Pheledelphy Brother Page was not with him. He thought he should come with Brother Pratt. The other letter was from Father John smith to George Smith. We ware jest rejoycing for the knews from America when P.P. and famely arived. I know [now] am at liberty to goe to other places to Preach and attend to buisness. Br. P. Pratt had a long jorney, 37 days going to New York, 34 on there return to Liverpool, but they are all well and in good spirits, but I think they will get enuph of old England before one year roles around. I am glad that my famely is in America and if it was the will of the Lord I should be willing to be their my self though I am contented here at present.

How much I think of [the] children, I want them to be [good?] children. I pray for you all continualy that God will preserve you from all evel from sickness and from sin. My daughter Elizabeth be a good girl, love and serve the Lord with all your hart, stay at home, goe not into company unless it is among humble ones, let your mother direct you in all things. I pray the Lord to preserve you and the rest of the children. I have sent you som presents, but I have one for you and Vilate that I keep till I com home and bring it to you my self. Elizabeth doe not run about anny but take good care of your heth and take care of the little children and mind your mother. I want my daughter Vilate to be a good girl and mind your mother. Spend all the time you can get in stud[y]ing your book and instructing the little children.

Oct 30 I jest arrived in Liverpool with Brother Kimball. There was a letter here fore him from his wife. It gave us good knews from our famelys except the sickness of Elizabeth and Vilate which I hope is over by this time. I aske my Hevenly Father to preserve my famely till I returne home. How I long to see my famely or know they are well and provided for so that they doe not suffer for food and rament, and I know that the Church is poor and it is as much as they can doe to attend to without doing enything for my famely. I know they woul[d] [have] done if they could but th[e]y cannot. Sister Kimball states in hir letter that you boath had recieved a present we sent you. I am thankeful that I had it in my power to send you som assistence, and be fore this I hope you have recived som things from Br Turly which will cause you to rejoice I think.

Last weak Brother Kimball and my self left Manchester for Preston and Liverpool on buisness about the Book of Mormon. Last Monday a letter came to Preston, from Br Richards. Stated that Br Lorenzo Snow had arived from Nauvoo, had brought a letter from you [and] one from Presedent Joseph Smith in ancer to mine to him. We wrote to Manchester to have Br Richards to keep all the letters till we returne to that place. When I com to your letter I expect I shall want to wright agane but I doe not know what the knews will be but hope it will [be] good. The worke of the Lord is roling on in this contry, the Elders are going in every direction to preach, the people are reciving there testemony and they are building up churches in meny parts of the Land. The Book of Mormon will not be out of press as soon as we expec[te]d but we shall get it to the People as soon as we can.

I feele to say [a] fue words of what past yesterdy. We ware in South Port at the house of Sister Dickson. Brother Peter Mellen [Melling] the Patriarch was there. He was fild with the holy Spirit of the Lord was upon him. He Proveside [prophesied] concerning things which caused my hart to rej[oi]ce in the Lord—I feele to say no more about it at present but may hereaf[t]er.

Sister Kimball stated in hir letter there had ben about 50 deths this seson. This gives pane of hart but still I feele they are better of[f] then they are here. Nawvoo is a sickely place. I think the mob will not truble them selves about the saints while they are in Nawvoo. I expect I should hardly know the Place if [I were] to come home now, and my Children will grow out of my knowledge so things will apear strange to me no dout when I doe come. I hope and pray you will not have so much trial to pass through as to alter you so I shall not know you. Sister Vilate says your house could hardly be caud [called] a shelter this makes me fee[l] bad but I will doe [all] I can for you to help you to make you and the Children comfortable while I am in the vinyard.

Doe tell mee somthing about T. B. Marsh when you wright agan if you can and tell me about [him], I have som dreams about him and others. Sister Kimball all so states that Br. Joseph Smith was agoing to send for som of the Elders to come home and takcare of their famelies, perhaps I am one of them. I have not seene his letter yet. I think we shall get home jestebout the right time. I want the Lord to conduct the hol matter, for I doe not feele as though I could doe enny thing with out him. The Lord must guide me or I shall goe rong.

How doe the church feele about Br. Joseph Smith at [this time?]. Is there feelings agan[s]t him. I have ben informed he has said the Brotherin would for sake him and som of them would secke his life and he would have to swim the Missi[ssip]p[i] River to get out of their hands. I shall be glad when church understand things and Lern that the Lord is God and he will takcare of his own work, and Moses will doe the work the Lord tells him to doe. May the Lord preserve us from provoking him as the Children of Isreal did the Lord and Moses in there day. I aske one thing of the Lord God the Eternall Father in [the] name of Jesus Christ that is that our Moses that the Lord has given us, may live to see the winding up scene of this generation, sin and inetquity destroyed from the face of the earth and Jesus come to raign with is people on the Earth and he go into the promist Caneneon [Canaan].

To Brother Joseph Young. We wis[h] you and your Br[ethre]n the Presedents of the 70ts woul[d] send som faithfull Elders that are men of judgment and that is capable of buylding up the Church—and managen things in the Church. and also see the Presedent of the Hy Priest Quorum and send som high preast. We have hered their is som on the way but we have seene non. L. Snow is in Manchester. We want menny. Brothers Hadlock and Clark will soon be gone over with companys. The Saints have got a start for to gether to America and goe they will, and nothing can stop them, and it is ne[ce]ssary to send some one of the America Brotherin with them. But for Heven sake due not send me here that is to big to be counsled. We doe not want men to leve there families to suffer for we can see enupth of poverty here with out here [hearing] of it from home. Among the Church there.

Some have sa[iled] for New orleans. Brother Mulner and some famelies from Scotland they have been gone about 2 weaks. We expect a company to start about the first of february provibly Br. Hadlock will goe with them. A nother company in spring early as posable and so[o]n they have so much of the spirit of getherin that they would goe if they knew they would die as soon as they got there or if they knew that the mob would be upon and drive them as so[o]n as they got there. They have the spirit of the times here as well as the Church there. They get the spirit of Provisi [prophecy] upon them and they tell many things that is about so and all we can due is to laugh at them a little and so pass it off. There will be a grate menny comming next seson.

I wish you would get councel from Br. Joseph Smith and doe acordinly. We will not ask you to send more Elders to us then we send to you. Change of Pasters [pastures] makes fat calves, so it is in comparson with the Elders, they due better in a strange contry then in there own as a general thing.

Give my love to Jane and the children and to all my frend[s], I have not time and paper to mechen names—I remember all of them—I am your Br. in the New Cv[Covenant] Brigham Young

Mary I shall not have time and room to say much more to you at present. I shall wright agan soon as I trust you will be anabled to take letters out of the office. I dremed last night of seeing the house whare you live. I [illegible word] it looked very open and cold, I feele for you. Tel Brs. of the first Presedent my love to them. I want you to see Br. Truman Angel for me and if you can due enny thing for him due it for me or my sake. Give my love to Mother Angel and Careoline. I am glad that you have not come a way from that contry. I trust I shall have plashier of seeing that contry agan. I am rejoiced to here that the Brotherin are settin up west and north. Take good care of the little Children. I have sent som presents to the Children. I am your husben and frend in E[verlasting] C[ovenant] Brigham Young

[The letter was addressed Mrs. Mary A. Young, Nauvoo Post Office, Hancock County, State of Illinoce, North America. The notation Single Sheet reminded the postmaster that the large folded letter required only the lowest rate. It was to go Via steam ship Packet to Halifacks and Boston. Brigham Young penned the following postscripts in the address quarter of the large sheet, the last one added after the letter was sealed:]

Mary take no concern about me for I am duing as well as I can and fare as well as I can ask. The Brotherin and Sisters would pluck out there eyes for me if it ware ne[ce]ssary. They due all they can for my comfort. They feed me and give me close and monny. They wash my feet and wate upon me as they would a little child, and may the Lord bless them for it and he will and they shall stand upon Mount Zion.

The climet dos not agree with me in this contry. I expect to try London this winter to see how that place will agree with me though my helth is a grate deal better then it was when I first came here. The helth of all the Bretheren is better. Be of good chere, the time will soon come when we shall meet agan and rejoice to gether. I supose the time seemes long to you and the Children that I am gon; it would seeme longer ware it not the will of Lord. When I think how diligant you are and how faithful to my famely and willing to suffer for the sake of my going to preach the gospel, you must be blest and blest you shall be. I pray the Lord to Bless you and I Bles you and all the faithful sisters—so farewell.

I am now in Liverpool but shall goe to Manchester to morrow or next day. Shall see Br Snow and find out more about things. I want to here from Br. Rigdon and know how he is and Br. G. Roberson. Give my love to them. Tell my Br[others] acording to the flesh to not come here till I returne home. May the Lord bless you and the Children and preserve your lives and helthes. I am as ever

Br Kimball sends his love to you and the children and all the frends.

[Written in a box on the first page:]

Mr. Brigham Young

52 Iron Monngor Row St. Luke Church London

in care of Henry Connor

Direct all of your letters to me [there] after you receive this as a bove stated as I expect to spend the winter their. B. Young

16

ORSON PRATT TO GEORGE A. SMITH AND WILFORD WOODRUFF, NOVEMBER 2, 1840

I presume we could do more good in Edinburgh & London if we could bring the enemy into open combat

Inevitably Orson Pratt compared his slow progress in Scotland with reports of John Taylor's success on the Isle of Man and similar successes elsewhere. Reflecting on this, he concluded that opposition is often important to success. While fellow-quorum members met active opposition, in Scotland his strenuous efforts had so far generated insufficient interest or opposition for broad success. Note also Orson's early thoughts and mixed feelings about returning home. Source: George A. Smith Collection, Church Archives.

No 40 North Richmond St. Edinburgh

November 2nd—40

Dear brethren Smith & Woodruff

Yours of October 31st came to hand this morning. I cannot forbear tendering to you my thanks for the interesting news which it gave of the success & triumph of truth in Birmingham, Potteries, Preston, Glasgow, Paisley, Belfast, Hillsborough &c. It seems that the work of the Lord is truly triumphing among the nations. I was much pleased with the contents of the letter you enclosed; from it we can see that the truth is rapidly spreading in our native land. It seems that our persecutions have given it a fresh impulse.

This morning I received the "Manx Liberal" from the "Isle of man"; It contained a lengthy reply by Er Taylor to the Rev. Hey's second Address. Er Taylor has cut up Hey into fine fodder. The same paper contains Dr J. Curran's conclusion against Mormonism It also contains a sad & laughable lamentation over the dying struggles of Methodistism by some person signing himself "A Staunch Wesleyan["] who probably had seen the folly of Mr. Hay. The probability is that the controversial war will continue a short time at least long enough to gether out the honest in heart. Er Taylor understands weilding the weapons of truth to a very good advantage & he has a very good good opportunity of doing it.

I presume we could do more good in Edinburgh & London if we could bring the enemy into open combat but in this place I can hardly get a dog to move his tongue. Indeed they are so effectually secured behind the bulwarks of Priest Craft that they are as careless as the Babylonians were when surrounded by Cyrus's army.

You ask me what I think about going home but I will assure you that it is a hard question & I hardly know how to answer it for I am in a strait betwixt not only two but many things for I am exceedingly anxious to see my family & I am exceedingly anxious to continue labouring in the vinyard. Sometimes I think about returning to stay with & visit them for a season & sometimes I think of sending for them & sometimes I think of going after them but as yet I am altogether undetermined relative to these matters. If you have entered into any determinations relative to going home &c. please inform me in your next.

[At the bottom of the address page:]

I have baptized none since my last. No news from any quarter by letter except from London therefore none to write. I am as ever

O. Pratt

To Ers Woodruf & Smith

17

HENRY CONNOR, JR., TO GEORGE A. SMITH, NOVEMBER 11, 1840

All the affection of A brother

Among George A. Smith's contacts and friends in London was Henry Connor. Jr son of the first London convert. Although young Connor had a difficult time accepting the teachings of the American apostles, he was genuinely touched by George A and the two apparently spent much time together discussing the scriptures. Only a day after the apostle left, Henry Jr. wrote his friend this poignant letter. Just a month later. On December 16, young Connor was baptized. Source: George A. Smith Collection, Church Archives.

Nov 11th—40

My Dear Friend

I take up my pen to address you for beleave me I have all the feelings of A friend and A brother towards you. I hope you arived safe at your journeys end and that this letter will find you in good health and spirits. It is true that I cannot see the scriptures in the same lite as you yet I beleave the Lord has blesst me with some degree of Christian charity and I extend to you and all around the hand of friendship. I wish you success with all my heart in doing good to the sons of men for when I look around me I see little else but sin and wickedness. I am but A young beginner in the way of richiousness and as yet but little expearienced yet my trust is in God and I can say from my heart I am sincear in all I do and say. I shall feel it my boundend duty as A Christian to do all I can to assist you in any way that I can.

I must confess that I was loath to part with you for I feel for you all the affection of A brother. I pray that the Lord may [speed] you if you are wright and convince me that I am wrong. May you have faviour in the eyes of the people and do all the good you can to the perishing souls of men awaken the [cairless] and the ardend sinner encourage those that seek the Lord and do good unto all men and if my Dear Brother I should never again meet you to take you by the hand in this life may I meet you in A better place.

My Father is getting quite well and able to attend to his work. There is not any one knows that I have writen to you but W Woodruff. I was obliged to get your address from him or I should not have told him. If you can find time I shall be happy to hear from you till then fairwell

I Remain Yours Sincearly

H. C. Connor Junr

18

HEBER C. KIMBALL TO GEORGE A. SMITH, DECEMBER 12, 1840

You Say the Devle is mad. This makes me glad, and I Shall not try to pleas him

Along with a commitment to keep each other informed about the work and to buoy each other up, the apostles shared a deep friendship that further motivated them to keep in touch. This letter, from Heber in London to George A. in Leek (but recently in London), is representative of the letters that traveled back and forth. Source: George A. Smith Collection, Church Archives.

London December the 12 1840

No 40 Iron Mongor Row Saints Luks Church London

Dear Brorather Smith I Received your last Leter with pleasure. Glad to hear of the prosperity of the work in that part of the Land. You Say the Devle is mad. This maks me glad, and I Shall not try to pleas him. I know that your disposition is some like mine on this Subjet. I have great love fore the Saints in that part of the Land. When I think of thare poverty it gives me Some Strong feelings. I Say in my heart O Lord Rowl on thy work and cut it chort in Richousness, that thy Saints may dwewll in peas whare poverty will be done away, when we can See'face to fase, when we can have the prevledg of building and inhabit plant and Eat the frieut of the Same with out being driven frome the Same as we have Suffered in America. Dear Brother the day will Soon come So we will press forward to the prise which lais at the end of the Rase, when we will not have to Suffer as we do at this time.

The 13 this morning I feel to rite a few more lines that you may know how we guit a long here in London. Things go Slow here in this City. I baptised Sisters Cop[e]land Sister. Since I came here. She is the one that came and hurd when you and myself was here. I think Mr Morgan and his wife well go forward Soon. Thare are Sevrel others that believe. Last Sunday we had the Hous nearly full, both after noon and Evning on week days nights. Thare is only fore or five that comes in to hear besids the Church.

Elder Young left here on the 10 for Heritfordshier. He was here 9 or 10 days Spent his time mostly in looking at thing[s] in london. I Expected to Have gon with him to those Confrences but I thought I would Stay a chort time. The Br[ethren] Seam to think it was best. I have a bad cold and travling goes Hard with me. my lungs are very bad. I am not able to Speak much in publick or in privit. The are [air] is very dence, the weather Cold, the Smok So bad that they have to lite up thare Lamps, and we have to write by candle some time in the midle of the day. It makes me like a hors that has got the Heaves. Elder young felt quite porly while here. Br Robart Williams is here. He has no home only what we make fore him. He has a Father here but he dosenot go Home. on the acount of his Step mother. His Father Came to hear once. He Seames to hear and Recieve. The Brethren and Sisters are all well at present. and feel well. Preas [Priest] Copen is by my Side this morning, thank God. When we guit threw with the duties of the day I will tell you more that is if thare is more to Say.

Good morning. 14 this morning we are Still alive. I have got a bad cold in my lungs which gives me a bad coff. I feel well at Hart and in good Spirrits. You know this is the main point. On the Sabath, In the after noon we had a hous full. We administerd the Sacrament at the Chappel. Before meting. All of the Saints present Except Mother Copen. After we got threw we then gave them a chort discours. Had a good time. Our Evning meting was not So full as the after noon. Mr Morgan and wife and Harrit Have Set the time to be baptised, on wensday Evning next. Harrit is on well with the Leprosy. Thare is Sevrel others that beliey.

I have just Recieved a leter from Elder Young. He had got to Chattenham. He Ses the prospect is good thare at present. [Word] from Elder O Pratt Stating that he had got one leter from his wife one from the quater master General he had got two numbers of the times and Seasons. Sept. and Oct. numbers. Gives the tidings of thare last confrance. Not much news in the leters. Elder Woodruff is well. We have Recieved a leter from Mrs [Songivannt]. She longs to guit with us to be baptised. She inquired fore you. I think I have told all of the news that I have to tell at present. Now dear Brother give my love to all of the Saints in that part. I cannot mention names fore I donot know them. May God bless you and them fore Ever. Elder Woodruff Sends His love. I am as Ever your Br in Christ

H C Kimball

[Written on both sides of the address page, in Wilford Woodruff's hand:]

Elder G. A. Smith

Dear Brothr, I have Receivet two Letters from [you] which I have not answered for the want of time one Dated Nov 30th the other Dec 3d. I was truly Glad to get them both. As Broth Kimball has told you the knews I shall not say much now. I shall be glad to hear from you at any time.

Give my love to all the Saints & take agood Share yourself. My Wife Sends her respects to you in her last letter & Said some of your Fathers family had been Sick but had got better. The work is prospering rapidly in America. Which makes me rejoice. Milton Holmes thinks of comeing to England this winter. Yours in the kingdom of patience

W Woodruff

19

GEORGE A. SMITH TO BATHSHEBA W. BIGLER, DECEMBER 5, 1840

I am determined Never to take another Mission across the Ocean without Leaveing a Rib at home

While his fellow missionaries thought often of their wives and children, George A., the only unmarried apostle, thought of his sweetheart and bride-to-be, Bathsheba W. Bigler. George and Bathsheba made an agreement in 1838 to marry in three years thence. Though Bathsheba and their plans were much on his mind, George A.'s illness and his uncertainty about her address kept him from writing for months. Awkward and untutored but full of tender feelings, this letter breaks the silence. Source: George A. Smith Collection, Church Archives; part of a letter, same date, to Josiah Fleming.

Stoke Upon Trent Staffordshire Dec 5th 1840

Dearest Sister Bathsheba

I take the Liberty to inform you in my Letter to Br Josiah, that you are Not Forgoten. I keep you Still in Memory and the Pleasante hours which I have Spent in your Society are also Remembered. I Should be very happy in the Enjoyment of A Privelege which I often anticipate of once more Enjoying your Society Which Was always vary Pleasant. And the Lord willing We Shall See Each other again & talk Over Matters. I am Determined Never to take another Mission across the Ocean without Leaveing a Rib at home unless the Lord So orders it. If you Look at the Motto on the Chain it Reads be ye Clean that Bear the vessels of the Lord. This Motto was my Choice when I was Called to My Lords Work and I am determined to Live up to it. I know that if the Power of Satan Does N[ot] Entirely Blind my understanding I Shall be faithfull to [two illegible words]. I told you that if I thought I Should Get A Companion For Life in England I would Make the Choice before I Left home but I Shall Never take any Such Step while you are the Choice of My Heart which is the Case at Present.

I have Not Writen to you as I ought to have Done. Will you Pleas forgive Me. I Expe[c]t Some Litters have been Lost. I heard your Family had Moved away after your Fathers Death and I Rote to America For their adress and for Eight Months after I Left Home I Could Not Write any and most all thought I Should not Recover of my Sickness & Blindness which I then had which Delay an[d] My hurt Must have kept you 12 Months without hearing from Me. Truly if you and I Come to gather it will be because we were Each others in Eternity. I Remain your Most Faithfull Friend in a Distant Land Geo. A Smith to Bathsheba Bigler Pleas write to Me as Soon as you Get this

20

GEORGE A. SMITH TO BATHSHEBA W. BIGLER, JANUARY 14, 18, 1841

If I could Enjoy your Society I Should be Well Satisfied but the Lord called and I have to Obey

This second letter from George A. Smith to Bathsheba W. Bigler bears an inside address of January 14, but the letter itself suggests that the body was begun on January 18, just three days before the marriage date they had agreed to in 1838. The plan now, with George thousands of miles away? "We agreed to Attend to these Matters as Soon as Convenient after the time which had been appointed."

Burslem Staffordshire England January 14th 1841

Dearest Bathsheba as the time apointed for our trial of the Game of Choosing as we first agreed in the Month of January 1838 has almost Gone and we acording to that arangement Should be Maried on the 21st day of this Month and it is Now the 18th and I am Nearly 6000 Miles from you and 3 Days to the time appointed I Remember it Well and Shall Not forget it for years to Come. And as we agreed to Attend to these Matters as Soon as Convenient after the time which had been appointed we Shall Let [it] Rest till then. I am Certin that you have yet A Sure Confidence in Me if you Still Retain your Integrity. As you know I Love Integrity and those Who Possess it and I am A true friend and do not think it Prudent for me to forsake A tried friend for A New One as my father['s] advise to me Was to Not Go far from home after A Wife.

Dear Sister you Will Please Excuse me as I am thinking the time will come When We Shall be One. The Lord knows and Will mak known in Due time. I am Enjoying Comfortable heath for Which I feel thankfull. I am Not Strong but Comfortable and as happy as I Could. If I could Enjoy your Society I Should be Well Satisfied but the Lord called and I have to Obey. I shall have to Leave of[f] Writing and Go to Meeting as I have Writen three Letters to Day one to G W Gee one to H C Kimball one to J Taylor.

After taking Some Supper of tost and Cold Water And Looking at the time I find I have Nearly one hour before Meeting and So I finish my Letter. It Will be as Good half an hours conversation. Perhaps I Shall Send A Number of Letters to you by Elder Clark Who is Going to Start for Home in A Few Days and as it is the only Chance we have to Convers I feel to impose. I Received the Letter you Wrote and have answered it as it Was Jacobs Letter. I Directed it to him. It may Cause A Laugh at my Expense if Not at yours as I Wrote Some things that Were Laughable and hope the Letter Will Reach you Safely. I Was Much Pleased With the Letter you Sent me and Read it over many times and Would be Glad to See you and talk it over as I Read it over and Over again. I Will Write By the Next Steam Packet Which you Will get before you Do this and hope you Will Give me Another Letter as soon as Convenient. Give my love to your Mother and Jacob Sarah and Malisa and Caleb Lyons and Josiah Fleming Sister Nancy and Br and Sister Martin all Our Virginia friends as if I wrote their Names And take A Large Share to yourself.

The work of the Lord Prospers in all Parts of this Kingdom. The Elders are Well and Doing Well. Elder Hadlock is Enjoying better health than he has been and Elder Kimball is Well. Sends his Love to you. Also Elder Woodruff. They are in London and doing Well. Now Dear Sister all I can Say is to again advise you to Remember the Principle of Pure and undefiled Religion and the Golden Rule and all Will bee Rite. I Must Confess I think the Advise Needless but it Will do No hurt. But the Cry is its Meeting time. I must Ley Down my pen and Go So I Bid you Good Night.

Jan 19th. On Looking over my Sheet this morning I feel Most Ashamed of it but as you know how to Look over my faults I shall Let it Go. I had A Good Meeting Preached to A Crowded Asembly Ordained one Elder and Confirmed one A Member. Had the Best Liberty to Preach that I have Enjoyed for Some time. My heath is geting better that is my Lungs. But my Sheet is full I must Close by Saying my hearts Desire and Prayer to God is for your Preservation Welfare and happiness and I Remain Sincrely your Most faithfull friend George A. Smith To Bathsheba Bigler

January 19th 1841

Will you Please Remember Me to Sister Kimball and family to all the Young Gentleman And Ladies Who Enquire after me. You will also Please Give my Love to My Father['s] Family and Espetialy my Sister Caraline. Tell her I am in firs[t] Rate Spirits And think if I Do Not Get home in 1841 I have Strong hopes of Geting there in the 19[th] Century. The Lords Will be Done G A S

Success to T G Bishop and Charles Shermand & Eliza

21

JOSEPH SMITH TO THE TWELVE, DECEMBER 15, 1840

I have great confidence in your united wisdom.

The following letter demonstrates Joseph Smith's awareness of the Twelve's labors in Britain and his full satisfaction with them. No doubt this was especially important to the Twelve since they had received so little official communication from the Presidency. (For the first six months they received none; in late fall Lorenzo Snow arrived with their first letter from Joseph Smith, and this, which arrived midwinter, would have been the second.) Among business items in the letter was the Prophet's approval of their plans to return home in the spring, and among the news from Nauvoo was Joseph Smith's own explanation of the newly revealed doctrine of baptism for the dead. Source: the hard-to-read original is in the Joseph Smith Collection, Church Archives, but we have relied on the transcription in Dean C. Jessee, ed., The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, 480-87. A major excerpt from the letter, undated, appeared in Times and Seasons 1 (January 1, 1841): 258-61; and a slightly edited version can be found in Joseph Smith's History 4:226-32, but it is misdated as if it had been written in October 1840.

Nauvoo Hancock Co, Ills. Decr. 15. 1840

Beloved Brethren.

May Grace, Mercy, and Peace rest upon you, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Having several communications laying before me, from my Brethren the "Twelve" some of which ere this merited a reply, but from the multiplicity of business which necessarily engages my attention I have delayed communicating to them, to the present time. Be assured my beloved brethren, that I am no disinterested observer of the things which are transpiring on the face of the whole earth and amidst the general movements which are in progress, none is of more importance, than the glorious work in which you are now engaged, and consequently, I feel some anxiety on your account, that you may, by your virtue, faith, diligence, and charity, commend yourselves to one another, to the Church of Christ and to your Father which is in heaven, by whose grace you have been called to so holy a calling, and be enabled to perform the great and responsible duties which rest upon you. And I can assure you, that from the information I have received; I feel satisfied, that you have not been remiss in your duty but that your diligence and faithfulness have been such as must secure you the smiles of that God, whose servants you are, and the good will of the saints throughout the world.

The spread of truth throughout England is certainly pleasing; the contemplation of which, cannot but afford feelings of no ordinary kind in the bosoms of those who have had to bear the heat and burthen of the day, and who were its firm supporters, and strenuous advocates in infancy, while surrounded with circumstances the most unpropitious, and its destruction threatened on all hands. But like the gallant Bark, that has braved the storm unhurt, spreads her canvass to the breese, and nobly cuts her way through the yielding wave, more conscious than ever of the strength of her timbers and the experience and capabilities of her Captain, Pilate and crew.

It is likewise very satisfactory to my mind, that there has been such a good understanding existing between you, and that the saints have so cheerfully, hearkened to council and vied with each other in their labors of love; and in the promotion of truth and righteousness; this is as it should be in the Church of Jesus Christ. Unity is strength. "How pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in Unity &c." Let the saints of the most high, ever cultivate this principle, and the most glorious blessings must result, not only to them individually but to the whole church—The order of the kingdom will be maintained—Its officers respected, and its requirements readily and cheerfully obeyed. Love is one of the leading characteristics of Deity, and ou[gh]t to be manifested by those who aspire to be the sons of God. A man filled with the love of God, is not content with blessing his family alone but ranges through the world, anxious to bless the whole of the human family. This has been your feelings and caused you to forego the pleasures of home, that you might be a blessing to others, who are candidates for immortality but who were strangers to the principals of truth and for so doing I pray that Heavens' choicest blessings may rest upon you.

Being requested to give my advice respecting the propriety of your returning in the spring, I will do so willingly. I have reflected on the subject some time and am of the opinion that it would be wisdom in you to make preparations to leave the scene of your labors in the spring. Having carried the testimony to that land, and numbers having received it, consequently the leaven can now spread, without your being obliged to stay. Another thing, there has been some whisperings of the spirit; that there will be some agitation, some excitement, and some trouble in the land in which you are now laboring. I would therefore say in the mean time be diligent, organize the churches and let every one stand in his proper place, so that those who cannot come with you in the spring may not be left as sheep without shepherds.

I would likewise observe that inasmuch as this place has been appointed for the gathering of the saints, it is necessary that it should be attended to, in the order which the Lord intends it should; to this end I would say that as there are great numbers of the saints in England, who are extremely poor and not accustomed to the farming business, who must have certain preparations made for them before they can support themselves in this country, therefore to prevent confusion and disappointment when they arrive here, let those men who are accustomed to making machinery and those who can command a capital even if it be but small, come here as soon as convenient and put up machinery and make such other preparations as may be necessary, so that when the poor come on they may have employment to come to. This place has advantages for manufacturing and commercial purposes which but very few can boast of; and by establishing Cotton Factories, Founderies, Potteries &c &c would be the means of bringing in wealth and raising it to a very important elevation. I need not occupy more space on this subject as its reasonableness must be obvious to every mind. In my former epistle I told you my mind respecting the printing of the Book of Mormon, Hymn Book &c &c. I have been favored by receiving a Hymn Book from you and as far as I have examined it I highly approve of it and think it to be a very valuable collection. I am informed that the Book of Mormon is likewise printed which I am glad to hear, and should be pleased to hear that it was printed in all the different languages of the earth. You can use your own pleasure respecting printing the Book of Doctrine & Covenants, if there is a great demand for them, I have not any objections, but would rather encourage it.

I am happy to say, that as far as I have been made aquainted with your movements, I have been perfectly satisfied that they have been in wisdom, and I have no doubt but the spirit of the Lord has directed you and this proves to my mind that you have been humble, and your desires have been for the salvation of your fellow man, and not your own agrandizement and selfish interest. As long as the saints manifest such a disposition their council will be approved of, and their exertions crowned with success. There are many things of minor importance, on which you ask council, but which I think you will be perfectly able to decide upon as you are more conversant with the peculiar circumstances than I am, and I feel great confidence in your united wisdom, therefore you will excuse me for not entering into detail. If I should see any thing that was wrong I should take the priviledge of making known my mind to you and pointing out the evil.

If Elder Parley Pratt should wish to remain in England for some time longer than the rest of the Twelve, he will feel himself at liberty to do so; as his family are with him consequently his circumstances are somewhat different to the rest, and likewise it is necessary that some one should remain who is conversant with the rules, regulations &c &c of the church and continue the paper which is published; consequently taking all these things into consideration I would not press upon Brother Pratt to return in the spring.

I am happy to inform you that we are prospering in this place, and that the saints are more healthy than formerly, and from the decrease of sickness this season, when compared with the last, I am led to the conclusion that this must eventually become a healthy place.

There are at present about 3000 inhabitants in Nauvoo, and numbers are flocking in daily; several stakes have been set off in different parts of the country, which are in prospering circumstances. Provisions are much lower than when you left. Flour is worth about four dollars per barrel, corn 25 cents per bushel: pottatoes about 20 cents and other things in abou[t] the same proportion. There has been a very plentiful harvest indeed, throughout the Union.
