You will observe by the "Times & Season" that we are about building a Temple for the worship of our God in this place: preparations are now making, every tenth day is devoted by the brethren for quarrying rock &c &c. We have secured one of the most lovely sites for it that there is in this region of country. It is expected to be considerably larger and on a more magnificent scale than the one in Kirtland and which will undoubtedly attract the attention of the great men of the earth. We have a bill before the Legislature for the incorporation of the City of Nauvoo for the establishment of a Seminary and other purposes, which I expect will pass in a short time.

You will also have received intelligence of the death of my Father, which event altho painful to the family and to the church generally, yet the sealing testimony of the truth of the work of the Lord was indeed satisfactory; the particulars of his death &c you will find in the Sep. number of the "Times and Seasons." Brother Hyrum succeeds him as patriarch of the Church, according to his last directions and benedictions.

Several persons of emmine[n]ce and distinction in society, have joined the Church, and become obedient to the faith, and I am happy to inform you that the work is spreading very fast on this continent. Some of the Brethren are now in New Orleans, and we expect to have a large gathering from the South.

I have had the pleasure of welcoming about one hundred of the Brethren from England who came with Elder Turley, the remainder I am informed stoped in Kirtland, not having means to get any further. I think those that came here did not take the best possible rout or the least expensive. Most of the brethren have obtained employment of one kind or another and appear tolerably well contented and seem disposed to hearken to council. Brothers Robinson & Smith lately had a letter from Elders Kimball, Smith & Woodruff in London which gave us information of the commencement of the work of the Lord in that City, which I was glad to hear. I am likewise informed that Elders have gone to Austrailia & to the East Indies I feel desireous that every providential opening of that kind should be filled, and that you should, prior to your leaving England, send the gospel into as many parts as you possibly can.

Beloved brethren, you must be aware in some measure of my feelings when I contemplate the great work which is now rolling on, and the relationship which I sustain to it; while it is extending to distant lands, and islands, and thousands are embracing it, I realize in some measure my responsibility and the need I have of support from above, and wisdom from on high; that I may be able to teach this people, which have now become a great people, the principles of righteousness, and lead them agreeably to the will of heaven so that they may be perfected and prepared to meet the Lord Jesus Christ, when he shall appear in great glory. Can I rely on your prayers to your heavenly Father in my behalf? and on the prayers of all my brethren & sisters in England? (whom having not seen yet I love) that I may be enabled to escape every stra[ta]gem of satan, surmount every difficulty, and bring this people, to the enjoyment of those blessings, which are reserved for the righteous. I ask this at your and their hands in the name of Jesus Christ.

Let the saints remember that great things depend on their individual exertion, and that they are called to be co-workers with us and with the holy spirit in accomplishing the great works of the last days, and in consideration of the extent, the blessings, and the glories of the same let every selfish feeling be not only buried, but anihalated, and let love to God and man, predominate and reign triumphant in every mind, that their hearts may become like unto Enoch's of old so that they may comprehend all things, present, past, and future, and "come behind in no gift waiting for the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ." The work in which we are unitedly engaged in, is one of no ordinary kind, the enemies we have to contend against are subtle and well skilled in manuvering. It behoves us then to be on the alert, to concentrate our energies, and that the best feelings should exist in our midst, and then by the help of the Almighty we shall go on from victory to victory and from conquest unto conquest, our evil passions will be subdued, our prejudices depart, we shall find no room in our bosoms for hatred, vice will hide its deformed head, and we shall stand approved in the sight of heaven and be acknowledged "the sons of God." Let us realize that we are not to live to ourselves but to God. By so doing the greatest blessings will rest upon us both in time and in Eternity.

I presume the doctrine of "Baptism for the dead" has ere this reached your ears, and may have raised some inquiries in your mind respecting the same. I cannot in this letter give you all the information you may desire on the subject, but aside from my knowledge independant of the Bible, I would say, that this was certainly practised by the antient Churches and St Paul endeavours to prove the doctrine of the ressurrection from the same, and says "else what shall they do who are baptised for the dead["] &c &c. I first mentioned the doctrine in public while preaching the funeral sermon of Bro Brunson, and have since then given general instructions to the Church on the subject. The saints have the priviledge of being baptized for those of their relatives who are dead, who they feel to believe would have embraced the gospel if they had been priviledged with hearing it, and who have received the gospel in the spirit through the instrumentality of those who may have been commissioned to preach to them while in prison. Without enlarging on the subject you will undoubtedly see its consistancy, and reasonableness, and [it] presents the the gospel of Christ in probably a more enlarged scale than some have viewed it. But as the performance of this right is more particularly confined to this place it will not be necessary to enter into particulars, at the same time I allways feel glad to give all the information in my power, but my space will not allow me to do it.

We had a letter from Elder Hyde a few days ago, who is in New Jersey, and is expecting to leave for England as soon as Elder Page reaches him. He requested to know in his letter if converted Jews are to go to Jerusalem or to come to Zion. I therefore wish you to inform him that converted Jews must come here. If Elder Hydes & Pages testimony to the Jews at Jerusalem should be received then they may know "that the set time hath come": I will write more particular instructions to them afterwards.

Your families are well and generally in good spirits, and bear their privations with christian fortitude and patience.

Brother Richards' question respecting coming in the spring is answered. I shall be very happy to see him & his family & likewise Brother Fielding. Tell him that Bro Thompson is making preparations for his coming.

With respect to the rout best to be taken I think you will be better able to give advise than myself. But I would not advise coming round by the lakes. And it would not be prudent to come via New Orleans in the sickly season, but in the spring or fall or winter it might do. Give my kind love to all the brethren, and sisters, and tell them I should have been pleased to have come over to England to see them, but am afraid that I shall be under the necessity of remaining here for some time, therefore I give them a pressing invitation to come and see me.

I am D[ea]r Brethren yours, affectionately

Joseph Smith

To the Travelling High Council and Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of LDS in Great Britain

To The "Twelve"

Do not understand me to say that all the Elders are to come with you, as it will be necessary for some to stay. J.

22

GEORGE A. SMITH TO JOHN LYMAN SMITH, JANUARY 8, 1841

Think how foolish it makes me feel to be looked up to with so much Earnestness

This touching letter to a younger brother reveals a good deal about George A. Smith's personality, including his thoughtful concern for parents and siblings with whom he clearly maintained strong bonds. He thought often of family, knew they thought often of him, and tried to reassure them about his own precarious health. George A. urges Lyman to "spare no pains" in assisting their parents, but also to attend to his studies—a point reinforced by his description of how he feels about teaching people he sees as more learned and experienced than himself. Source: George A. Smith Collection, Church Archives.

Stafford St Longton Staffordshire Eng.

Janaury [8] 1841

Dear Brother Lyman this Cold Weather Makes me think of you as I have to Sleep alone and find it vary Cold. But I have A good Bed and Plenty of Cloths to keep me warm and the Night Passes vary Comfortably as I Seldom go to Bed before 12 o Clock and vary often Lay till 2 o clock in the Morning. This Comes from my having Somany Who Come to hear me talk and Recive instruction from me. You may well think I have to be A teacher of good Principles to them that Recieve my testimony, and you Cannot think how foolish it makes me feel to Be Looked up to with So much Earnestness by Persons Who have been Professers of Religon and Preachers of the Different Sects. I thank the Lord for the Wisdom he has given me and the Success I have had in the teaching thes Men for thire is Now in this District No less than 88 official Members in the Church and they all Look to me for instruction as Children to A Father and this Makes me feel vary Small indeed and Causes me to Cry unto my father Who is in heaven for Wisdom and Paetence to do my fathers Work and Sound his Gospel to the World Which may the Lord Grant.

Now Lyman as I am a Long way from home and do not know how things are Going I Want you Should keep a Good Look out and See that Father and Mother are taken Good Care of in my absence. Spare No Paines to Mane [make] them [comforatable] and hapy and When you Get this Letter Please to Write and Let me [know] how you Get along for food and Clothing and how you Get along Sleeping alone this Cold Winter and how you Get along Studying Geography and Learning to Write and Read and do Not Neglect to Spell all your Words Correctly. I want to know about your Progress in School. Do you keep the Old White Mare yet Old Cheese (the old Pied Cow that Was Gone So long What is be come of her)[?] Do you have Milk this Winter & Pleanty of hoe cake and [transp] Pork to Live on[?] I am in the Land of Englishmen but Get Plenty to Eat While thousands are Suffering for food and fire.

Last Sabbath there Was A Storme of thunder and Rain which Was So Dreadfull at Birmingham that the People thought the Saviour Was Coming. The Church of St Peter Was Struck with Lightning at Wolverhampton and Set on fire and Greatly Damaged. It Was Built in the year 966 the Oldest Church in this Part of the Kingdom. The Pulpit is Cut Out of A Solid Rock and Display Great knowlede of the Archatects of the 10th Century.

Remember Me to all our Cousins and All the Friends and tell them to Pray for me. I Cannot tell When I Shall Come home or how long I Shall See you but hope it Will be Soon for I think Much of you and Caroline. I am in as Good health as Could be Expected for me as you know how bad I was when I Left home and how Much I have had to Encounter. I am not Strong but feel very well. My Eyes are So I can Write with A Strong Light and Not by A Candle. I Do Not Read but Little. How are Mothers Eyes[?] I Shall try to Get her Some Glasses when [I] leave for home in New York. Whi[le] I was in London I had Not the Meanes. I [should] Like to know how her Eyes are as I Can Judge better. Can she See with any Glasses better than Without? I use A Pair of old ones to Write in as my Eyes Seem too Dim to Do without but I will Lay them of and Write that you may See the diffrent Hand) I Expect to Send by Elder Clark to you and Menny others as Every Letter here Costs me 20 Cints or one Shiling English. You will pleas to Write as Soon as you Get this and tell me how you Get on in the World

I Remain your Brother George A. Smith

To John Lyman Smith

[Written on the side of the last page:]

Be a Good Lad and Do Good to all and mind your Parents Give my Love to Father & Mother Caraline and the Children

[Written on the side of the first page:]

Direct to G. A Smith at Mr. Players Stafford Street Longton Staffordshire England and I Shall Get it if it Crosses the Pond.

[George scribbled several additional notes on the address page, including one that confirms the letter was "Writen to Send by Elder Clark" in order to save postage. "The Weather is More Mild and Damp this Past Week here" says another, perhaps a boon to George A., who noted that "my health is as good as it has been since I Left home." Still another note urged Lyman to "be a Good Boy [and] Study and Mind your father and Mother and Pray for me as your Brother."]

23

PARLEY P. PRATT TO SIDNEY RIGDON, JANUARY 8, 1841

A little news from this part of the vineyard

The following is an extract from a letter sent by Parley P. Pratt to Sidney Rigdon, First Counselor to Joseph Smith in the First Presidency of the Church. While it is typical of the newsy letters the apostles sent in order to keep the Presidency informed, its report of British Campbellites gives it special interest. Before he became a Latter-day Saint, Sidney Rigdon had been an associate of Alexander Campbell in Ohio where, later, he was also a spiritual mentor to Parley. After Parley encountered the Book of Mormon, the tables were turned: it was he who introduced his friend Sidney to the glad tidings. Sidney also accepted, and both then had missionary success among people Campbell had taught to look for a restoration. Here Parley tells Sidney of the first baptisms in Britain from among the Campbellites, a harbinger, he hopes, of things to come. Source: Times and Seasons 2 (April 1, 1841): 364-65; brackets are in the original.

Manchester, Jan. 8th, 1841.

Pres't S. Rigdon:

Dear Brother,

I take this opportunity to address you, hoping these lines will find you alive, and recovered from that lingering sickness which has so long prayed upon your system. We are well; that is, myself, wife, and children, and the brethren generally, with whom you are acquainted. We have just received a few numbers of the Times and Seasons, [Sept. and Oct. Nos.,] from which we learn that Gadianton [Lilburn] has sent a demand for some of us to come back to Mo. in order to have a trial. Say to him and his band, that I for one, will be there quite as soon as he will wish to see me, and that when I come it will be to have a trial, and a just one too! therefore in his patience let him possess his soul; in the mean time I will be gathering up witnesses, for I only left the dungeon to be gathering up witnesses whom he had dispersed, and thus prepare for trial. Tell Missouri to fear not, for we will never forsake her.

I must now give you a little news from this part of the vineyard. In the first place, we have had one snow this winter of some 3 inches deep. The weather is now so cold that it is in danger of freezing potatoes in the chamber: it is the coldest we have had.

It is somewhat sickly with scarlet and other fevers. One family of Saints burried 3 children at a time.

Peace is declared between the allied powers and Egypt. Palestine is in the hands of Turkey. The Jews have as much libery there as the United States Government guarantees to its citizens.

As to the progress of the work of God in this country it is increasing at every step. It is now prospering in Ireland, and in Wales, as well as in Scotland and England. It is spreading into various new places in England. We have several hundred faithful preachers; and the spirit of enquiry seems to be generally awakened. The Clergy of the church of England, the Methodist priests, and the Baptist ministers, and Unitarians, etc. are all in arms, as it were, against the Saints.

The country is flooded with pamphlets, tracts, papers &c. published against us. Some of them have bear & wolf stories in them, some of them, have snake stories, and others gander stories. I must say that "Jonathan" is far behind "John Bull" in ingenuity in regard to inventing lies; all the foolishness ever published in the United States against the truth, would be considered sober earnest, compared to the follies which are being made manifest here, but I will forbear with a promise to send you a few specimens when our next emigrants sail for your place.

I must now inform you of the fact, that we have rept the first fruits of Campbellism in England. A few societies have been formed in England upon that principle for some years, but have made but little progress. One society of one hundred members exists about seventy miles from Manchester, at a place called Nothingham. They discovered about 2 years ago that they had been baptized for the remission, of sins without authority, and that they had not obtained remission, nor the gifts of the Spirit. From that time till now, many of them have been seeking and praying for the Lord to send officers and raise up his own church. At length, some of our writings fell into some of their hands, which soon brought two of their number to Manchester to enquire. They attended our meeting in the hall of Manchester, were well pleased, and called at our office next morning: after spending the day in enquiring, etc. one of them purchased 3 Voices of Warning and returned home; the other, (an inteligent gentleman,) staid two or three days, enquired diligently, and at length was baptized and confirmed, and went home to tell the glad tidings; this was a week or two ago. We expect to hear from them soon, and go out and baptize and organize a church there. Tell friend Campbell to go ahead and prepare the way, the Saints will follow him up and gather the fruits. The work of the Lord in this country rolled on unnoticed for some years except by the few. It was almost exclusively confined to the poor, and what they would call the lower classes; the editors, priests, and public in general hardly knew of its existence: but at length they began to "smell the rat," and since that time it has blazed forth like a flame which had been smothered. Many of its opposers who were very violent against it have become preachers of it; and at this time a general spirit of enquiry is beginning to be awakened among all classes.

I often feel as though I should like to be in the midst of our old friends in the west, but when it will be my lot I know not, I am resigned to the kind of life I am now living; I can truly say that I was never more contented, or more happy than of late. It does us much good to hear from Nauvoo; and I hope the presidency, and others will favor us with frequent communications. Say to President Smith that I want to see his essay on the priesthood very much. Br. Rigdon, be sure to write to me when you receive this. Our latest news from Nauvoo is Nov. 12, or when the two Englishmen left there—they have just arrived safe with letters. &c. this is January 13th.

Yours &c.

P. P. Pratt

24

ORSON PRATT TO GEORGE A. SMITH, FEBRUARY 8, 1841

Come Bro. Geo. put on your thinking cap

By early 1841 all the apostles were thinking of going home, a prospect they discussed freely in their letters. Here Orson Pratt writes to George A. Smith about the possiblities, and the letter seems to indicate some indecision on the part of George A. This letter also demonstrates that these two apostles had a sense of humor. Note Orson's play on his initials at the close. Source: George A. Smith Collection, Church Archives.

40 North Richmond St. Edinburgh Feb 8th 1841

Dear Brother George:

Your letter of the 6th came duly to hand this morning. I rejoice to hear from you but am sorry to hear of your ill health. But I feel in hopes bro. George that you will gain your health again. A good hearty strong constitution is an excellent qualification in the midst of a land of wretchedness & want. I suppose that 250 or 300 saints are now swiftly sailing between Old England & Ireland bound for Joseph's land. Dear Bro. Geo. you have often wished to know what I thought about going home. I think I can now give you a decided answer. I intend to preach my farewell discourse on Sunday the 28th of March, & on monday morning the 29th of March I intend to leave Edinburgh for Liverpool, & from the first of April until Wednesday morning the 7th of April I intend to be with all of our Quorum that meet in Manchester & then the first good ship that sails from Liverpool for N. York I intend shall carry me & all this if the Lord will.

And now brother George I have told you my calculations without joking. What say you? Will you go too? come let me have a decided answer. Er Young says he intends going immediately after the conference on the 6th of April. Er Hedlock's calculations were the same the last news. Er H. Clark is already pitching & diving towards the promised land. I think the most if not all the 12 will be going. Come Bro. Geo. put on your thinking cap & think out the time you will go & write me the results or conclusions of your mind on this subject.

The sea was so rough last week that I did not baptize any although I set 2 different evenings to attend to baptism. If the wind & waves will permit I shall probably baptize some to night. I have no late news from Er Hedlock. Please write immediately for it is necessary to keep the mail & letter carries busy this cold weather

Yours &c Oh! Pea!

To G.A.S.

25

EPISTLE OF THE QUORUM OF THE TWELVE TO THE BRITISH SAINTS, APRIL 15, 1841

Feeling anxious for your welfare and happiness in time and in eternity

Early in April, 1841, the eight apostles serving in Britain met in Manchester before all but Parley P. Pratt departed for America. The addition of Orson Hyde, passing through en route to fulfill his special mission to Palestine, brought to nine the number of apostles meeting that April—the most to meet together as a quorum since the spring of 1836 when the Kirtland Temple was dedicated! Among their last official acts as a quorum in Britain, these nine completed and signed their final farewell and counsel to the British Saints, and its publication closed volume one of the Star, the periodical they had launched the April before. Source: Millennial Star (April 1841): 309-312.

AN

EPISTLE OF THE TWELVE

To the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints in England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and the Isle of Man, Greeting:-

Beloved Brethren,—Inasmuch as we have been labouring for some time in this country, and most of us are about to depart for the land of our nativity; and feeling anxious for your welfare and happiness in time and in eternity, we cheerfully offer you our counsel in the closing number of the first volume of the Star, hoping you will peruse it when we are far away, and profit by the same.

First of all, we would express our joy and thanksgiving to Him who rules and knows the hearts of men, for the heed and diligence with which the Saints in this country have hearkened to the counsel of those whom God has seen fit to send among them, and who hold the keys of this ministry. By this means a spirit of union, and consequently of power, has been generally cultivated among you.

And now let the Saints remember that which we have ever taught them, both by precept and example, viz: to beware of an aspiring spirit, which would lift you up one above another: to seek to be the greatest in the kingdom of God. This is that spirit which hurled down the angels—it is that spirit which actuates all the churches of the sectarian world, and most of the civil and military movements of the men of the world—it is that spirit which introduces rebellion, confusion, misrule, and disunion, and would, if suffered to exist among us, destroy our union, and consequently our power, which flows from the spirit, through the priesthood—which spirit, and power, and priesthood, can only exist with the humble and meek of the earth.

Therefore beware, O ye priests of the Most High! lest ye are overcome by that spirit which would exalt you above your fellow- labourers, and thus hurl you down to perdition, or do much injury to the cause of God. Be careful to respect, not the eloquence—not the smooth speeches—not the multitude of words—not the talents of men: but be careful to respect the offices which God has placed in the church. Let the members hearken to their officers, let the priests, teachers, and deacons hearken to the elders. and let the elders hearken to the presiding officers of each church or conference. And let all the churches and conferences hearken to the counsel of those who are still left in this country to superintend the affairs of the church; and by so doing, a spirit of union will be preserved, and peace and prosperity will attend the people of God.

We have seen fit to appoint our beloved brethren and fellow-labourers, Levi Richards and Lorenzo Snow, to travel from conference to conference, and to assist brother Pratt in the general superintendence of the church in this country. These are men of experience and sound[n]ess of principle, in whose counsel the church may place entire confidence, so long as they uphold them by the prayer of faith.

The spirit of emigration has actuated the children of men from the time our first parents were expelled from the garden until now; it was this spirit that first peopled the plains of Shinar, and all other places; yes, it was emigration that first broke upon the deathlike silence and loneliness of an empty earth, and caused the desolate land to team with life, and the desert to smile with joy. It was emigration that first peopled England,—once a desolate island, on which the foot of man had never trod, but now abounding in towns and cities. It was emigration that turned the wiles of America into a fruitful field, and besprinkled the wilderness with flourishing towns and cities, where a few years since the war whoop of the savage, or the howl of wild beasts was heard in the distance. In short, it is emigration that is the only effectual remedy for the evils which now afflict the over-peopled countries of Europe. With this view of the subject, the saints, as well as thousands of others, seem to be actuated with the spirit of enterprise and emigration, and as some of them are calculating to emigrate to America, and settle in colonies of our brethren, we would here impart a few words of counsel on the subject of emigration.

It will be necessary, in the first place for men of capital to go on first and make large purchases of land, and erect mills, machinery, manufactories, &c., so that the poor who go from this country can find employment. Therefore it is not wisdom for the poor to flock to that place extensively, until the necessary preparations are made. Neither is it wisdom for those who feel a spirit of benevolence to expend all their means in helping others to emigrate, and thus all arrive in a new country empty handed. In all settlements there must be capital and labour united in order to flourish. The brethren will recollect that they are not going to enter upon cities already built up, but are going to "build cities and inhabit them." Building cities cannot be done without means and labour.

On this subject we would call the particular attention of the Saints to the epistle, and also to the proclamation, signed by the first presidency of the church, published in the eleventh number of this work; and would earnestly exhort them to observe the order and instructions there given. We would also exhort the Saints not to go in haste, nor by flight, but to prepare all things in a proper manner before they emigrate; and especially in regard to their dealing with the world, let them be careful to settle everything honestly as becometh Saints, as far as lies in their power, and not go away in debt, so far as they have the means to pay. And if any go away in debt, because they have not means to pay, let it be with the design of paying as industry shall put it in their power, so that the cause of truth be not evil spoken of.

We have found that there are so many "pick-pockets," and so many that will take every possible advantage of strangers, in Liverpool, that we have appointed Elder Amos Fielding, as the agent of the church, to superintend the fitting out of the Saints from Liverpool to America. Whatever information the Saints may want about the preparations for a voyage, they are advised to call on Elder Fielding, at Liverpool, as their first movement, when they arrive there as emigrants. There are some brethren who have felt themselves competent to do their own business in these matters, and rather despising the counsel of their friends, have been robbed and cheated out of nearly all they had. A word of caution to the wise is sufficient. It is also a great saving to go in companies, instead of going individually. First, a company can charter a vessel, so as to make the passage much cheaper than otherwise. Secondly, provisions can be purchased at wholesale for a company much cheaper than otherwise. Thirdly, this will avoid bad company on the passage. Fourthly, when a company arrives in New Orleans they can charter a steam-boat so as to reduce the passage near one-half. This measure will save some hundreds of pounds on each ship load. Fifthly, a man of experience can go as leader of each company, who will know how to avoid rogues and knaves.

Sovereigns are more profitable than silver or any other money in emigrating to America; and the brethren are also cautioned against the American money, when they arrive in that country. Let them not venture to take paper money of that country until they become well informed in regard to the different banks; for very few of them will pass current very far from the place where they are issued, and banks are breaking almost daily. It is much cheaper going by New Orleans than by New York. But it will never do for emigrants to go by New Orleans in the Summer on account of the heat and sickness of the climate. It is, therefore, advisable for the Saints to emigrate in Autumn, Winter, or Spring. Let the Saints be careful also to obtain a letter of recommendation, from the Elders where they are acquainted, to the brethren where they are going, certifying their membership, and let the elders be careful not to recommend any who do not conduct themselves as Saints; and especially those who would go with a design to defraud their creditors.

In regard to ordaining and licensing officers, each conference is now organised, under the care of their respective presidents, who, with the voice of the church, may ordain, according to the gifts and callings of God, by the holy spirit, and under the general superintendance of Elders Pratt, Richards, and Snow. Licenses should be signed by the presiding officers.

There are many other items of importance, which we would gladly mention, had we time and space sufficient, but this must suffice for the present; and may the God of our father bless you all with wisdom and grace, to act each your part in the great work which lies before us, that the world may be warned, and thousands brought to the knowledge of the truth; and may he bless and preserve you blameless until the day of his coming. Brethren and sisters pray for us. We remain your brethren in the new and everlasting covenant,

BRIGHAM YOUNG,

HEBER C. KIMBALL,

ORSON HYDE,

P. P. PRATT,

ORSON PRATT,

WILLARD RICHARDS,

WILFORD WOODRUFF,

JOHN TAYLOR,

G. A. SMITH.

Manchester, April 15th, 1841

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Most of the rich manuscript material on which this book is based is housed in the Church Archives, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, cited below as well as in the text as Church Archives. In addition to the material specifically cited in the footnotes, there are other published and unpublished materials that the reader may find of great value. We have also listed some of them below. The reader will be interested, for example, in noting that in later years members of the Quorum of the Twelve prepared personal "histories" that were published in the Deseret News and the Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star (cited as Millennial Star). A more detailed guide to topics addressed in this volume is David J. Whittaker, "Mormonism in Victorian Britain: A Bibliography," in Mormonism in Early Victorian Britain, ed. Richard L. Jensen and Malcolm R. Thorp, 258-71. A valuable guide to primary sources of Mormon history is Davis Bitton, comp., A Guide to Mormon Diaries and Autobiographies (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1976). An excellent guide to the published works on Mormonism during the first 100 years is Chad J. Flake, comp., A Mormon Bibliography, 1830-1930 (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1978). A ten-year supplement by Chad J. Flake and Larry W. Draper appeared in 1989.

JOURNALS, DIARIES, AND PERSONAL HISTORIES OF THE TWELVE, PUBLISHED AND UNPUBLISHED

ORSON HYDE

Hyde, Orson. Autobiography (1804-1842). Holograph and typescript, Church Archives.

——. "History of Orson Hyde." Published serially in the Deseret News 8 (May 5-May 12, 1858) and again in the Millennial Star 26 (November 19-December 10, 1864).

HEBER C. KIMBALL

Kimball, Heber C. Autobiography. Ms. Heber C. Kimball Collection, Church Archives.

——. Diary. Heber C. Kimball Collection, Church Archives.

——. Journal of Heber C. Kimball. Nauvoo, Ill.: Robinson & Smith, 1840.

——. President Heber C. Kimball's Journal. Salt Lake City: Juvenile Instructor Office, 1882.

——. "Synopsis of the History of Heber Chase Kimball." Published serially in the Deseret News 8 (March 31-April 28, 1858) and again in the Millennial Star 26 (July 16-November 12, 1864).

Kimball, Stanley B., ed. On the Potter's Wheel: The Diaries of Heber C. Kimball. Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 1987.

ORSON PRATT

Pratt, Orson. "History of Orson Pratt." Published serially in the Deseret News 8 (June 2-June 9, 1858) and again in the Millennial Star 27 (January 14-February 11, 1865).

——. The Orson Pratt Journals. Comp. and ed. Elden J. Watson. Salt Lake City: Elden J. Watson, 1975.

PARLEY P. PRATT

Pratt, Parley P. Autobiography of Parley Parker Pratt. (1874) 5th ed. Ed. Parley P. Pratt, Jr. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1961.

——. "History of Parley P. Pratt." Published in the Deseret News 8 (May 19, 1858) and again in the Millennial Star 26 (December 24, 1864).

WILLARD RICHARDS

Richards, Willard. Diary. Holograph and typescript, Willard Richards Collection, Church Archives. (In addition to the small holograph diary kept in England, there is a typescript of another version apparently expanded by Richards later. Both versions have been used, and the distinction is made in the footnotes.)

——. "History of Willard Richards." Published serially in the Deseret News 8 (June 23-June 30, 1858) and again in the Millennial Star 27 (February 25-March 18, 1865).

GEORGE A. SMITH

Smith, George A. "History of George Albert Smith." Typescript, George A. Smith Collection, Church Archives. This typescript is based on "Memoirs of Geo. A. Smith," ms., George Albert Smith Collection, which, in turn, is based on "History of George Albert Smith by himself," ms., George A. Smith Collection. The last item is an expanded version of the Journal listed below.

——. Journal. George A. Smith Collection, Church Archives.

——. "My Journal." Published serially in The Instructor 81-84 (1946-1949).

——. "Sketch of the Auto-Biography of George Albert Smith." Published serially in the Deseret News 8 (August 11-August 18, 1858) and again in the Millennial Star 27 (July 1-July 15, 1865).

JOHN TAYLOR

The "History of John Taylor" was never published, and no contemporary diaries, journals, or personal histories are currently available. A scrapbook containing contemporary newspaper accounts of his Isle of Man mission is in Church Archives.

WILFORD WOODRUFF

Cowley, Matthias F., ed. Wilford Woodruff Fourth President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. History of His Life and Labors as Recorded in His Daily Journals. Prepared for publication by Matthias F. Cowley. 1909. Reprint. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1964.

Woodruff, Wilford. "History of Wilford Woodruff." Published serially in the Deseret News 8 (July 7-August 4, 1858) and again in the Millennial Star 27 (March 18-June 24, 1865).

——. Journal. Wilford Woodruff Collection, Church Archives. For the sake of convenience, we have used and quoted from Wilford Woodruff's Journal, 1833-1898. Typescript. 9 vols. Ed. Scott G. Kenney. Midvale, Utah: Signature Books, 1983-1985.

——. Leaves from My Journal. Salt Lake City: Juvenile Instructor, 1881. 2nd ed., 1882. Reprinted in Three Mormon Classics, comp. Preston Nibley. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1944.

BRIGHAM YOUNG

Young, Brigham. Diary. Brigham Young Papers, Church Archives.

——. "History of Brigham Young." Ms. Church Historian's Office Collection, Church Archives. Three manuscripts preliminary to the Deseret News history below.

——. "History of Brigham Young." Published serially in the Deseret News 7-8 (January 27-March 24, 1858) and again in the Millennial Star 25-26 (May 9, 1863-June 4, 1864).

——. Manuscript History of Brigham Young 1801-1844. Ed. Elden J. Watson. Salt Lake City: Elden J. Watson, 1968.

OTHER DIARIES, JOURNALS, AND MANUSCRIPT COLLECTIONS, PUBLISHED AND UNPUBLISHED

Allen, James B. and Thomas G. Alexander, eds. Manchester Mormons: The Journal of William Clayton, 1840 to 1842. Santa Barbara: Peregrine Smith, Inc., 1974. The original of this journal is in the Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

Beecroft, John. Journal. Church Archives

Blair, Phillip. Collection. J. Willard Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Campbell, Robert Lang. Diary. Original and typescript. Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

Clayton, William. Collection. Church Archives.

Cordon, Alfred. Journal. Church Archives.

Day, Thomas. Journal and Reminiscence. Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

Fielding, Joseph. Collection. Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

——. Collection. Church Archives.

——. Diary (holograph and typescript; for convenience, since dates are difficult to find in the holograph, we have referred to page numbers in the typescript). Church Archives.

Fleming, Helen Bourne. Collection. Church Archives.

Freeman, John. Journal. Church Archives.

Haight, Isaac Chauncy. Biographical Sketch and Diary. Typescript. Church Archives.

Hyde, Orson. Collection. Church Archives.

The Journal History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Church Archives.

Kimball, Heber C. Collection. Church Archives.

Lang, William. Autobiography. Typescript. Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

Lee, William. Diary, 1820-1895. Typescript. Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

"Manuscript History of the British Mission." 48 vols., 1837-1962. Church Archives.

Maughan, Mary Ann Weston. "Journal of Mary Ann Weston Maughan." Our Pioneer Heritage. 20 vols. Ed. Kate B. Carter. Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1958-1977. 2:354-55.

Miller, Charles M. Diary. Typescript. Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

Minutes of Conferences and Councils. Church Archives.

Morris, George. Autobiography. Typescript. Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

Nauvoo Minutes. Church Archives.

Pratt, Orson. Collection. Church Archives.

Pratt, Parley P. Collection. Church Archives.

Richards, Willard. Collection. Church Archives.

Russell, Isaac. Collection. Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

Smith, Bathsheba W. Bigler. "Autobiography of Bathsheba W. Bigler." Typescript. Ed. Alice Merrill Horne. Copy in possession of Harriet Horne Arrington.

——. Collection. Church Archives.

Smith, Charles. Journal. Church Archives.

Smith, George A. Collection. Church Archives.

——. Family Papers. J. Willard Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Smith, Joseph. Collection. Church Archives.

Snow, Lorenzo. Collection. Church Archives.

——. Journal. Church Archives.

——. Notebook. Church Archives.

Taylor, John. Collection. Church Archives.

Thatcher, Luna Young. Collection. Church Archives.

Thomas, Wanda Clayton. Collection. J. Willard Marriott Library. University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.

Turley, Theodore. "Theodore Turley Mission Journal 1839-40." Ed. Richard Eyring Turley, Jr. Senior honors project, Brigham Young University, 1982. Original journal in Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

"United Brethren Preacher's Plan of the Frooms Hill Circuit, 1840." Broadside. Church Archives.

Woodruff, Wilford. Collection. Church Archives.

Young, Brigham. Papers. Church Archives

CONTEMPORARY PUBLICATIONS

Copies of these rare works are available in the Church Archives or Harold B. Lee Library. Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.

[Anonymous]. He is gone ... Dymock, England, 1866. Photocopy of poem, Church Archives. Adams, George J. A Letter to His Excellency John Tyler, President of the United States, Touching the Signs of the Times, and the Political Destiny of the World. New York: C. A. Calhoun, 1844.

Bennett, Samuel. A Few Remarks by way of Reply to an Anonymous Scribbler, Calling Himself a Philanthropist, Disabusing the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints of the Slanders and Falsehoods Which he has Attempted to Fasten upon it. Philadelphia: Brown, Bicking & Guilbert, 1840.

The Book of Mormon: an Account Written by the Hand of Mormon, Upon Plates Taken From the Plates of Nephi ... Translated by Joseph Smith, Jr. Kirtland, Ohio: Printed by O. Cowdery and Co., for P. P. Pratt and J. Goodson, 1837.

The Book of Mormon: an Account Written by the Hand of Mormon Upon the Plates Taken From the Plates of Nephi ... Translated by Joseph Smith, Jr. First European Edition, From the Second American Edition. Liverpool: Printed by J. Tompkins for B. Young, H. C. Kimball and P. P. Pratt, 1841.

A Collection of Sacred Hymns For the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Europe, Selected by Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt, and John Taylor. Published by Order of a General Conference, and for Sale at 124 Oldham Road, Manchester, and by Agents Throughout England. Manchester: Printed by W. R. Thomas, 1840.

Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of the Latter-day Saints: Carefully Selected From the Revelations of God, and Compiled by Joseph Smith, Junior, Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, Frederick G. Williams [Presiding Elders of said Church] Proprietors. Kirtland, Ohio: Printed by F. G. Williams and Co. for the Proprietors, 1835.

Elders' Journal of the Church of Latter Day Saints. Kirtland, Ohio, and Far West, Missouri, October 1837-August 1838.

Haining, Samuel. Mormonism Weighed in the Balances, of the Sanctuary, and Found Wanting; The Substance of Four Lectures. Douglas, Isle of Man: Robert Fargher, 1840.

Hewitt, William. Exposition of the Errors and Fallacies of the Self-named "Latter-day Saints." In Which the Author exposes the Fallacies of the L.D.S. by Publishing His Sentiments. Lane-End, England: C. Watts, 1840.

Howe, Eber D. Mormonism Unvailed: or, A Faithful Account of That Singular Imposition and Delusion, From its Rise to the Present Time. With Sketches of the Characters of its Propagators, and a Full Detail of the Manner in Which the Famous Golden Bible was Brought Before the World. To Which Are Added, Inquiries Into the Probability That the Historical Part of the Said Bible was Written by One Solomon Spalding [sic], More Than Twenty Years Ago, and by Him Intended to Have Been Published as a Romance. Painesville, Ohio: Published by the author, 1834. Reprinted in 1840 under the title History of Mormonism ... .

Hyde, Orson. A Timely Warning to the People of England of Every Sect and Denomination, and to Every Individual Into Whose Hands it May Fall, by an Elder of the Church of Latter Day Saints. Broadside. Manchester: W. R. Thomas, 1840. The first version of this broadside was entitled A Prophetic Warning To all the Churches ..., and was printed in Toronto, Canada, August 1836. It was revised and printed under the current title in Preston, in 1837, and later reprinted in Manchester.

The Imposture Unmasked; or, A Complete Exposure of the Mormon Fraud; Being a Critical Review of the Book of Mormon, and an Expose of the Character of Joseph Smith,

Sidney Rigdon, Martin Harris, Parley Pratt, and Other Leading Actors in the Latter-Day Saint Delusion. 2d ed. Douglas, Isle of Man: Reprinted from the Mona's Herald and Central Advertiser for the British Empire, by R. Fargher, 1841.

Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate. Kirtland, Ohio, October 1834-September 1837.

The Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star. Liverpool, England. 1840-1970.

Lewis, Samuel. Topographical Dictionary of England. 4 vols. 7th ed. London: S. Lewis and Co., 1848.

Livesey, Joseph. Reminiscences of Early Teetotalism. Preston, n.d.

Livesey, Richard. An Exposure of Mormonism, Being a Statement of Facts Relating to the Self-styled "Latter-day Saints," and the Origin of the Book of Mormon. Preston: J. Livesey, 1838. 2d edition, Manchester: William Shackleton and Son, 1840.

Palmer, William. The External Evidence of the Book of Mormon Examined. London: Arthur Hall and Co., Briscoe, Printer, [1849?].

Pratt, Orson. Absurdities of Immaterialism; or, A Reply to T. W. P. Taylor's Pamphlet, Entitled: "The Materialism of the Mormons or Latter-day Saints Examined and Exposed." Liverpool: R. James, 1849.

——. [An] Interesting Account of Several Remarkable Visions, and of the Late Discovery of Ancient American Records. Edinburgh: Ballantyne and Hughes, 1840.

——. The Seer. Washington, D.C., and Liverpool, January 1853-August 1854.

——. A Series of Pamphlets by Orson Pratt, One of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.... (Fifteen pamphlets.) Liverpool: Franklin D. Richards, 1851.

——. [Tracts] by Orson Pratt, One of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and President of Said Church Throughout Great Britain and all European Countries. (Eight pamphlets.) London: L.D.S. Book and Star Depot, August 25, 1856-March 15, 1857.

Pratt, Parley P. An Address by a Minister of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to the People of England. Manchester: W. R. Thomas, 1840.

——. An Address by Judge [Elias] Higbee and Parley P. Pratt, Ministers of the Gospel of the Church of Jesus Christ of "Latter-day Saints," to the Citizens of Washington, and to the Public in General. [Washington, D.C.?]: 1840.

——. An Answer to Mr. William Hewitt's Tract Against the Latter-day Saints. Manchester: W. R. Thomas, 1840.

——. Dialogue Between a Latter-day Saint and an Enquirer After Truth. (Reprinted From the Star of January 1) To Which is Added, A Solemn Warning to the Methodists. By One Who was Formerly a Preacher Among Them. Manchester: Parley P. Pratt, 1842.

——. An Epistle of Demetrius, the Silversmith, to the Workmen of Like Occupation and all Others to Whom it May Concern,—Greeting: Showing the Best Way to Preserve our Craft and to Put Down the Latter-day Saints. Manchester: W. Shackleton and Son [1842].

——. History of the Late Persecution Inflicted by the State of Missouri Upon the Mormons, in Which Ten Thousand American Citizens Were Robbed, Plundered, and Driven From the State, and Many Other Imprisoned, Martyred, &c., for Their Religion, and all This by Military Force, by Order of the Executive. Detroit: Dawson & Bates, 1839. Reprinted with additions under the title Late Persecution of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. Ten Thousand Citizens Robbed, Plundered, and Banished; Others Imprisoned, and Others Martyred for their Religion. With a Sketch of Their Rise, Progress and Doctrine. New York: J. W. Harrison, 1840.

——. Key to the Science of Theology: Designed as an Introduction to the First Principles of Spiritual Philosophy; Religion; Law and Government; as Delivered by the Ancients, and as Restored in This Age, for the Final Development of Universal Peace, Truth and Knowledge. Liverpool: F. D. Richards, 1855.

——. A Letter to the Queen Touching the Signs of the Times and the Political Destiny of the World. Manchester: Printed and Published by P. P. Pratt, 1841.

——. The Millennium, a Poem. To Which is Added Hymns and Songs on Various Subjects New and Interesting, Adapted to the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. Boston: Parley P. Pratt, 1835.

——. The Millennium and Other Poems: To Which is Annexed, A Treatise on the Regeneration and Eternal Nature of Matter. New York: W. Molineux, 1840.

——. Mormonism Unveiled: Zion's Watchman Unmasked, and its Editor, Mr. L. R. Sunderland, Exposed: Truth Vindicated: The Devil Mad, and Priestcraft in Danger! New York: Parley P. Pratt, 1838.

——. The Prophet. New York City, May 1844-May 1845.

——. Prospectus of the Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star. Broadside. Manchester: W. R. Thomas, 1840.

——. A Reply to Mr. Thomas Taylor's "Complete Failure," &c., and Mr. Richard Livesey's "Mormonism Exposed." Manchester: W. R. Thomas, 1840.

——. Truth Defended, or, A Reply to the "Preston Chronicle," and to Mr. J. B. Rollo's "Mormonism Exposed." Manchester: Printed and published by Parley P. Pratt, 1841.

——. A Voice of Warning and Instruction to All People, Containing a Declaration of the Faith and Doctrine of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, Commonly Called Mormons. New York: W. Sandford, 1837.

Primitive Methodist Magazine.

Richards, Franklin D. A Compendium of the Faith and Doctrines of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Compiled From the Bible, and Also From the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Other Publications of the Church. Liverpool: Orson Pratt, 1857.

Rigdon, Sidney. An Appeal to the American People: Being an Account of the Persecutions of the Church of Latter Day Saints; and of the Barbarities Inflicted on Them by the Inhabitants of the State of Missouri. Cincinnati: Glezen and Shepard, 1840.

Rollo, J. B. Mormonism Exposed, From the Word of God. South Bridge, England: Glass, Printer, [1841].

Smith, George A. The Rise, Progress, and Travels of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Being a Series of Answers to Questions.... Salt Lake City: Printed at the Deseret News Office, 1869.

Smith, Joseph. General Smith's Views of the Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States. Nauvoo, Ill.: John Taylor, 1844.

Spencer, Orson. Letters Exhibiting the Most Prominent Doctrines of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. 3d ed. Liverpool: Orson Spencer, 1848.

Stevenson, H. A Lecture on Mormonism, Delivered in the Wesleyan Methodist Chapel, Alston, December 7th, 1838. Newcastle, England: J. Blackwell and Co., 1839.

Taylor, John. An Answer to Some False Statements and Misrepresentations Made by the Rev. Robert Heys, Wesleyan Minister, in an Address to His Society in Douglas and its Vicinity, on the Subject of Mormonism. Douglas, Isle of Man: Penrice and Wallace, 1840.

——. Calumny Refuted and the Truth Defended; Being a Reply to the Second Address of the Rev. Robert Heys, Wesleyan Minister to the Wesleyan Methodist Societies in Douglas and its Vicinity. Douglas, Isle of Man: Penrice and Wallace [1840].

——. The Mormon. New York City, February 1855-September 1857.

——. A Short Account of the Murders, Roberies [sic] Burnings, Thefts, and Other Outrages Committed by a Mob & Militia of the State of Missouri, Upon the Latter Day Saints. The Persecutions They Have Endured for Their Religion, and Their Banishment From that State By the Authorities Thereof. [Springfield, Ill.?], 1839.

——. Truth Defended and Methodism Weighed in the Balance and Found Wanting: Being a Reply to the Third Address of the Rev. Robert Heys, Wesleyan Minister to the Wesleyan Methodist Societies in Douglas and Vicinity. And Also an Exposure of the Principles of Methodism. Liverpool: J. Tompkins, 1840.

Taylor, Thomas. An Account of the Complete Failure of an Ordained Priest of the "Latter-day Saints" to Establish His Pretensions to the Gift of Tongues, Which Took Place Oct. 12, 1840: With an Address to Men of Reason and Religion, Warning Them Not to be Deceived by the Craftiness of Such Low Impostures. Manchester: Pigot and Slater, [1840].

The Times and Seasons. Nauvoo, Ill., 1839-1846.

Webster, Thomas. Some Extracts from the Book of Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of the Latter Day Saints, to Which are Added Some Facts Tending to Show the Utter Failure of Their Pretended Prophecies and Their Unsuccessful Attempts at Working Miracles, &c. By Thomas Webster, Formerly One of the Elders of the Mormon Church. Preston: W. Pollard, [1841?].

Winchester, Benjamin. An Examination of a Lecture Delivered by the Rev. H. Perkins on the Religious Opinions and Faith of the Latter-day Saints and Some of the Most Prominent Errors and Mistakes Corrected. [Philadelphia?]: 1840.

[Woodruff, Wilford, and Heber C. Kimball]. The Word of the Lord to the Citizens of London. London: Doudney and Scrymgour, [1841].

OTHER SECONDARY LITERATURE

Alexander, Thomas G. "The Reconstruction of Mormon Doctrine: From Joseph Smith to Progressive Theology." Sunstone 5 (July/August 1980): 24-33.

——. Things in Heaven and Earth: The Life and Times of Wilford Woodruff, a Mormon Prophet. Salt Lake City: Signature Books, 1991.

——. "Wilford Woodruff and the Changing Nature of Mormon Religious Experience." Church History 45 (March 1976): 50-69.

——. "The Word of Wisdom: From Principle to Requirement." Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 14 (Autumn 1981): 78-88.

Allen, James B. "Emergence of a Fundamental: The Expanding Role of Joseph Smith's First Vision in Mormon Religious Thought." Journal of Mormon History 7 (1980): 43-61.

——. "Line upon Line: Church History Reveals How the Lord Has Continually Added to His People's Knowledge and Understanding." Ensign 9 (July 1979): 32-39.

——. "The Significance of Joseph Smith's 'First Vision' in Mormon Thought." Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 1 (Autumn 1966): 29-45.

——. Trials of Discipleship: The Story of William Clayton, a Mormon. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1987.

——, ed. "We Had a Very Hard Voyage for the Season': John Moon's Account of the First Emigrant Company of British Saints." Brigham Young University Studies 17 (Spring 1977): 339-41.

——, and Glen M. Leonard. The Story of the Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976.

——, and Malcolm R. Thorp. "The Mission of the Twelve to England, 1840-41: Mormon Apostles and the Working Classes." Brigham Young University Studies 15 (Summer 1975): 499-526.

Armytage, W. H. G. Heavens Below: Utopian Experience in England, 1560-1960. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1961.

Arrington, Leonard J. Brigham Young: American Moses. New York: Alfred Knopf, 1985.

——, and Ronald K. Esplin. "The Role of the Council of the Twelve during Brigham Young's Presidency in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." Task Papers in LDS History, No. 31. Salt Lake City: Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1979.

Axon, William E. A., ed. The Annals of Manchester: A Chronological Record from the Earliest Times to the End of 1885. Manchester: John Heywood, 1886.

Backman, Milton V. Joseph Smith's First Vision: The First Vision in Historical Context. 1971. 2nd edition. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980.

——. "Joseph Smith's Recitals of the First Vision." Ensign 15 (January 1985): 8-17.

Banks, J. A. "The Contagion of Numbers." In The Victorian City: Images and Reality, 2 vols., ed. H. J. Dyos and Michael Wolff, 1:105-22. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1973.

Barker, Helen Bennion. "John Bennion." In Our Pioneer Heritage, 20 vols., ed. Kate B. Carter. Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1958-1977. 13:408-10.

Barlow, Brent A. "History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Ireland Since 1840." Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1968.

——. "The Irish Experience." In Truth Will Prevail: The Rise of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the British Isles 1837-1987, ed. V. Ben Bloxham, James R. Moss, and Larry C. Porter, 299-331. Solihull, England: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1987.

Barron, Howard H. Orson Hyde: Missionary, Apostle, Colonizer. Bountiful, Utah: Horizon Publishers, 1977.

Billington, Louis. "Popular Religion and Social Reform: A Study of Revivalism and Teetotalism, 1830-50." Journal of Religious History 10 (June 1979): 266-93.

Bitton, Davis. "The Waning of Mormon Kirtland." Brigham Young University Studies 12 (Summer 1972): 455-64.

Bloxham, V. Ben. "The Apostolic Foundations, 1840-1841." In Truth Will Prevail: The Rise of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the British Isles 1837-1987, ed. V. Ben Bloxham, James R. Moss, and Larry C. Porter, 121-62. Solihull, England: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1987.

——. "The Call of the Apostles to the British Isles." In Truth Will Prevail: The Rise of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the British Isles 1837-1987, ed. V. Ben Bloxham, James R. Moss, and Larry C. Porter, 104-20. Solihull, England: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1987.

Briggs, Asa. The Making of Modern England 1784-1867: The Age of Improvement. New York: Harper & Row, 1959.

Buchanan, Frederick S. "The Ebb and Flow of the Church in Scotland." In Truth Will Prevail: The Rise of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the British Isles 1837-1987, ed. V. Ben Bloxham, James R. Moss, and Larry C. Porter, 268-98. Solihull, England: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1987.

——. "The Ebb and Flow of Mormonism in Scotland, 1840-1900." Brigham Young University Studies 27 (Spring 1987): 27-52.

Bush, Lester E., Jr. "The Spaulding Theory, Then and Now." Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 10 (Autumn 1977): 40-69.

——. "The Word of Wisdom in Early Nineteenth Century Perspective." Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 14 (Autumn 1981): 46-65.

Cannon, M. Hamlin. "Migration of English Mormons to America." American Historical Review 52 (April 1947): 436-55.

Cardwardine, Richard. Trans-Atlantic Revivalism, Popular Evangelicalism in Britain and America, 1790-1865. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1978.

Carter, Kate B., ed. Heart Throbs of the West. 20 vols. Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1958-77.

Chadwick, Owen. The Victorian Church, Part I. New York: Oxford University Press, 1966.

Cook, Lyndon W. Joseph Smith and the Law of Consecration. Provo, Utah: Grandin Book Co., 1985.

——, and Donald Q. Cannon, eds. Far West Record: Minutes of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1830-44. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983.

Cotterill, John. "Midland Saints: The Mormon Mission in the West Midlands, 1837-77." Ph.D. thesis, University of Keele, 1985.

Crawley, Peter. "A Bibliography of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in New York, Ohio, and Missouri." Brigham Young University Studies 12 (Summer 1972): 465-537.

——. "A Descriptive Bibliography of the Mormon Church, 1830-1847." (Unpublished manuscript.)

——. "Parley P. Pratt: Father of Mormon Pamphleteering." Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 15 (Autumn 1982): 13-26.

——. "The Passage of Mormon Primitivism." Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 13 (Winter 1980): 26-37.

——, and Richard Lloyd Anderson. "The Political and Social Realities of Zion's Camp." Brigham Young University Studies 14 (Summer 1974): 406-20.

——, and David J. Whittaker. Mormon Imprints in Great Britain and the Empire, 1836-1857. Friends of the BYU Library Newsletter No. 30. Provo, Utah: Friends of the Brigham Young University Library, 1987.

Currie, Robert, Alan Gilbert, and Lee Horsley. Churches and Church Goers: Patterns of Church Growth in the British Isles Since 1700. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977.

Curtis, N. F. R. "Economic Growth and the Standard of Living." Chapter 5 of British Economic Growth During the Industrial Revolution. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985.

Davies, Rupert, A. Raymond George, and Gordon Rupp, eds. A History of the Methodist Church in Great Britain. 3 vols. London: Epworth Press, 1978.

Dennis, Ronald D. Welsh Mormon Writings from 1844 to 1862, A Historical Bibliography. Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Religious Studies Center, Special Monograph Series, vol. 4, 1988.

The Dictionary of National Biography. 22 vols. London: Oxford University Press, 1917.

Dyos, H. J., and Michael Wolff, eds. The Victorian City: Images and Realities. 2 vols. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1973.

Ehat, Andrew F. "Joseph Smith's Introduction of Temple Ordinances and the 1844 Mormon Succession Question." Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1982.

—-. and Lyndon W. Cook, eds. The Words of Joseph Smith: The Contemporary Accounts of the Nauvoo Discourses of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Religious Studies Center, 1980.

Eliade, Mircea, ed. The Encyclopedia of Religion, 16 vols. New York: Macmillan, 1987.

Ellsworth, S. George. "A History of Mormon Missions in The United States and Canada, 1830-1860." Ph.D. dissertation, University of California at Berkeley, 1951.

England, Breck. "Gospel Seeds in Scottish Soil." Ensign 17 (February 1987): 26-31.

——. The Life and Thought of Orson Pratt. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1985. Esplin, Ronald K. "Brigham Young in England." The Ensign 17 (June 1987): 28-33.

——. "The 1840-41 Mission to England and the Development of the Quorum of the Twelve." In Mormons in Early Victorian Britain, ed. Richard L. Jensen and Malcolm R. Thorp, 70-91. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1989.

——. "The Emergence of Brigham Young and the Twelve to Mormon Leadership, 1830-1841." Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1981.

——. "Inside Brigham Young: Abrahamic Tests As a Preparation for Leadership," Brigham Young University Studies 20 (Spring 1980): 300-310.

——. "Joseph, Brigham and the Twelve: A Succession of Continuity." Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Summer 1981): 301-41.

——. "Sickness and Faith, Nauvoo Letters." Brigham Young University Studies 15 (Summer 1975): 425-34.

Evans, Richard L. A Century of "Mormonism" in Great Britain. 1937; reprint, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1984.

Fales, Susan. "Artisans, Millhands, and Laborers: The Mormons of Leeds and Their Nonconformist Neighbors." In Mormons in Early Victorian Britain, ed. Richard L. Jensen and Malcolm R. Thorp, 156-78. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1989.

——. "The Nonconformists of Leeds in the Early Victorian Era: A Study in Social Composition." Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1984.

Foster, Craig L., "Anti-Mormon Pamphleteering in Great Britain, 1837-1860." Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1989.

Fussell, G. E., and K. R. Fussell. The English Countryman: His Life and Work from Tudor Times to the Victorian Age. London: Orbis Publishing, 1981.

——. The English Countrywoman: A Farmhouse Social History A.D. 1500-1900. 1953: Reprint. New York: Benjamin Blom, 1971.

Gash, Norman. Aristocracy and People: Britain 1815-1865. London: Edward Arnold, 1979.

Gilbert, Alan D. Religion and Society in Industrial England. London: Longman, 1976.

Girouard, Mark. Cities & People: A Social and Architectural History. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1985.

Godfrey, Kenneth W., Audrey M. Godfrey, and Jill Mulvay Derr, "Bathsheba Wilson Bigler Smith (1822-1910)." In Women's Voices: An Untold History of the Latter-day Saints 1830-1900, 121-33. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985.

Hammond, J. L. and Barbara Hammond. The Age of the Chartists 1832-1854: A Study of Discontent. 1930; reprint, New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1967.

Hardwick, Charles. History of the Borough of Preston and its Environs, in the County of Lancaster. Preston: Worthington & Co., 1857.

Harris, Jan G. "Mormons in Victorian England." Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1987.

——. "Mormons in Victorian Manchester." Brigham Young University Studies 27 (Winter 1987): 47-56.

Harrison, Brian. Drink and the Victorians. London: Faber and Faber, 1971.

Harrison, J. F. C. "The Popular History of Early Victorian Britain: A Mormon Contribution." Journal of Mormon History 14 (1988): 3-15.

——. The Second Coming: Popular Millenarianism 1780-1850. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1979.

Hastings, James, ed. Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics. 13 vols. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1951.

Henriques, Ursula. Religious Toleration in England 1787-1833. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1961.

Hicks, Michael. Mormonism and Music: A History. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1989.

Hill, Marvin S. "An Historical Study of the Life of Orson Hyde, Early Mormon Missionary and Apostle 1805-1852." Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1955.

Hobsbawm, E. J. "The British Standard of Living, 1790-1850." Economic History Review, Second Series, 10 (1957): 53-54.

Hopkins, James K. A Woman to Deliver Her People: Joanna Southcott and English Millenarianism in an Era of Revolution. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981.

Hoskins, W. G. The Making of the English Landscape. Hammondsworth: Penguin Books, 1933.

Ingliss, Keith S. Churches and the Working Classes in Victorian England. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1963.

Jackson, J. Hampden. England Since the Industrial Revolution 1815-1948. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1975.

Jensen, Richard L. "The British Gathering to Zion." In Truth Will Prevail: The Rise of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the British Isles 1837-1987, ed. V. Ben Bloxham, James R. Moss, and Larry C. Porter, 165-98. Solihull, England: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1987.

——. "The John Taylor Family." Ensign 10 (February 1980): 50-56.

——, and Malcolm R. Thorp, eds. Mormons in Early Victorian Britain. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1989.

Jessee, Dean C. "The Early Accounts of Joseph Smith's First Vision." Brigham Young University Studies 9 (Spring 1969): 275-94.

——. "Wilford Woodruff." In The Presidents of the Church, ed. Leonard J. Arrington, 117-43. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986.

——. "The Writings of Brigham Young." Western Historical Quarterly 4 (July 1973): 273-94.

——, ed. "Joseph Smith's 19 July 1840 Discourse." Brigham Young University Studies 19 (Spring 1979): 390-94.

——, ed. Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974.

——, ed. The Personal Writings of Joseph Smith. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1984.

Jones, Garth N. "Who Came in Second?" Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 21 (Summer 1988): 149-54.

Jorgensen, Lynn Watkins. "The First London Mormons: 1840-1845. 'What Am I And My Brethren Here For?'" Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1988.

Journal of Discourses. 26 vols. London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-1886; reprint, Salt Lake City, 1967.

Kent, John. "Feeling and Festivals: An Interpretation of Some Working Class Religious Attitudes." In The Victorian City: Images and Reality, 2 vols., ed. H. J. Dyos and Michael Wolff, 2:855-71. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1973.

Kimball, Stanley B. "Brigham and Heber." Brigham Young University Studies 18 (Spring 1978): 396-409.

——. "Heber C. Kimball and Family, the Nauvoo Years." Brigham Young University Studies 15 (Summer 1975): 447-79.

——. Heber C. Kimball: Mormon Patriarch and Pioneer. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1981.

Lewis, Samuel. Topographical Dictionary of England. 7th ed. 4 vols. London: S. Lewis and Co., 1848.

Lively, Robert L. "The Catholic Apostolic Church and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: A Comparative Study of Two Minority Millenarian Groups in Nineteenth Century England." Ph.D. dissertation, Oxford University, 1977.

Lyon, T. Edgar. "Nauvoo and the Council of the Twelve." In The Restoration Movement: Essays in Mormon History, ed. F. Mark McKiernan, Alma R. Blair, and Paul M. Edwards, 167-205. Lawrence, Kansas: Coronado Press, 1973.

——. "Orson Pratt: Early Mormon Leader." Master's thesis, University of Chicago, 1932.

Marcus, Steven. "Reading the Illegible." In The Victorian City: Images and Reality, 2 vols., ed. H. J. Dyos and Michael Wolff, 1:257-76. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1973.

McKay, John P., Bennett D. Hill, and John Buckler. A History of World Societies. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1984.

McLeod, Hugh. "Class, Community and Region: The Religious Geography of Nineteenth-Century England." In A Sociological Yearbook of Religion in Britain, ed. Michael Hill, 6:29-72. London: SCM, 1973.

——. Religion and the Working Class in Nineteenth-Century Britain. London: Macmillan, 1984.

"Missionary Sketches." Juvenile Instructor 5 (October 15, 1870): 166-67.

Mitchell, B. R. Abstract of British Historical Statistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1962.

Moore, Richard G. "A History of Mormon Periodicals from 1830 to 1838." Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1983.

Moss, James R. "The Gospel Restored to England." In Truth Will Prevail: The Rise of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the British Isles 1837-1987, ed. V. Ben Bloxham, James R. Moss, and Larry C. Porter, 71-103. Solihull, England: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1987.

——, and Lavell Moss. Historic Sites of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the British Isles. Salt Lake City: Publisher's Press for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1987.

Noall, Claire. Intimate Disciple: Portrait of Willard Richards. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1957.

Norman, Edward R. Church and Society in England 1770-1970. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976.

Obelkevich, James. Religion and Rural Society in South Lindsey, 1825-1875. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976.

Perkes, William Evans. History of Richard Rushton Sr. and Family. Alhambra, California: Published privately by the Rushton Family Organization, 1977.

Peterson, Paul H. "An Historical Analysis of the Word of Wisdom." Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972.

Petrie, Sir Charles. The Victorians. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1960.

Phillips, Paul T. The Sectarian Spirit: Sectarianism, Society, and Politics in Victorian Cotton Towns. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1982.

Pickup, David M.W. "The Pick and Flower of England": The Story of the Mormons in Victorian Lancashire. Burnley, Lancashire, England: Living Legend, 1991.

Pierce, J. Joseph Livesey as Reformer and Teacher. N.p., 1885.

Pike, E. Royston. "Hard Times": Human Documents of the Industrial Revolution. New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1966.

Pusey, Merlo, Builders of the Kingdom: George A. Smith, John Henry Smith, George Albert Smith. Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1981.

Quinn, D. Michael. "Latter-day Saint Prayer Circles." Brigham Young University Studies 19 (Fall 1978): 79-105.

Roberts, B. H. A Comprehensive History of the Church. 6 vols. Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1930.

——. The Life of John Taylor. 1892. Reprint. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1963.

Sekers, David. The Potteries. Great Britain: Shire Publications Ltd., 1981.

Sheppard, Francis. London 1808-1870: The Infernal Wen. London: Secker & Warburg, 1971.

Shepperson, Wilbur S. "The Place of the Mormons in the Religious Emigration of Britain." Church History 20 (July 1952): 207-18.

Simpson, J. A., and E. S. C. Weiner, eds. The Oxford English Dictionary. 20 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989.

Smart, Paul F. "The History of the Early Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Preston, Lancashire, England [1837-c.1851]. Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1989.

Smith, Job. "The United Brethren." Improvement Era 13 (July 1910): 818-23.

Smith, Joseph, Jr. History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Ed. B. H. Roberts. 2d ed. rev. 7 vols. Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Deseret Book Co., 1971.

Smith, Paul Thomas. "Among Family and Friends: John Taylor's Mission to the British Isles." The Ensign 17 (March 1987): 36-41.

——. "John Taylor." In The Presidents of the Church, ed. Leonard J. Arrington, 75-114. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1986.

Sonne, Conway B. Saints on the Seas: A Maritime History of Mormon Migration, 1830-1890. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1983.

——. Ships, Saints, and Mariners: A Maritime Encyclopedia of Mormon Migration, 1830-1930. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1987.

Stock, Hugh. "The Book of Mormon, 1830-1879, A Publishing History." Master's thesis, University of California at Los Angeles, 1979.

Storch, Robert D. "'Please to Remember the Fifth of November': Conflict, Solidarity and Public Order in Southern England, 1815-1900." Chapter 4 of Popular Culture and Custom in Nineteenth-Century England, ed. Robert D. Storch. London: St. Martin's Press, 1982.

Stott, G. St. John. "John Taylor's Religious Preparation." Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 19 (Spring 1986): 123-28.

Taylor, Arthur J., ed. The Standard of Living in Britain in the Industrial Revolution. London: Methuen & Co. Ltd., 1975.

Taylor, P. A. M. Expectations Westward: The Mormons and the Emigration of their British Converts in the Nineteenth Century. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd, 1965.

Taylor, Samuel W. The Kingdom or Nothing: The Life of John Taylor, Militant Mormon. New York: Macmillan, 1976.

Thistlewaite, Frank. The Anglo-American Connection in the Early Nineteenth Century. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1959.

Thompson, F. M. L. The Rise of Respectable Society: A Social History of Victorian Britain, 1830-1900. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1988.

Thompson, Kenneth A. Bureaucracy and Church Reform. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970.

Thorp, Malcolm R. "Early Mormon Confrontations with Sectarianism, 1837-40." In Mormons in Early Victorian Britain, ed. Richard L. Jensen and Malcolm R. Thorp, 46-69. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1989.

——. "The Religious Backgrounds of Mormon Converts in Britain, 1837-52." Journal of Mormon History 4 (1977): 51-66.

——. "Sectarian Violence in Early Victorian Britain: The Mormon Experience, 1837-1860." Bulletin of the John Rylands University Library of Manchester 70 (Autumn 1988): 135-47.

——. "Social and Religious Origins of Early English Mormons." World Conference on Records, Series 444, August 12-15, 1980. Salt Lake City: Corporation of the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1980.

Underwood, Grant R. "The Millenarian World of Early Mormonism." Ph.D. dissertation, University of California at Los Angeles, 1988.

Valentine, Hyrum W. The Trio's Pilgrimage. N.p., 1947.

Van Wagoner, Richard S. "Sarah M. Pratt: The Shaping of an Apostate." Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 19 (Summer 1986): 69-99.

Walker, Ronald W. "Cradling Mormonism: The Rise of the Gospel in Early Victorian England." Brigham Young University Studies 27 (Winter 1987): 25-36.

——, ed. "The Willard Richards and Brigham Young 5 September 1840 Letter from England to Nauvoo." Brigham Young University Studies 18 (Spring 1978): 466-75.

Ward, W. R. Religion and Society in England 1790-1850. London: B. T. Batsford Ltd., 1972.

Watt, Barbara Fluckiger. "Bathsheba Bigler Smith: Woman of Faith and Courage." In Sister Saints, ed. Vicky Burgess-Olsen, 201-21. Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1978.

Weber, Adna Ferrin. The Growth of Cities in the Nineteenth Century: A Study in Statistics. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1965.

Weinreb, Ben, and Christopher Hibbert. The London Encyclopedia. London: Macmillan, 1984.

Wells, Emmeline B. "Biography of Mary Ann Young." The Juvenile Instructor 26 (June 15, 1891): 56-57.

Werner, Julia Stewart. The Primitive Methodist Connection: Its Background and Early History. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1984.

Whitney, Helen Mar. "Scenes in Nauvoo." Woman's Exponent 10 (August 1, 1881): 34.

Whitney, Orson F. History of Utah. 4 vols. Salt Lake City: George Q. Cannon & Sons, 1904.

——. Life of Heber C. Kimball. 1888. 3d ed. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1967.

Whittaker, David J. "The 'Articles of Faith' in Early Mormon Literature and Thought." In New Views of Mormon History: Essays in Honor of Leonard J. Arrington, ed. Davis Bitton and Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, 63-92. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1987.

——. "The Bone in the Throat: Orson Pratt and the Public Announcement of Plural Marriage." Western Historical Quarterly 18 (July 1987): 193-314.

——. "Early Mormon Pamphleteering." Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1982.

——. "Harvest in Herefordshire." Ensign 17 (January 1987): 46-51.

——. "Orson Pratt, Prolific Pamphleteer." Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 15 (Autumn 1982): 27-41.

Whittaker, Thomas. Life's Battles in Temperance Armour. London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1884.

Willson, David Harris, and Stuart E. Prall. A History of England, 3d ed. New York: Holt, Rhinehart and Winston, 1984.

Wilson, Brian R. "American Religion: Its Impact on Britain." In Contagious Conflict: The Impact of American Dissent on European Life, ed. A. N. J. Den Hollander, 233-63. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1973.

Yeo, Eileen. "Christianity in Chartist Struggle 1838-1842." Past and Present, no. 91 (May 1981): 109-39.
