“Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends” (John 15:13). There is no one who showed more love for His “friends”—God’s daughters and sons—than our dear Savior, Jesus Christ. There is no greater example in all the world of greater love. And it was that greater love that He had for His Father in Heaven and for each one of us that enabled Him to endure indescribable suffering and death and thus carry out His infinite Atonement. He voluntarily laid down His life for each of us and, in so doing, demonstrated infinite love.

But it was not only in Gethsemane and on Calvary that our Savior demonstrated that greater love. Elder Tad R. Callister (1945–2025), who served as a General Authority Seventy and as Sunday School General President, taught: “The Savior’s love was not a love for the righteous only; it was not an abstract love; nor was it demonstrated by one dramatic sacrificial act and nothing more. To the contrary, it was a day-by-day, hour-by-hour, even moment-by-moment love! It was love that stretched from premortality into eternity. … It was a love that blessed little children, healed the sick, and offered hope to the hopeless. It was a love that reached out to every individual as he or she was and lifted them to higher ground. Love was exhibited in every conscious, waking moment of his mortal life. Love flowed from every pore, every thought, every act. As naturally and regularly as we seek air, he sought to bless. Again and again in those moments of physical exhaustion and pressing ‘agendas’ he was there for the one—to listen, to love, and to bless. His entire life was an accumulation of acts of love, capped by the most significant of all—his atoning sacrifice.”

Jesus Christ is our greatest example of greater love. He taught us through His words and deeds how to follow His example and become His true disciples.

“As I have loved you, … love one another.

“By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another” (John 13:34–35).

We have the opportunity each day of our lives to follow the Savior’s example of greater love in the way we interact with and treat those around us, including those who may be unkind to us. As we take His name upon us and follow His example of treating others with greater love, we will feel His greater love for us, which will lift us and transform us to eventually become like Him.

May we commemorate Easter each Sunday as we remember our dear Savior and Redeemer—His life and His atoning sacrifice for us—by preparing for and partaking of the emblems of that sacrifice through the ordinance of the sacrament. May we show Him our immense gratitude for His loving sacrifice for us by following His example of loving and ministering to others, no matter how inconvenient. And just as He did, let us always seek to do the will of our Father (see John 6:38).

I am so grateful for my Savior, Jesus Christ. His life and atoning sacrifice became the greatest symbol of His and our Father in Heaven’s infinite love for each of us, with the tangible symbols of that love and sacrifice—the marks in the Savior’s hands, feet, and side—remaining even after His Resurrection (see Isaiah 49:15–16). “Greater love hath no man than this.” May we show greater love for Him this Easter season, and always, by showing greater love for others (see Matthew 25:40).
