[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="170840564" id="p_ozoVw">Editors’ note: This Easter series explores what we can learn from individuals who knew the Savior during His earthly ministry and after His Resurrection. The series runs February through April.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

Following the Lord’s Resurrection, Peter became the chief Apostle to preside over the affairs of Christ’s Church. He expanded the gospel’s reach and set a path of faith and action spurred by revelation. Prophets in this dispensation have paralleled this path.

Despite human frailties, Peter’s first tendency often was to act in faith. For example, when receiving his call from the Lord, he immediately left his fishing profession to become a fisher of men (see Matthew 4:19–20; Luke 5:11). And before he began to sink in the waters of the Sea of Galilee, he stepped from the boat in faith and walked on water (see Matthew 14:28–29). Moreover, long before he thrice denied that he knew the Savior, Peter, through divine revelation, boldly declared that Jesus was the Christ (see Matthew 16:13–17).

Similarly, modern prophets in faith answer the Lord’s calls and act to further the gospel’s reach. Like Peter, they receive revelations to guide Church growth and witness that Jesus is the Christ. They work to gather all God’s children and to establish His kingdom on both sides of the veil.

As an eyewitness of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, Peter sought to instill hope in others as he testified of the Savior’s atoning sacrifice and triumph over death. He taught that God the Father has “begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ” (1 Peter 1:3).

Likewise, in our day, President Russell M. Nelson (1924–2025) testified of the hope that springs from Jesus Christ and of the need to share that message with others: “Each of God’s children deserves the opportunity to hear and accept the healing, redeeming message of Jesus Christ. No other message is more vital to our happiness—now and forever. No other message is more filled with hope.”

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="170840600" id="p_sYqV9">“Each of God’s children deserves the opportunity to hear and accept the healing, redeeming message of Jesus Christ. No other message is more vital to our happiness—now and forever. No other message is more filled with hope.”</p> <div class="citation-info"> <p data-aid="170840604" id="p_dANIS">—President Russell M. Nelson</p> </div> [/SIDEBAR]

In relation to sharing the message of Jesus Christ with others, consider Peter’s vision of a sheet knit together at the four corners, filled with beasts, creeping things, and fowls. In this vision, Peter was commanded to slay and eat the animals. However, to eat them was an abomination under the law of Moses (see Leviticus 11). Peter said he would not eat the animals, calling them “common” and “unclean” (Acts 10:14). But the Lord corrected him: “What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common” (Acts 10:15).

While Peter pondered the meaning of the vision, three men arrived at his location. They were sent by Cornelius, a devout Gentile, who had been told by an angel to summon Peter (see Acts 10:3–7). Likewise, the Spirit told Peter to go with the men and doubt nothing (see Acts 10:19–20).

However, by entering the house of a Gentile, Peter defiled himself according to Jewish law (see Acts 10:28). Yet this was in obedience to his vision and to the Spirit. It signified that the law of Moses was fulfilled through Christ and that redemption was available to all, not only to the Israelites.

“By this experience and revelation to Peter, the Lord modified the practice of the Church and revealed a more complete doctrinal understanding to His disciples,” taught President D. Todd Christofferson, Second Counselor in the First Presidency. “And so the preaching of the gospel expanded to encompass all mankind.”

Similarly, latter-day prophets have instituted inspired and revelatory changes to bring the gospel to all the world (see Matthew 24:14; Doctrine and Covenants 112:28). This includes President Thomas S. Monson (1927–2018) hastening the work in 2012 by lowering the age that missionaries can serve. And in 2023, President Nelson announced a new and improved version of Preach My Gospel to better guide missionary work.

Other inspired advancements include that beginning in 2019, missionaries were allowed to communicate with their families on their weekly preparation day, and in 2020, President Nelson authorized every missionary in the Church to have access to a smartphone, helping to expand digital proselyting as the COVID-19 pandemic spread worldwide.

Peter’s actions to fulfill his revelatory vision were not without opposition. When Church brethren who followed the law of circumcision heard that Peter had entered Cornelius’s house, they contended with him. But Peter related to them the vision and that the Holy Ghost fell upon the Gentiles even as it had upon the Jews who had embraced Christ. (See Acts 11:2–16.)

“Forasmuch then as God gave them the like gift as he did unto us, who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ; what was I, that I could withstand God?” he said (Acts 11:17).

Even as Peter maintained his integrity to God, the Prophet Joseph Smith did the same when faced with external opposition after telling others about the First Vision. “I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it; at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation” (Joseph Smith—History 1:25).

With Apostles James and John, Peter in this dispensation restored the Melchizedek Priesthood through the Prophet Joseph Smith (see Doctrine and Covenants 27:12; 128:20). This same priesthood after the order of the Son of God is conferred today on worthy male members, each tracing their priesthood line directly to Peter and ultimately Jesus Christ.

Moreover, Peter’s words influenced latter-day revelation about the spirit world. In 1918, while studying 1 Peter, chapters 3 and 4, President Joseph F. Smith (1838–1918) received a vision. He wondered about Peter’s written words regarding how “the Son of God preached unto the spirits in prison” (Doctrine and Covenants 138:28). And his eyes were opened and his understanding quickened (see Doctrine and Covenants 138:29).

It was divinely revealed to President Smith that Christ during the three days His body lay in the tomb visited the spirit world. There, the Savior organized His Church among the righteous dead. And they continue to proselytize to others in the spirit world. Thus, the gospel is preached to the dead (see Doctrine and Covenants 138:30), granting them the potential to accept salvation and exaltation offered through Christ. This is facilitated today by members who receive ordinances vicariously for the dead in latter-day temples.

Peter informed us why this great work is made available to all: “God is no respecter of persons” (Acts 10:34). He also revealed why the gospel must be preached to the dead: “that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit” (1 Peter 4:6).

Latter-day prophets also teach redemption of the dead and our latter-day roles in this work. “Priesthood keys give us the authority to extend all of the blessings promised to Abraham to every covenant-keeping man and woman,” President Nelson said. “Temple work makes these exquisite blessings available to all of God’s children, regardless of where or when they lived or now live.”

Like Peter, prophets in Christ’s restored Church continue to institute changes as directed by the Lord. This includes President Nelson broadening policies to allow young women and young men to serve as witnesses in temple baptistries, and to allow both women and men to serve as sealing witnesses in temple sealing ordinances.

It includes President Nelson in 2018 reemphasizing the Lord’s given name for His Church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It includes his announcement to discontinue ward Young Men presidencies starting in 2020, enabling bishops—an Aaronic Priesthood office—to work more closely with young men who hold and officiate in Aaronic Priesthood offices.

In addition, prophetic efforts have hastened the work to build more temples, that God’s people may be gathered on both sides of the veil. Hundreds of temples around the world are in operation, under construction, or planned.

Across dispensations, from Peter to Joseph Smith to President Dallin H. Oaks, God’s prophets have acted in faith to build His kingdom, to witness that Jesus is the Christ, and to gather all God’s children on both sides of the veil. As Peter did in ancient times, prophets and apostles today continue to follow Jesus Christ and lead His Church through revelation.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="170840755" id="p_itiHH">To learn more about Peter, read <cite>The Ministry of Peter, the Chief Apostle</cite>, a collection of articles from the 43rd Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium in 2014. Visit rsc.byu.edu/book/ministry-peter-chief-apostle.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
