After serving almost three years as mission leaders in Ghana, my wife, Raelene, and I were finally hitting our stride. All seemed well.

Then, unexpectedly, Raelene developed an excruciating pain in her lower back. After being diagnosed with kidney stones too large to pass, she was flown to Johannesburg, South Africa. Following a successful operation, she went into cardiac arrest and passed away in the operating room.

How could this happen? We had been giving our all to our mission.

“Does this make you angry at God?” a former colleague asked.

“No, I don’t blame God,” I replied. “I don’t understand why this occurred, but none of us are spared heartache, even when we are trying to follow the Savior’s example of going ‘about doing good’ (Acts 10:38). The hope of resurrection is now more personal, more real to me. Easter will never be the same again.”

As I searched for comfort and guidance in the words of the scriptures and modern prophets, I saw a connection between the process of Easter mourning and the promise of Easter morning. I found words that described Jesus Christ’s power and the promimse of our resurrection—words that spiritually nourished me and gave new meaning to something that previously had been mostly abstract.

I was reminded that “the fundamental principles of our religion are the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets, concerning Jesus Christ, that He died, was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven.”

Elder Gary E. Stevenson of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles has taught that because of Jesus Christ and His Atonement:

- “Everything changed.”

- “Everything is better.”

- “Life is manageable—especially the painful moments.”

- “Everything is possible.”

This Easter—and every Easter—I will celebrate the power and promise of a glorious resurrection for me, Raelene, loved ones, and even people I’ve never met. I am neither alone nor lonely, despite the unexpected loss of my beloved wife.

We will see each other again, recall stories and memories, exchange knowing glances, and share the experiences we’ve had while apart. We’ll have plenty to catch up on with each other.
