I was with my family at a friend’s home eating dinner on Christmas Eve when I received a call from the mother of one of my patients. Her 19-year-old son had suffered a long, arduous journey with leukemia that involved multiple complications from the disease and its treatment.

Finally, after another unsuccessful round of intensive chemotherapy, he had decided against further care and returned home. He was at peace knowing that he would soon die.

That evening, when his breathing changed and he developed a high fever, his mother called for an ambulance. After they arrived at the hospital emergency room, she called me.

“I don’t know what to do!” she cried.

Doctors did not expect her son to survive the next few hours. We talked about ways to keep him comfortable, and I told her I was there for the family.

I finished my dinner, and the children started their enactment of the Nativity. As our family friend began reading from Luke chapter 2, my phone rang again and I stepped outside.

My patient was gone. Through tears, I told the family how much their son had meant to me. I expressed my hatred of childhood cancer and that I wished I could have done more for him.

After wiping away my tears, I reentered our friend’s home. My oldest son was portraying Joseph, standing next to the manger, and my youngest son, a shepherd, listened earnestly to the angel declare:

“Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy. …

“For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord” (Luke 2:10–11).

In that moment, I silently cried out, “Are You really there? Did You really come to this earth over 2,000 years ago as a helpless infant? Did You truly bear our pains and afflictions of every kind?”

As I watched the children humbly and reverently honor our Savior, I heard the answer: “Yes, I am here. I came and overcame. ‘I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands’” (see Isaiah 49:16).

None of us are immune from pain, sorrow, and heartache. But in those moments, we can be lifted by the angel’s words: “Fear not” (Luke 2:10). And we can be strengthened by the Lord’s words: “In the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world” (John 16:33).

Since then, Christmas Eve has had new meaning for me. I am reminded of my patient, his family, and the comfort of knowing that through the Savior’s sacrifice, we too will overcome the world.
