Lucy Mack Smith, Scot Facer Proctor, Maurine Jensen Proctor, Revised and Enhanced History of Joseph Smith By His Mother (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1996)

PICTURE CAPTIONS

PICTURE CAPTIONS

Solomon Mack was born and raised near the mouth of the Connecticut River in Lyme, Connecticut.

Old fort house at Fort Edward.

George Washington would dine here twenty-six years after Solomon Mack.

Solomon and Lydia Mack had four of their children here in the town of Marlow, New Hampshire.

The interior of the Sunderland, Massachusetts, village church where Lovisa preached may have been like this one.4

Daniel Gates Mack saved three men from drowning in Miller's River near this spot.

Solomon Mack Jr. died at Gilsum, New Hampshire, October 12, 1851, at age seventy-eight.

Gilsum, New Hampshire, is located in a dense forest, ten miles east of the Connecticut River.

Modern interior of Tunbridge, Vermont, town store.

Tradition says Lucy and Joseph met here.

Original marriage entry of Joseph Smith and Lucy Mack in Tunbridge town clerk's office.

Part of Joseph and Lucy Smith's farm in the hills above the town of Tunbridge, Vermont.

Birth entries of Smith children still can be found in the Tunbridge town records.

About the time the Smiths did business in Randolph, it was the tenth largest town in Vermont.

Asael and Mary Smith with their eleven children moved to Tunbridge about November 1791.

Site of the house, with original front porch stone, where Joseph Smith the Prophet was born.

The typhoid fever epidemic of 1812 and 1813 left six thousand dead in the Connecticut River Valley.

Dr. Nathan Smith's saddlebag for house calls was likely present for Joseph's operation.

Jesse Smith and young Joseph came here to Salem, Massachusetts, for the sea breezes.

The Prophet Joseph would return here in 1836.

The Smith home and farm, 1814-16.

Here crop failures would drive them to New York.

Lucy, with her children, parted from her mother, Lydia Gates Mack, here in Royalton, Vermont.

Palmyra Four Corners: (from left) Methodist, Episcopalian, Presbyterian, and Baptist churches.

Joseph Smith put the promise of James to the test and found it to be good.

Joseph saw Heavenly Father and his Son Jesus Christ here in the Sacred Grove.

Moroni visited Joseph in the cabin on this site where the family lived from 1818 to 1825.

The west side of the Hill Cumorah, not far from the top, is the area where Moroni met with Joseph.

Fields where Joseph and his family worked were planted in wheat, corn, beans, and flax.

Alvin lovingly completed much of the workmanship in the Smith home before he passed away.

Alvin Smith is buried in the Swift Cemetery located just a few hundred feet north of downtown Palmyra.

Notice which appeared in the Wayne Sentinel, Wednesday, September 29, 1824.5

The spacious Smith frame house had four upstairs bedrooms and four rooms on the main floor.

The comfortable front room in the Smith frame house was just as son Alvin had desired it to be.

Pantry in the Smiths' Manchester frame house, with period utensils, crockery, and implements.

In one of the bedrooms in this home, the Prophet informed Joseph Knight of his obtaining the plates.

The ancient record and breastplate were hidden under one of the hearthstones in the Smith home.

Copy of original reformed Egyptian characters taken from the plates and sent to "the learned."

The structure in the center is where Joseph and Emma were living in Harmony, Pennsylvania.10

Crude stone in Harmony marks the grave of little Alvin Smith, first son of Joseph and Emma.

In this room Martin Harris revealed to the Smiths that the 116 pages of manuscript were gone.

House (circa 1850) built on the foundation where Martin Harris's home once stood.

A heavy fog blighted Martin Harris's crops in these fields the day he realized he had lost the sacred manuscript.

Joseph and Emma's Harmony home was on this site.

Here fifteen revelations were received.

School (circa 1848) built on the foundation of Oliver Cowdery school.

Original is in background.

The Smiths would now move from their comfortable frame home back to their small cabin.

Joseph and Oliver were baptized in these waters of the Susquehanna River on May 15, 1829.

Reconstruction of the Peter Whitmer Sr. farmhouse, where the Book of Mormon was translated.

Joseph and his scribes worked on the translation in an upper room of the Whitmer home.2

The Three Witnesses retired to a nearby grove and there beheld Moroni and the ancient plates.

The Eight Witnesses viewed the ancient plates near the area where Joseph saw the Father and the Son.

Lucy Smith spent a night sleeping with the sacred manuscript in a chest beneath her headboard.1

Twenty-six-year-old John Gilbert worked here and set the type for the Book of Mormon.1

The Grandin Company building in downtown Palmyra had a press, a bindery,4 and a bookstore.

The 1830 edition of the Book of Mormon had no verses or columns and contained 590 pages.5

Notice appearing Friday, March 26, 1830, in the Wayne Sentinel in Palmyra, New York.

The Church was organized in the home of Peter Whitmer Sr. on Tuesday, April 6, 1830.4

Samuel Harrison Smith first preached the gospel in this countryside of western New York.

Sidney Rigdon preached here in this Mentor, Ohio, church. He accepted the restored gospel.

Joseph Knight Sr.'s farm in Colesville, New York, was the site of the first branch of the Church.

Joseph and Emma arrived here in front of the Gilbert and Whitney store on February 1, 1831.

Lucy Mack Smith and her group of eighty Saints went by boat along the Erie Canal to Buffalo.4

Here at Buffalo Harbor the Saints witnessed the opening of the ice to allow their passage west.

The Fairport, Ohio, lighthouse on Lake Erie marked the end of the water journey for the Saints headed for Kirtland.

Isaac and Lucy Morley's farm was a gathering place for many of the Saints, including the Smiths.

Here in Independence, Jackson County, over twelve hundred Saints would gather to try to establish Zion.

While along the banks of the Missouri, William W. Phelps saw the destroyer riding upon the waters.

Sixteen revelations were received here in the Johnson farmhouse within a one-year period.

About a dozen of the fifty in the mob entered this room and violently tore Joseph from his bed.6

Near this spot, about a thousand feet from the Johnson home, Joseph was tarred and feathered.

Great light and knowledge was poured out upon the Prophet in this room of the Johnson home.

The School of the Prophets first met in this room of the Gilbert and Whitney store in Kirtland.25

Joseph was likely standing on this porch as he heard the news of the mobbings in Missouri.28

Zion's Camp marched a thousand miles through the areas of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri.8

Joseph would say, "Come, brethren, let us go into the stone-quarry and work for the Lord."3

Not only Joseph and Emma lived in this Kirtland home, but many of the Smith family as well.11

The Kirtland Temple was dedicated on Sunday, March 27, 1836. Over a thousand people attended.

Joseph's study above the Whitneys' store was the Church's headquarters for over two years.11

Many of the Smith family were buried in this cemetery in Kirtland, including Mary Duty Smith.4

Joseph the Prophet left Kirtland on Friday, January 12, 1838. He would never see it again.

Far West was on the frontier of northwestern Missouri and swelled to six thousand citizens.

Joseph laid out a city here at Adam-ondi-Ahman, about thirty-five miles north of Far West.

Joseph and Emma lived here in Far West in a cabin located just a few feet from this barn.11

Lyman Wight's home was located here on the southwestern slope of Tower Hill at Adam-ondi-Ahman.

Agnes Smith and her babies waded the Grand River after the mob burned her house to the ground.

Four large cornerstones, laid on July 4, 1838, still mark the site of the Far West Temple.

Sixteen hundred balls were fired upon the people here at Haun's Mill. Nineteen were massacred.

Liberty Jail, where Joseph and his brethren remained from the beginning of December until April.24

The lower floor of Liberty Jail, where the prisoners spent much time, was only six feet high.28

Lucy and Joseph and family came through this area of Missouri in the bitter winter of 1839.20

The Smiths crossed the Mississippi River near here and spent the rest of the winter in Quincy.

Joseph Sr., Lucy, and young Lucy moved into this home with Joseph and Emma in May 1839.

The center for the Smith family was here until August 1843, when the Mansion House was done.

Illinois state capitol building in use during the 1840s still stands in Springfield.15

Nauvoo arose from the mosquito-infested swamps and became, like its name, "a beautiful place."

Joseph was no longer safe on the streets of Nauvoo after the attempted assassination of Boggs.

Joseph's trial here in this Springfield courtroom has become famous in Illinois's legal history.11

Joseph and Emma moved into the Mansion House in August 1843. Joseph lived here ten months.

Joseph, Hyrum, Willard Richards, and John Taylor were in Carthage Jail until June 27, 1844.

Joseph and Hyrum were killed by a ruthless mob in this upper room of the Carthage Jail.

Joseph and Hyrum stand side by side as the heads of the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Mother Smith's riding bonnet on display in Nauvoo, Illinois.

1996 Bookcraft
