Years ago my husband and I were called to serve a mission at the institute of religion in Santa Monica, California, USA. We served not only as the directors of the institute but also as teachers. One night I pleaded with the Lord in prayer, “Let me be a funnel for Thy inspiration so that I might help one of Thy children.” After my prayer, I went to sleep but awoke at 4:30 a.m.

My husband typically taught the 7:00 a.m. Book of Mormon class, but early that morning, the Lord answered my prayer. The lesson theme was “The Desire of My Heart,” but I had no idea what my husband was scheduled to teach, nor did I reference his lesson manual. But I got up, told him I wanted to teach the lesson that day, and went to the institute building.

I found several theme-related scriptures, including 1 Nephi 2:16: “And it came to pass that I, Nephi, … having great desires to know of the mysteries of God, wherefore, I did cry unto the Lord; and behold he did visit me, and did soften my heart that I did believe all the words which had been spoken by my father.”

Then I connected Nephi’s desires to those of King Solomon in 1 Kings 3:9: “Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a people?”

Only one young man showed up to our class that day. He was not even a member of the Church, but I knew that this lesson was what the Lord had planned for him. We read and discussed the Nephi and Solomon scripture stories. Then I asked him to respond in writing to this prompt: “What are the desires of your heart?” After a few minutes, I asked if he would like to share what he had written. He said, “I would like to know if the Book of Mormon is true and if I should be baptized.”

The Lord heard and soon responded to this young man’s desire. Imagine our joy when, four months later, my husband and I attended his baptism. I am grateful that the Lord made me a funnel for an inspired lesson that day to help prepare this young man for baptism.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="154821836" id="aside1_p1">Editors’ note: As this article was being prepared for publication, Sister Brandenburg passed away.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
