Boyd K. Packer, Let Not Your Heart Be Troubled ( 1978)

2

In the spirit of Testimony [^1]

The Deseret News of 10 July 1956 printed a bulletin from the LDS Hospital on the condition of an eighteen-year-old girl who had been brought to the hospital six days earlier having survived nine days pinned under a car in Parley's Canyon, near Salt Lake City. The bulletin was, for a change, optimistic: "Attending physicians at the LDS Hospital said the girl's blood condition is so improved she likely will need no more transfusions .... Doctors said her diet has been increased to include potatoes, eggs, and puddings. She no longer requires intravenous feedings."

The injuries she had sustained in the accident were not of themselves the important factor. It was the lack of food and moisture that reduced her body to that poor condition. It was several days before the doctors gave much hope for her recovery.

It isn't easy to minister to one so starved. It was not a matter of just putting food before her. The food had to be carefully administered, for delicate balances could be upset, and her life was at stake. Doctors were extremely careful, for their very treatment might prove fatal. When she recovered, that was regarded as something of a miracle.

So it is with those around us who are spiritually undernourished, or starved. We refer to them as the lost sheep. We are called to minister to them. They are of all descriptions. Some have deficiencies of one kind or another that merely rob them of spiritual vigor. Others have so seriously starved themselves of spiritual things that we scarce can hope to save them.

Home Teacher Ministers to Undernourished

Responsibility for redemption of the lost sheep rests with the priesthood. The doing of it rests upon the home teacher He is the priesthood representative charged with the responsibility to see that every member of the Church is properly nourished spiritually and does not suffer physical want. He it is who must see that the parents in the home are aware of the need to provide adequate spiritual sustenance for their children. And he is the one who can relate all Church agencies to the home, calling for just the right blend of spiritual nourishment to sustain those who are well and heal those who are undernourished.

We wonder why home teaching is not more successful than it is. Members who have been instructed often enough, and ought to know, still are listed among the lost sheep. If we are to redeem them we must know what kind of nourishment to administer, and when, and in what amounts. It is not a matter of just putting it before them.

What can improve our ability, as individuals or as organizations, to redeem the lost sheep? What "vitamin" sparks an appetite for spiritual things?

Feelings Must Be Engaged

In the April 1964 issue of the Improvement Era there appeared an article by Wilford B. Lee entitled "John Is Inactive... Why?" The author pointed out that knowledge does not necessarily control activity. Thus many know what they ought to do but fail to do it, even after encouragement from home teachers.

"There is a great body of evidence," Brother Lee wrote, "to indicate that, in moral behavior especially, people do not act in accordance with their knowledge." And he observed that one could hardly find an obese person who does not know that, if he is to reduce his weight, a part of what he must do is to reduce his intake of food. Can you imagine a medical doctor who uses cigarettes and does not know that smoking is detrimental to his health? Were you ever acquainted with a divorce of parents in which both of the parties didn't know full well that tragic effects would be visited upon their children? In such cases the persons know the right course but still fail to follow it.

As regards righteous behavior, then, to know intellectually is not enough. The feelings must be engaged. Nephi told his wayward brothers-lost sheep, if you will: "Ye are swift to do iniquity but slow to remember the Lord your God. Ye have seen an angel, and he spake unto you; yea, ye have heard his voice from time to time; and he hath spoken unto you in a still small voice, but ye were past feeling, that ye could not feel his words." (1 Nephi 17:45, italics added.)

Alma recognized what would redeem the lost sheep. He knew what the moving power was. In the eighth year of the reign of the judges he was heavily involved in secular affairs. But serious problems, remarkably similar to those we face, arose in the Church, and "the church began to fail in its progress." A major reason was that "the people of the church began to wax proud, because of their exceeding riches, ... which they had obtained by their industry."

Alma was not the only one concerned. It was a source of worry to "the people whom Alma had consecrated to be teachers, and priests, and elders over the church." The blessing of prosperity somehow turned into "envyings, and strife, and malice, and persecutions, and pride." Fortunately, then as now, some members were faithful, "abasing themselves, ... imparting their substance to the poor and the needy, feeding the hungry."

Faced with this situation in the Church, Alma withdrew from secular affairs. "And this he did that he himself might go forth among his people, .... that he might preach the word of God unto them, to stir them up in remembrance of their duty, ... seeing no way that he might reclaim them save it were in bearing down in pure testimony against them." (Alma 4:6, 7, 9, 10, 13, 19.)

Testimony Is the Moving Power

Testimony, then, is the moving power. Testimony is the redeeming force.

Programs will redeem only to the degree that they produce testimony. Elaborate programming will not hurt us if the Spirit is there, nor help us if it is not. To send priesthood home teachers to the lost sheep as a program is not enough. They must go in the spirit of testimony.

Since testimony is needed, all who hold offices in the Church ought to reach for it. If we know in the beginning that that is what we are trying to accomplish, we can come nearer to doing it. But we must know that it is tied to the scriptures-we must rely on the spirit of revelation. For "notwithstanding those things which are written, it always has been given to the elders of my church from the beginning, and ever shall be, to conduct all meetings as they are directed and guided by the Holy Spirit" (D&C 46:2).

At times we seem to do little better than our ancestors, who knew that iron was necessary for health, so they put a horseshoe in the well bucket. There is a better way.

There are two dimensions to testimony. The one, a testimony we bear to them, has power to lift and bless them. The other, infinitely more important, the testimony they bear themselves, has the power to redeem and exalt them. You might say they can get a testimony from what we say. The testimony comes when they themselves bear a witness of the truth and the Holy Ghost confirms it to them. James said, "Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only" (James 1:22). And the Lord said, "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine" (John 7:17).

Give Opportunities to the Weak

If you who hold positions in the Church would redeem the lost sheep, see that the "vitamins" go to hose with deficiencies and not merely to those who are nourished by regular, balanced diets.

Activity-the opportunity to serve and bear testimony-is like medicine. It will heal the spiritually sick. It will strengthen the spiritually weak. It is a most necessary ingredient in the redemption of the lost sheep. Yet there is a tendency, almost a programmed tendency, to give opportunities for growth to those who are already over-surfeited with activity. This kind of pattern, evident in our stakes and wards, may keep the lost sheep out.

When a home teacher brings a lost sheep to meetings, it is only a beginning of his being found. Where can he be used for his spiritual benefit? Actually, there aren't many places in which a leader can use a person who is struggling for worthiness. Unfortunately, it seems that those few situations in which we could use them-to offer prayers, to make brief responses, to bear testimony-are almost invariably reserved for the active: for the stake presidency, for the high council, for the bishopric, for the patriarch, for the auxiliary leaders. Indeed, we sometimes go to great lengths to import speakers and participants-to the loss of our hungry ones.

At a ward sacrament meeting I attended recently a sister had been invited to sing whose husband was not active in the Church. He was, however, at the meeting. The bishop wanted a very special program for this occasion. His first announcement was: "Brother X, my first counselor, will give the opening prayer." His second counselor gave the closing prayer.

How unfortunate, I thought. The three men in the bishopric struggle with such concern over the spiritually sick, then take the very medicine that would make those people well-activity, participation-and consume it themselves in front of the needy!

Some will say: "We must be careful with the weak among us. It is better not to call on them to pray or to bear testimony, for they will be frightened and repelled and will leave us." That is a myth! A commonly accepted one, but a myth nevertheless! I have asked bishops-hundreds of them-whether they could certify to such a happening in their personal experience. I have had very few affirmative responses-in fact all those bishops produced only one or two instances. So the risk is very small, whereas such an invitation may result in a lost sheep being reclaimed.

Several years ago I visited a stake presided over by a man of unusual efficiency and ability. Every detail of the stake conference had been scheduled. He had done the usual thing in assigning prayers from the selected circle of the stake presidency, the high council, the bishops, and the stake patriarch. Those brethren had not been notified, so we changed the assignment from those who deserved the honor to those who needed-desperately needed -the experience.

The president had a detailed agenda for the general sessions, and he mentioned that there were twenty minutes in one session that were not scheduled. I told him that we could call on some to respond who otherwise would not have the opportunity and needed the strengthening experience. He countered with the suggestion that he alert several able, prominent leaders to prepare for possible speaking assignments. "There will be many nonmembers present," he said. "We are used to having an organized and very polished conference performance. We have very able people in the stake. They will leave an excellent impression."

Twice again during our meeting he mentioned the schedule and pressed to have the stake's "best performers" called. "Why don't we save this time for those who need it most?" I said. His reaction was a disappointed, "Well, you are the General Authority."

Early Sunday morning he reminded me that there was still time to alert someone and thus leave the best impression.

The morning session was opened by the president with a polished and stirring address. Next we called on his second counselor. He was obviously flustered, and he began, "You can't believe a thing Brother Packer says." (We had previously indicated that both counselors would probably speak in the afternoon session.) We were to go to his home for the noon meal. He had known there would be time to go over his notes, so he had left them at home.

For want of his notes he turned to testimony, giving an inspiring account of an administration he had performed during the week. A brother, given up by his doctors, had been called from the very shadows of death by the power of the priesthood. I do not know what was on his notes, but surely it could not have compared in inspiration to the testimony he bore.

An elderly woman sat on the front row holding hands with a weathered-looking man. She looked a bit out of place in the fashionably dressed congregation-rather homespun by comparison. She looked as if she ought to talk in conference, and given the privilege she reported her mission. Fifty-two years before she had returned from the mission field, and since then she had never been invited to speak in Church. It was a touching and moving witness that she bore.

Others were called upon to speak, and near the close of the meeting the president suggested that I take the remainder of the time. "Have you had any inspiration?" I asked. He said that he kept thinking of the mayor. (The voters in that large city had elected a member of the Church to be mayor, and he was in attendance.) When I told him we could have a greeting from the mayor, he whispered that the man was not active in the Church. When I suggested that he call upon him anyway he resisted, saying flatly that he was not worthy to speak in that meeting. At my insistence, however, he called the man to the stand.

The mayor's father had been a pioneer of the Church in that region. He had served as bishop of one of the wards and had been succeeded by one of his sons-a twin to the mayor, as I recall. The mayor was the lost sheep. He came to the pulpit and spoke, to my surprise, with bitterness and with hostility. His talk began something like this: "I don't know why you called on me. I don't know why I am in church today. I don't belong in church. I have never fit in. I don't agree with the way the Church does things."

I confess that I began to worry, but he then paused and lowered his eyes to the pulpit. From then until his talk was over he did not look up. After hesitating, he continued: "I guess I just as well tell you. I quit smoking six weeks ago." Then, shaking his fist in a gesture over his head towards the congregation, he said, "If any of you think that's easy, you have never suffered the hell I have suffered in the last few weeks."

Then he just melted. "I know the gospel is true," he said. "I've always known it was true. I learned that from my mother as a boy.

"I know the Church isn't out of order," he confessed. "It's me that's out of order, and I've always known that, too."

Then he spoke, perhaps, for all of the lost sheep when he pleaded: "I know it's me that is wrong, and I want to come back. I have been trying to come back, but you won't let me!"

Of course we would let him come back, but somehow we hadn't let him know that. After the meeting the congregation flooded up-not to us but to him, to say, "Welcome home!"

On the way to the airport after conference the stake president said to me, "I've learned a lesson today."

Hoping to confirm it, I said, "If we had done what you wanted to do you would have called on this man's father, wouldn't you, or perhaps his brother, the bishop?"

He nodded in affirmation and said: "Either of them, given five minutes, would have presented a stirring fifteen-or twenty-minute sermon to the approval of all in attendance. But no lost sheep would have been reclaimed."

All of us who lead in the wards and stakes must open the door to the lost sheep; stand aside to let them through. We must learn not to block the entrance. It is a narrow way. Sometimes we assume the clumsy posture of trying to pull them through the gate which we ourselves are blocking. Only when we have the spirit of lifting them, pushing them before us, seeing them elevated above us, do we have that spirit that will engender testimony.

I wonder if that is what the Lord meant when he said, "They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick" (Matthew 9:12).

I do not appeal for the lowering of standards. Just the opposite. More lost sheep will respond quicker to high standards than they will to low ones. There is therapeutic value in spiritual discipline.

Discipline is a form of love, an expression of it. It is necessary and powerful in people's lives.

When a toddler is playing near the road, we steer carefully around him. Few will stop and see him to safety: if necessary, discipline him. That is, unless it is our own child or grandchild. If we love them enough we will do it. To withhold discipline when it would contribute to spiritual growth is an evidence of lack of love and concern.

Spiritual discipline framed in love and confirmed with testimony will help redeem souls.

Take Opportunity to Bear Testimony

There are many situations in which Church programs can be spiritualized, many moments overlooked that are opportunities to

testify. Let me give three examples.

First example:

Suppose that a stake priesthood executive committee is in session. Elsewhere in the building the stake Primary officers are assembled. The stake president asks Brother Ross of the high council, he being advisor to the Primary, to slip out of the meeting and see whether Sister Martin, the Primary president, has the name she would like cleared as her new second counselor. Brother Ross interrupts the Primary meeting briefly and gets the name that is to be cleared. He is about to leave the room when Sister Martin says, "Would you like to say anything to our Primary sisters?"

As sure as we are born, Brother Ross will say: "Oh, no, they are waiting for me in the high council room. You will have to excuse me." And he will slip away, missing the most choice opportunity to strengthen the Primary sisters that will come in many weeks.

Think how powerful it would be if he said: "Why, yes, there are two things, but I must be brief. First I want to thank you sisters for the dedicated and devoted service you give. We want you to know how grateful we are and that the Lord is pleased with you. Even more important, I want to assure you that the work in which we are engaged is the Lord's work. He does love His little children. He looks after them and those who help them, for He does live. I just want to leave that bit of testimony with you. Now if you will excuse me, please."

Thirty seconds-a testimony!

Second example:

A Sunday School teacher concludes a lesson-one perhaps led afield by the question of some unsettled and disturbed class member:

"It has been a challenging lesson today. We have not settled all of the issues raised, but as we conclude I want you to know there is one thing settled in my heart and soul. It is that the gospel of Jesus Christ is true. This is His church. Perhaps next week we can draw closer to the answers we seek. May the Lord bless you. See you next Sunday."

Twenty seconds-a testimony!

Third example:

The bishop concludes an interview-perhaps to sign a recommend, or any interview.

"It's good to visit with you, Brother Parks. I want to assure you that this is the Lord's work. That witness comes again and again as I serve in this calling. Thank you for coming tonight."

Ten seconds-a testimony!

The testimony of ward and stake and general leaders of the Church strengthens everyone who comes within their influence. Those who serve in the organizations are strengthened, and in turn they strengthen those who attend. Priesthood holders, who go out as home teachers, are strengthened, and they bear testimony to strengthen the members. The home teachers themselves have home teachers. Thus there is a cycle of strength and spiritual nourishment that can make each of us as an individual and the Church as an organization like a magnet, drawing more of the lost sheep into the fold.

New means of communication are being used. Wonderful, dedicated men, under call, are experimenting continually with new and better means of extending to all mankind the influence of testimony within the Church. At first we could be heard in but a single hall. Then that voice was extended across the world by radio. Now we can be both heard and seen live-on television. I hope the day is at hand when the message can be heard and seen and felt.

In our programming we must keep the "feel" of those who are in need. The mind will communicate with the mind, the heart with the heart, and the spirit with the spirit. What we feel they will feel. Somehow feeling must be kept in our work or we will not redeem the lost sheep.

Somehow as priesthood and auxiliary leaders we must remember how it is to be spiritually hungry and poor. Somehow we must remember-or imagine-what it is like to be unrepentant, rebellious, and unforgiving. We must pray fervently for a feeling for it, and pray for the gift to teach by the Spirit.

And there is the consolation that, as we seek to serve the Lord in serving them, others who are both physically and spiritually hungry may receive sustenance from what we do.

May the Lord bless all of us with an appreciation for the privilege of bearing testimony and with the desire to share it, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

---
Notas:
[^1] Direction Address given at general conference October 1982.
