Boyd K. Packer, Let Not Your Heart Be Troubled ( 1978)

7

The Country with a Conscience [^1]

When my wife and I lived in New England we visited two historic sites as often as we could. Each inspired a deep feeling of reverence. The first, the birthplace of the Prophet Joseph Smith at South Royalton, Vermont; the other, the Old North Bridge at Concord, Massachusetts, where the never-ending struggle for independence began.

At Concord you follow the battle lane through the trees toward the bridge. A few yards in on the left is a small marker that is missed by most who go there. It marks the grave of two British soldiers. The small plaque reads:

They came three thousand miles and died To keep the past upon the throne; Unheard, beyond the ocean tide, Their English mother made her moan. —James Russell Lowell

From this distance it does not offend one's patriotism to feel some deep compassion for those who then were the enemy. Time rearranges our prejudices, and enemies become allies.

But it takes time for feelings to mellow. One early American historian describing the Battle of Bunker Hill said, "Three times in the face of the withering fire, the cowardly British charged up the hill."

Closer to the bridge is the memorial shaft. The monument was dedicated in 1837. Ralph Waldo Emerson, who lived in the neighborhood, wrote his famous "Concord Hymn" for the occasion. Across the bridge where the farmers made their stand is the statue of the Minuteman, cast from old cannons—a colonial farmer depicted leaving his plow, musket in hand. It was dedicated in 1875. President Ulysses S. Grant, his cabinet, and the governors from all New England were present. Emerson's words are engraved on the base of the statue. Let me recite them for you. They are well worth memorizing.

Concord Hymn By the rude bridge that arched the flood, Their flag to April's breeze unfurled, Here once the embattled farmers stood, And fired the shot heard round the world. The foe long since in silence slept; Alike the conqueror silent sleeps; And Time the ruined bridge has swept Down the dark stream which seaward creeps. On this green bank, by this soft stream, We set today a votive stone; That memory may their deed redeem, When, like our sires, our sons are gone. Spirit, that made these heroes dare To die, and leave their children free, Bid Time and Nature gently spare The shaft we raise to them and thee. —Ralph Waldo Emerson

Historical Greatness of Rank and File

George Washington was not at Concord Bridge, nor anyone else you can name. Those there were the anonymous rank and file of the colonists, who wore no uniforms, were untrained for combat, and carried nondescript weapons never intended for military action.

At the dedication of the Minuteman statue, George William Curtis said of them:

The minute-man of the Revolution!—he was the old, the middle-aged, and the young. He was Captain Miles of Concord, who said that he want to battle as he went to church. He was Captain Davis of Acton, who reproved his men for jesting on the march. He was Deacon Josiah Haynes of Sudbury, eighty years old, who marched with his company to the South Bridge at Concord, then joined in the hot pursuit to Lexington, and fell as gloriously as Warren at Bunker Hill. [We don't remember Warren, either.] He was James Hayward of Acton, twenty-two years old, foremost in that deadly race from Concord to Charlestown, who raised his piece at the same moment with a British soldier, each exclaiming, "You are a dead man!" The Briton dropped, shot through the heart. James Hayward fell mortally wounded. "Father," he said, "I started with forty balls; I have three left. I never did such a day's work before. Tell mother not to mourn too much; and tell her whom I love more than my mother, that I am not sorry I turned out."

This was the minute-man of the Revolution, the rural citizen trained in the common school, the church, and the townmeeting; who carried a bayonet that thought, and whose gun, loaded with a principle, brought down, not a man, but a system." (Charles Eliot Norton, ed., Orations and Addresses of George William Curtis [New York: Harper & Brothers, 1894].)

However anonymous each may be, it is always on the rank and file of humankind that the great moments in history rest. It was true then and it is true now.

Let me tell you of two whose names you have never before heard.

Peter Francisco

No one knows for sure where Peter Francisco came from. It is thought that he may have been kidnapped from the island of Terceira, in the Azores, by Portuguese sailors who hoped to sell him in the American colonies as an indentured servant. If that was the plan something went wrong with it, because they abandoned him on the wharf at Hopewell, Virginia, a few miles downriver from Richmond. He was five years old.

Peter was taken into the home of Judge Anthony Winston, an uncle of Patrick Henry's. Peter was present when the famous "Give me liberty or give me death" speech was given. It did something to the boy. He was sixteen years old and a strapping six feet six inches when he joined Company Nine of the Virginia Tenth Regiment on 10 October 1776.

His first fight was the ill-fated Battle of Brandywine Creek. There he was wounded in the leg and removed to a Moravian farmhouse for treatment. General Lafayette was there being treated for a bullet wound. The general asked the boy if he could do something for him. Peter requested a sword big enough to match his physical stature. The general sent him one. It was five feet long.

Peter fought at Germantown and suffered through Valley Forge. At Monmouth he took a musket ball in his thigh. At the British stronghold at Stony Point he was the second man over the wall and fought on despite a nine-inch bayonet slash across his abdomen.

At nineteen he returned home with a musket ball in one of his legs. It would cause him pain for the rest of his life. Within a year he had re-enlisted and was fighting with the Virginia militia in the South. At Camden, South Carolina, the militia was defeated. Peter rescued a cannon and a colonel from behind enemy lines.

At Guilford Courthouse a British soldier stabbed through the calf of Peter's leg with a bayonet. Later another pierced his other leg at the knee, slicing all the way to the hip bone before Peter fell from his horse. He stayed conscious long enough to crawl to a tree. He was then twenty-one.

Near the end of the war he emerged from a tavern at Burkeville, Virginia, to face nine British soldiers who were scavenging for supplies. Peter was completely unarmed. While some of them looted the tavern, two soldiers held him at sword point. One of them took an interest in Peter's silver knee-buckles. Presently the soldier was dead and Peter held the sword. Six British survivors fled to the advance guard of Tarleton's Legion. The entire guard, four hundred strong, retreated, not knowing that the "ambush" was only one man.

There is more, much more, but that should suffice. Question: Why isn't Peter Francisco remembered? Answer: Because he wasn't general, even an officer. He was offered a battlefield commission but had to refuse—literacy was required for a commission. Peter Francisco could neither read nor write.

Peter lived to raise a family and died 16 January 1830, when he was about seventy years old.

Hannah Hendee

On 16 October 1780, about the time that Peter was routing the British at the Burkeville tavern, Robert Havens was awakened by the barking of a neighbor's dog; something was after the sheep. Partially clothed, he left his house near the White River in South Royalton, Vermont, and ascended the hill. He found the sheep safe. He stood pensively looking back as the first light of dawn touched his frontier home. Something was wrong!

As he turned to retrace his steps, he saw a large company of Indians move from the forest and push in the front door of his home. Two teenage boys who had been aroused to help with the sheep were getting dressed. One was his son Daniel Havens. The other, Thomas Pimber, was courting a neighbor girl and had stayed overnight with the Havens family.

The boys burst through the back door and ran for their lives. Daniel stumbled as he reached the stream, rolled down the bank under a log, and was not discovered. Thomas Pimber was not so fortunate. In a few minutes the Indians were roaring with delight. His scalp had a double cowlick. Cut in two, it would fetch a double bounty from the British.

The Indians—three hundred of them from Canada—and a few Tories were commanded by a British captain named Horton. The British had offered the Indians eight dollars each for live captive men, something less for boys, and a lesser amount for scalps. The British had placed no bounty on women and girls, who were therefore immune to captivity and subject to something less than death.

During that long-forgotten burning of South Royalton, Vermont, the Indians moved downriver capturing the men and boys, killing those who resisted. They killed all the livestock and burned the houses and barns holding the harvest upon which the colonists depended for survival during the long New England winter.

Some distance downstream, the Hendee family had been warned. The husband set out on foot to warn others further downstream. Hannah Hendee grabbed her seven-year-old son, Michael, and a younger daughter and ran for the woods. Just when she thought she had reached safety a band of Indians stepped from the shadows and wrested her boy from her. One of them spoke English. She demanded to know what they were going to do to her boy. The Indian replied, "Make a soldier of him."

As the Indians dragged her sobbing boy away, she made her way toward the road along the river carrying her little girl, who screamed in panic for her mother to keep the Indians away.

Near the river she met Captain Horton and asked what they intended to do with the little boys. She was told that they would be marched to Canada with the men. She said the youngsters could not endure such a march, and was told, "In that case, they will be killed."

She headed down the road toward Lebanon, sixteen miles away, carrying her little girl. She had not gone far when she was filled with a surge of uncommon resolve, a fierce determination. They should not keep her little boy!

She returned upriver and found the British and the Indians gathering their captives on the opposite bank. She started across and would have drowned had not an old Indian helped her to shore.

Oblivious of the danger, she demanded her little boy. Captain Horton said he could not control the Indians; it was none of his concern what they did. She threatened him: "You are their commander, and they must and will obey you. The curse will fall upon you for whatever crime they may commit, and all the innocent blood they shall here shed will be found in your skirts when the secrets of men's hearts are made known, and it will cry for vengeance upon your head!"

When her little son was brought in she took him by the hand and refused to let go. An Indian threatened her with a cutlass and jerked her son away. She defiantly took him back and said that she would follow them every step of the way to Canada, she would never give up, they would not have her little boy!

Finally, intimidated by her determination, Captain Horton told her to take her son and leave. He could face an army of men, but not a mother driven by the strongest of emotions. She had gone but a few rods when she was made to return. Captain Horton said she must wait in camp until all the captives were assembled and the march north began.

During the day other little boys were brought into camp. Desperately they clung to Mrs. Hendee. With uncommon courage she interceded for them as vigorously as she had for her own.

Finally, when the captives were assembled for the long march to Canada, Mrs. Hendee somehow crossed the river with her daughter and nine small boys: her son, Michael, Roswell Parkurst, Andrew and Sheldon Durkey, Joseph Rix, Rufus Fish and his brother, Nathaniel Evans, and Daniel Downer. Two of them she carried across. The others waded through the water with their arms around each other's necks, clinging to her skirts. As the cold October night closed in, Mrs. Hendee huddled in the woods with the soaking-wet little brood she had rescued from certain death.

One of the boys, Daniel Downer, "received such an affright from the horrid crew, that he was ever afterwards unable to take care of himself, wholly unfit for business and lived for many years, wandering from place to place, a solemn, tho' silent witness of the distress and horror of that dreadful scene." (Evelyn Wood Love-joy, History of Royalton, Vermont [Burlington, Vermont: Free Press Printing Co., 1911].)

They talk about a woman's sphere, As though it has a limit; There's not a place in earth or heaven, There's not a task to mankind given, There's not a blessing nor a woe, There's not a whispered yes or no, There's not a life, or death, or birth, That has a feather's weight of worth . . . Without a woman in it. —Author unknown

Inspired by the Cause

Surely neither the famous Patrick Henry, who demanded liberty or death, nor the revered Nathan Hale, who regretted that he had but one life to give for his country, offered more than did Hannah Hendee, the long-forgotten mother from South Royalton, Vermont. Mrs. Hendee was at war, inspired by the best of all causes, armed with nothing more than a clear conscience, justified by the highest principles of morality.

War is a terrible, terrible thing, but there are times when the God of Heaven justifies a people in taking up arms. The Book of Mormon tells of Nephites locked in battle against a stronger enemy army who "did fight like dragons."

Nevertheless [the record says], the Nephites were inspired by a better cause, for they were not fighting for monarchy nor power but they were fighting for their homes and their liberties, their wives and their children, and their all, yea, for their rites of worship and their church.

And they were doing that which they felt was the duty which they owed to their God; for the Lord had said unto them, and also unto their fathers, that: Inasmuch as ye are not guilty of the first offense, neither the second, ye shall not suffer yourselves to be slain by the hands of your enemies.

And again, the Lord has said that: Ye shall defend your families even unto bloodshed. Therefore for this cause were the Nephites contending with the Lamanites, to defend themselves, and their families, and their lands, their country, and their rights, and their religion. (Alma 43:45-47.)

Since that fateful day at Concord Bridge, few generations have passed in this land without a call to arms. Threats to our independence have recurred with persistent regularity.

Only twenty-one years passed between the armistice in 1918, which ended World War I, and September 1939, when World War II began! Who was it said, "We learn from history that we learn nothing from history"?

With little hesitation, this nation has responded to threats to freedom with military action. We have fought not only to protect our own independence but also to secure or protect it for other nations.

Sustained by a courage that comes only from a moral people, we have fought for our homes and our families, our lands, our country, our rights, and our religion. "Chains," President David O. McKay said, "are worse than bayonets" (Conference Report, April 1955, p. 24).

While Americans were never to a man "Simon Pure" and there have always been some of us bad enough not to deserve the title of good, moral Christian people, there have always been enough of us who have been good enough to deserve it.

Balance of Decency Shifts

Strength that comes from decency, from morality, is the one, the essential ingredient required for the preservation of freedom, indeed for the preservation of humankind. And there is reason to believe that we are losing it.

Something changed. Perhaps for the first time since Concord Bridge that balance of decency and morality is shifting past the center. The balance, which measures the morality of all of us put together, is slowly tipping in the wrong, fatal direction. These lines written to describe another time and place seem to fit our circumstance now.

That which they would never yield To military might, They threw away unwittingly When evil came by night And scattered tares among the grain. They did not rouse to see Their fundamental moral strength In mortal jeopardy. —"Ancestral Home," by Boyd K. Packer, from Donna S. Packer, On Footings from the Past (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), p. 401.

The war in Vietnam did something to us. We had the military might—the arms, the ammunition, the manpower, the planes and ships and instruments of war undreamed of in the past. But we could not conquer!

What happened did not happen at Danang or Saigon. It only surfaced there. It happened first in and to the universities of America. It happened when agnostics and atheists were protected in teaching their philosophy of religion in public institutions of higher learning. Because they claim affiliation with no church, the principle of separation of church and state is supposed not to apply to them. They are free to teach their faithless philosophy at public expense, to shake—even destroy—the faith of their students. Meanwhile teachers of faith are restrained and churches are kept off campus.

What happened, happened in and to the schools and the churches, to the towns and the cities; it happened in the homes and in the hearts of the American people.

Some terrible things occurred in Vietnam. Our men had no stomach for it when they were doing it and could not get over it after it was done. Many fought without the conviction that what they were doing had a fundamental moral purpose.

Vietnam was different from the atomic bombs on Nagasaki and Hiroshima at the end of World War II. At that time, because of the slaughter occurring each day and the certainty of a horrible increase in casualties on both sides in the event of an invasion of Japan, it had been argued, not without substance, that the loss of life on both sides would be less should the war be brought to an end by the use of the bomb. Even then, something was lost to humanity when that occurred, because the rank and file of humanity suffered.

It was different in the war in Korea as well, for there we had our motives more securely in place. And what was to happen later to the moral fabric of our nation had not happened then.

Weakening of Moral Fiber

Something has happened to our collective conscience. Countries have a conscience, just as people do. Something in our national conscience became unsettled. In the end, a clouded conscience cannot conquer. In the end, a clear conscience cannot be defeated.

Something is weakening the moral fiber of the American people. We have always had couples live together without marriage, but we have not honored it as an acceptable life-style. We have always had children born out of wedlock, but we have never made it to be respectable. And we have never before regarded babies, whether conceived in or out of wedlock, to be an inconvenience and destroyed them by the thousands through abortion; and this while barren couples yearn for a child to raise.

We have always had some who followed a life of perversion, but we have never before pushed through legislation to protect that way of life lest we offend the rights of an individual. We have never been this "liberated" before.

We have always had those who were guilty of criminal acts, but we have not put the rights of the accused above the rights of the victim.

If one single soul does not wish to listen for a moment to a public prayer—one which does not offend, which even pleases the majority—we are told we must now eliminate prayer completely from all public life.

We have always had addictive drugs, but not in the varieties we have now and not widely sold near public schools, even elementary schools. When perversion and addiction are justified as the expression of individual rights and call up a pestilence which threatens even the innocent, must the right of privacy preclude even individual testing to help find out where it is moving? What kind of personal freedom is this, anyway?

Individual and Collective Rights

Did our young men give their lives for this? We have always held the rights of the individual to be sovereign. But we have never before placed the collective rights of the majority in subjugation to the individual rights of any single citizen.

Any virtue, pressed to an extreme, becomes a vice; thrift becomes stinginess, generosity becomes wastefulness, selfconfidence becomes pride, humility becomes weakness, and on and on. Individual rights as an ideal cannot endure except there be respect for the agency of others. There is no true freedom without responsibility. Freedom without restraint becomes tyranny of a new and fatal kind.

Freedom certainly cannot exist under a system where the citizens are stripped of individuality and pressed into the classless society by a despotic state, where men and women are compelled to exist as faceless worker bees. That is slavery!

Neither can freedom long survive in a society where the rights of the individual are fanatically promoted regardless of what happens to society itself. The rights of the individual—the ideal, the virtue—when pressed to the extreme, like other virtues will presently become a vice. Unless they ensure some balance, activists, lawyers, legislators, judges, and courts who think they are protecting individual freedom are in fact fabricating a new and subtle and sinister kind of dictatorship.

We have a present example.

A symbol is an object that represents something which, though equally real, is not tangible. The flag is a symbol.

When Freedom from her mountain height, Unfurled her standard to the air, She tore the azure robe of night, And set the stars of glory there; She mingled with its gorgeous dyes The milky baldric of the skies, And striped its pure, celestial white With streakings of the morning light. Then from his mansion in the sun She called her eagle bearer down, And gave into his mighty hand The symbol of her chosen land. —Joseph Rodman Drake, in John Bartlett, Familiar Quotations (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1968), p. 578.

To destroy that symbol is to reject what it represents.

The burning of the flag is an act which in itself becomes symbolic. It symbolizes the rejection of the Pledge of Allegiance. The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of speech. Speech is made up of spoken or printed words. Words are words are words. Acts are acts are acts.

The willful destruction of the flag that belongs to all of us is the act of an extremist. A court decision legalizing the destruction of it to protect the rights of one protester is equally extreme.

The rights of the individual, though God-given, cannot be absolute, simply because there are many individuals. Did not God himself counsel us to be temperate in all things? (Alma 7:23; 38:10; D&C 12:8.)

Freedom Requires a Virtuous Citizenry

Freedom cannot survive in the face of this strange new despotism. But it can survive in a sensible society where extremes are pulled back into balance. We call that democracy. It is worth preserving. It is now in an ominous kind of danger.

The Book of Mormon says something about that.

Choose you by the voice of this people, judges, that ye may be judged according to the laws which have been given you by our fathers, which are correct, and which were given them by the hand of the Lord.

Now it is not common that the voice of the people desireth anything contrary to that which is right; but it is common for the lesser part of the people to desire that which is not right; therefore this shall ye observe and make it your law—to do your business by the voice of the people.

And if the time comes that the voice of the people doth choose iniquity, then is the time that the judgments of God will come upon you; yea, then is the time he will visit you with great destruction even as he has hitherto visited this land. (Mosiah 29:25-27.)

The Book of Mormon warns us as well to be alert during times of peace and prosperity:

Yea, and we may see at the very time when he doth prosper his people, yea, in the increase of their fields, their flocks and their herds, and in gold, and in silver, and in all manner of precious things of every kind and art; sparing their lives, and delivering them out of the hands of their enemies; softening the hearts of their enemies that they should not declare wars against them; yea, and in fine, doing all things for the welfare and happiness of his people; yea, then is the time that they do harden their hearts, and do forget the Lord their God, and do trample under their feet the Holy One—yea, and this because of their ease, and their exceedingly great prosperity.

And thus we see that except the Lord doth chasten his people with many afflictions, yea, except he doth visit them with death and with terror, and with famine and with all manner of pestilence, they will not remember him. (Helaman 12:2-3.)

There needs to be enough of us who have faith enough and who are moral enough to desire that which is right. Virtues, like love and liberty and patriotism, do not exist in general, they exist in particular. If morality exists at all, it exists in the individual heart and mind of the ordinary citizen. Such virtues cannot be isolated in any other place; not in the rocks or in the water, not in trees or air, not in animals or birds. If it exists at all, it exists in the human heart. Morality flourishes when the rank and file are free. It flourishes where a conscience is clear, where men have faith in God and are obedient to the restraints he has set upon human conduct.

There is a light, a "true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world" (John 1:9). This Light of Christ is the ingredient which binds the whole human family together and forms something of a universal conscience. There is nothing that is right that we cannot achieve if our individual and our national conscience is clear.

Live Ordinary, Decent Lives

Now what are we to do? Let me tell you:

Just go home and be decent, Sunday-go-to-meeting people. Teach your children decency and honor, cooperation and tolerance, citizenship and patriotism. Teach them to be good. Teach them to have a clear conscience. Then we will produce a generation who will know what to do and have the courage to do it.

Eighty-year-old Deacon Josiah Haynes, who fell at Concord, and twenty-two-year-old James Hayward, whose last words to the girl he loved more than his mother were, "I'm not sorry I turned out," both had conviction and the courage to die for it. Peter Francisco in Virginia, Hannah Hendee in Vermont—both lived for it.

You live for it! Just be decent. Take care of your family, you yourself. Don't abandon that responsibility to the government, and don't let them take it from you. Go where virtue and morality and clear consciences are fostered. Go to church, do your part, pay your tithes and offerings, say your prayers, read the scriptures. Be a citizen, vote; in fact, pray and then vote. Then, when the crisis comes—and come it will—you and all the rest of us will know what is right and be willing to do what is right.

I see something else happening, something good. I see a resurgence of faith and decency. I see a restless public saying, "Hey now, we're getting close to the limit of some things!" I see the rank and file joining to express a collective will. I hear them saying: "We've had enough of extremes. We want balanced, common, garden-variety democracy."

It has been prophesied that the Constitution of the United States will hang by a thread and that the elders of Israel will step forth to save it (Brigham Young, Journal History, 4 July 1854; Church News, 15 December 1948). In my mind that does not require a few heroes in public office steering some saving legislation through the halls of Congress, neither some brilliant military leaders rallying our defense against an invading army. In my mind, it could well be brought about by the rank and file of men and women of faith who revere the Constitution and believe that the strength of democracy rests in the ordinary family and in each member of it.

That saving strength rests in ordinary fathers and mothers who do not neglect the spiritual development of their children. It rests in fathers and mothers who will send their sons and daughters to the four corners of the earth to teach that if we will follow in His word, "then [we will be his] disciples indeed; and [we] shall know the truth, and the truth shall make [us] free" (John 8:31-32).

Patrick and Nathan, we need you! George and Abraham, we need you! We need your heroic kind of patriotism! Josiah and James and Peter and Hannah, we need you most of all. We need you right where you are, in ordinary towns living in ordinary homes, going to ordinary jobs, sending your children to ordinary schools, and taking them to ordinary churches to worship God. That will secure to us the moral fiber from which will come the extraordinary patriotism and the extraordinary faith to keep us free.

Address given at American Freedom Festival, Provo, Utah, 25 June 1989.

---
Notas:
[^1] Direction Address given at general conference October 1982.
