Boyd K. Packer, Let Not Your Heart Be Troubled ( 1978)

16

Keeper of the Faith [^1]

I wish I could express how good it is to be here and how much I have enjoyed and benefited from the classes I have been able to attend. I feel more equal-not quite equal, but more equal-to this assignment as a result of having had that experience.

I am amazed at the growth of the Seminary and Institute program. I kept in touch with it, of course, until three years ago when Sister Packer and I were called to go to New England. We were in touch with the program as it operates there, and many times we renewed and compounded our admiration for it and our certainty that it is an inspired program and actually does accomplish the things it was organized to accomplish. We have now seen case studies of this out there, so I know now better than I ever knew; and my prejudice for the program has not been diminished (in case there might have been any thought that that would happen). On the contrary, it has been sharpened and increased.

Now, you have spent the summer here at BYU, and I think today is your last day of classes. Tomorrow night is your banquet. You have been studying, working, associating, and, I suppose, commiserating with one another over problems teachers have. After today you go back to hundreds of classrooms, to tens of thousands of Latter-day Saint students.

In wondering what to say to you, my mind strangely enough took the theme from a rather unimportant incident that happened in Virginia some time ago. I was there on an assignment, and a friend of mine, a nonmember whom I hadn't seen for nearly twenty years, came to visit. He had been a navigator on a bomber in World War II, and we had roomed together for many months in Japan. He is now a district judge in Virginia. He had read in the newspaper of this meeting I was attending, and had seen there a picture of me, so he drove some distance to renew the acquaintance. We had a good visit.

He told me he had tried to keep track of me and in one way or another had learned a little about my activities. Then he said: "A few months ago I saw a couple of your missionaries on the street as I was going to court one morning. I stopped them, knowing who they were, and asked them if they might be acquainted with Boyd Packer. They said they had never heard of you." (When he pronounced my name in his deep Southern accent I could understand that the missionaries might have had trouble in interpreting it, but I laughed off his comment, "I tell you that because I think it will keep your ego in shape.") He added: "I told them that I thought you were a keeper of the faith or something and that they probably ought to know you. Both of them denied any knowledge, so it wasn't until I saw the notice in the newspaper that I was able to make contact with you."

Who Is a Keeper of the Faith?

Well, I got wondering about his thinking that I was a "keeper of the faith or something," and I wondered which it was. I began to wonder who is a keeper of the faith.

I learned the answer not too long thereafter when President Moyle was planning to go to Alaska. I was working very closely with him, and something had been said about my wife and me accompanying him on this tour. I didn't want to go. There were several reasons, one of them being that I knew Sister Moyle was going to go, and because of some financial pressures Donna wouldn't be able to go. (There were some other reasons, but I bring that in to kind of comfort you.)

I went to President Moyle's office one day, and he mentioned it again. I said, "Oh, President, why don't you just leave me here. I don't want to go. It just complicates things, so why don't you just leave me here and let me tend shop. I'll feel good about it!"

At this he became very serious, almost stern. "No," he said, "I want you to go. I've already talked to President McKay, and he wants you to come with me." Then he prophetically made a statement that had its fulfillment in scarcely a month. He said: "Boyd, I'm not going to be here very much longer. I know that. If what I know is worth anything, it ought to be preserved and kept. I don't know anywhere to keep it except in those of you who are younger. I want you to come along, and I want you to listen to me and stay close to me." Then I could see that he was a keeper of the faith and that the place he wanted to keep it was in those who were younger.

So I found out that that is where faith is kept. I think it is appropriate to address you, my brethren and sisters, probably as no other group in the Church, as keepers of the faith-keepers of the faith kept and preserved because it is embodied in those who are younger.

Now, faith relates to the unknown. It goes to the edge of the light and then a few steps into the darkness. I want to make that point. Faith is different from knowing something. I read from Alma 32:16:

Blessed is he that believeth in the word of God, and is baptized without stubbornness of heart, yea, without being brought to know the word, or even compelled to know, before they will believe.

Yea, there are many who do say: If thou wilt show unto us a sign from heaven, then we shall know of a surety; then we shall believe.

Now I ask, is this faith? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for if a man knoweth a thing he hath no cause to believe, for he knoweth it .... Faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true. (Alma 32:16-18, 21.)

In keeping faith I hope you are able to know that there are some things that must be taken on faith; and that, in our insatiable quest for knowledge, always preparatory to and preliminary to gaining spiritual knowledge there is the exercise of faith. As the prophet Moroni said, "Dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith" (Ether 12:6).

Now, as keepers of the faith and with the youth of the Church before you, how do you keep it? What do you teach them? I have two or three suggestions.

Teach Them About Preexistence

Teach them about preexistence. It's marvelous to me how in missionary work you mention the fact that we lived before we came here, and almost nobody resents that-virtually nobody even questions it. It's just that they have never thought of the preexistence. Teach our youth to know that they lived before they came here. It's marvelous to me that the world cannot see that if there is eternity before us in one direction there must of necessity have been an eternity behind us in the other. If there will not be an end, there must have not been a beginning, because beginnings and ends go together. Eternity is not like that.

Let me read a few lines from William W. Phelps:

If you could hie to Kolob in the twinkling of an eye, And then continue onward with that same speed to fly, Do you think that you could ever, through all eternity, Find out the generations where Gods began to be? Or see the grand beginning, where space does not extend? Or view the last creation, where Gods and matter end? Methinks the Spirit whispers, "No man has found 'pure space,' Nor seen the outside curtains, where nothing has a place."

The works of God continue, and worlds and lives abound; Improvement and progression have one eternal round. There is no end to matter; there is no end to space; There is no end to spirit; there is no end to race.

There is no end to virtue; is no end to might There is no end to wisdom; there is no end to light. There is no end to union; there is no end to youth; There is no end to priesthood; there is no end to truth. There is no end to glory; there is no end to love; There is no end to being; there is no death above. There is no end to glory; them is no end to love; There is no end to being; there is no death above. —Hymns, no. 284

Keep the faith to that end. Teach the youth that we lived before we came here; that there was a preexistence.

You Don't Have to Know All the Answers

The next suggestion as keepers of the faith is to you. Do you have to know all the answers? Well, if you do, as the scripture confirms, you don't need any faith. If you know it all, you don't need any faith. Read in the book of Ether that marvelous experience Mahonri Moriancumr had with the Lord, where it is said that "he had faith no longer, for he knew, nothing doubting" (Ether 3:19). So don't think you have to know all the answers.

I have come to know one thing that is increasingly important, particularly with our college-age students, who at the moment are under more stress from some of the directions that are apparent in society. I have come to know that more important than giving them all the answers is giving them something of a posture or a position in confronting the difficult and challenging questions that come to them. I believe this. Our youth will be content without knowing everything. They are content to take many things on faith. They don't want to know everything right now. They want to know what to do when they don't know everything-or even much of anything-on the questions they meet every day from their associates.

Help them to dismiss the idea that everybody around them is going to be comfortable. Our young people get the idea that they want to please everybody. They want everybody to feel good when they leave. They want everybody to agree. They want to be pleasing. But if they want this and yet are going to live the gospel, they want that which they will never have. Once they learn this lesson, it's marvelous what happens.

I had the privilege of teaching an institute class for the students at Harvard University, These students finally discovered that when they had a conversation on the gospel and came away having irritated or agitated or discomforted somebody, they probably had accomplished a good deal more than if everybody had agreed with them. And considering the frame of mind of many with whom they conversed, if the Latter-day Saint agreed with all they said that was some indication that he was wrong.

Well, it's a marvelous thing when youngsters can experience such a trial and stand on the position of testimony. The more excited or unnerved the other people become, the more calmed and reserved our young people are-and there's a security that comes from that. In other words, if they leave people a little uncomfortable when they talk about the Church position with reference to a particular issue, they can let it go at that.

We don't have to know everything or please everyone. The only way we could please everyone would be to yield, to stray from the truth. Teach our young people, then, that their lot in life is not easy. This isn't an easy gospel. It was never intended to be. It's upstream all the way, uphill all the way. It has been from the beginning and will continue to be so into the eternities. Teach them to know that, and their joy and their strength will increase.

Teach Them from the Scriptures

Teach them from the revealed word-the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. Teach them! If you can induce in them a love for the scriptures, therein they can find the answers to the difficult questions. With this in mind, I think I'll read a verse or two from chapter 42 of Alma. (This is a teacher, a keeper of the faith, dealing with a student. It's a father dealing with his son.) Let me point out a couple of things in it. Alma is speaking to Corianton. (Notice that he could read his mind.)

"And now, my son, I perceive that there is somewhat more which doth worry your mind, which ye cannot understand-which is concerning the justice of God in the punishment of the sinner." Here was a boy wondering why sinners had to be punished. His father perceived that, and said, "for ye do try to suppose that it is injustice that the sinner should be consigned to a state of misery" (Alma 42:1).

As you read through chapter 42 of Alma, notice these verses:

Now behold, it was not expedient that man should be reclaimed from this temporal death, for that would destroy the great plan of happiness [for then death must be necessary, not a punishment].

Now, repentance could not come unto men except there was a punishment, which also was eternal as the life of the soul should be, affixed opposite to the plan of happiness, which was as eternal also as the life of the soul. [I would hate to live in a world where there was no repentance. I need it. I don't know whether you do-I suspect you do. If it takes punishment for repentance to be effective, I'm willing to take the one to have the other.]

Now, how could a man repent except he should sin? How could he sin if there was no law? How could there be a law save there was a punishment? (Alma 42:8, 16-17.)

Teach them the scriptures. Teach them that when their faith wanes and they need more knowledge, they should seek in the revealed word of the Lord.

I'm prompted to mention something I didn't have in my notes. Coming out to general conference this spring, Sister Packer and I got off the plane in Chicago, where a stopover was scheduled. We had the "occupied" cards in our seats, and, though the plane wasn't full, when we got back on the plane we noticed that a man was sitting in the seat next to me. I was irritated. I have a little trouble with cigarette smoke, and I thought he'd sit and blow smoke on me all the way. I glanced back and saw all the empty seats back of us and wondered why he didn't take one of those seats.

He was a fine-looking young man, and as missionaries will I was soon engaged in a conversation with him. It wasn't long before I could tell he didn't smoke. We had a visit. I asked him who he was, where he was going, and so forth-that always invites the inquiry and begins the conversation. As soon as I mentioned I was a member of the Church, he said, "Oh, my wife is a member of your church. She just became a member."

Then we had an interesting conversation in which he started talking about "our" bishop and "our" this and "our" that. I finally asked, "Why aren't you a member?"

Immediately his countenance changed. "I can't," he said. "I would give anything if I could, but I can't. It isn't anything personal with me, but it relates to other people. I just can't. There is something that has to be answered; I've just prayed that I could talk with somebody. I thought maybe of talking with one of the leaders or somebody about this question."

I asked, "Why do you suppose you're sitting in this seat?"

"What do you mean?" he responded.

I said, "Look back there." He glanced over, and I added, "See all those empty seats. Why do you suppose you're sitting here? Was that an accident?"

So we began to talk. We talked about the pioneer trail, and I talked to him about the scriptures, and for some reason I said, "Let me give you a sample of what's in the Book of Mormon." I read to him chapter 42 of Alma as we rode along in the plane. I just read it and he listened. Then we got off in Salt Lake City. He had some business there and was going on to the West Coast.

I asked him, "Has your wife ever been to a general conference of the Church?"

He replied, "No."

I said, "That would be a marvelous thing."

"Well," he responded, "we can't come."

I said, "Well, in case something should happen to change that, we'll be staying at Hotel Utah." Then we parted.

The next week, when general conference came, on Friday night near midnight I got a call from California. It was this same young man. "We're leaving right now," he said. "We're going to drive all night to come to conference."

So we met this couple and made arrangements so they could get into a session or two of conference, and then Sunday afternoon they came over to my office-a very lovely wife and a fine young man, a young professional engineer.

He told me, "I don't need to go into that problem anymore. It's solved, and the next time I see you .... "

I knew what he was going to say, but I interrupted him and said, "You'll hold the priesthood!"

He said, "That's right."

Then he told me something more about our flight together. "Do you know why I sat by you in Chicago? I was assigned that seat. Normally they only assign seats at the place of flight origin, and I was irritated that they gave me a seat assignment. I walked on the plane thinking, 'I won't sit there.' But then I thought, 'Well, there must be some reason for it.' That was the seat I was assigned to, and that's why I was sitting by you."

Well, I don't know what his problem was, but the answer was in the Book of Mormon. Teach them, if they are to keep the faith, to read the revealed word.

Teach Them to Testify

Teach them to testify. Let's talk just a minute about testimony. After hearing 206 missionaries stand up and make an expression, I finally came to the realization that we had heard 205 talks and only one testimony. The responses went something like this: "I'm grateful to be a missionary. I'm glad to be on a mission. I have a great companion. I love my companion. I've had good companions all the time. We had a great experience last week. We were tracting [and so on], and so you see how grateful I am to be on a mission. I have a testimony of this gospel. In the name of Jesus Christ, amen."

These missionaries had talked about testimony, but they had talked around and through it, underneath it and over it, but never to it. It was marvelous what happened when we were able to show them how one bears testimony.

There are two ways to spell bear. Bear means to carry. All of the missionaries were bearing testimonies-carrying them all over New England. Everywhere they went their testimony went with them. There's another spelling to that word (and I wonder if we don't use the wrong one). Bare means to expose or reveal or make known. So we may carry a testimony but not reveal it! Teach our young people to bear their testimonies instead of saying they have testimonies and then not saying what they are. Teach them to bear direct witness.

While a witness may come from hearing a testimony borne by another, I am convinced that the witness comes when the Spirit of the Lord falls upon a man or woman when he or she is bearing testimony personally. Teach them to bear testimony. If they don't have a testimony it may come when they start bearing it.

I have seen one or two brethren even in our program who are very hesitant about bearing testimony. They get so concerned about knowledge, and they say: "Well, I don't really know that! I don't know whether I can say it." Well, you never will know until you say it. It isn't that seeing is believing; it's that believing is seeing. Can't you see where it is hidden? The skeptic, the sophisticate, the experimenter, the insincere never take that step and bear a testimony, and the witness is therefore held from them. Teach our young people to bear testimony-to bear testimony that Jesus is the Christ, that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God, that the Book of Mormon is true, that we lived before we came here, that Christ died to redeem us, and that he is the Son of God. As they testify of those things the Holy Ghost will bear witness in their hearts, and it will be compounded a thousandfold more powerfully than if they just listen to a witness borne by others.

Teach our youth to bear testimony-direct, specific witness. I'm not offended at the testimony of little children who stand up and say, "I know." Some people criticize that, but it is the kindergarten of all spiritual learning. Teach our youth to bear witness and testimony, for therein they conform to a principle that opens the door so that great confirmation can come. As keepers of the faith, teach them to bear witness, to bear testimony.

Let me suggest that you read chapter 5 of Alma. As an example:

And now, my brethren, I would that ye should hear me, for I speak in the energy of my soul; for behold, I have spoken unto you plainly that ye cannot err, or have spoken according to the commandments of God.

For I am called to speak after this manner, according to the holy order of God, which is in Christ Jesus; yea, I am commanded to stand and testify unto this people the things which have been spoken by our fathers concerning the things which are to come.

Then notice these next two verses:

And this is not all. Do ye not suppose that I know of these things myself? Behold, I testify unto you that I do know that these things whereof I have spoken are true. And how do ye suppose that I know of their surety?

Behold, I say unto you that they are made known unto me by the Holy Spirit of God. Behold, I have fasted and prayed many days that I might know these things of myself. And now I do know of myself that they are true. (Alma 5:43-46.)

That kind of a testimony comes from the bearing of it.

Let me read from the book of Ether one other reference that I find very interesting in this regard, and I think it may help us as keepers of the faith. You remember that I mentioned earlier the incident in which the brother of Jared went up and had this interview with the Lord. "And the veil was taken from off the eyes of the brother of Jared, and he saw the finger of the Lord; and it was as the finger of a man, like unto flesh and blood; and the brother of Jared fell down before the Lord, for he was struck with fear."

The Lord told him to stand up, and asked him, "Why hast thou fallen?"

The brother of Jared replied, "I knew not that the Lord had [a body oil flesh and blood."

The Lord explained something about that and then asked, "Sawest thou more than this?" And this marvelously courageous man responded, "Nay; Lord, show thyself unto me."

But before this could be, there had to be a test. The Lord said unto him: "Believest thou the words which I shall speak?"

Notice that the brother of Jared had to answer whether he believed not what was said but what would be said. "Do you believe what I am going to say?" "And he answered: Yea, Lord, I know that thou speakest the truth, for thou art a God of truth, and canst not lie." (Ether 3:6-12.)

Teach them to bear witness. Teach them to bear witness a little ahead, maybe, of what they know, for in this they will get a confirmation.

Disease and Treatment

One more thing. I was on a plane once with a doctor, a member of the Church. While we were traveling, I noticed his interest in a man across the aisle. Finally he nudged me and said, "That man has got [something-or-other-he named a very dangerous disease]." I asked, "How do you know?" He said, "Well, the color of his skin."

I looked at his skin, and it looked kind of white and transparent. The doctor went on: "I saw his eyes and noticed what he ate. Did you notice what he ate?"

I said, "No. I noticed what I ate."

"He's got the disease all right," said the doctor. "I couldn't be sure without a lab test, but if he walked into my office I'd put him on medication immediately. The treatment wouldn't hurt him. I wouldn't wait even for the test, because this is serious."

I asked, "Do you think he knows he's got it?"

"Obviously not," was the reply, "or he wouldn't be on this airplane. I hope he gets to a doctor soon."

"Well, aren't you going to tell him?" I asked.

"Not me," he said, "not me."

"Well, why?" Again, "Not me!"

"Well, aren't you going to do anything about it-just mention

it?"

"Not me!"

Finally we stopped at a city. The man got off and I proceeded home.

A week or two later I was going out to Reno Stake Conference with another medical doctor who at that time was a member of the General Welfare Committee. I told him of this incident and chided him about his profession. "What kind of Christians are you anyway? If you had been there, you would have told him, wouldn't you?"

He said, "Not me! No sir!" Then he told me about once being on a plane when one of the stewardesses came back through the aisle asking, "Is there a doctor aboard? Is there a doctor aboard?" No one answered. Finally she became frantic: "Isn't there a doctor?" He leaned out into the aisle and could see that up in the front of the plane a man was stretched out in the aisle. Then he identified himself (he showed me a little kit he carried-a little of this and that for emergencies) and went forward. He told me, "I got the man conscious enough again to tell me what it was." The man knew what he had. The pilot came back and they held a little parley and decided that, since they were about halfway into their journey, instead of returning to their airport of origin they would radio ahead for an ambulance and a doctor to meet the plane. The doctor told me the interesting thing was that, when the flight resumed, three other men came over in the course of the next hour and identified themselves as doctors, wanting to know what was wrong with the man. They were interested in the case, but they wouldn't identify themselves.

Well, why? I think I know why. You do, too. Doctors' malpractice suits. They are scared to even stop and give first aid along the highway, for fear somebody may sue them for heavy damages. You know how a person would act if you tapped him on the shoulder and said, "Say, do you know you have such-and-such disease?" Well, you know how doctors get-you can hardly get a doctor to tell you what's wrong with you when you pay and go to his office.

Well, we see people dying of a spiritual disease—the disease of impenitence or immorality or selfishness or something else. We just want ever so much to tap them on the shoulder and say, "Brother, did you know that you're dying of a spiritual disease? You'd better get some treatment." If you do that a time or two, you get to be like a medical doctor who almost won't put a tourniquet on a bleeding accident victim.

Now, let me diagnose a disease among us. I think all of us come down with it now and again. Some of us have chronic cases of it, and if you're going to be a keeper of the faith you must positively "heal thyself, physician"-heal thyself. It's the disease of impenitence. Go before the Lord and become clean. Purify yourselves that your hearts and your hands and your feet will be clean before the Lord. As you go back to these hundreds of thousands of students, go in that spirit. Cease to be selfish; cease to complain; cease to be jealous; cease to be idle; live the gospel; heal thyself.

I bear to you, my brethren and sisters, the witness. Some people say He did not come, but He did. Some people say there was no plan, but there is. Some people say there is no Savior, but He lives-and I bear witness of Him. Some people say He has no servants here, but He has. I bear to you my witness that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, the Only Begotten of the Father; that in His gospel is salvation; and the faith, if kept, must be kept in those who are young-to their salvation and to the salvation of the generations to follow them. In the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

---
Notas:
[^1] Direction Address given at general conference October 1982.
