Boyd K. Packer, Let Not Your Heart Be Troubled ( 1978)

17

Moral and Spiritual Values in Character Education [^1]

I am very happy to be here this morning, and I want you to know I have not taken lightly this invitation to speak to you on the subject, "Moral and Spiritual Values in Character Education." I felt compelled to respond as a vote of confidence in your interest in considering moral and spiritual values in the teaching, m Utah, of 146,000 secondary school students.

Most of you preside over the largest institution in your community. You relate to a larger cross-section of the community, perhaps, than any other public figure, dealing with the students, their parents, with community leaders, and therefore your influence as an opinion maker in the community is pivotal. You have a tremendous opportunity and a great responsibility.

Morality in Decline

Morality is a very unstable element. Untended, it quickly combines with other things in the environment. What results may appear to have the same properties as highly refined morality but can be dangerous to society if left to spread unchecked.

Because morality is such an unstable element, it is very rare indeed to find it in its purified form. There are many counterfeits. Many an immorality now has currency disguised as morality. The same words are used to promote both of them. The same description is used for the counterfeit as we formerly used for the genuine product.

Some who merchandise freedom and relaxation are selling addiction. Others are selling slavery. Communists, for instance, talk incessantly about democracy and freedom.

Nowadays justice is so misrepresented that the victim of a crime often receives much less of it than the criminal. And legislation which is supposed to vouchsafe freedom of speech is cleverly twisted to protect the pornographer and penalize the victim.

And then there are the trends. We now hear the term "consenting adults" used to defend actions that were formerly known to be both immoral and illegal.

For a number of years I've been going to Europe on assignments. I have noticed, particularly in England (which might have a society comparable to ours), that they are just a year or two-I was going to say down the road, but on the skids, a little farther than we are. By looking at what they're doing now it isn't too difficult to see what we'll face here in two or three years.

We see this counterfeit morality moving across us like a cloud. Those who haven't carefully looked at it think mistakenly that it's beneficial.

Some say that morality should be left to be. They claim that the worst that would result from this "scientific neglect" would be an amoral society-neither moral nor immoral. Now, that's a silly notion!

Nature abhors a vacuum, and the idea of a so-called neutrality never has been maintained. If we do not plant moral and spiritual values firmly in place, something creeps in to replace them.

Some declare, "I'll let my children grow up uninfluenced; and when they are mature they'll choose for themselves, and then they'll not only be moral but they'll also be strong and free."

That's an interesting idea. Try it on your garden! Plant the seeds and leave the weeds, and see what you get.

If the nation's farmers did that, one season would see food shortages, another would produce a famine.

Morality, I repeat, is a very unstable element. Moral character does not develop by accident. It must be produced to exist, and it must be sustained to endure.

When we speak of teaching moral values and the development of moral character, we should understand this:

If we oppose it, it can't happen. If we just permit it, it won't happen. If we stress it, it might happen.

And I suppose the purpose of this part of your conference is to somehow ensure that it will happen.

Need to Teach Values in Public Schools

Teaching moral and spiritual values and developing character is but a part of what you do. You have many other things that you are involved in. Fortunately others spend full time at it-every waking hour. And there have been developed some very highly refined processes for producing moral character.

The churches are (I think we should, in some cases, say were) concerned about these matters. But if we were to talk of what they do, the word spiritual would dominate the conversation, and then somehow we would be thought to be preaching instead of teaching.

As principals of our secondary schools, and as public servants, if there is no spiritual reason for you to be concerned about character and values and morality there are certainly some very practical reasons, There is more than sufficient evidence to document that.

I make just these passing comments about the school environment itself. You know these things better than I do, since you are involved totally in the school environment.

Student crime, violence, and vandalism have been escalating in one form or another to the extent that it is frightening. In Education USA the statement is made: "In-school assault and battery has increased 58 percent over 1970; school robberies, 117 percent; sex offenses, 62 percent; drug problems, 81 percent; serious crimes by girls under 18, 306 percent."

Los Angeles reports that on-campus incidents involving dangerous weapons have increased 159 percent, with 70 murders-teenage murders-so far this year

Recently the Religious News Service pointed out that school vandalism is costing taxpayers $500 million a year. The Senate subcommittee on education sets that figure at $600 million. That's enough to purchase all of the textbooks that we use in this country for a year, Or it's enough to hire an additional fifty thousand teachers.

It has only been a year or two since here in Utah a school was burned-probably by an arsonist-and cost two million dollars to replace.

The School Law News quotes the Senate subcommittee as recommending such things as smaller classes, better police programs (interestingly, police in schools we now take matter-of-factly), better school and community liaison programs, better-trained security personnel, and more supplemental programs in art, music, and career education.

My question is: Why not address ourselves to the basic problem itself? Get at the root of it! That is precisely what I hope you have in mind here.

Isn't it interesting that a public that fidgets nervously when you talk about resolving problems for spiritual reasons is now concerned and forced to face those same problems for very temporal ones?

At last the pinch on the dollar compels us to look at such things, for instance, as one school district that spends $125,000 annually on a program for unwed mothers in secondary schools.

Churchill's Concern with Character and Morality

In order to get a perspective on this problem, I invite you to step back and look at a larger scene. I want to review a thread that runs through recent history.

One man had the best vantage point to see the formation of our society today. For ninety years he watched and recorded it. From the pages of the recent past I call Sir Winston Churchill to be our commentator.

While center stage for most of his life, he somehow managed to take careful notes. He added prodigious research, an uncanny ability to analyze, together with an almost prophetic sense of destiny. He then recorded it in such works as A History of the English-Speaking Peoples, The Second World War, and others.

Now, I don't think you need a history lesson, but I want to quote from here and there in his writings to illustrate the fact that concern for moral and spiritual values is not just academic.

During World War I Winston Churchill was Britain's First Lord of the Admiralty and was a keen observer of the world's circumstances. Following that war, in 1928 he wrote this:

All the noblest virtues of individuals were gathered together to strengthen the destructive capacity of the mass ....

Democratic institutions gave expression to the willpower of millions. Education not only brought the course of the conflict within the comprehension of everyone, but rendered each person serviceable in a high degree for the purpose in hand ....

The war stopped as suddenly and as universally as it had begun. The world lifted its head, surveyed the scene of ruin, and victors and vanquished alike drew breath. In a hundred laboratories, in a thousand arsenals, factories, and bureaus, men pulled themselves up with a jerk, and turned from the task in which they had been absorbed. Their projects were put aside unfinished, un-executed; but their knowledge was preserved; their data, calculations, and discoveries were hastily bundled together and docketed "for future reference" by the War Offices in every country....

It is in these circumstances that we entered upon that period of exhaustion which has been described as Peace. It gave us, at any rate, an opportunity to consider the general situation. Certain som-bre facts emerge, solid, inexorable, like the shapes of mountains from drifting mist. It is established that henceforward whole populations will take part in war, all doing their utmost, all subjected to the fury of the enemy. It is established that nations who believe their life is at stake will not be restrained from using any means to secure their existence. It is probable-nay, certain-that among the means which will next time be at their disposal will be agencies and processes of destruction wholesale, unlimited, and perhaps, once launched, uncontrollable.

Mankind has never been in this position before. Without having improved appreciably in virtue or enjoying wiser guidance, it has got into its hands for the first time the tools by which it can unfailingly accomplish its own extermination. That is the point in human destinies to which all the glories and toils of men have at last led them. They would do well to pause and ponder upon their new responsibilities. Death stands at attention, obedient, expectant, ready to serve, ready to shear away the peoples en masse; ready, if called on, to pulverize, without hope of repair, what is left of civilization. He awaits only the word of command. He awaits it from a frail, bewildered being, long his victim, now-for one occasion only-his Master. (From The Aftermath, as quoted in Winston S. Churchill, The Gathering Storm [Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1948], pp. 38-41.)

That was World War I, but it was to happen again because the lesson of World War I was missed. Morality was left untended. Spiritual values and character building were emphasized in a few places, but only here and there. Character was worse than ignored; it was tampered with. And it only takes a generation to bring about such a decline.

The next episode began in 1939 when Germany invaded Poland. Britain, they thought, would not resist. There was no honor left there. They had determined that with the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia.

But enough was enough, and on Sunday, 3 September 1939, after the "all clear," Sir Winston went to the House of Commons, knowing that he would participate in a declaration of war, He had received a note from the Prime Minister inviting him to come to the latter's room as soon as the debate died down. He wrote:

As I sat in my place, listening to the speeches, a very strong sense of calm came over me, after the intense passions and excitements of the last few days. I felt a serenity of mind and was conscious of a kind of uplifted detachment from human and personal affairs. The glory of Old England, peace-loving and ill-prepared as she was, but instant and fearless at the call of honor, thrilled my being and seemed to lift our fate to those spheres far removed from earthly facts and physical sensation. I tried to convey some of this mood to the House when I spoke, not without acceptance. (The Gathering Storm, p. 409.)

I had to search for several months before I was able to find the proceedings of the House on that fateful Sunday and to read the text of Sir Winston's talk. It is very brief, and since it is but a paragraph and so meaningful with reference to what we are talking about, I want to read his speech in its entirety.

In this solemn hour it is a consolation to recall and to dwell upon our repeated efforts for peace. All have been ill-starred, but all have been faithful and sincere. This is of the highest moral value-and not only moral value, but practical value-at the present time, because the wholehearted concurrence of scores of millions of men and women, whose cooperation is indispensable and whose comradeship and brotherhood are indispensable, is the only foundation upon which the trial and tribulation of modern war can be endured and surmounted. This moral conviction alone affords that ever-fresh resilience which renews the strength and energy of people in long, doubtful and dark days. Outside, the storms of war may blow and the lands may be lashed with the fury of its gales, but in our own hearts this Sunday morning there is peace. Our hands may be active, but our consciences are at rest. ("War"—The House of Commons, 3 September 1939.)

And so it happened again. Is it not interesting that this man, who was a politician and a statesman, in talking about those events centers on such words as moral conviction, faithful, con-scienceq cooperation, sincere, comradeship, brotherhood, malice, wickedness, righteousness, virtue, scruples, honor, religion, prayer? These are words having to do with morality and character and spirituality.

Sir Winston wrote this also:

One day President Roosevelt told me that he was asking publicly for suggestions about what the war should be called. I said at once, "The Unnecessary War." There never was a war more easy to stop than that which has just wrecked what was left of the world from the previous struggle. The human tragedy reached its climax in the fact that after all the exertions and sacrifices of hundreds of millions of people and of the victories of the Righteous Cause, we have still not found peace or security, and that we lie in the grip of even worse perils than those we have surmounted.

It is my earnest hope that pondering upon the past may give guidance in days to come, enable a new generation to repair some of the errors of former years and thus govern, in accordance with the needs and glory of man, the awful unfolding scene of the future. (The Gathering Storm, pp. v-vi.)

Well, his summation of the Second World War, like that of the first, ties our hopes to character and to moral and spiritual values, and I read just a few more lines.

In the Second World War every bond between man and man was to perish. Crimes were committed by the Germans under the Hitlerite domination to which they allowed themselves to be subjected, which find no equal in scale and wickedness with any that have darkened the human record. The wholesale massacre by systemized processes of six or seven millions of men, women, and children in the German execution camps exceeds in horror the rough-and-ready butcheries of Genghis Khan, and in scale reduces them to pigmy proportions.

(They, of course, have been far exceeded in our generation in the last few years in Communist China and other areas where this horrible process of human annihilation has been practiced.)

Deliberate extermination of whole populations was contemplated and pursued by both Germany and Russia in the Eastern war. The hideous process of bombarding open cities from the air, once started by the Germans, was repaid twentyfold by the ever-mounting power of the Allies, and found its culmination in the use of the atomic bombs which obliterated Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

And then this:

We have at length emerged from a scene of material ruin and moral havoc the like of which had never darkened the imagination of former centuries. After all that we suffered and achieved, we find ourselves still confronted with problems and perils not less but far more formidable than those through which we have so narrowly made our way.

It is my purpose, as one who lived and acted in these days, ... to show how easily the tragedy of the Second World War could have been prevented; how the malice of the wicked was reinforced by the weakness of the virtuous. (The Gathering Storm, p. 17.)

Notice those words again: wicked, virtuous, moral, malice. Words having to do with character and morality. They are not essential, perhaps, in teaching chemistry or mathematics, or geography, or vocational arts. They have more substance in teaching political science, home and family living, social problems, or history, and perhaps a casual meaning in teaching languages. But they are words that must be taught! And they will not thrive on their own. These are words that must be cultivated and nurtured. The ideals they represent are absolutely essential to the survival of civilization.

Motivations Not Necessarily "Church Oriented"

I compliment you as the principals of the secondary schools for caring about these ideals. The state office for education has done some excellent work in character education and there are some districts that have ongoing programs that are very good. You have much, very much support in this intent to be concerned about moral and spiritual values.

If you proceed, however, your efforts can, and by some certainly will, be misconstrued. They'll say that you are out of your province.

Recently here at Brigham Young University we established an "Institute for the Studies in Values and Human Behavior." It took some doing to get the word values included in that, because the first proposals all centered only on the study of human behavior. But the word is there, and the Institute is off to a good start.

Dr. Allen E. Bergin, director of the Institute, recently gave an address to a symposium on values. In it he indicted the behavioral scientists for their efforts to analyze human behavior and to at once completely ignore the moral and spiritual dimensions of our lives.

The reaction to his address was most interesting. The fact that such a distinguished scholar would accuse his own profession of avoiding some essential ingredients in their field offended some of them and embarrassed others.

I think that response very strange, coming from a profession whose central effort over the last generation has been to get individuals to talk openly about their frailties as part of the healing process. Should they not be willing to do it as a profession?

The integrity of that profession may well now be judged on how they react and how thoughtfully they consider the declarations of Dr. Bergin. They cannot understand human behavior unless they include as an essential consideration the moral and spiritual dimensions of life. Otherwise they put themselves in the position which might be likened to a school for bakers where for some unknown reason they prohibit the discussion about, or the use of, leavening. Whatever else they do, or whatever else their students accomplish, the results of their efforts and that of their students ultimately must be described as flat and tasteless.

When you address yourselves to moral and spiritual values and character education, some will suppose that your motivation is "church oriented." But whatever your motivation is, it's an essential one. And the words we are talking about do not belong exclusively to the churches.

The Boy Scouts have demonstrated that. They operate under the sponsorship of a whole cross-section of agencies, churches, civic organizations, clubs, even governments. And they deal in a very straightforward manner with such words as trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous, kind, obedient, thrifty, cheerful, brave, clean, and reverent. They determine to make their participants physically strong, mentally alert, and morally straight.

You are not out of your province, or even near the borders of it, when you address yourselves to moral and character education. You are right in the center of what matters most, and you have a great deal of support.

How to Teach These Values

Now I want to say something about how teaching for character and how teaching of moral and spiritual values differ from most other disciplines.

Sometimes we think we're working at it and trying to accomplish it, yet we're failing and we don't quite know why. We're investing time and effort and the classroom space and the energy, but we're not getting it done. To do it well, we need to include it as a part of all the subjects. It is done best if, like leavening, it is a basic ingredient for all that's taught. But to do it at all you'll need a few specialized tools. Now, let me explain. This really should be another talk, but I just want to get far enough into the teaching of spiritual and moral values to make a point.

The best certification of man's intelligence is his ability to reproduce his environment in symbols. He can look at things around him, make symbols to represent them, put them on paper, and even record them in the database of a computer, The alphabet is perhaps the best and simplest example.

Three symbols from among the twenty-six, C-A-T, symbolize cat. Now, although there's no way to put those three letters, C-A-T, together in a line or upside down or leaning on one another to make them actually look like a cat, nevertheless it isn't too difficult to use them as a symbol and to teach youngsters what a cat is.

And then we can increase the information. B-I-G would make it a big cat. B-L-A-C-K would tell the color of it, and R-U-N-N-I-N-G would describe its motion.

We can convey, through the use of these little symbols that we put on charts and blackboards and so on, a great deal of information.

A cat has size and shape and color and texture. It can be described as big or little, soft or hard, black or white, this shape or that. We can get a picture of it. We can make films of it, and eventually we could even show a cat. And we can get the idea, cat, taught.

Most of the things we are obliged to teach, and most of the things you govern by way of instruction, can somehow be taught by using the tools we've just discussed. We can recreate the tangible, material world around us in symbols, utilizing some useful tools in making these symbols descriptive. We convey from one person to another the idea-cat, or most other ideas-by describing it in terms of size or shape or color or weight or texture, or a number of other features.

Now, the reason why ofttimes the teaching of moral and spiritual values is so difficult is that in that field it is our responsibility to teach such intangible principles as courage, faith, honesty, love, humility, reverence, modesty. In teaching morality we do not recreate the material world around us; we deal with the intangible world within us, and there is a very big difference. The ordinary teaching tools available to us just don't work very well. To convey to a youngster the idea of a cat is much simpler than to convey the idea of honesty.

Honesty is very difficult to describe. For instance, how big is honesty? We soon learn that size isn't helpful. Only vaguely can we talk to a youngster who knows nothing about honesty, by talking about the amount of honesty. Very honest, or not so honest-that's relative. We can't tell him what color it is. We can't tell him what shape it is. We can't tell him what texture it is. And that's the point.

When they are teaching moral and spiritual values, most teachers don't realize that the basic tools-the hammer, the saw, the ruler, the common basic tools for building material images in other people's minds-are not used in the same way as they are used in teaching anything else. They cannot be used directly. A whole new set of tools, designed in a different way, must be employed.

It is far, far easier to recreate the visible, tangible world around us in alphabetic symbols than to recreate the intangible, invisible world within us and have it understood.

What do we do, then, if we cannot use the regular basic tools of teaching to convey moral and spiritual values? What do we do with the intangibles? How do we teach them?

Well, of course there's a way. We can tell stories about people and their actions and demonstrate honesty, for instance, in that way. This is helpful and may put the idea of honesty into the mind of a student. But it is not the most effective way.

It is better to use symbols to represent them. A more effective way is to tie the invisible idea, honesty, to some tangible thing that a student already knows about and then build from that knowledge.

Your professors of education define this very useful process as apperception. Apperception is defined as "the process of understanding something perceived in terms of previous experience."

This means that if we have something difficult to teach, such as honesty, or reverence, or love, or courage, we should begin with the experience of the student and talk about things he already knows. Then when we make a transfer to or comparison with that which we want him to know, he will perceive the meaning.

If somehow we might associate honesty with something the student already knows about, something that is tangible and measurable in dimensions, then the teaching about it would become much easier. Then we could form words to describe it, create stories about it; we could measure it, draw pictures of it, make slides and films of it and show it, or present it as an object lesson. Then we would be on solid ground with the students, because students, generally speaking, are more interested in what they know about than those things they don't know about.

Now just one sentence as an example: The biblical symbol for faith is a seed-a mustard seed. But then, that's another talk!

The letters in the alphabet can be arranged in words which in turn become symbols for objects in the tangible world about us. We can open a book full of such symbols and read them, and in so doing we can see the things the symbols represent.

In a similar way the commonplace things that we already know about can be made to represent intangible, invisible ideals. We can learn to read those symbols and in so doing we can see the things that they represent, such as love, faith, charity, and obedience.

All of that, then, is for this one point: We, and you, and those whom you govern in our schools, could become very good indeed at teaching moral character, teaching values, if we put as much effort into developing specialized tools to do it as we do for the other subjects; for instance, mathematics. And it seems to me that if you could interest some of your teachers in the public schools-in a public way, not in a "church way"-to understand and develop the processes for teaching moral and spiritual values, we could accomplish what we need to accomplish as easily as we can teach any of the other disciplines.

Negative Religion Threatens Takeover

Our garden has gone untended and the weeds have almost choked out any concern for values from our system of public education. Beginning in the teachers colleges in the universities, prospective teachers, bombarded with humanism and secularism and pragmatism and atheism, have been graduated with a noticeable breach in their preparation. Concern for standards at colleges of education is reserved mostly for academic standards, and the students graduate to seek employment in schools that in some instances now have been described, and not without some truth, as jungles.

Again I make reference to the fact that I travel just a little, and given an interest in education it makes one shudder to think what they have there that we're going to have here, unless we wake up and do something about it.

The United States Supreme Court several years ago handed down a decision relating to prayer in the public schools. That decision was a partial decision. It was one-sided. Regardless of what the intent was-and I know what the intent was-the effect has been to offer great encouragement to those who would erase from our society every trace of reference to the Almighty. And an extension of that has been, as an effect, the abandonment of any concern for moral and spiritual values in the public schools.

The decision was partial because the plaintiff wanted to protect her son from any contact with religion in the public schools. Now her son is protected from my type of religion, and my son is exposed to hers.

There is a crying need for educators to understand and identify atheism for what it is-and that is, a religion. Though a negative one, nevertheless it is a religious expression.

We put sunshine and rain together under the heading of weather. It would be a little ridiculous to talk about clear skies and cloudy ones and claim that the two are not related and could not be considered under the single heading-weather. It is equally ridiculous to separate theism from atheism and claim that they are two separate matters. This is particularly so when we condone in the classroom, and in some instances encourage, the atheist's preaching of his doctrine and the standards of conduct and morality that accompany his beliefs, and then at once, with great vigor, eliminate any positive reference to theism and the standards that accompany that belief.

Administrators in our schools who intend to maintain academic freedom had better see to it that they administer impartially. Otherwise they offend the very principle that they claim to sustain.

We are very particular to forbid anyone from preaching sectarian religion in a public school in the classroom, and to define any decent standard of morality as sectarian; but for some reason we are very patient with those who teach negative religion and the degrading standards that accompany it.

In the separation of church and state we ought to demand more protection from the agnostic, from the atheist, from the Communist, from the skeptic, from the humanist, from the amoral and the immoral, than we have yet been given. The atheist has no more right to teach the fundamentals of his sect in public schools than does the theist. Any system of schools in our society that protects the destruction of faith and in turn forbids the defense of it must ultimately destroy the moral fiber of a people.

The Hour Is Late

Now, finally, is anything more abundantly clear in our present society? Is anything more evident in public schools in general? We're coming apart at the seams. Anyone can see that. It's time that you as administrators in the public schools in this state and across the nation recognize that, and I'm very grateful that you're doing something about it here.

A wise administrator would not allow a subject that has very significant moral implications to be taught without considering very seriously, as a part of that teaching, those very moral implications. The teaching of human maturation, so-called sex education, in our public schools is the best case in point. If you teach that and ignore the very significant moral implications surrounding it, it's only half taught.

A couple of years ago Neal A. Maxwell and I were sent to Europe, where we met with the minister of education in Denmark and spent some time reviewing their textbooks and their processes of education and seeing some of the things that are developing there. Since this is mixed company here, I'm not able to describe what is in those elementary school textbooks. But it's sufficient to say that it would be regarded as hard-core pornography in elementary and in secondary schools here. And the trend, as I said, is in the direction that we will one day face the same thing.

I repeat, a wise administrator would not allow a subject that has very significant moral implications to be taught without considering very seriously, as part of that teaching, those moral implications.

How encouraging, again I say, at last to see a group of administrators concerned, really concerned, about character education. I hope we're in time. We'd better be about it, because it's late; almost, but not quite, too late.

One final reference to Sir Winston Churchill. When Great Britain finally made the decision, they had passed up several moral commitments, and when they finally decided to act on it he responded:

Here was decision at last, taken at the worst possible moment and on the least satisfactory ground, which must surely lead to the slaughter of tens of millions of people. Here was righteous cause deliberately... committed to mortal battle after its assets and advantages had been so improvidently squandered. Still, if you will not fight for the right when you can easily win without bloodshed; if you will not fight when your victory will be sure and not too costly; you may come to the moment when you will have to fight with all the odds against you and only a precarious chance of survival. There may even be a worse case. You may have to fight when there is no hope of victory, because it is better to perish than to live as slaves. (The Gathering Storm, pp. 347-48.)

Well, after that ominous comment I think I want to conclude on a note of optimism.

I used to worry a good deal more about some of these things than I do now. When Madeline Murray, or whatever her name is now, prospered in her effort that ended in that Supreme Court decision, that caused a chain reaction in a lot of things. And then I read somewhere this statement:

Betwixt God and Mrs. Murray A battle royal rages, But it isn't fair, considering The difference in their ages!

I pondered over the question of how I should conclude this talk. You're all public school administrators, and we are, in a sense, in a public school environment. And then I had the happy thought that we're not on public school property right now!

So I have no hesitancy in exposing a very deep anxiety that comes from having visited in perhaps seventy countries, in public schools in those places, and seeing what's going on, and in praying that the Lord will bless you in your work and your efforts, that you can have inspiration beyond your training and beyond your experience as you consider the questions and the challenges of teaching moral and spiritual values. That particularly you can be supported in those times when you, as an administrator, must stand alone, that you will have a moral courage that will be exemplary.

What a great thing if you can go and reinforce yourself with your superintendent, with your board of education, and gain from them moral support for the teaching of character and values in your school, and for holding to a standard in which you have tremendous support that represents the cross-section of the public whose children you teach, and indeed whose servants we are, as educators!

So may the Lord bless you to remember those words that the politician and statesman thought so vital-morality, conviction, courage, honor, righteousness, wickedness, malice, prayer, religion, obedience, character, and values.

God bless you in your work, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

---
Notas:
[^1] Direction Address given at general conference October 1982.
