Boyd K. Packer, Let Not Your Heart Be Troubled ( 1978)

25

Live by the Spirit [^1]

Dear brethren and sisters, I feel very grateful this rooming to be able to attend this general conference for Scandinavia.

Although the name Packer is an English name, I am in fact Scandinavian by ancestry. My grandfather on my mother's side emigrated from Denmark, bringing with him his two-year-old son. He worked in the smelter's to earn money to bring his Swedish wife to America. My father's mother also was Danish.

They came as converts to the Church. When my mother was six, Grandmother died. Mother then went to live with Grandma Jensen, who spoke no English. My mother, therefore, grew up speaking Danish.

In those days, when the converts arrived from overseas they were sent to the outlying settlements surrounding the Church headquarters. Brigham City, where I was raised, was settled almost entirely by converts from Scandinavia. The names in our town were Danish names and Swedish names and Norwegian names-Olsen, Johnson, Jensen, Jeppsen, Andersen, Christensen, Isaacson, and many others.

My wife also traces her ancestry to Denmark. Her grandfather immigrated to America in 1853. He was devoted to the gospel of Jesus Christ. When the Logan Temple was built he hiked over the mountains each Monday morning, a distance of twenty-five miles, to work on the temple. On Saturday evening he would hike the steep trails back over the mountains to spend the weekend with his family.

A Great Lesson

Today I wish to share with you a great lesson I learned from my little Danish mother. Many times she told us children of this incident in her life. She was teaching us a lesson every Latter-day Saint must learn. It is that message I would leave with you today.

In the early days of their marriage my father and mother lived on a little farm at Corinne. It was very difficult to raise crops, so they were very poor.

One morning, my father had to go into town. He had broken a piece of farm equipment and it had to be welded before he could continue planting. He came to the house and told Mother he must go to the blacksmith in Brigham City, a distance of seven miles. Although Mother was in the middle of doing the weekly washing, she quickly made arrangements to go with him, for it was not often that she could go to town.

On the cook stove in the kitchen she had been heating water for the washing. She also had a kettle of water heating on top of a tittle stove in the bedroom. While she set her washing things aside, banked the fires, and quickly got the little children ready for the trip to town, she thought of all the things she could do while Father was at the blacksmith's.

In the meantime Father harnessed the horse and brought the buggy to the front gate. Mother hurried out with the children and lifted them into the buggy. As she began to climb into the buggy herself, she hesitated a moment and then said, "I think I won't go with you today."

"What's the matter?" Father asked.

"I don't know," she answered. "I just have the feeling that I shouldn't go."

When she said feeling, that meant something to my father. He was wise enough not to tease her or try to talk her out of it. He simply said, "Well, if you have that feeling, perhaps you had better stay home."

As she lifted the children out of the buggy, you can imagine what they did!

She watched Father as the buggy went down the road then clattered across the bridge over the Bear River, up the bank on the opposite side, and out of sight. She stood at the gate with the children, who were crying in disappointment, and said to herself, "Now, wasn't that silly of me!"

She returned to the little house with the thought of finishing the washing.

I should tell you that that was a very humble home, The ceiling was not wood or plaster, but was made of cloth stretched and sized with glue and then wallpapered. They did that in homes in those days- not in the expensive homes but in the very humble homes.

The chimney pipe of the little stove in the bedroom was insulated with a brass ring at the point where it went through the fabric ceiling. No one knew that above the ceiling the pipe had rusted through. Now, sparks had escaped into the attic and settled into the dust. Mother had been back in the home only a few minutes when she smelled smoke and found the ceiling afire.

The little youngsters formed a bucket brigade from the pump. Mother stood on a chair and threw the water to the ceiling, and soon the fire was out.

And so the incident closes, except to ask the very important question: Why didn't she go to town that day?

Father and Mother had prayed earnestly that the Lord would bless them to be able to raise their family-feed them, clothe them, and provide shelter for them. They had been saving money to pay for their farm, and their savings were hidden away in that little house. All they owned was somehow centered in that humble home. To lose it would have been a great tragedy.

This little Danish mother of mine had prayed many times that they might be blessed. On that day her prayers were dramatically answered.

Again the question: Why did she not go to town that day?

She did not hear an audible voice saying, "Emma, you'd better not go to town today, I'm going to answer your prayers." Nor did a written message descend from which she could read, "Emma, you'd better stay home today," She stayed home because of a feeling; a still, small voice had spoken to her. She told my father, "I just have the feeling that I shouldn't go."

It was a great lesson my little Danish mother taught us.

Learn to Live by the Spirit

This is my counsel to you, my brethren and sisters in Scandinavia, and particularly to the young people among you: Learn to live by the Spirit.

Following baptism, each of us was confirmed a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. We were blessed to receive the Holy Ghost, which was to be a gift and a blessing to us in our lives.

Through the Holy Ghost we may always have a very clear signal to follow. If we are living worthily that signal will be a constant guide to us.

It is a quiet gift, It is unknown in the world. To Latter-day Saints it is a great blessing. It can guide us in all we do in life. All of us, particularly our young people, must learn to trust in that Spirit. We must learn to be spiritually minded. The prophet said, "To be carnally-minded is death, and to be spiritually-minded is life eternal" (2 Nephi 9:39).

That voice of inspiration is so quiet and still that it can be explained away. It is easy to be disobedient to that voice. It often takes great courage to follow it. But to Latter-day Saints it is a clear signal.

There is a very important message on this subject in the Book of Mormon. On one occasion Nephi scolded his brothers Laman and Lemuel for their unbelief, telling them: "Ye are swift to do iniquity but slow to remember the Lord your God. Ye have seen an angel, and he spake unto you; yea, ye have heard his voice from time to time; and he hath spoken unto you in a still small voice, but ye were past feeling, that ye could not feel his words." (1 Nephi 17:45, italics added.)

Someone once criticized the Book of Mormon by saying that it did not use correct language, and pointed to the above verse as the example: "You were past feeling, that ye could not feel his words." You don't feel words, the person insisted, you bear them. If the book were true, the passage would read, "You were past hearing, that you did not hear his words."

That correction would only be made by someone who did not know about the Spirit. There are literally millions of members of the Church across the world who know what that word feel means in this context. Many, perhaps most of you, could bear testimony of being prompted by the Spirit in this way.

Members of the Church should learn to trust in that guidance: to be prayerful, and live so that the Spirit of the Lord can operate through us.

Honor Your Baptismal Covenants

In order to have that Spirit guide us we must prepare ourselves for it. To do that, to be worthy of constant inspiration, we must keep the covenants we made at the time of baptism.

The Lord set forth in the scriptures the qualifications for being accepted by baptism:

And again, by way of commandment to the church concerning the manner of baptism-All those who humble themselves before God, and desire to be baptized, and come forth with broken hearts and contrite spirits, and witness before the church that they have truly repented of all their sins, and are willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end, and truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins, shall be received by baptism into his church (D&C 20:37).

When we have complied with those requirements the ordinance of baptism carries with it a remission of our sins. Think how marvelous that is- to be able to stand clean and worthy before our Heavenly Father.

It is not an easy thing in this world to stay worthy, to stay clean and pure. Each day may bring little irritations and temptations and mistakes. Our Heavenly Father has provided a way that we can renew the covenants we made with him at the time of our baptism. Each week we can gather together to partake of the sacrament for that purpose.

It is not very likely that during the course of a week, between sacrament meetings, we will get so far off the path of righteousness that we will lose our way. There is always that still, small voice to guide us.

I reverently quote from the sacramental prayer.

O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it; that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him, and keep his commandments which he hath given them, that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. (Moroni 4:3.)

Note the last clause, "that they may always have his Spirit to be with them."

The prayer on the water concludes:

that they may witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they do always remember him, that they may have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. (Moroni 5:2.)

Discerning Right in a Wicked World

We live in a day when evil is everywhere. At times it almost seems that right is wrong and wrong is right. We would hardly know which way to go if we did not have somewhere to turn in making many of the decisions we must make in life.

As members of the Church we are not just cut loose and left to shift for ourselves in this world. That would be a terrible thing. We are not left adrift. That constant spiritual guidance that we have in the Church is a clear signal, if we live for it and if we follow it.

There is no more wonderful time than now to be alive. And there is no finer place to live than in Denmark, or Finland, or Norway, or Sweden. The inspiration of the Lord can come to members of the Church in Scandinavia as readily as in any other place on this earth.

The remission of our sins, which we received at the time of baptism, can remain with us.

Humble yourselves even in the depths of humility, calling on the name of the Lord daily, and standing steadfastly in the faith of that which is to come, which was spoken by the mouth of the angel.

And behold, I say unto you that if ye do this ye shall always rejoice, and be filled with the love of God, and always retain a remission of your sins; and ye shall grow in the knowledge of the glory of him that created you, or in the knowledge of that which is just and true. (Mosiah 4:11-12, italics added.)

Inspiration can come, of course, from sources other than through the Holy Ghost. How, then, can we tell the difference?

The prophet Mormon left this counsel for us:

Wherefore, take heed, my beloved brethren, that ye do not judge that which is evil to be of God, or that which is good and of God to be of the devil.

For behold, my brethren, it is given unto you to judge, that ye may know good from evil; and the way to judge is as plain, that ye may know with a perfect knowledge, as the daylight is from the dark night.

For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God.

But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil; for after this manner doth the devil work, for he persuadeth no man to do good, no, not one; neither do his angels; neither do they who subject themselves unto him. (Moroni 7:14-17.)

Leaders Can Assist with Counsel

It is to the leaders of the Church that members tend to turn when they have not yet learned to discern inspiration. The gift of the Holy Ghost is a great and priceless gift. It is essential that leaders of the Church keep themselves worthy in order that they can be constantly guided by that Spirit.

To be called to a position in the Church is no small thing. We have an obligation to live, then, as perfectly as we know how to live.

Very often when a member of the Church has a decision to make, he or she may pray about it and yet still feel unsettled, not quite knowing whether one path of action represents an opportunity or a temptation. What does he do then? He can seek counsel, He can seek the counsel of wise and inspired leaders.

First, he can go to the father arid head of the family, Then, following the order of the Church, he may go to his branch president or bishop. There he will find counsel from one who has the right to receive inspiration, to be guided by that Spirit.

Quite often people will come to Church headquarters wanting to see the President of the Church. They have a personal problem of one kind or another and they want his counsel. They say: "I want him to tell me what to do. I have prayed about this matter, and I still do not know quite what to do."

Fortunately, it is not necessary for members of the Church to have an interview with the President of the Church in order to solve these problems. And as a practical matter, if he should open his door to every member of the Church who came with problems, he would not have time for the ministry that he is ordained to perform.

The Lord taught this lesson in the Old Testament. Moses opened his tent to all of Israel. They came in such numbers that they were lined up from morning until evening waiting to have a chance to talk over their problems with Moses.

One of them perhaps had a wayward son or daughter whom he wanted to talk about. Another had difficulty with his neighbor. Moses listened to them and judged these matters.

One day Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, saw what was going on. He said to Moses:

What is this thing that thou doest to the people? why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto even?

And Moses said unto his father-in-law, Because the people come unto me to inquire of God.

When they have a matter, they come unto me; and I judge between one and another, and i do make them know the statutes of God, and his laws.

And Moses' father-in-law said unto him, The thing that thou doest is not good.

Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee; thou art not able to perform it thyself alone.

Jethro then told Moses:

[Choose] out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens:

And let them judge the people at all seasons: and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee. (Exodus 18:14-18, 21-22.)

And so it is today in the Church. When we are confused and at a loss to know which way to go, we can turn first to the local leader of the Church-to our branch president or bishop. As appropriate, he in turn can counsel with the stake president, or the mission president, who if necessary can counsel with the General Authorities, who themselves are in constant counsel with the prophet himself.

As with the Israelites in the wilderness, it is not necessary to have the President of the Church or the other General Authorities hear all of the problems of the people. It is not necessary for the stake president or the mission president to personally judge all of these matters.

Even the bishops or branch presidents do not need to hear all of these matters, although it is true that they will hear more of them than the leaders above them will. The point is that each of us should live in such a way as to be able to follow the inspiration of that still, small voice. We must have the courage to follow these feelings. Such inspiration will always lead us to do right, to be active in the Church. This inspiration will always teach Latter-day Saints to be Latter-day Saints indeed.

Influence Others with the Spirit You Carry

I close with another experience.

At one point when I was president of a mission I was interviewing a young missionary assigned to St. Johns, Newfoundland, located nearly two thousand miles from mission headquarters. He seemed reluctant to let the interview end, and finally he said, "I feel strong now and I'm not discouraged, but you are going to go away."

"But you have my assistants who come and visit you," I said.

"Yes," he said, "they come for a brief visit, but they go away."

"What about the zone leaders?" I asked.

"It is the same with them. They will come every few weeks and pay us a brief visit, and then they will go away." He added, "I feel strong and inspired when you are here, but it seems that all of you go away and then I am discouraged and don't know which way to go."

I then could see that we had failed to teach this elder a very important lesson. So I said to him: "Elder, do you not know that when we are gone and you are here, you are to the people here as we are to you? That is, you must be a strength and an inspiration to them. We should only need to visit you infrequently. You should carry the Spirit with you, and give of the Spirit to all among whom you labor."

He had never thought of that!

Right at this moment there are a number of General Authorities here with you. But in a day or two we will be moving to assignments elsewhere in the world. When we are gone and you are here, just remember that you have the responsibility to convey inspiration to those with whom you associate-your families, the other members of the Church, and nonmembers.

How can you do that? You can simply carry the spirit of this conference with you, and you can carry the spirit of the gospel with you at all times. You can be guided and prompted and inspired. In this Church we are not left comfortless. The Lord said:

If ye love me, keep my commandments.

And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever;

Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you.

I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you. (John 14:15-18.)

This is the great lesson that I learned from my little Danish mother-that we have the right to be prompted and inspired, and that if we are living righteously and if we are prayerful the Lord will guide us.

I have come to know that it is not always easy to follow these promptings. I have come to know also that we need to stay faithful and active in the Church. And I have come to know that if we do this and constantly improve in righteousness and spiritual living the Lord will bless us with the guidance we need and seek. For this is the one true Church, and hence its faithful members are entitled to that guidance; Jesus Christ is at its head, directing its course; Joseph Smith was the great prophet called to lead this final gospel dispensation; and we have a living prophet leading us today. These things I have come to know. Of them I bear witness in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

---
Notas:
[^1] Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. I recognize two kinds of faith. The first is the kind which is apparent in the world. It is the common denominator of most everything that goes on. It is the thing that lets us exist. It is the thing that gives us some hope of getting anything done. Everyone has it, some in a larger measure than others. The second kind of faith, remarkably rare, unusual to find, is the kind of faith that causes things to happen. Faith is a power as real as electricity but a thousand times more powerful. Now, did you ever exercise faith-exercise it, practice it, you see, not just take it for granted? When you look at yourself, ask yourself how faithful you are. Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is a first principle of the gospel according to the Lord. Is it a first principle in the gospel according to you?
