Boyd K. Packer, Let Not Your Heart Be Troubled ( 1978)

26

"Let Not Your Heart Be Troubled" [^1]

I begin with a testimony that the gospel of Jesus Christ is true, that in its exalted principles rest the keys to the nature of man, his relationship to God, and the ideal pattern of his regard for himself and his fellowmen. Any position which ignores revealed truth concerning the nature of man and his relationship to God must ultimately prove to be inadequate, if not downright erroneous and destructive.

The challenge that you will face in this generation is best summed up by a little girl I know who imagined that she was cornered by all the frustrations and confusions of a fast-moving technologically oriented society. She assessed our plight in eloquent simplicity when she said, "Life gets complicateder and complicateder."

One could hardly ignore the unnecessarily high incidence of problems, even among our people, relating to emotional stress and emotional breakdown. This incidence is unnecessarily high because there are ways to prevent it-ways to relieve it.

In the New England Mission during the last year we have had a substantial drop in medical expenses for missionaries, most of which expenses were for the relief of psychosomatic illnesses. In this school environment you are not immune from pressures which relate to schoolwork; from tensions and problems and the long list of attendant, emotionally oriented difficulties and disorders-insecurity, worry, stress, confusion, dependency, suspicion, withdrawal, fear, and, ultimately, failure. Life does, indeed, get complicateder and complicateder.

Areas of Challenge

I think it is fair to say that the pressures of Grandfather's day, with all the challenge of wresting a place from the hostile frontier, had a certain tranquility about it that we will never know again. Inasmuch as you face these challenges in your college environment, I thought it might be helpful to you to list a few of the difficulties a collegeaged person might face and make some rather practical observations which may be of assistance to you.

I list, then, these areas of challenge:

These are the pitfalls-quiet, inner, and personal. Before them one may feel frail and helpless. These are the silent, the lonely battles.

As I list these rather practical suggestions, I hope you will ponder them carefully-measure yourself against them and, perhaps, try them out.

The Weather

First: Declare your independence from the weather! Now, I readily recognize that changes in the barometric pressure and in weather have certain physiological effects. It is interesting to note, however, the large percentage of people who seem to be completely subjugated in their moods to the flimsy, variable, uncontrollable exigencies of weather. Their attitudes are waited to and fro not just by every "wind of doctrine" but literally by every wind.

It was interesting to see the effect on missionaries when they were invited to declare their independence from weather. (There are two hundred of you here who know that in New England we have a marvelous variety of good weather.) Even inclement weather can be tolerable perhaps enjoyable, if we have asserted our agency and decided that we are going to be pleasant regardless of what the barometer says.

Isn't it true that man's a fool? When it's hot he wants it cool, When it's cool, he wants it hot. Always wanting what it's not.

It is time that we begin to achieve that degree of maturation which is necessary so that we can be emancipated from the influences of meteorological phenomena—that is college language for, "Why not grow up!"

What a marvelous thing it is to see young men and women who have learned not to care greatly what the weather is! They dress against it if it is inclement and for it if it is not. They go about their purposes of life undisturbed by weather or its variations. When it starts to rain, they simply say: "Let it rain. We got here first." Surely you of college age can find some more important index for your disposition than the viscissitudes of the weather.

Your Body

The next suggestion I make has been the subject of thousands of volumes. Simply this: Take care of your body. It is the instrument of your mind and the foundation of your character. Within it are kindled the life-giving capacities suited to prepare mortal bodies for the coming generations.

Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy: for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are. (1 Corinthians 3:16-17.)

When will we learn to do the following simple things:

A Healthy Depression

Did you know that it is normal and healthy to be depressed occasionally? As General Authorities, we face a long line of people who call upon us because they are unhappy-they are depressed. They are worried about this and that and really not certain what they are worried about. They are a little like the man who insisted: "You can't tell me that worry doesn't help. The things I worry about never happen!"

When we search the revealed word for some evidence of the nature of man, we find statements such as this:

For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so, ... righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad. (2 Nephi 2:11.)

If you happen to hit a good sorry mood once in a while, relax and enjoy it-it is a good sign that you are normal. It is all right to worry about things now and again, I suppose, but when you get worried about being worried, that is when you are getting of the track.

I really was hesitant to put this "literature" in here, but it has a thought:

If you can smile when things go wrong, And say it doesn't matter, If you can laugh off cares and woe, And trouble makes you fatter, If you can keep a cheerful face When all around are blue, Then have your head examined, bud, There's something wrong with you. For one thing I've arrived at: There are no ands and buts, A guy that's grinning all the time Must be completely nuts.

February

Watch out for February! We learned in supervising teaching that after the interesting beginnings of school-you have the football season, the holidays, the beginning of the basketball season-then, after the first of the year, come the cold, dreary days of winter. We noted that at that time the teacher would fail and the students would have problems. Depressions are then accentuated, It has been interesting to notice this and to point it out when people come in during those dreary days of winter, depressed and unsettled. Then they find out that there was not anything wrong-it was just February. It is worthwhile to know that.

Unsettled Transgression

I have mentioned the corrosive guilt of unsettled transgression. Be wise enough to learn not to talk about your problems with the wrong people. Unfortunately, many young people who have made mistakes, particularly if these are in the category of moral transgression, end up telling a roommate about it. If there is something weighing heavily on your mind, talk it over first with the Lord in prayer, and then with your parents. Learn what a bishop is for, and confide in him when faced with such problems. There may be one here who has been immorally involved; if so, you should get it settled-get that page torn out of your life so that you can go on.

With reference to all of the other little things that seem to loom so big, forget them-just get them out of your mind. Go ahead. Face the sunlight of truth in order that the shadows of sin, doubt, and error will be cast behind you.

Innocence Brings Power

Innocence brings great power. I have managed to read a biography or two-one of them of Theodore Roosevelt, the rugged, individualistic, forceful president of the United States. There is a very interesting statement by the author, Noel F. Busch:

He never suffered from the "repressed guilt feelings" which provide the sand in the gears of most less happily adjusted humans. T.R.'s total clarity of conscience can be deduced not only from his own by no means infrequent affirmations, but also from circumstantial evidence in the form of other character traits and tendencies. One of the latter might be the capacity for intense and uninterrupted enjoyment, which he possessed to a degree unthinkable for anyone with a psyche clouded by any trace of self-doubt or accusation. Corollary evidence might be supplied by the excellence of his memory. Like a sundial which records only the shining hours, memory, most psychologists agree, tends to erase unpleasant experiences while taking full note of pleasant ones. Roosevelt's astounding ability to recall events, ideas and people may well have been derived at least in part from the obvious fact that for him all experiences tended to be happy ones. (T. R., The Story of Theodore Roosevelt and His Influence on Our Times [New York: Reynal and Company, Inc., 1963], pp. 9-10.)

There was great power in his innocence, and when you see great men with that quality you find that they are unclouded by things that are unsettled. Sweeter words were never spoken than these spoken by the Lord: "I will remember your sins no more" (see D&C 58:42).

Troubles and Dependency

We have reached a state when evidently we cannot get any considerable number of people together in school, business, society, the military, or anywhere else without having them attended by a sufficient number of counselors, psychologists, and psychiatrists. I look with concern on the increased dependency upon psychologists and psychiatrists. Now, explicitly, I did not say I look with concern upon the use of them. I said I look with concern upon our growing dependency upon them. I have misgivings about the growing tendency to diagnose every aberration of behavior as the beginnings of "psycho-something-or-other."

Let me caution you to be careful. Do not tell your troubles to the wrong people. We do not call a neurosurgeon every time we have a slight headache, and you had better be careful before going to an analyst.

May I say that I recognize the need for professional help from psychiatrists. I have at times referred individuals to them, but I say again that I look with concern upon our growing dependency upon them. I would suppose that when there is that measure of difficulty or disorder which requires professional attention, that attention ought to be given on the referral from the bishop and from the medical doctor. But we are at the point now where at the slightest aberration in behavior we are sent for professional clinical inspection.

I am not always sure that the measures that are taken are wise. For instance, I am not sure it is always wise to try to erase grief with sedatives. Perhaps when we know the true nature of man, we may be more discriminating in the administering of sedatives in an attempt to erase grief or bring peace to broken hearts, and we may be more careful in the buffering of individuals from life through the use of tranquilizers.

Act-Not React

Take courage! Do not continually be reacting. Be independent in your moods. Search yourself. Start to act. Be selective in your emotional diet. How unfortunate it is to see someone with a well structured physical body who lives on intellectual and emotional garbage. Just because Jean-Paul Sartre points out the miserable all of the time does not mean that you have to join him.

Sydney Harris wrote, in the Chicago Daily News:

I walked with my friend, a Quaker, to the newsstand the other night, and he bought a paper, thanking the newsie politely. The newsie didn't even acknowledge it.

"A sullen fellow, isn't he?" I commented.

"Oh, he's that way every night," shrugged my friend.

"Then why do you continue to be so polite to him?" I asked.

"Why not?" inquired my friend. "Why should I let him decide how I'm going to act?"

Disorders with Moral Implications

Now we are in a touchy area! There are some emotional disorders and psychological beginnings that have their fulfillment in the ugliness of perversion. There are disorders that, while psychological in beginning, have moral implications and may ultimately be acted out physically. It is a critically serious thing when we get that mixed up in our feelings and thinking about our relationships to other people. Some yield to these neurotic feelings and find themselves immorally involved, guilty of perverted acts. It is heartbreaking to have someone come pitifully seeking help yet tangled in a mesh of tragic experiences.

I have a simple and practical suggestion with regard to this matter. This may seem like strange counsel for a member of the Board of Trustees to give at a university: nonetheless, I say' this is well-considered counsel. The counsel is simply this: If at sometime in your life you go through one of these phases-and there are some elements of normalcy about them-do not be attracted to read all of the books on the subject.

Some years ago Dr. Dale Tingey and I were at the Washington State University at Pullman. We had called upon a friend who was the director of the medical services. In his outer office was a long table stacked with several dozen pamphlets on physical illnesses: tuberculosis, cancer, encephalitis, and so forth. Dale motioned to the table and said: "Well, there they are. Pick one out. If you read enough about it and think about it long enough, you will be sure you have it." And to his expression I might add parenthetically that, if it is emotionally oriented, you may cause yourself to get it. Sometimes study can magnify rather than reduce these problems, particularly when they are psychologically oriented. Again, I repeat: Any position which ignores the revelations of the Lord pertaining to the nature of man must ultimately prove to be inadequate, if not downright false and destructive. Virtually none of the writers on these subjects are sensitive to such revelations.

I have almost come to believe that the chances of rescuing people from these addictions are inversely proportional to the number of books they have read on the subject. If they have been to the library seeking out all of the long treatises on perverted activities, they become almost, if not entirely, convinced that there is no hope for them. Their faith is extinguished and their chances for rescue are diminished. They ought to understand that their problem is not a basic presetting of their nature so much as an addiction. Habit patterns strengthen addiction, but a cure can be effected. A cure must be effected.

The greatest source for stability is a strong home life. If somehow this was denied you, or if somehow you have denied it, know that the deficiency is not likely to be supplied by the professional counselor, by the psychologist, or by the psychiatrist. For unless those who try to fill in that void-to fill in those yearning vacancies-are conversant with the nature of man, they cannot prescribe accurately. And unless they can regard man in his true status as a son or daughter of a divine being possessed of divine capacity, unless they have reverence for life which comes from truth, they likewise cannot prescribe accurately. Thank the Lord that here at this university we have men as counselors, psychiatrists, and psychologists who are amply trained and competent in their field and yet humbly and reverently conversant with the operations of the Spirit of the Lord. Again, any position which ignores revealed truth concerning the nature of man and his relationship to divinity must ultimately prove to be inadequate.

Purpose in the Challenge

Well, those are the simple suggestions. I commend them to you with the hope that you will recognize that there is purpose in the challenges of life. Disappointment, sorrow, pain-these are all flames for the Refiner's fire, but they are meant to temper us only, not to consume us:

In the furnace God may prove thee, Thence to bring thee forth more bright, But can never cease to love thee; Thou art precious in his sight. God is with thee, God is with thee; Thou shalt triumph in his might.

-Hymns, no. 43

It was never intended that we float in an effortless environment at 72 degrees and bathe constantly in the sensation of physical, sensational, and spiritual pleasures. We are here to grow.

Now pull yourselves together. If you are having some of these strains and stresses, pull yourself together.

I am reminded of a story of two men who were crossing the country on a bicycle built for two. On a hot July day they had negotiated a very steep hill, and the man on the back, panting from exhaustion, said, "I didn't think we were going to make it!" The man in front, wiping his brow, said, "I didn't either. If I hadn't had the brakes on all the way up, we would have gone backwards for sure!"

Now pull yourself together.

Your body, with all its limitations, is priceless. I remember from some years ago a few lines from the Thornton Wilder play Our Town. Emily had noticed that George noticed that she noticed him, and this little touching conversation took place as Emily and her mother sat shelling peas.

"Mama, am I good-looking?"

There was a little discussion, then Mama said, "Emily, now stop it! You are pretty enough for all normal purposes."

"Keep My Commandments"

I conclude with these few verses from the book of John:

If ye love me, keep my commandments.

And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever;

Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him; but ye know him, for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you.

I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you....

These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with

you.

But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.

Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. (John 14:15-18, 25-27.)

I bear my witness that Jesus is the Christ, that there is a sustaining power that will overrule the troubles that come to us in our youth, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dissatisfaction over the shape and proportion of your body. Young men, because you are not the tall, firmly muscled, athletically proportioned male with the "collar ad" features, and, young women, because you do not fit the image of "Miss Something-or-Other," worshipped so generously by society, you have the tendency to become dissatisfied, miserable over something that you cannot change. Eat nourishing, balanced meals, particularly a well balanced, sustaining breakfast.
