Boyd K. Packer, Let Not Your Heart Be Troubled ( 1978)

27

Keeping Covenants [^1]

My dear brothers and sisters, especially the young people. For many years I was a seminary teacher for the Church, and I have a great deal of love for the young people in the Church. I pray that the Spirit of God may be with me during my address. Please pray for me. I desire tO speak about covenants.

This is a sacred occasion, the dedication of a temple. It is a joyful time, a time to rejoice and a time to consider very soberly our obligation. President Joseph Fielding Smith was ninety-five when he died. I shall never forget his prayers. He would pray without fail that he would be faithful, that he would endure to the end, and that he would keep his covenants and obligations.

Doctrine and Covenants section 132 speaks of being sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise. Promise is an interesting word. It is found often in the scriptures. The Lord said to us, "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise" (D&C 82:10).

"He Did Not Keep His Covenants"

I would like to tell the young people of an experience I had when I was a very young man and was talking with a very old man. This is the story he told me.

When he was a little boy-that would be nearly one hundred years ago-he lived in a very small community a long way from Salt Lake City. One of the men in the ward, a close relation to the President of the Church, had passed away. When the funeral was held, everyone in the ward went to the funeral, as was the custom. So this little boy went with his father and mother to the funeral. Just as the service was about to begin, to their great surprise in walked the prophet, the President of the Church. He had come a long way by train and then by buggy to attend the funeral service of his relative.

The service was similar to those of other funerals. Some kind things were said about the deceased man. He was described as a good man. Someone said that he had given flour to the widows, and he had helped those in the ward. We like to say kind things at funerals, of course.

The concluding speaker was the President of the Church. What he said was not comforting. He gave a talk that perhaps only the President of the Church could give; and he perhaps could speak in that way only because he was speaking about a relative. He confirmed that this man had been a good man and said that the good things he had done would earn him a reward; but then he said: "The fact is, he did not keep his covenants."

This man, when he was young, had gone to the temple to be married, to be sealed. Some sweet young girl had persuaded him to change his habits and become worthy, so he stopped doing some wrong things, began to pay his tithing and attend church, eventually received a temple recommend; and then the couple went to the temple and were sealed. But after a while, because the temple was a long way away and they did not return, he forgot. He began to slip back into some of his old habits. He forgot to pay his tithing. He ceased being the man he had become.

His relative, the President of the Church, knew all this, so he acknowledged that all the good he had done would earn him rewards, but he said, "The fact is, he did not keep his covenants." There were things he did that he should not have done, for he had covenanted not to do them. Similarly there were things he had covenanted to do that he had not done. So he had covenanted not to do some things and covenanted to do some things, and he had become loose and lazy on those things. He was basically a good man, maybe a good Christian as far as the world would judge it. But he had not kept his covenants, his agreements.

When you young people go to the temple to be married, you will hear about the importance of your marriage being sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise. "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say." And if you do what He says, He cannot break those promises; you will receive what is promised. But if you do not keep your part of the covenant the promises will not be fulfilled. There cannot be justice in your receiving the reward if you have not earned it.

Covenants in Ancient Israel

The ancient Israelites used to make contracts and covenants. Sometimes these were in connection with their business, and they would write them on a piece of wood. If I made a covenant with my brother here, we would write the agreement on the wood. We would each sign it, and perhaps he would agree to pay me some money. Then we would split the board down the middle. He would take one half and I would take the other. In order for this contract to be consummated, both halves would have to be brought together and I would have to fulfill my part of the bargain and he would have to fulfill his part. That is where the illustration in the Old Testament comes from, wherein Ezekiel mentions the stick of Judah and the stick of Joseph-referring to the Bible and the Book of Mormon-which when brought together fulfill a covenant, a contract. The purpose of that coming together is to testify that Jesus is the Christ, the Book of Mormon being another testament of Jesus Christ.

The Lord Is Bound When We Keep Covenants

Now, the Lord is very generous. He tells us to strive to be perfect, so that he may bless us even more richly as we travel that path. It is very difficult to be perfect. I am not sure I know anyone who is perfect. Someone asked Brigham Young, "Are you perfect?" He said, "No, I am not. If I were perfect, I would be taken to heaven so fast it would scare this whole congregation." But he was striving for perfection. He was trying to do everything he could to be perfect. He was keeping his covenants. If we will keep our covenants and do as we promise to do, then the Lord is bound and we will receive the blessing.

When we prepare for the temple, we will be asked questions. One question will be about the Word of Wisdom. "Do you keep the Word of Wisdom?" Well, do you or don't you? Quite often when I am interviewing leaders, I will say, "Are you worthy of a temple recommend?" Often they will say, "Well, I feel I am." And I will say, "But are you worthy?" It does not matter how you feel. It matters whether you are worthy. Then the brother will smile and he will say, "I am worthy." "Do you keep your covenants?" "I keep my covenants." That is a commendable thing.

I remember an occasion many years ago when I went for a temple recommend. I had a very good bishop, and we were friends. He said to me: "I think I can just sign your recommend. I know you well enough. You are the supervisor of the seminaries. I will just sign this recommend." But I said: "Bishop, I cannot accept it. It is your responsibility to ask those questions and it is my privilege to answer them."

Now, we must keep our covenants. "Are you morally clean?" "Do you pay your tithing?" "Do you sustain the authorities of the Church?" "Well, yes, everybody but Brother Somebody." No, that is not the way it works. Brother Somebody probably needs your sustaining influence more than anyone. Keep your covenants. Keep your covenants.

When you come to the temple and receive your endowment, and kneel at the altar and be sealed, you can live an ordinary life and be an ordinary soul-struggling against temptation, failing and repenting, and failing again and repenting, but always determined to keep your covenants-and that marriage ordinance will be sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise. Then the day will come when you will receive the benediction: "Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy of thy lord" (Matthew 25:21).

God grant that we will be a covenant-keeping people, that we will not take our covenants lightly. I bear witness that Jesus is the Christ, that He lives, that the marvelous gospel and the ordinances and the covenants were revealed of Him to us for our exaltation, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

---
Notas:
[^1] Dissatisfaction over the shape and proportion of your body. Young men, because you are not the tall, firmly muscled, athletically proportioned male with the "collar ad" features, and, young women, because you do not fit the image of "Miss Something-or-Other," worshipped so generously by society, you have the tendency to become dissatisfied, miserable over something that you cannot change. Eat nourishing, balanced meals, particularly a well balanced, sustaining breakfast.
