Boyd K. Packer, Let Not Your Heart Be Troubled ( 1978)

28

Bruce R. McConkie, Apostle [^1]

A few days ago I had my last visit with our beloved Brother McConkie. He was resting on the bed, dressed, alert, patient. We expressed our deep love for one another and said our good-byes.

President Lee told me on one occasion how the passing of one certain member of the Twelve had affected him more deeply than had any other. Now I understand. I cannot express the loneliness and the deep, personal loss I feel.

Brother McConkie and I shared a witness that, I have come to believe, few men share. I could, and I did, speak more openly to him of sacred things than to any other man. We had talked in recent months of his coming graduation from mortality. On those occasions, despite his great regret at leaving his family and his brethren, he spoke in terms of anticipation. He was absolutely devoid of any fear.

As we said our good-byes I inquired whether I could do anything else for him. He asked for a blessing.

The faithful will understand President Romney's statement, "I know when I speak with the power of the Holy Ghost because then I always learn something from what I have said." We learned something from that blessing a few days ago. I will share part of it with you at the conclusion of my tribute to my beloved Brother Bruce.

Miracles in His Life

We were told more than a year ago that he would live only a few weeks. Miraculously he returned to full service, in full vigor. Later he and I traveled together to South America. In the Quorum we teasingly called Bruce the archbishop of South America. He organized more stakes there than any two of us.

He pressed for a different pattern for stakes in those developing countries. As they were approved, the work flourished. Brother Oaks and Brother Maxwell are in South America today. Perhaps they would have hurried back from any other place to be at this service, but not from there. They asked to stay to press the work that was so dear to him, the ministry that was his, as something of a tribute to him.

It was a miracle that he could deliver his final inspired testimony at general conference a couple of weeks ago. That was the exclamation point to his ministry.

These recent miracles were not the first. His life began as a miracle. When he was born, it was a very difficult birth. He was thought to be stillborn and was set aside. Then as they worked frantically to save his mother, someone heard a tiny cry and turned to him.

Later, when his own firstborn son died in infancy, he surely wondered why his son could not have been spared, as he was. But he and Amelia suffered through it; kept their faith. Bruce lived to be a disciple and a special witness of another firstborn son who, when His time came, was not spared.

I will recall in Bruce's own words another experience, another miracle:

"One of my earliest childhood recollections is of riding a horse through an apple orchard. The horse was tame and well broken, and I felt at home in the saddle.

"But one day something frightened my mount, and he bolted through the orchard. I was swept from the saddle by the overhanging limbs, and one leg slipped down through the stirrup. I desperately hung to an almost broken leather strap that a cowboy uses to tie a lariat to his saddle.

"Suddenly the horse stopped, and I became aware that someone was holding the bridle tightly and attempting to calm the quivering animal. Almost immediately I was snatched up into the arms of my Father.

"My father had been sitting in the house reading the newspaper when the Spirit whispered to him: 'Run out into the orchard.'

"Without a moment's hesitation, not waiting to learn why or for what reason, my father ran. Finding himself in the orchard without knowing why he was there, he saw the galloping horse and thought, 'I must stop this horse.' He did so and found me.

[His father did not know Bruce was there until after he had stopped the horse.]

"I was saved from death or serious accident because my father hearkened to the voice of the Spirit. If he had not responded instantly to the whisperings of the still small voice, my life might have ended then or had its course totally changed."

But there was a work for him to do.

Raised Up to a Purpose

To me there was one great crowning contribution and achievement in Brother McConkie's ministry. Some may not agree, because he accomplished and contributed so many things. But I am sure, quite sure of this: If ever there was a man who was raised up unto a very purpose, if ever a man was prepared against a certain need, it was Bruce R. McConkie. That purpose and need had to do with the scriptures.

All members of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve had important work to do in the publication of the new editions of the scriptures with all of the aids, the footnotes, the corrections, the Topical Guide, the dictionaries, the indexes, the reversification, the new chapter headings, additional revelations, and more.

This work, while hardly appreciated yet, will one day emerge as a signal, inspired event of our generation. Because of it we shall raise up generations of Latter-day Saints who will know the gospel and know the Lord.

Brother Monson and I served for years with Brother McConkie on the Scriptures Publication Committee. I know full well that the work could have been accomplished without me. I venture to suggest, as well, that Brother Monson was not crucial to that work.

But it could not have been done without Elder Bruce R. McConkie. Few will ever know the extent of the service he rendered. Few can appraise the lifetime of preparation for this quiet, crowning contribution to the onrolling of the restored gospel in the dispensation of the fulness of times.

I should not have felt right about participating in the recent satellite broadcast on the scriptures had Bruce been unable to participate, Only Amelia knows the pain he endured during the many hours it took to record that program. But it is recorded and his testimony is preserved.

His preparation for the work began in the home, where his father and his mother invited scriptural discussions around the family table. Before his mission he had read the Book of Mormon three times. He was on a single scriptural track that would lead to the apostleship and to his crowning achievement in mortality.

His main interest centered in the scriptures. He was in the mission field when the Cumorah Pageant started. All missionaries participated in the pageant, as he joked, "according to our talents." His talent was scriptural. "I parked cars."

Knew the Law and the Prophets

S. Dilworth Young wrote:

It was while walking to and from law school that Elder McConkie developed a habit of study.... He would think of a subject in the gospel, such as repentance, and would then, in his mind, make up an outline for a sermon on the subject.

He would, from memory, add the appropriate scripture and material supporting the outline. He had memorized a verse of scripture a day while in the mission field, and so he had a large amount to draw upon.

Doing this daily, as he walked, gave him practice in analysis and logic of doctrinal subjects.... He continued this until this method of thinking became second nature to him.

Elder McConkie came to know two things as few mortals have known them: The law and the prophets.

He came to know the law and he came to know the prophets. When he was called as a General Authority, I am sure there were snide remarks about nepotism, for he had married the daughter of Joseph Fielding Smith of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. People making such remarks did not know that the President of the Church had kept his call from her father until it had to be announced. If they could not see then, can they see now that in that union this chosen man was brought under the constant tutelage of Joseph Fielding Smith, scripturalist, son of a prophet, grandson of Hyrum the patriarch, and a prophet himself?

And Amelia, the very image of her father, was perfect, just perfect, as his help meet for this ministry.

It you know ecclesiastical history at all, if you know the dealings of the Lord with men and of men with men, you should not be surprised that the one characteristic which the Lord pressed upon him was the very thing that many, even some close to him, misunderstood. As is often true, the great ones are not tully understood or appreciated while they live.

A Great Man Walked Among Us

Perhaps one day we will see how great a man has walked among us. He was not less than Elder Talmage or the others we revere from the past. His sermons and writings will live on. In these, he will live longer than any of us. The scriptures have something to say about testimonies being in fuller force after the death of the testator.

His manner of delivery was unique, with something of an Old Testament scriptural quality about them.

It was not granted to Brother McConkie to judge beforehand how his discourses would be received and then to alter them accordingly. He could not measure what ought to be said and how it ought to be said by, "What will people think?" Would his sermons leave any uncomfortable? Would his bold declarations irritate some in the Church? Would they inspire the critics to rush to their anvils and hammer out more "fiery darts," as the scriptures call them?

Would his manner of delivery offend? Would his forthright declarations, in content or in manner of presentation, drive some learned investigators away? Would he be described as insensitive or overbearing?

Would his warnings and condemnations of evil undo the careful work of others whose main intent was to have the world "think well of the Church?" Perhaps it was given to other men to measure their words in that way, but it was not given to him.

He and I have talked of this. And when he was tempted to change, the Spirit would withdraw a distance and there would come that deep loneliness known only to those who have enjoyed close association with the Spirit, only to find on occasion that it moves away. He could stand what the critics might say and what enemies might do, but he could not stand that.

He would be driven to his knees to beg forgiveness and plead for the renewal of that companionship with the Spirit which the scriptures promise can be constant. Then he would learn once again that what was true of holy men of God who spake in ancient times applied to him as well. He was to speak as he was moved upon by the Holy Spirit. What matter if it sounded like Bruce R. McConkie, so long as the Lord approved! I knew him well enough to know all of that.

Brother McConkie was as sensitive a man as ever I have known. I have had my arms around him as he wept openly over what some had said or done. I have delighted in his sparkling sense of humor that few men could equal. I have sensed that he was quite as much an Apostle as was Peter, James, John, or Paul.

President Kimball spoke in public of his gratitude to Elder McConkie for some special support he received in the days leading up to the revelation on the priesthood.

We did learn much from that final blessing we gave Brother McConkie. In it I quoted from verses in section 138 of the Doctrine and Covenants. That section is one of the revelations added to the scripture as part of recent editions. It is a revelation given to Amelia's grandfather, President Joseph F. Smith, on 3 October 1918 and is referred to as "The Vision of the Redemption of the Dead."

The heading of that section (which, incidentally, Bruce wrote) says this:

In his opening address at the eighty-ninth Semi-annual General Conference of the Church, on October 4, 1918, President Smith declared that he had received several divine communications during the previous months. One of these, concerning the Savior's visit to the spirits of the dead while his body was in the tomb, he had received the previous day.

President Smith had been reading and pondering certain verses from First Peter in the New Testament, including this one:

For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the Spirit (1 Peter 4:6).

The following verses were the ones from which I quoted in that blessing:

And as I wondered, my eyes were opened, and my understanding quickened, and I perceived that the Lord went not in person among the wicked and the disobedient who had rejected the truth, to teach them;

But behold, from among the righteous, he organized his forces and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men; and thus was the gospel preached to the dead (D&C 138:29-30).

One more verse:

I beheld that the faithful elders of this dispensation when they depart from mortal life, continue their labors in the preaching of the gospel of repentance and redemption, through the sacrifice of the Only Begotten Son of God, among those who are in darkness and under the bondage of sin in the great world of the spirits of the dead (D&C 138:57).

Following the blessing, Brother McConkie wept and said, "It is now all in the hands of the Lord." He affirmed his willingness to do as the Lord should wish.

After we left his home that day, for the first time he took off his clothes and went to bed.

Last Thursday as the Brethren met in the temple, the message came from him and from his Amelia that he was ready now to go. Would we ask the Lord? At the altar that was done. The following day at Amelia's invitation his family knelt around the bed for a final family prayer. His son Joseph was voice. At last they were willing to let him go, and at the very moment they asked the Lord, his passing came. It was a tender and sweet experience for the family.

He Is with His Lord

Where is Bruce McConkie now? He is with his Lord. When the refining process is complete, I know something of how he will appear. He will be glorious! What will he do? Whatever the Lord wills him to do. I believe he shall be, as the revelation describes them, "a chosen messenger, clothed with power and authority to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness" (see D&C 138:30-31).

President Priday of the Provo Temple called to tell me of an experience. When Bruce died, his ninety-five-year-old mother was in the temple doing ordinance work for the dead. This was her daily work. Bruce's sister Margaret rushed to the temple and found her, and there, in that sacred sanctuary, she learned that her noble son was now beyond the veil.

Now he may preach the plan of redemption to complement the sacred ordinance work that this lovely little lady has performed so faithfully for so many years. For the temple workers, that was a sweet experience. President Priday, who knew nothing of my speaking today, said he was just prompted to call to tell me of it.

Now Bruce is gone. What will we do without him? Others, of course, will receive the fiery darts fashioned on the anvils of the adversary. And, in his own words, "the wagon train will move on." His brethren will share the extra burden and "the wagon train will move on!"

If you heard at the last conference the sermons of Elder Nelson and Eider Oaks, who had been duly called to the Quorum of the Twelve, you will know that the Lord is preparing others as he prepared Bruce R. McConkie for the holy apostleship. "The wagon train will move on."

And now, in testimony, let him speak for himself, and let him speak for me, as well:

Let it now be written once again—and it is the testimony of all the prophets of all the ages—that he is the son of God, the Only Begotten of the Father, the Promised Messiah, the Lord God of Israel, our Redeemer and Savior: That he came into the world to manifest the Father, to reveal anew the gospel, to be the great exemplar, to work out the infinite and eternal atonement: and that not many days hence he shall come again to reign personally upon the earth and to save and redeem those who love and serve him.

And now let it also be written both on earth and in heaven, that this disciple, ... does himself also know of the truth of those things of which the prophets have testified. For the things have been revealed unto him by the Holy Spirit of God. And he therefore testifies that Jesus is Lord of all, the Son of God, through whose name salvation cometh.

President Wilford Woodruff included this sentence in his last will and testament: "If the laws of the spirit world permit, and I shall be governed by them, I should like to attend my own funeral."

And I have known other occasions when that was permitted. Should Bruce be here, I would say:

God bless you, our beloved Brother Bruce R. McConkie. We love you deeply, we know that you now are with Him. God grant that all of us may finish the race as you have done, and that one day where He is, and where you are, we may be also, in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.

---
Notas:
[^1] "To show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers." The brass plates of Laban, which Lehi brought from Jerusalem.
