Boyd K. Packer, Let Not Your Heart Be Troubled ( 1978)

29

The Book of Mormon [^1]

It will be our objective to examine the structure of the Book of Mormon, Another Testament of Jesus Christ, and to show from the record itself, in the words of the ancient prophets, what purpose the Lord had for the preservation of the record.

To present the Book of Mormon properly, a missionary or member should know how it is put together and why it is structured in the way it is; for there is something of an obstacle which prevents most beginners from reading the entire book. Following this examination I shall recommend a way for the Book of Mormon to be presented to investigators so as to overcome that obstacle.

I have chosen as a title for this presentation:

"The Things of My Soul"

The source for this will emerge as we proceed. From the title page we read:

The Book of Mormon An account written by the hand of Mormon upon plates taken from the plates of Nephi

and that it was "written by way of commandment, and also by the spirit of prophecy and of revelation.... "

Notice the words commandment, prophecy, and revelation. Then comes this threefold statement of purpose:

Book of Mormon Sources: The Plates

Many records and plates are mentioned in the Book of Mormon (see 1 Nephi 1:17; Mosiah 8:9; 25:5; Helaman 3:15; 3 Nephi 5:19). Of these we will consider five (see "A Brief Explanation about the Book of Mormon," in the front of the book):

The Brass Plates of Laban

First, the brass plates of Laban. When Nephi obtained these plates, he said:

It is wisdom in God that we should obtain these records, that we may preserve unto our children the language of our fathers;

And also that we may preserve unto them the words ... of all the holy prophets, which have been delivered unto them by the Spirit and power of God (1 Nephi 3:19-20; see also 5:13).

Nephi found

that they did contain the five books of Moses, which gave an account of the creation of the world, and also of Adam and Eve, ...

And also a record of the Jews from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah;

and a genealogy of his fathers (1 Nephi 5:11, 12, 14).

Nephi wrote that the plates of brass were "of great worth unto us, insomuch that we could preserve the commandments of the Lord unto our children" (1 Nephi 5:21).

Lehi prophesied "that these plates of brass should go forth unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people who were of his seed," and that they "should never perish; neither should they be dimmed any more by time." (1 Nephi 3:18-19.)

Eight generations later (see Omni 1:14) Lehi's descendants discovered the Mulekites, whose ancestors also had come out of Jerusalem. The Mulekite situation taught a profound lesson. "Their language had become corrupted [because] they had brought no records with them; and they denied the being of their Creator" (Omni 1:17, italics added).

That corruption of language was particularly sad, for there were records of metal and of stone which they could not read.

The Mulekite leader, Zarahemla, was overjoyed to find that the Nephites had the brass plates. Mosiah caused that the Mulekites should be taught his language, so that they could receive the scriptures and their genealogies. Benjamin, prophet-king, taught the value of the sacred records, saying:

I would that ye should remember that were it not for these [brass] plates, which contain these records and these commandments, we must have suffered in ignorance, ... not knowing the mysteries of God (Mosiah 1:3).

Were it not for these things, which have been kept and preserved by the hand of God, that we might read and understand of his mysteries, and have his commandments... even our fathers would have dwindled in unbelief (Mosiah 1:5).

Then Benjamin bore testimony of the record:

These sayings are true, and also ... these records [the brass plates] are true. And behold, also the [small] plates of Nephi, which contain the records and the sayings of our fathers ... are true; and we can know of their surety. (Mosiah 1:6.)

The Large Plates of Nephi

The second record, the large plates of Nephi, which he also called "mine other plates," were largely a secular history handed down through the lineage of the kings (see Jarom 1:14; Words of Mormon 1:10). They are, for the most part, written in the third person. Nephi wrote: "Upon [these] other plates should be engraven an account of the reign of the kings, and the wars and contentions of my people" (1 Nephi 9:4).

The large plates were many in number. In fact, many plates and records which we do not now have are mentioned in the book.

And now there are many records kept of the proceedings of this people, by many of this people, which are particular and very large, concerning them.

Behold, there are many books and many records of every kind, and they have been kept chiefly by the Nephites.

And they have been handed down from one generation to another by the Nephites. (Helaman 3:13, 15-16.)

At least four times in his abridgment of these plates Mormon repeats that he cannot write "a hundredth part" of what is in the records (see Words of Mormon 1:5; Helaman 3:13-16; 3 Nephi 5:8; 26:6).

We know also that these plates contained genealogies (see 1 Nephi 6:1; 19:2; Omni 1:18).

Nephi faithfully kept the secular history on the large plates. After his death these plates were kept by the kings. No doubt they contained a great resource of historical information. They were by no means the most valuable record, however, for Nephi was commanded to keep another account; not a secular history this time, but a record of the ministry. This record was written on the small plates of Nephi.

The Small Plates of Nephi

The purpose of the small plates was best explained when Nephi gave the records to his brother Jacob, for they were to remain with Jacob's seed. Notice that they are written in the first per-SOD.

And he gave me, Jacob, a commandment that I should write upon these [small] plates a few of the things which I considered to be most precious; that I should not touch, save it were lightly, concerning the history of this people....

For he said that the history of his people should be engraven upon his other [large] plates, and that I should preserve these [small] plates and hand them down unto my seed, from generation to generation.

And if there were preaching which was sacred, or revelation which was great, or prophesying, that I should engraven . . . them upon these [small] plates, and touch upon them as much as it were possible, for Christ's sake, and for the sake of our people. (Jacob 1:2-4.)

Did you notice that he was "not to touch (save it were lightly) on the history of the people" but he was to touch upon the sacred things "as much as possible"? To know that is to know how the prophets and Apostles of today must regard the records of our people and whether or not we are obliged to please the world in what we do with them.

Nephi made this clear statement on the relative value of the two histories:

It mattereth not to me that I am particular to give a full account of all the things of my father, for they cannot be written upon these [small] plates, for I desire the room that I may write of the things of God.

For the fulness of mine intent is tbat I may persuade men to come unto the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and be saved

Wherefore, the things which are pleasing unto the world I do not write, but the things which are pleasing unto God and unto those who are not of the world.

Wherefore, I shall give commandment unto my seed, that they shall not occupy these plates with things which are not of worth unto the children of men. (1 Nephi 6:3-6, italics added)

This I do that the more sacred things may be kept for the knowledge of my people.

... I do not write anything upon plates save it be that I think it be sacred. (1 Nephi 19:5-6.)

Again notice why he did as he did:

I have received a commandment of the Lord that I should make these plates, for the special purpose that there should be an account engraven of the ministry of my people (1 Nephi 9:3).

Wherefore, the Lord hath commanded me to make these plates for a wise purpose in him, which purpose I know not.

But the Lord knoweth all things from the beginning; wherefore, he prepareth a way to accomplish all his works among the children of men. (1 Nephi 9:5-6.)

Then this verse from which we take our title:

And upon these [small plates] I write the tbings of my soul, and many of the scriptures which are engraven upon the plates of brass. For my soul delighteth in the scriptures, and my heart pondereth them, and writeth them for the learning and the profit of my children.

Behold, my soul delighteth in the things of the Lord. (2 Nephi 4:15-16, italics added,)

For that very reason, Nephi copied the prophecies of Isaiah from the brass plates onto his small plates. He wrote:

Wherefore I, Nephi, to be obedient to the commandments of the Lord, went and made these plates upon which I have engraven these things.

And I engraved that which is pleasing unto God. And if my people are pleased with the things of God they will be pleased with mine engravings which are upon these plates. (2 Nephi 5:31-32.)

After Nephi died, eight others wrote upon the small plates.

Nephi passed them to his brother Jacob, admonishing him, as already noted, "not [to] touch, save it were lightly, concerning the history of this people," but "if there were preaching which was sacred, or revelation which was great, or prophesying," he should "touch upon them as much as it were possible." (Jacob 1:2, 4.)

The seven chapters Jacob wrote are most precious and include the provoking allegory of the olive vineyard from the writings of the prophet Zenos.

Jacob gave the record to his son Enos, a worthy man who told how he "wrestled before the Lord" and received forgiveness for his sins. His words are worthy of a prophet.

Enos passed the record to his son Jarom, who wrote that the prophets persuaded the people to "look forward unto the Messiah and believe in him to come as though he already was" (Jarore 1:11). Among his concluding words he wrote: "And I, Jarom, do not write more, for the plates are small. But behold, my brethren, ye can go to the other [large] plates of Nephi; for behold, upon them the records of our wars are engraven, according to the writings of the kings." (Jarom 1:14.)

Jarom gave the record to his son Omni, who confessed: "I of myself am a wicked man, and I have not kept the statutes and the commandments of the Lord as I ought to have done" (Omni 1:2). It may seem strange that a book is named after him, but even this self-confessed wicked man knew the sacred nature of the record and delivered it to his son Amaron for safekeeping (see Omni 1:3).

Amaron passed the record on to his brother Chemish, who recorded: "Now I, Chemish, write what few things I write, in the same book with my brother; for behold, I saw the last which he wrote, that he wrote it with his own hand; and he wrote it in the day that he delivered them unto me" (Omni 1:9).

Chemish in due course gave the records to his son Abinadom, who wrote: "I know of no revelation save that which has been written, neither prophecy; wherefore, that which is sufficient is written" (Omni 1:11).

Abinadom's son Amaleki was the last to write on the small plates. A better man than his father, he told how Mosiah discovered the Mulekite people. Amaleki wrote: "Having no seed, and knowing King Benjamin to be a just man before the Lord, wherefore, I shall deliver up these plates unto him." Finally he added, "These plates are full." (Omni 1:25, 30.)

Benjamin, who was both prophet and king, "took [the small plates] and put them with the other [large] plates, which contained records which had been handed down by the kings" (Words of Mormon 1:10).

It was at this point that the small plates of Nephi, the sacred history handed down from father to son, and the large plates of Nephi, the secular history kept by the kings, came together. And they were still together when Mormon found them more than four hundred years later.

When Mormon was a boy of ten, Ammaron (who had received the records from his brother Amos II) told him where they were hidden. He instructed the boy: "When ye are about twenty and four years old . . . ye shall take the [large] plates of Nephi ... and the remainder shall ye leave in the place where they are." (Mormon 1:3-4.)

Mormon began to abridge the large plates. When he came to the reign of King Benjamin, surely he read his testimony that the small plates of Nephi "are true; and we can know of their surety" (Mosiah 1:6).

Can we doubt that Benjamin's testimony inspired Mormon to return to Jashon and look for that precious record? (See Mormon 2:17.)

Mormon wrote:

After I had made an abridgment from the [large] plates of Nephi down to the reign of this king Benjamin, of whom Amaleki spake, I searched among the records which had been delivered into my hands [those words "searched among" assure us that there were many records-see Helaman 3:13-16], and I found these plates, which contained this small account of the prophets, from Jacob down to the reign of this king Benjamin, and also many of the words of Nephi.

And the things which are upon these plates pleasing me, because of the prophecies of the coming of Christ; ...

Wherefore, I chose these things, to finish my record upon them, which remainder of my record I shall take from the [large] plates of Nephi; and I cannot write the hundredth part of the things of my people.

But behold, I shall take these [small] plates, which contain these prophesyings and revelations, and put them [as they were written, without abridgment] with the remainder of my record, for they are choice unto me; and I know they will be choice unto my brethren.

And I do this for a wise purpose; for thus it whispereth me, according to the workings of the Spirit of the Lord which is in me. And now, I do not know all things; but the Lord knoweth all things which are to come; wherefore, he worketh in me to do according to his will.

And my prayer to God is concerning my brethren, that they may once again come to the knowledge of God, yea, the redemption of Christ. (Words of Mormon 1:3-8.)

I have the conviction that Mormon's reading of the small plates of Nephi greatly influenced what he chose from the large plates to include in the rest of his abridgment; for while we have some history of the people, we have much "preaching which [is] sacred, [and] revelation which [is] great, [and] prophesying" (Jacob 1:4).

Being able to choose but a hundredth part, Mormon chose the better part. He was, however, not able to resist putting in a generous amount of military science and tactics-for he was a general. This unusual human insight is also a testimony!

Mormon was drawn to the prophecies concerning the coming of Christ. The inspiration that came to him as he abridged the records resulted in his work being, indeed, another testament of Jesus Christ.

Mormon finished the abridgment and wrote of his last days (see Mormon chapters 1-7). He then suffered death at the hands of the Lamanites (see Mormon 8:3). His son Moroni finished his record (see Mormon 8:3-5). Moroni then abridged the plates of the Jaredites as something of an appendix to the record. Later he wrote the obvious "I have not as yet perished" (Moroni 1:1), and added his own book of Moroni.

The Plates of Mormon

The plates of Mormon, as delivered to Joseph Smith, consisted of the following:

—Mormon's abridgment of the large plates of Nephi —The record of Lehi —The small plates of Nephi, unabridged —The Words of Mormon explaining why he included the small plates —Mormon's abridgment of the remainder of the large plates of Nephi —Mormon's account of the history of his day, completed by Moroni —Moroni's own book —Moroni's abridgment of the twenty-four gold plates, the book of Ether —The title page added by Moroni —The sealed portion

Surely the purposes of the Lord were being worked out when Nephi concentrated on the things of his soul: the preachings which were sacred, and the revelations which were great, and the prophesying; and when Mormon placed the small plates of Nephi, intact, without abridgment, into his record.

Centuries later the Prophet Joseph Smith translated the record of Lehi from the plates of Mormon down to the reign of King Benjamin. Then the manuscript of that translation, consisting of 116 pages, was lost or stolen.

The sacred history on the small plates of Nephi became the providential replacement (see D&C 10:37-46). At that time the Lord consoled Joseph Smith and confirmed the purpose as stated on the title page of the Book of Mormon:

Remember, remember that it is not the work of God that is frustrated, but the work of men (D&C 3:3).

And for this very purpose are these plates preserved, which contain these records-that the promises of the Lord might be fulfilled, which he made to his people;

... That they may believe the gospel and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ, and be glorified through faith in his name, and that through their repentance they might be saved. (D&C 3: 19-20.)

The Christ: The Message of the Book

To present the Book of Mormon properly to others, members and missionaries must know that the message of the book is a testimony to the world that Jesus is the Christ. That message recurs through the pages like a golden thread. Indeed, the Book of Mormon is another testament of Jesus Christ.

Long before Christ was born in the flesh, Nephi recorded visions of His ministry which have no equal in the Old Testament.

Lehi had a vision in which he saw the tree of life (see 1 Nephi chapter 8). Nephi was deeply moved by the things his father had told him. He later wrote: "Believing that the Lord was able to make [these things] known unto me, as I sat pondering in mine heart I was caught away in the Spirit of the Lord" (1 Nephi 11:1). Of the spirit personage who attended him he wrote: "I beheld that he was in the form of a man; yet nevertheless, I knew that it was the Spirit of the Lord" (1 Nephi 11:11).

Nephi desired "to behold the things which [his] father saw." Before that was granted, there was a test, a question. The Spirit said to him: "Believest thou that thy father saw the tree of which he hath spoken?" The answer shows Nephi's great faith: "Yea, thou knowest that I believe all the words of my father" (1 Nephi 11:1-5).

After he was shown the vision of the tree of life, the Spirit asked, "What desirest thou?" (1 Nephi 11:10.) When Nephi replied that he wanted to know the interpretation of that vision, there was then opened to him a supernal vision in which he saw

—A virgin, beautiful and fair. —The virgin bearing a child in her arms. —The ministry of the Son of God. —John the Baptist, the prophet who should prepare the way. —Twelve others following Jesus. —The heavens opened and angels ministering unto the Twelve. —The multitudes blessed and healed. —Christ lifted upon the cross and slain for the sins of the world. —The wisdom and the pride of the world and the fate of those who fight against the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb. (See 1 Nephi 11:1-36.)

That testimony of Christ is repeated through the pages of Book of Mormon history up to the crowning event: the appearance of the Lord to the Nephites in fulfillment of prophecy.

The account of His appearance to the Nephites is consistent with the New Testament account of

His ministry in Jerusalem. He called and gave authority to twelve. He announced that the law of Moses was fulfilled. He taught as He taught in Jerusalem. He blessed and healed the people. He blessed their little children. He instituted the sacrament as He had in Jerusalem, with that one crucial difference—when they brought the bread, "He brake and blessed it" (3 Nephi 18:3) instead of blessing it first, as He had in Jerusalem.

He did many other things—two of which, of great significance, are often overlooked.

First, He dictated to the Nephites what we have in our Bible as the third and fourth chapters of Malachi and caused them to be written. Then He expounded them. These chapters contain prophecies of the coming of Elijah and the turning of the hearts of the fathers to the children and of the children to their fathers. That return of Elijah and the bestowal of the sealing power is the foundation of the sacred work for the dead. It is of consummate importance to all mankind in this dispensation of the fulness of times. (See 3 Nephi chapters 24 and 25.)

Second, He gave a commandment to them concerning the writings of the prophet Isaiah:

And now, behold, I say unto you, that ye ought to search [the words of Isaiah]. Yea, a commandment I give unto you that ye search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah.

For surely he spake as touching all things concerning my people which are of the house of Israel; therefore it must needs be that he must speak also to the Gentiles.

And all things that he spake have been and shall be, even according to the words which he spake. (3 Nephi 23:1-3.)

Twenty-one chapters of Isaiah are duplicated in part or in whole in the Book of Mormon. They are in Old Testament prophecy language. Much of it is symbolism and allegory. They are not easily read nor understood. They form a barrier to the casual reader.

Most people who open the cover of the Book of Mormon do not feel able to go beyond the Isaiah chapters. They lay the book aside, thinking perhaps they will try another day. If they complete reading the book at all, it is after several attempts to surmount this unusual barrier.

Few people indeed ever complete the reading of the Book of Mormon on the first try.

Let me illustrate.

The Book of Mormon begins, "I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents," and so forth. At chapter 20 of 1 Nephi stands a barrier-two chapters of Isaiah. If the reader goes beyond that, to chapter 8 of 2 Nephi, another similar barrier looms like a mountain.

The reader becomes discouraged and lays the book aside. Then, in the future, he tries once more- "I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents," and so on-and it happens again. And yet a third time, perhaps a fourth. Finally, the persistent reader surmounts that barrier. Then he does not stop reading in Alma or Helaman or 3 Nephi; he finishes the Book of Mormon.

The twenty-one chapters are not the only quotations from Isaiah in the Book of Mormon. Single verses and paraphrases appear throughout the book.

Isaiah is the most quoted prophet in the New Testament. The Lord Himself quoted Isaiah seven times, the Apostles forty times more. In addition there are ninety partial quotes or paraphrases of Isaiah's words.

Isaiah is the most quoted prophet in the Doctrine and Covenants. Sixty-six quotations from thirty-one chapters of Isaiah attest to the singular importance of this great prophet.

All of this confirms that the Lord had a purpose in preserving Isaiah's words, notwithstanding they have a winnowing effect upon the harvest gathered in from all nations, and thus some precious souls may be lost.

The Book of Mormon has great converting power only if it is read. It is not too difficult to place copies of the book. It is another thing to have it read.

It is our conviction that an answer to that challenge rests in the way the Book of Mormon is first introduced to the investigator or reintroduced to the members of the Church.

The Book of Mormon is often introduced as "a history of the ancient inhabitants of the American continent, the ancestors of the American Indians." We have all seen missionaries about the world with street boards displaying pictures of American Indians or pyramids and other ruins in Latin America.

That introduction does not reveal the contents of this sacred book any better than an introduction of the Bible as "a history of the ancient inhabitants of the Near East, the ancestors of the modern Israelites" would reveal its contents.

The presentation of the Book of Mormon as a history of the ancestors of the American Indians is not a very compelling nor a very accurate introduction. When we introduce the Book of Mormon as such a history-and that is the way we generally introduce it-surely the investigator must be puzzled, even disappointed, when he begins to read it. Most do not find what they expect. Nor do they, in turn, expect what they find.

We have a study which shows that most investigators read very few pages in the Book of Mormon. And, sadder still, most converts do little more. Very few of them finish reading the book.

We can do much better than we have hitherto done in introducing the Book of Mormon. In doing so we can foster in the heart of the missionary and the member a reverence for the sacred testament.

A Suggestion on Placing Copies of the Book of Mormon

We present now this suggestion.

In substance, the following message should accompany the placement of each Book of Mormon by every missionary and by every member. Every missionary should be familiar enough with the Book of Mormon to present such an introduction in his own words. We recommend that this introduction not be memorized nor read.

Each one receiving a copy of the book by purchase or by gift should be told:

"Except for the Bible, the Book of Mormon is different from any book you have read. It is not a novel. It is not fiction. For the most part it is not difficult to read. However, like all books of profound value, it is not casual reading. But if you persist, I assure you it will prove to be the most rewarding book you have ever set your mind to read.

"The Book of Mormon is not biographical, for not one character is fully drawn. Nor, in a strict sense, is it a history.

"While it chronicles a people for a thousand and twenty-one years and contains the record of an earlier people, it is in fact not a history of a people. It is the saga of a message, a testament. As the influence of that message is traced from generation to generation, more than twenty writers record the fate of the individuals and civilizations that accepted or rejected that testament.

"The history in the Book of Mormon is incidental. There are prophets and dissenters, and genealogies to move them from one generation to another, but the central purpose is not historical.

"As the saga of the message is traced, one writer requires 160 pages to cover 38 years (Alma), while seven other writers together use only six pages to cover over three hundred years (Enos, Jarom, Omni, Amaron, Chemish, Abinadom, Amaleki). In either case, the testament survives.

"The Book of Mormon is a book of scripture. It is another testament of Jesus Christ. It is written in biblical language; the language of the prophets.

"For the most part it is in easy-flowing 'New Testament' language, with such words as spake for spoke, unto for to, with 'and it came to pass,' with thus and thou and thine.

"You will not read many pages until you catch the cadence of the language and the narrative will be easy to understand. As a matter of fact, most teenagers readily understand the narrative of the Book of Mormon.

"Then, just as you settle in to move comfortably along, you will meet a barrier. The style of the language changes to 'Old Testament' style; for interspersed in the narrative are chapters reciting the prophecies of the Old Testament prophet Isaiah. They loom as a barrier, like a roadblock or a check point beyond which the casual reader, prompted by idle curiosity, generally will not go.

"You, too, may be tempted to stop there, but do not do it! Do not stop reading! Move forward through those difficult-to-understand chapters of Old Testament prophecy, even though you understand very little of it. Move on, if all you do is skim and merely glean an impression here and there. Move on, if all you do is look at the words. Soon you will emerge beyond those difficult chapters to the easier 'New Testament' style which is characteristic of the rest of the Book of Mormon.

"Being forewarned about that barrier, you will be able to surmount it and finish reading the book.

"You will follow the prophecies of the coming of the Messiah through generations of the Nephite people to that day when those prophecies are fulfilled and the Lord appears to them. You will be present, through eyewitness accounts, at the ministry of the Lord among the 'other sheep' of whom He spoke in the New Testament (see John 10:16).

"Thereafter you will understand the Bible as never before. You will come to understand the Old Testament and know why we, as a people, hold it in such esteem. You will come to revere the New Testament, to know it is true. The account of the birth and life and death of the man Jesus as recorded in the New Testament is true. He is the Christ, the Only Begotten Son of God, the Messiah, the Redeemer of mankind.

"This testament, the Book of Mormon, will verify the Old and the New Testaments.

"Perhaps only after reading the Book of Mormon and then returning to the Bible will you sense that the Lord had purpose in preserving the words of Isaiah in the Book of Mormon. notwithstanding they become a barrier to the casual reader.

"Christ quotes Isaiah seven times in the New Testament-the Apostles forty more times. One day you may revere these prophetic words in both books.

"Those who never move beyond the Isaiah chapters miss the personal treasures to be gathered along the way. For instance. a knowledge of

The purpose of mortal death. The certainty of life after death. What happens when the Spirit leaves the body. The description of the resurrection. How to receive and retain a remission of your sins. What hold justice may have on you, or mercy. What to pray for. Covenants and ordinances. Many other jewels that make up the gospel of Jesus Christ.

"It is beyond that barrier, near the end of the record, that you find a promise addressed to you and to everyone who will read the book with intent and sincerity. After you have read the Book of Mormon, you become qualified to inquire of the Lord, in the way He prescribes in the book, as to whether the book is true. Then you will be eligible, on the conditions He has established, to receive a personal revelation."

That is the introduction—that is the message—in substance, which every member and every missionary should present in his own words with every copy of the Book of Mormon.

To review, the person receiving the book should understand that

—Except for the Bible, the Book of Mormon is different from any book he will read.

—It is not a novel, it is not fiction, it is not biographical.

—It is not the history of a people but a saga of a message.

—It is written in scriptural language.

—There is a barrier of difficult-to-understand Old Testament prophecy, the writings of Isaiah.

—The reader is to persist through that barrier.

—There is the promise of a personal testimony to those who will persist.

To present such an introduction, the member and the missionary must know something of how and why the Book of Mormon is structured as it is. Learning that will increase the member's and the missionary's testimony of the book and allow them to present it with increased conviction and inspiration and testimony. Thus they may convey the book with a personal testimony of its truth as in no other way. Then we will have lifted the book from among all other books. We will have given it a dignity and a virtue that it fully deserves.

The history in the book has importance because it affirms that these were real events, happening to real people. We too are real people caught up in real events relating to this testament of Jesus Christ that are of equal magnitude. For we are custodians of that record.

Except we revere, above all else, preaching which is sacred and revelation which is great, and prophesying, we may be diverted from the ministry entrusted to us. Therefore we should soberly consider our responsibility, lest we fall into that circumstance which befell the Church so many times in the Book of Mormon days, when "because of their iniquity the church had begun to dwindle; and they began to disbelieve in the spirit of prophecy and in the spirit of revelation; and the judgments of God did stare them in the face" (Helaman 4:23).

This "voice from the dust" teaches, indeed warns us, the living prophets and Apostles, what we must do, and what we must not permit to be done with this sacred testament of the Lord.

When Nephi first began to keep his plates, the Lord instructed him that the record was to be "handed down from one generation to another, or from one prophet to another, until further commandments of the Lord" (1 Nephi 19:4).

Responsibility for the Book of Mormon, as well as for the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, and the other revelations, rests upon the prophets and Apostles today. They must be the things of our soul. We must convey them to the coming generation. In this we have no accountability but to Him who is our Master, whose church this is, and whose servants we are.

All of this we present as a testimony that the Book of Mormon is fully worthy of the unparallelled endorsement given to it in the Doctrine and Covenants (17:6) wherein the Lord said to the Three Witnesses:

He [Joseph Smith] has translated the book, even that part which I have commanded him, and as your Lord and your God liveth it is true.

---
Notas:
[^1] "To show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers." The brass plates of Laban, which Lehi brought from Jerusalem.
