nelson’s Complete Book of

BIBLE MAPS AND CHARTS

call to repentance, threat of judgment, and promise of reward to those who respond. The author is Christ; He speaks to those who have accepted His sacrifice and tri-umph, but who are failing in spiritual maturity or faithfulness.

The seven ChurChes Of revelaTiOn

Commendation Criticism instruction Promise

Ephesus Rejects evil, Love for Christ no Do the works you did The tree of life

(2:1-7) perseveres, has longer fervent at first

patience

Smyrna Gracefully bears None Be faithful until The crown of life

(2:8–11) suffering

death

Pergamos Keeps the faith of Tolerates immorality, Repent Hidden manna and

(2:12-17) Christ idolatry, and heresies

a stone with a new

name

Thyatira Love, service, faith, Tolerates cult Judgment coming; Rule over nations

(2:18–29) patience is greater of idolatry and keep the faith and receive morning

than at first immorality

star

Sardis Some have kept the A dead church Repent; strengthen Faithful honored and

(3:1-6) faith

what remains clothed in white

Philadelphia Perseveres in the faith None Keep the faith A place in God’s

(3:7–13)

presence, a new

name, and the New

Jerusalem

Laodicea None Indifferent Be zealous and Share Christ’s throne

(3:14–22)

repent

Nelson’s Complete Book of Bible Maps and Charts © 1993 by Thomas Nelson, Inc.

fOur differenT views On revelaTiOn

The reader’s approach to Revelation as a whole is conditioned by conclusions on two important interpretive questions—the historical referent of the visions in 6:1— 18:24, and the character of the thousand-year period depicted in chapter 20.

The visions of 6:1—18:24 are usually viewed in one of four different ways. The “Preterist” (from the Latin term for “past”) interpretation understands this passage to refer to events which occurred during the period of the Roman empire. The “His-torical” interpretation understands Revelation to present a panoramic outline of church history from the apostolic era to the Second Coming of Christ. According to the “Idealist” approach, the Book of Revelation depicts in symbolic fashion the great spiritual struggle between good and evil. Finally, the “Futurist” interpretation views Revelation as a description of future events which will accompany the end of the age.

Whatever our view of the Millennium, we should focus on preparing for the 452 Lord’s Second Coming and His eternal reign (Heb. 10:13; 1 Cor. 15:25–27).

Maps and Charts.indd 452

1/18/10 4:26:32 AM
