J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Introduction

This book began because of a personal need. Having heard the hundreds of inspirational and fascinating stories about Joseph Smith throughout our lives, it one day occurred to us that we knew almost nothing about him historically. We had no historical framework within which to place the many incidents of Joseph's amazing life. We did not understand how the events were connected with each other, or what other events were transpiring simultaneously. We thought that it would be useful for students, teachers, and researchers of the life of Joseph Smith to have a historical outline within which they could place these events. However, with the exception of the rather brief chronology printed in the annual Church Almanac, we could not find anything published since Andrew Jenson's chronology of 1914. We began to compile our own list, beginning with a few key dates per year.

Then the list grew.

After going through Joseph Smith's six volumes of personal history three times (plus the seventh by his successors), reading all the current biographies about Joseph Smith side by side, and studying dozens of other books and articles about him, we were able to put this chronology in its present form.

We were surprised to learn that most authors seem to agree on the basic facts. It was not where or when a certain revelation was given or decision made that was debated, but why it was given, what effect it had on the early Saints, and what outside influences might have affected Joseph's thoughts at that time. Each author seemed to have taken the known facts, surrounded them with historical and national environment, given more or less credence to earlier pro- or anti-Mormon claims, and then added his or her own interpretation and exploration of the motivations and effects of a certain event.

It therefore seemed that—in contrast—a chronological listing of those known facts, with as little personal interpretation as possible, might be a useful aid in the study of Church history.

We realize that in the case of a person as controversial as Joseph Smith, even the mere printing of "nothing but facts" is a highly subjective undertaking. Since it is impossible to print every fact, the mere selection of which facts to print will betray the bias of the compiler. We have included every date of major importance in Joseph's dealings as a religious leader (and numerous dates of minor importance). Such items as "sold a cow" or "sliding on ice" with the children, are included as random samples of the other kinds of activities that Joseph was involved in.

Of course the information included here is intended to be only a sketch. For details the reader will have to go to the many biographies available. (We have included an extensive bibliography in the back of this volume.) Probably most helpful in finding details on day-to-day events is the History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, by Joseph Smith himself. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1978.)
