J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Jan. 1829

Joseph Knight, Sr., takes Joseph Smith, Sr., and Samuel H. Smith in a sleigh to visit Joseph in Harmony. Knight gives Joseph some money with which to buy paper.

Feb. 1829

During his father's visit, and for him, Joseph receives D&C 4.

Mar. 1829

Martin requests a revelation and Joseph receives D&C 5. By this time, with Emma as scribe, Joseph has translated only 16 pages.

Apr. 5, 1829

Oliver Cowdery hears about Joseph Smith and goes to Harmony to meet him.

Apr. 7, 1829

Joseph begins to translate once again, with Oliver Cowdery as scribe.

Apr. 1829

Joseph receives a revelation (D&C 6) through the Urim and Thummim for Oliver Cowdery. Oliver confesses that he has prayed for a witness about the plates; the revelation is an answer to his prayers. Joseph and Oliver have a difference of opinion about John the apostle—did he die or continue to live? Joseph prays and through the Urim and Thummim receives D&C 7. They continue to translate and Oliver desires the power to translate. Joseph receives D&C 8. Oliver tries unsuccessfully to translate, and Joseph receives D&C 9.

Apr. and May 1829

Joseph and Oliver continue to translate throughout the month of April. After a while local townspeople begin to gather and form into mobs, but they are counteracted by the influence of the Hale family, who have recently become more friendly toward Joseph.

May 15, 1829

The Aaronic Priesthood is restored by John the Baptist. Joseph baptizes Oliver and Oliver then baptizes Joseph. Joseph is to be called the first Elder of the Church and Oliver is to be called the second.

May 25, 1829

Samuel H. Smith, Joseph's younger brother, visits Joseph in Harmony, becomes convinced of the truthfulness of the gospel, and is baptized.

Soon afterwards Hyrum Smith visits, and Joseph, through the Urim and Thummim, receives D&C 11. Shortly thereafter, Joseph Knight, Sr., travels 30 miles from Colesville to bring such supplies as lined writing paper, grain, mackerel, potatoes, and tea, enough to last until they are finished translating. For Knight, Joseph receives D&C 12.

June 1829

Joseph inquires of the Lord concerning his "zealous friends and assistants in the work," the Whitmers. Joseph receives D&C 14 for David Whitmer; D&C 15 for John Whitmer; and D&C 16 for Peter Whitmer, Jr. Joseph and Oliver baptize Hyrum Smith and David and Peter Whitmer in Seneca Lake.

About June 1, 1829

Joseph and Oliver move to the Peter Whitmer home in Fayette (Waterloo), Seneca Co., N. Y. Oliver has been writing to his friend David Whitmer about the progress of the translation, and when the people around Harmony start giving them trouble, Oliver asks David for assistance. David, finding his fields miraculously plowed during the night, sets out in a wagon to bring Joseph and Oliver to the Whitmer home. Joseph continues here until the translation is complete, being supplied free room and board by the generous Whitmer family. Oliver is the primary scribe. As to the manner of translation, Joseph's most elaborate statement was, "Through the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated the record by the gift and power of God." (HC 4:537.) He also stated in 1831, "it was not intended to tell the world all the particulars of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon." (HC 1:220.) Some contemporaries such as Emma Smith, Martin Harris, and David Whitmer did, however, explain the mode of translation in more detail. (See CHC 1:127-33; FWK 1:70, 190-206; DH 73-74; EE 50-51; PN 29, 80; PC 39-56; JSMS 101-2.)

June 11, 1829

Joseph deposits the title page and obtains the copyright.

June 26, 1829

E. B. Grandin, having turned down an offer to publish the Book of Mormon, publishes the title page in the Wayne Sentinel.

Late June 1829

After reading in the Book of Mormon about three witnesses (Ether 5:2-4, 2 Nephi 11:3), Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris ask Joseph to inquire of the Lord to see if they can be those three witnesses. Joseph receives D&C 17, saying they may if they rely on the word of the Lord with "full purpose of heart." "Not many days after" Joseph and the three retire to the woods to pray for the witness. After much prayer they are visited by an angel who shows them the plates. They draw up "The Testimony of the Three Witnesses" and sign it. (HC 1:54-57.) Joseph exclaims, "Now they know for themselves, that I do not go about to deceive the people, and I feel as if I was relieved of a burden which was almost too heavy for me to bear, and it rejoices my soul, that I am not any longer to be entirely alone in the world." (LMS 152.)

"Soon after" eight other witnesses also see and handle the plates. (HC 1: 57-58.) "Meantime we continued to translate, at intervals." (HC 1:59.) Joseph and Oliver, anxious to receive the promised Melchizedek Priesthood, pray about it in Father Whitmer's home. In conjunction with this, Joseph receives D&C 18, in which Oliver and David are called to help determine who the Twelve Apostles should be.

Between May 15, 1829, and April 1830 (probably June 1829)

The Melchizedek Priesthood is restored to Joseph and Oliver by Peter, James, and John. They ordain Joseph and Oliver to the higher priesthood and holy apostleship.

July 1, 1829

According to David Whitmer, the translation at the home of his parents began June 1, 1829, and was completed July 1, 1829. After the translation is completed, Oliver Cowdery copies an entire second manuscript in case of robbery or destruction of the first.

July-Aug. 1829

Joseph tries to get a printer for the book. Having been turned down by E. B. Grandin, publisher of the Wayne Sentinel, Joseph goes to Thurlow Weed, who also turns him down, and then to Elihu F. Marshall, who agrees to publish it if proper security is guaranteed. Grandin then consents to do the printing if Martin Harris will guarantee payment.

Aug. 25, 1829

A contract is drawn up with Grandin to print 5,000 copies of the book for $3,000. Martin Harris mortgages his farm to Grandin, agreeing to pay the full amount within 18 months or Grandin can sell the farm.

John H. Gilbert, who set the type, said the book was printed between August 1829 and March 1830. Joseph instructs Cowdery to be very careful with the manuscript: he is to make a second copy, allow only one copy out of his hands at a time, deliver only a few pages at a time—with a guard (Hyrum Smith delivered the first 24 pages, having hidden them under his vest), and leave a guard on duty day and night.

Summer 1829

As soon as 64 pages are printed up, Solomon Chamberlain takes the printed but unbound pages and heads on a mission of 800 miles through Canada (probably the first mission of the Church) telling people to prepare for the coming forth of the full Book of Mormon. When the translation is completed, Joseph returns the plates to the angel Moroni.

Sept. 2, 1829

A new paper, the Reflector, begins publication in Palmyra. Abner Cole, using the name Obadiah Dogberry, begins this paper to fight against Mormonism and to discourage the sale of the forthcoming book. Since Cole is printing at the Grandin press, he easily gets copies of printed pages of the Book of Mormon and, beginning in January 1830, publishes whole sections of "Joe Smith's Gold Bible." The matter is eventually submitted to arbitration and Cole is forced to stop printing.
