J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Jan. 2, 11, 13, 22, 1830

The Reflector publishes plagiarized sections of "The First Book of Nephi" and "Alma. "

Winter 1830

According to David Whitmer, when Martin Harris has problems raising the money to pay for the printing, Hyrum suggests that they go to Canada and sell the copyright. Hyrum asks Joseph, and Joseph receives a revelation that agrees. When Hiram Page and Oliver return from Toronto, having been unsuccessful, they ask Joseph why the revelation failed, and he says, "Some revelations are of God; some revelations are of men; and some revelations are of the devil." (CHC 1: 162-66.)

Mass meetings are held in Palmyra to boycott the printing of the book, and Grandin becomes so nervous about his money that he suspends printing. Joseph returns to Palmyra to urge Martin to pay the printer in full, but Martin's wife is opposed, so he refuses

Mar. 1830

Joseph receives D&C 19, in which Martin Harris is told to repent and pay his debt to the printer.

Mar. 26, 1830

The Wayne Sentinel announces that the Book of Mormon has been published and advertises its sale. Within a few days, Martin Harris is on the streets of Palmyra, trying to sell copies for $1.25. Harris is by now legally separated from his wife. As soon as the books are printed, Solomon Chamberlain takes eight or ten copies and goes on a preaching mission, selling one. On this mission he meets Brigham and Phinehas Young at a reformed Methodist conference.

Mar. 29, 1830

Hyrum and Samuel Smith are suspended from the local Presbyterian church for nonattendance.

Apr. 1830

Joseph receives D&C 20.

Apr. 6, 1830

The "Church of Jesus Christ" is officially organized in the home of Peter Whitmer, Sr., in Fayette, N. Y. Although about thirty people are present, only six—Joseph, Oliver, Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Samuel H. Smith, and David Whitmer—become the first legal members of the Church. After prayer, they sustain Joseph and Oliver, who ordain each other to the office of elder in the Church. The sacrament of bread and wine is passed. They lay their hands on each member of the Church for the gift of the Holy Ghost and confirmation as a member of the Church. Some prophesy and all praise the Lord and rejoice exceedingly. Joseph receives D&C 21.

They ordain the other brethren to various offices and leave the house, go to the river, and baptize several, including Joseph's parents, Martin Harris, and Orrin Porter Rockwell. (A&L 47 explains the changes in the name of the Church until it reached the present name—see May 3, 1834, and April 26, 1838. ENS, Jan '71, 39-56, carries excellent paintings of the events on this day.)

Apr. 9, 1830

W. W. Phelps, an anti-Masonic newspaper publisher, buys a Book of Mormon. He later meets Joseph, determines to join the Church, is thrown into prison by some Presbyterian traders to keep him from it, and is finally baptized a year later.

Apr. 11, 1830

First Sunday meeting is held at the home of Peter Whitmer, Sr. Oliver Cowdery gives the first public discourse since the organization of the Church. Six persons are baptized.

Apr. 18, 1830

Seven more are baptized by Oliver Cowdery.

Apr. 1830

Joseph receives D&C 22 and 23. He visits the Knights in Colesville, N. Y. After several meetings, Newel Knight cannot bring himself to pray vocally. He returns from the woods, where he attempted—unsuccessfully—to pray, and his limbs and face become very distorted; he is tossed around the room under the power of Satan. Joseph lays his hands on him and rebukes the devil in the name of Christ, and Newel is healed miraculously in the presence of eight or nine neighbors. This is the first miracle in the Church.

Sometime between June 1830 and Oct. 1830

Joseph begins his translation of Genesis 1:1—5:8, which is now Pearl of Great Price, Moses 2:1—5:43a.

May 1830

Newel Knight visits Joseph Smith in Fayette, N. Y., and is baptized one week after the miracle.

June 1830

The Reflector publishes a series of anti-Book of Mormon articles, satirizing it under the title "The Book of Pukei." (See FWK 1:266-98.)

June 9, 1830

The first conference of the Church is held in the Whitmer home, Fayette, N. Y. About 30 attend and the power of the Holy Ghost is manifested; many prophesy, see visions, etc. Shortly thereafter, 11 are baptized, including three of Joseph Smith's siblings.

June 27-28, 1830

The Prophet visits Colesville and the Knight family. On Sunday they dam up the river to baptize over a dozen people, but a mob gathers and tears the dam down, threatening persecution and harm. Early Monday morning the Saints dam up the river again and baptize thirteen people, including Emma Smith. A mob of 50 surround them and watch.

June 28, 1830

During an evening meeting to confirm new members, Joseph is arrested for disorderly preaching. He is taken to trial in South Bainbridge, five miles from Colesville, where James Davidson and John Reid defend him. Josiah Stowell, his former employer, testifies in his behalf. (J. Stowell was a loyal supporter of Joseph although he never moved west with the Saints—he was 61 and had extensive land holdings.) Immediately after Joseph is acquitted in the first trial, he is arrested a second time, taken back to Colesville, and tried again. After the gathering of a mob and a good deal of alarm, he is again acquitted. Joseph writes that during the trials the Lord comforted the Saints by revealing a "precious morsel": Moses 1:1-42, "The Visions of Moses." (HC 1:98-101.)

June 30, 1830

Samuel H. Smith sets out on one of the first Church missions, trying to sell the Book of Mormon. After much discouragement, he leaves one at the home of John P. Green, the brother-in-law of Brigham Young. He also leaves one with Phinehas H. Young, a brother of Brigham.

July 1830

Joseph and Oliver farm in Harmony, Pa. During this time Joseph receives D&C 24, 25, and 26.

Aug. 1830

Joseph begins to arrange and copy the revelations he has received to date. Oliver moves to the Whitmer home in Fayette, N. Y., and writes Joseph a letter stating that D&C 20:37 is in error and commanding Joseph in the name of God to change it. Joseph goes to the Whitmer home and talks with the Whitmers and Oliver, convincing them that the verse is acceptable.

About this time Isaac Hale, Emma's father, is convinced by a Methodist preacher that Joseph is an imposter. Newel Knight and wife visit Joseph Smith for Knight's confirmation. Joseph sets out to buy wine for the sacrament; he meets a heavenly messenger and is told not to buy wine or strong drink from his enemies. (D&C 27; the first four paragraphs were written in August and the remainder was written in September.)

Joseph and the Whitmers visit the Colesville Branch. They pass miraculously unrecognized through a hostile mob. Since there is also persecution in Harmony, Joseph and his family move to the Whitmer home in Fayette.

Aug. 31, 1830

Hyrum Smith arrives in Fayette, having walked twenty-five miles with a man named Parley P. Pratt, who borrowed a Book of Mormon from a Baptist deacon named Hamblin and read it excitedly. He has now come to N. Y. wanting to meet the Prophet.

Sept. 1830

Hiram Page has been receiving revelations through a seer stone and has convinced Oliver Cowdery and the Whitmers that these were true revelations from the Lord. In response to this Joseph receives a revelation to Oliver Cowdery (See D&C 28.) Later, in the presence of six elders, Joseph receives D&C 29.

Sept. 1, 1830

Parley P. Pratt is baptized by Oliver Cowdery.

Sept. 19, 1830

Parley P. Pratt baptizes his brother Orson on Orson's nineteenth birthday.

Sept. 26-29, 1830

The second conference of the Church is held at Fayette, N. Y., 62 members attend. On the first day there is much disagreement and discussion about Hiram Page's seer stone but the Church votes unanimously to sustain Joseph Smith. Joy unspeakable and the manifestations of the Holy Ghost attend the three-day conference. During this conference Joseph receives revelations for John, David, and Peter Whitmer, Jr., and Thomas B. Marsh. (See D&C 30, 31)

Fall 1830

After the conference Hyrum goes to Colesville with his family on his mission. The day he leaves, Joseph Smith, Sr., is imprisoned because of a $14 debt owed to a Quaker. The man offers to forgive the Prophet's father if he will renounce the Book of Mormon, but he refuses. A mob threatens the home of Lucy Mack Smith, but she is saved when 19-year-old William returns and scares the mob away. Joseph, Sr., ends up spending 30 days in jail, but he preaches the gospel while there and converts two men.

Oct. 1830

Joseph receives D&C 32, instructing Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson to accompany Oliver Cowdery and Peter Whitmer on their mission to the Lamanites in the wilderness. These four missionaries leave and preach to Indians near Buffalo, then travel 200 miles until they reach the area of Kirtland, Ohio. Joseph also receives D&C 33.

Oct. 15, 1830

The four missionaries arrive in Mentor, Ohio, and introduce the gospel to Sidney Rigdon. Within a week they preach in Mentor, Euclid, and Kirtland and baptize 17. Sidney Rigdon refuses to debate his former follower, Parley P. Pratt, but agrees to study the Book of Mormon alone, and after two weeks Rigdon also is converted.

Oct. 21, 1830

Joseph translates Gen. 5:28-37, which becomes Moses 5:43-51. The translation of Genesis continues sporadically throughout the following three years.

Oct. 31, 1830

The four missionaries in Kirtland move from Sidney Rigdon's home to the communal family farm of Isaac Morley and there confirm a dozen more members in the Church in Kirtland.

Nov. 4, 1830

Orson Pratt comes to meet Joseph. Joseph receives D&C 34 for him.

Nov. 7, 1830

Missionaries confirm about 30 more new members in Mayfield, Ohio. By this time they have also baptized Sidney Rigdon's friend John Murdock and Dr. Frederick G. Williams, who gives them cash and a horse and accompanies them on their mission to the Lamanites.

About Nov. 20, 1830

The missionaries leave three branches of the Church in Ohio, having baptized about 130 people. Kirtland is presided over by Lyman Wight (another former follower of Rigdon), Warrensville by John Murdock, Mentor by Sidney Rigdon. (The one disciple of Rigdon whom they were not able to convert was Orson Hyde, who preached against the Book of Mormon for awhile and was not baptized until Oct. 30, 1831.)

Dec. 10, 1830

Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge, a successful Painesville hatter, arrive in Fayette from Kirtland to meet Joseph. Joseph later writes that Partridge is "a pattern of piety and one of the Lord's great men." (HC 1:128.)

Dec. 11, 1830

Joseph baptizes E. Partridge. (HC 1:129.)

Mid-Dec. 1830

In response to a visit from Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge (see Dec. 10, below), the Lord reveals to Joseph D&C 35 and 36. To encourage the small flock of 70 members in Colesville and surrounding areas, the Lord reveals to Joseph some of the lost books of the Bible. Joseph records the Prophecy of Enoch (what is now Moses 7:1-69). Joseph also receives D&C 37.
