J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Jan. 1832

Joseph recommences the translation, working until the time of the next conference. During this time he asks the Lord for an explanation of 1 Corinthians 7:14 and receives D&C 74.

Jan. 10, 1832

Until this time Joseph and Sidney Rigdon have been in the southern part of Ohio, preaching the gospel, after which they return to Hiram. Joseph receives D&C 73, telling the elders to continue preaching until their next conference.

Jan. 25, 1832

Conference is held at Amherst, Ohio. For the first time Joseph is sustained and ordained as President of the High Priesthood. He then receives D&C 75.

Feb. 16, 1832

Joseph returns to Hiram, Ohio, and continues translating the New Testament with Sidney Rigdon as scribe. While translating John 5:29, they wonder if there isn't some sort of gradation in rewards in the next life because of people's varied degrees of righteousness. In response to this question they receive a series of visions, known as D&C 76. About this vision Joseph writes, "The sublimity of the ideas; the purity of the language; the scope for action; . . . the rewards for faithfulness, and the punishments for sins, are so much beyond the narrow-mindedness of men, that every honest man is constrained to exclaim: 'It came from God. "'

According to Philo Dibble, this vision was given in the presence of about 12 others. Joseph and Sidney would stare into space. One would say "What do I see?" And then he would say what he was seeing and the other would say "I see the same"; and then they would repeat the process. At the end of the vision, Dibble reports that Joseph sat calmly and firmly while Sidney was pale and limp, and that Joseph remarked with a smile, "Sidney is not used to it as I am." Sidney stayed up that night recording the vision. (HC 1:252-53; HA 67-68.)

Feb. 16, 1832-Feb. 2, 1833

Joseph translates John 5:30-Revelation 2.

About Mar. 1, 1832

Joseph continues to translate the scriptures. In response to Joseph's questions about the Revelation of John, the Lord gives him D&C 77.

Mar. 3, 1832

Hyrum sells six copies of the Book of Mormon to a peddler and receives as pay ten yards of calico, some cotton cloth, four tin pans, some other tins, and a six-pound cheese. The normal price was eight books for $10, or two books for $2. 50.

Mar. 8, 1832

Joseph ordains Jesse Gause and Sidney Rigdon to be his counselors in the Presidency of the High Priesthood.

Before Mar. 20, 1832

About this time several people apostatize from the Church and become enemies of Joseph. Simonds Ryder (see June 1831) leaves the Church because a note signed by Joseph and Sidney spelled his last name with an "i" instead of a "y." Ryder deduces that if the Spirit could be mistaken in spelling his name, it could also be mistaken in other matters it had given to Joseph. Leaving the Church with Ryder are Eli Johnson, Edward Johnson, and John Johnson, Jr. (three sons of John Johnson, Sr., in whose house Joseph was then staying). These men accuse the Prophet of immorality and of trying to steal their father's wealth by teaching him the law of consecration. In addition, Ezra Booth accuses Joseph of too much joking and jesting and of losing his temper. Perhaps for this reason, the Lord begins using pseudonyms in the revelations. As Joseph continues to translate the Bible he receives D&C 78. Following that, he receives D&C 79, 80, and 81.

The original handwritten copy of D&C 81 mentions Jesse Gause as the one called to be the counselor to Joseph Smith, but his name has been crossed out and the name of Frederick G. Williams inserted. Although Elder Williams is called as a counselor to Joseph Smith at this time, he will not be set apart until March 1833.

About this time Joseph receives a letter from Missouri which states that the printing press is set up and ready to print the Evening and Morning Star. A prospectus of that paper is included.

Mar. 24, 1832

Joseph is sitting up late with his 11-month-old adopted son, who has the measles, when about a dozen men break into the house, drag the Prophet from the house, strip his clothes from him, and begin to pour hot tar all over his body. At this time he sees others of the mob pulling Sidney Rigdon from his house. Because Sidney is unconscious, Joseph supposes that he is dead and begins to plead for his own life. The mobbers break a vial of nitric acid against his mouth, trying to poison him. In the process they break a tooth, causing him to have a slight whistle for life. One man says, ''That's the way the Holy Ghost falls on folks!" and jumps on Joseph, ripping off his remaining clothes and scratching his fingers into Joseph's skin. Joseph pulls the tar away from his mouth so he can breathe. Two men rush out of the house to help Joseph and, each assuming that the other is from the mob, start attacking each other. In this fight, the collar bone of John Johnson, Sr., is broken. When the mob finally flees, Joseph tries to return to the house; when Emma sees him she thinks the tar is blood and faints. Joseph spends the night with his friends, who pull and rip off the pieces of tar and skin. Simonds Ryder, the Johnson sons, and Ezra Booth are thought to have led the mob.

Mar. 25, 1832

The people assemble for Sunday worship and Joseph preaches a sermon, never mentioning the episode of the night before, even though he knows that several of the mob are in the audience. That day he baptizes three.

Sidney Rigdon, whose head was dragged across the frozen and rough ground until he became unconscious from the tarring and feathering, goes delirious for several days. The morning after the tarring and feathering, he asks his wife for a razor with which to kill Joseph, and then asks Joseph for a razor with which to kill his wife. Several days later Sidney preaches that the keys have been taken from this people and will be given to another people. He also will not allow praying. Joseph eventually has to take away Sidney's preaching license until he repents and returns to a normal state of mind.

Mar. 29, 1832

Joseph's adopted son, Joseph Murdock Smith, dies from a cold caught when he was pulled from Joseph's arms during the mobbing. (Some claim this child was the first martyr in the Church; see BYS, W '74, 205.)

Apr. 1, 1832

Joseph leaves Hiram, Ohio, for Missouri with Newel K. Whitney, Peter Whitmer, and Jesse Gause. They go around Kirtland for fear of another mob. A mob does follow them as far as Cincinnati, 300 miles away. The Missouri Saints felt jealousy of the Kirtland Saints because Joseph had spent so much time in Kirtland and had picked so many of the leaders from there.

Apr. 4, 1832

Joseph buys paper for the newspaper being printed by W. W. Phelps. He sends Emma a letter telling her to stay at the Whitney store in Kirtland. However, when Emma arrives, an aunt who is visiting the Whitneys makes it impossible for her to stay there. During Joseph's absence she is shuffled from the home of one member to another; she is very lonely, having no place to stay and having just lost a child.

Apr. 14, 1832

Brigham Young is baptized, confirmed and ordained an elder in Mendon, N. Y. He also converts his brother Joseph, who later becomes president of the First Quorum of Seventy. Two days after Brigham's baptism, Heber C. Kimball is also baptized.

Apr. 24, 1832

Joseph arrives in Independence, Mo., by stage and greets the brethren there.

Apr. 26, 1832

A conference is held at which Joseph is acknowledged as the President of the High Priesthood just as he had been at the Amherst conference on the previous January. He receives D&C 82.

Apr. 27, 1832

Joseph transacts business to make the Saints more independent of their enemies, who seem to be moving in all around them.

Apr. 28-29, 1832

Joseph visits and enjoys a reunion with the Colesville Saints, who have settled in Kaw Township.

Apr. 30, 1832

Joseph returns to Independence and receives D&C 83.

May 1, 1832

A council of the Church meets in Independence and decides to print only 3,000 copies of the Book of Commandments (10,000 had originally been planned at the Hiram Conference of Nov. 1, 1831). W. W. Phelps is assigned to print the hymns selected by Emma Smith. It is decided that the Church stores in Kirtland and Independence should be joined as one firm, with a different company name for each.

Between May 6 and June 1832

Joseph leaves Independence with Sidney Rigdon and Newel K. Whitney and travels to Kirtland, mostly by stage. At one point in the journey the horses bolt; Bishop Whitney attempts to jump from the coach and breaks a leg. Sidney proceeds to Kirtland while Joseph and Bishop Whitney stay in Greenville, Indiana, for four weeks while the latter's leg heals. Joseph sets his leg and administers to him. At one point Joseph eats something poisonous and vomits blood so badly that he dislocates his jaw. Bishop Whitney administers to him at once and he is healed but loses much hair from his head. The day they are ready to leave, Joseph, as a seer, prophesies the events of the upcoming day, and they all come to pass.

June 1832

Joseph arrives back in Kirtland and spends most of the summer translating the Bible. The first issue of the Evening and Morning Star is published in Independence, with W. W. Phelps as editor. The press is 12 miles from the western boundary of the United States and 120 miles west of any other press in the country. Publication in Missouri continues until July 1833.

June 6, 1832

While staying in Greenville, Joseph writes a very personal letter to Emma, stating that he has visited a grove just out of the town almost daily to "give vent to all the feelings of my heart in meditation and prayer I have Called to mind all the past moments of my life and am left to morn [and] Shed tears of sorrow for my folly in suffering the adversary of my Soul to have so much power over me as he has had in times past but God is merciful and has forgiven my Sins and I rjoice that he Sendeth forth the Comforter unto as many as believe and humbleeth themselves before him. . . . God is my friend in him I shall find comfort I have given my life into his hands I am prepared to go at his Call I desire to be with Christ I Count not my life dear to me only to do his will. . . ." (BYS, Su '71, 517-20; for other personal notes by Joseph Smith, see ENS, Ap '77, 11.)

July 1832

The second issue of the Evening and Morning Star is published, stating that Zion (Missouri) is too poor and that the Saints should not come from Ohio without consulting with their local bishop.

July 20, 1832

Frederick G. Williams commences working as Joseph's scribe, and continues until January 1836.

July 1832

The Upper Missouri Advertiser begins publication by W. W. Phelps as a weekly paper for the Missouri Saints.

Aug. 19 1832

Jesse Gause sets out on an eastern mission with Zebedee Coltrin.

Aug. 19, 1832

Zebedee Coltrin returns to Kirtland because of illness. Jesse Gause (set apart as Joseph's counselor on March 8, 1832) continues east and soon disappears from all Church history records.

Sept. 22-23, 1832

At this time many pairs of elders are returning from their successful eastern missions, and Kirtland is filled with great joy. Joseph and six elders receive D&C 84.

Oct. 1832

Joseph settles pregnant Emma and adopted daughter Julia in a house (formerly a store) owned by Newel K. Whitney and A. S. Gilbert. Joseph and Bishop Whitney take a short trip to Albany, Boston, and New York. They negotiate a loan for $15,000 or $20,000 in goods for the Church's new venture of a general store in Kirtland. When Joseph returns to Kirtland he sets up the store, but it fails miserably because he is overly generous. If he turns down people's credit, they leave the Church; when he decides that the worth of a soul is more important than the worth of dry goods, he extends credit to almost anyone and the store soon fails.

Oct. 13, 1832

While in New York Joseph writes a very tender and personal letter to Emma showing his concern over her delicate health during the last stage of her pregnancy, and expressing his fascination with New York City. (See BYS, W '74, 205.)

Nov. 1832

The Evening and Morning Star announces that there are 830 members in Missouri.

Nov. 6, 1832

Joseph Smith III is born in Kirtland to Joseph and Emma after a very hard labor. Joseph is their first child to live. Just after the son is born the Prophet returns from his eastern trip.

Nov. 8, 1832

Brigham Young, Joseph Young, and Heber C. Kimball of Mendon, N. Y., arrive in Kirtland to meet Joseph Smith for the first time. They find him chopping and hauling logs in the woods. That evening they have a meeting, and during prayer Brigham begins speaking in tongues. Some ask Joseph Smith about it and he says it is the pure Adamic language. Joseph records this as the first time he has heard the gift of tongues in the Church. (HC 1:295-297.)

Summer 1831-Nov. 27, 1832

Sometime between these dates, the first part of Joseph's personal history is recorded by Frederick G. Williams. This record includes the first presently known written account of the first vision.

Nov. 27, 1832

Being concerned about the mechanics of the law of consecration as it is being practiced in Missouri, Joseph sends a letter to W. W. Phelps in Independence. Part of his communication is later published as D&C 85.

Dec. 1832

At this time there are many national troubles, especially between the government of the United States and the state of South Carolina. President Andrew Jackson's protective tariff has been opposed by South Carolina; and on Nov. 24, 1832, the legislature of South Carolina declares that as of Feb. 1, 1833, Jackson's tariff will no longer apply to that state, and that they will secede if President Jackson tries to enforce the law. On Dec. 10 President Jackson issues a proclamation against South Carolina and threatens to march forty thousand government troops against them. During this crisis, on Christmas day 1832, Joseph receives D&C 87, the Civil War prophecy.

Dec. 6, 1832

Joseph receives D&C 86.

Dec. 27, 1832

Joseph receives D&C 88, "The Olive Leaf which we have plucked from the Tree of Paradise, the Lord's message of peace to us." (HC 1:316.) The Saints are commanded to build a house to the Lord.
