J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Jan. 4, 1833

Joseph writes a long letter to New York newspaper editor N. E. Seaton. The letter explains the plan of God in the latter days, the coming bloodshed, and the reasons for the plagues that are covering the land (such as the Asiatic cholera). Joseph says, "I think that it is high time for a Christian world to awake out of sleep. . . . this is what has caused me to overlook my own inability, and expose my weakness to a learned world. . . . I step forth into the field to tell you what the Lord is doing, and what you must do to enjoy the smiles of your Savior in these last days." (HC 1:312-16.)

Jan. 14, 1833

A conference is held in the Kirtland Mills (Kirtland, Ohio). Orson Hyde and Hyrum Smith are appointed to write a letter to Zion (Missouri) telling the people not to complain against Joseph, to repent, that they are loved by the Kirtland Saints, and that the School of the Prophets will commence in two or three days. Joseph writes to W. W. Phelps in Independence, sending him D&C 88, the "Olive Leaf," and telling him to make the Star more interesting: "For if you do not render it more interesting than at present, it will fall, and the Church suffer a great loss thereby." (HC 1: 316-17.)

Winter 1833

Joseph spends most of the winter translating the scriptures, sitting in conferences, writing letters, and attending the School of the Prophets. Brigham Young, Joseph Young, and Heber C. Kimball spend the same time on a mission to the area around Kingston, Canada. They baptize 45 persons and organize three branches.

Jan. 22-23, 1833

A conference is held with several high priests and elders. Joseph speaks in another tongue, as do other elders. The next day they assemble again and participate in the ordinance of the washing of feet. (See John 13:4-15.) Each elder washes his own feet and then Joseph washes their feet. Joseph receives a father's blessing from Joseph Smith, Sr. F. G. Williams then asks permission to wash Joseph's feet, and does so. They partake of the sacrament.

Jan. 24, 1833

According to Zebedee Coltrin, the School of the Prophets commenced on this day.

Feb. 2, 1833

On this day Joseph records, "I completed the translation and review of the New Testament, on the 2nd of February, 1833 and sealed it up, no more to be opened till it arrived in Zion." (HC 1:324.) It appears that Joseph translated Genesis 24:42a-Malachi 4:6 between this date and July 2, 1833.

Feb. 12, 1833

Joseph writes a second letter to Mr. Seaton (see Jan. 4, 1833) requesting that he publish Joseph's whole letter, not just part of it, as it has been given by a commandment of God.

Feb. 26, 1833

A solemn assembly is held in Zion (Missouri), to discuss D&C 88 and the various letters of Jan. 14, 1833.

Feb. 27, 1833

Joseph receives D&C 89. According to Brigham Young the School of the Prophets was meeting in Joseph's kitchen, a small room in the house attached to the store owned by Bishop Whitney. As the brethren would gather after breakfast, they would immediately light their pipes, filling the room with smoke, or they would begin to chew tobacco, spitting it on the floor. After the complaints of his wife, Joseph prayed about the problem and received the above revelation. (See JD 12:157-58.) (For the health fads of the day, see A&L 95.)

Mar. 8, 1833

Joseph receives D&C 90.

Mar. 9, 1833

Joseph has come to the portion of the scriptures called the Apocrypha, and wonders whether or not to translate it. He receives D&C 91.

Mar. 15, 1833

Brother Lake's preaching license is withdrawn because he claimed to receive revelations. He was under the influence of an evil spirit. The same day Joseph receives D&C 92.

Mar. 18, 1833

The School of the Prophets is held with great joy. Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams are ordained by Joseph to be members of the First Presidency. This is the first official organization of the First Presidency since the Church was restored. The sacrament is passed and Joseph promises that the pure in heart will see a heavenly vision; many do.

Apr. 1833

The School of the Prophets closes until fall.

Apr. 6, 1833

In Jackson County, Missouri, about 80 Saints gather at the ferry on the Big Blue River on the Jackson County border line to celebrate and worship. They rejoice in the fact that it is the third anniversary of the organization of the Church and 1800 years since the day Christ died. This is the first time the birth of the Church is celebrated. They also discuss, and publish in the Star, the signs of the last days, including the fact that 60 million people have died of the Asiatic cholera in the past 15 years.

Apr. 13, 1833

Joseph answers a letter to Brother Jared Carter stating that "it is contrary to the economy of God for any member of the Church . . . to receive instructions for those in authority, higher than themselves." (HC 1:338.)

Apr. 18, 1833

A mob of 300 "old settlers" gathers at Independence to decide on plans to destroy or expel the Mormons from Jackson County. After they spend all day trying to decide on various plans, their liquor gets the worst of them and they break up in a "Missouri row." These "old settlers," largely from the southern states, came to Jackson County before the Saints, and could not move on because anything west of Missouri had been designated by President Jackson as Indian territory. They watched with some resentment as ever-increasing numbers of the religiously oriented northerners flocked into Jackson County claiming that God had given the county exclusively to them. Acts of violence began as early as the spring of 1832, when the homes of some Saints were stoned and windows broken. In the fall of 1832, some haystacks were burned, houses shot into, and people insulted; and as recently as February 20, a mob of 50 or 60 men armed with whips and guns attacked at least one household. The group on this date constitutes the first organized resistance to the Mormons in Missouri.

Apr. 21, 1833

Joseph writes to the brethren in Zion, telling them not to print any of the new translation of the Bible in the Star, that it will be printed in a volume by itself, and the New Testament and Book of Mormon will be bound together in one volume.

Apr. 30, 1833

A conference of high priests is held in the schoolroom in Kirtland, and various business is attended to.

May 6, 1833

On this date Joseph receives D&C 93. He also receives D&C 94.

May 25, 1833

Joseph's uncle John Smith and cousin George A. Smith from Potsdam, N. Y., arrive in Kirtland. They are the only relatives of the family of Joseph Smith, Sr., who have thus far received the gospel, outside of Joseph's immediate family.

June 1, 1833

There is great excitement in Kirtland as the Saints anticipate the commencement of the building of the house of the Lord. Although the Church is very poor, a letter is sent throughout the Church asking for subscriptions for the house. Joseph receives D&C 95.

June 4, 1833

A high priests conference considers the matter of what to do with the French farm. Joseph prays and receives D&C 96.

June 5, 1833

George A. Smith hauls the first load of stone for the building of the temple. Others commence digging the foundation. (For stories of the great sacrifice and dedication made by all connected with the building of the Kirtland Temple, see WEB 125-27; OFW 67-70.)

June 6, 1833

A conference of the High Priesthood is held, and Orson Hyde is chosen as a clerk to the First Presidency.

June 25, 1833

Joseph writes to Bishop Partridge in Missouri about the law of consecration, stating that there must be a balance between the will of the bishop and the will of the people, that it must be done by the mutual consent of both parties. He also mentions plans for a second edition of the Book of Mormon.

The plat for the city of Zion is made known and the plan of temples is sent to the brethren in Zion. (See the description in HC 1:357-62. For an analysis of Joseph's city plan and of the later cities actually built by the Saints and a comparison of them to many other rural American city plans of his day, see BYS, W '77, 223-33.) Joseph says that when one city is full, they will build another, "and so fill up the world in these last days . . . for this is the city of Zion." (HC 1:358.)

Summer 1833

About 1200 Saints have gathered in Jackson County, Mo. The School of the Prophets was established there. P. P. Pratt writes that all is peaceful and plentiful, there are no law suits or broken promises, robberies, idleness, Sabbath breaking—"In short, there has seldom if ever, been a happier people upon the earth than the Church of the Saints now were." (PPP 93-94.)

July 1833

The Evening and Morning Star publishes an announcement titled "Free People of Color." So that any Mormon Negroes can migrate into Missouri without being captured as slaves, the announcement quotes the law that allows free Negroes to come and go unhindered. The southern settlers in Missouri, whose animosities toward the Mormons have been building all along, are infuriated by this announcement. They join together to form a secret constitution to rid themselves of the Mormons "peaceably if we can, forcibly if we must." They accuse the Mormons of (1) pretending to claim personal revelations, miracles, tongues, and thereby blaspheming God; (2) being deluded fanatics; (3) increasing in numbers daily; (4) being the very dregs of society; (5) raising sedition among the slaves; (6) inviting free Negroes and mulattoes of other states to become Mormons and move to Missouri; (7) declaring that God has given the state of Missouri to them. (HC 1:374-76.)

July 2, 1833

Joseph writes to the Brethren in Zion stating among other things that his translation of the Bible has just been finished.

July 16, 1833

The Evening and Morning Star publishes an extra edition stating that the previous article entitled "Free People of Color" has been misunderstood. The intention of the article was not only to stop free Negroes from immigrating to Missouri, but also to stop them from joining the Church altogether.

July 20, 1833

The retraction does nothing to alleviate the animosity of the other settlers. On this day several hundred assemble and declare that the Mormons must leave at once. They proceed to W. W. Phelps's printing press and destroy it and tear down his house. The Book of Commandments, which was on the press at the time, is destroyed, and a few people gather up extra pages from which come the extremely rare 160-page copies of the book presently extant. The mob then covers Bishop Edward Partridge and Charles Allen with acid and tar and feathers. Bishop Partridge is so meek that the crowd is humbled and finally stops its attack. The Rev. Pixley, one of the leaders of the mob, gives the Saints 15 minutes to leave town.

July 23, 1833

The mob again attacks the Saints in Independence. Six saints—John Corrill, John Whitmer, W. W. Phelps, A. S. Gilbert, Bishop Partridge, and Isaac Morley—offer themselves as a ransom for the Saints if the mob promises not to pursue the other Saints. They are forced to sign a treaty stating that half the Saints will leave Jackson County by January 1, 1834, and the rest will leave the following April. It is evident that the Lt. Gov. Lilburn Boggs is playing a large part in the mob action. Boggs, in fact, has contended with the Mormons for purchase of several of the lands that Mormons now own. In Kirtland at this time, 24 elders—six at each corner—set the cornerstone of the Kirtland Temple.

Aug. 1833

Joseph receives D&C 99.

Aug. 2, 1833

Joseph receives D&C 97.

Aug. 6, 1833

Joseph receives D&C 98, part of which explains the Lord's law of retribution.

Between Aug. 1833 and Sept. 4, 1833

Sometime between these dates Oliver Cowdery leaves Missouri and travels to Kirtland with the terrible news of the persecutions in Jackson County.

Sept. 4, 1833

Joseph writes to Vienna Jaques in Independence, thanking her for her pecuniary offerings and also stating in reference to the Missouri persecutions, "I am not at all astonished at what has happened to you, neither to what has happened to Zion, and I could tell all the whys and wherefores of all these calamities. But alas, it is in vain to warn and give precepts, for all men are naturally disposed to walk in their own paths." (HC 1:407-9.) (Earlier in the year Joseph had written several letters to Missouri telling the brethren to repent or terrible troubles would come.)

Sept. 11, 1833

A council meets in Kirtland to consider the expediency of a press there and proposes that the paper be called the Latter Day Saint Messenger and Advocate. The Star will also be transferred to Kirtland, with Oliver Cowdery as editor. A council is held in Jackson County, Missouri. Bishop Partridge is acknowledged as head of the Church in Zion, and ten high priests are chosen to preside over the ten branches there. W. W. Phelps sings a song about the tribulations of the Nephites in tongues and Lyman Wight interprets the tongues.

Sept. 28, 1833

Orson Hyde and W. W. Phelps are dispatched to Governor Dunklin of Missouri with a petition, signed by almost all of the members there, that outlines the history of the abuses against the Mormons, including the destruction of the press, the tarring and feathering, the offering of six lives as ransom and the members' being forced to sign the illegal agreement to leave the state.

Oct. 1, 1833

Joseph sends Oliver Cowdery to New York with $800 to buy a new press.

Oct. 5-Nov. 4, 1833

Joseph, Sidney Rigdon, and Freeman Nickerson leave Kirtland on a mission to Upper Canada and return to Kirtland. Their mission follows this itinerary:

Elk Creek (Oct. 8).

Westfield (Oct. 10).

Westfield with Nash, an infidel (Oct. 11).

At Perrysburg, N. Y., with Father Nickerson (Oct. 12).

Lodi, Canada (Oct. 14).

Upper Canada (Oct. 18).

Mount Pleasant, near Brantford County (Oct. 20).

Colburn Village (Oct. 22).

Colburn, Waterford, and Mount Pleasant (Oct. 24).

Joseph preaches at Mount Pleasant and baptizes twelve (Oct. 27).

Sacrament, confirmation, two are baptized (Oct. 28).

Two are baptized and confirmed; the gift of tongues is experienced (Oct. 29).

They leave for Kirtland (Oct. 29).

They reach Buffalo (Nov. 1).

They reach Kirtland at 10 A.M. (Nov. 4).

Oct. 11, 1833

Joseph, on this mission, records in his journal that he has "much anxiety about my family." (HC 1:419.)

Oct. 12, 1833

Joseph receives D&C 100 "while Joseph and Sidney are on the mission in Perrysburg, N. Y. "

Oct. 19, 1833

Governor Dunklin of Missouri answers the petition of the Saints, advising them to go to the local justices of the peace for protection and to sue in the local courts for property damage.

Oct. 20, 1833

The Church officials in Missouri announce their intentions to defend themselves, having purchased powder and lead in Clay County. The Missourians look upon this as breaking the treaty agreement of July 23, 1833.

Oct. 26, 1833

A mob of about 50 meet together and vote "to a hand to move the Mormons." (CHC 1:343.)

Oct. 30, 1833

The Saints receive an offer from lawyers Wood, Reese, Doniphan, and Atchison to defend the Saints for the sum of one thousand dollars (two hundred and fifty dollars each).

Oct. 31-Nov. 7, 1833

The mobs begin a reign of terror in Missouri.

Oct. 31, 1833

A mob of 50 attacks houses west of the Big Blue River, whipping and stoning women, men, and children.

Nov. 1, 1833

On this Friday night, a mob moves to attack the Colesville Branch, which is located on the prairie about 13 miles west of Independence. Two advance spies contact Parley P. Pratt and hit him on the head with their guns, drawing blood. The other Saints are aroused and capture these two, keeping them for the night. This causes the rest of the mob to postpone their attack. Violence breaks out against the Saints' homes in Independence. The home of A. S. Gilbert is destroyed. The Gilbert and Whitney store is destroyed; goods are thrown everywhere. Other houses are attacked and windows are broken, with Saints whipped and driven into the wilderness.

Nov. 2, 1833

The Saints in Independence move a half mile away from the city into the wilderness and camp there in groups of 30. Another mob attacks the Saints located on the Big Blue River, six miles from Independence. David Bennett, who has been sick in bed, is beaten terribly, and one of the mob receives a bullet in his thigh.

Nov. 3, 1833

Several Saints go to the justices of the peace, who refuse to issue peace warrants because they fear the mob. The friends of the Saints warn them to leave Independence at once because the mob has warned that tomorrow "would be a bloody day." (HC 1:429.)

Nov. 4, 1833

The mobs, 40 or 50 with guns, begin their destruction. They meet 30 Mormons, with 17 guns, led by David Whitmer. At sunset there is a battle, and two of the Missourians are killed (including one who had claimed, "With ten fellows, I will wade to my knees in blood, but that I will drive the Mormons from Jackson County"). Andrew Barber is also shot and dies the next day (the first Mormon to die in battle). Philo Dibble is wounded and lies dying for several days until Newel Knight administers to him; then Dibble immediately vomits up several quarts of blood and the bullet with which he was wounded. That evening the Gilbert and Whitney store is totally demolished, and several of the Saints are advised to go to jail, as that is the only safe place in town. Later that night, however, they return home. (HC 1:429-32.)

Nov. 5, 1833

Early in the morning A. S. Gilbert, Isaac Morley, and John Corrill are taken to prison and shot at on the way. Rumors spread that Lt. Gov. Boggs is behind the mob. Rumors also spread that the three prisoners will be shot, and 100 Saints gather to protect them. Before a full-scale war breaks out, however, the Saints decide to surrender their arms if the Missourians also promise to disarm. The Mormons later discover that the leaders of these harassers seem to be Lt. Gov. Boggs, the Rev. Isaac McCoy, Judge S. D. Lucas, and almost every other local government official. In the evening of November 5 and 6 about 150 women and children flee to the prairie with only six men to protect them.

Nov. 6, 1833

W. W. Phelps, A. S. Gilbert, and William E. McLellin send a letter to Governor Dunklin explaining their side of the Missouri problems.

Nov. 7, 1833

The Saints are driven from Jackson County to Clay County, Ray County, Van Buren County (and from Van Buren County to Lafayette County). On both sides of the Missouri River, 1200 homeless Saints gather, destitute, camping out in tents.

Nov. 13, 1833

At 4:00 A.M. a meteoric shower fills the sky with "the falling of the stars." The destitute Saints camped along the Missouri look upon this as a favorable sign from heaven. According to one source, in the fall of 1833 Joseph Smith, Jr., had prophesied, "forty days shall not pass, and the stars shall fall from heaven." (HA 69; HC 1:439.)

Nov. 19, 1833

Joseph records some personal notes and his personal opinion of his counselors: Sidney Rigdon is a great and good man but has several faults so that one cannot place confidence in him; Frederick G. Williams "is one of those men in whom I place the greatest confidence and trust, for I have found him ever full of love and brotherly kindness." (HC 1:443-44.)

Nov. 22, 1833

Don Carlos Smith, Joseph's youngest brother, comes to live with Joseph to learn the art of printing.

Nov. 25, 1833

Orson Hyde and John Gould arrive from Missouri to tell Joseph and the brethren in Kirtland the terrible news of the happenings there.

Dec. 1, 1833

Oliver Cowdery and Newel Whitney arrive in Kirtland with a press from the East.

Dec. 5, 1833

Joseph receives a letter from W. W. Phelps further outlining the Missouri persecutions. About this time Joseph writes Bishop Partridge in Missouri instructing him to seek redress at the law but not to sell any Jackson County lands.

Dec. 6, 1833

The Missouri elders petition Governor Dunklin for assistance in restoring them to their homes, for military protection, and for a court of inquiry once it is safe for Mormons to testify. This includes the statement that the protection of the Saints in Jackson County by force of the militia must be made to last until the Saints can receive "strength from our friends to protect ourselves." (HC 1:452.)

Dec. 10, 1833

Joseph writes to the persecuted Saints in Missouri, stating that "when we learn your sufferings, it awakens every sympathy of our hearts; it weighs us down; we cannot refrain from tears, yet we are not able to realize, only in part, your sufferings." (HC 1:453-56.)

Dec. 12, 1833

A letter arrives stating that the Saints who had moved to Van Buren County will also be driven from there.

Dec. 15, 1833

W. W. Phelps writes to Joseph that Gov. Dunklin will restore the Saints to Jackson County, but that he has no constitutional power to protect the Saints once they have been restored to the county, and the mob is swearing to kill them if they return. (There is evidence that this becomes the underlying motivation for the march of Zion's Camp in May 1834-to protect the Saints once they have been restored, not to restore them by force, as is commonly supposed. See BYS, Su '74, 406-20.)

Dec. 16, 1833

Joseph receives D&C 101.

Dec. 18, 1833

The press is dedicated and the first issue of the Evening and Morning Star is published, with Oliver Cowdery as editor. Joseph Smith, Sr., is ordained the first patriarch of the Church. The Prophet records his personal blessings upon his parents and his brothers (including the statement concerning the pride of his brother William, which will prove to be prophetic in the troubles that occur during December 1835 and January 1836).

Dec. 24, 1833

Four aged families are driven out of Independence, Missouri. These are Revolutionary War veterans, and one was a bodyguard to George Washington.

Dec. 26, 1833

A Church court is held in Kirtland. Three persons are excommunicated and two others repent.

Dec. 27, 1833

The remains of the press in Independence are sold, and $300 of that money goes to lawyers for fees.

Dec. 29, 1833

In Richland, New York, Elders Zera Pulsipher and Elijah Cheney call at the home of Wilford Woodruff. He is at work, but his wife tells him of the preaching meeting that the elders will hold that evening. When he hears of the meeting he goes at once to the sermon and stands and bears testimony and is converted.
