J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Jan. 1, 1834

The scattered Saints in Missouri hold a conference in Clay County with Bishop Partridge presiding. They decide to send Lyman Wight and Parley P. Pratt as messengers to Kirtland.

Jan. 8, 1834

Work is progressing rapidly on the temple in Kirtland. However, threats of mob violence become so bad that guards sleep at the temple with their rifles. At one A.M. a cannon owned by the enemies of the Church fires 13 rounds. The Church in Kirtland is poverty stricken because of the great expense of the temple building.

Jan. 11, 1834

Joseph and five others in Kirtland pray (1) that the Lord will protect their lives; (2) that the Lord will protect the lives of those in the United Order; (3) that Joseph will be given the victory over the threats against his life by apostate Doctor Philastus Hurlburt; (4) that the Kirtland bishop will get enough money to pay off the Church's debts; (5) that the printing press will be protected; and (6) that the Lord will deliver up Zion.

Jan. 22, 1834

The elders in Kirtland send a long letter of comfort and exhortation to the Saints in Missouri.

Jan. 28, 1834

Joseph prays again for protection from Doctor Hurlburt. (Hurtburt's threats will eventually result in a trial—see April 4, 1834.)

Jan. 31, 1834

Joseph prays that the Star might get 3,000 new subscribers within the next three years.

Feb. 4, 1834

Gov. Dunklin of Missouri writes to Elders Phelps, Morley, Whitmer, Partridge, Corrill, and Gilbert, stating that although he sympathizes with the Saints, he regrets to say that the president of the United States alone has the power to call out the militia, and Dunklin himself has too little power to help.

Feb. 12, 1834

A high priests and elders council is held in Kirtland. Joseph explains that a man's heart must be pure before judging any matter. He explains the strict propriety of councils held in ancient days as compared with the present situation where one man will be uneasy, another sleeping, another praying.

Martin Harris is tried before the court for accusing Joseph of not understanding the Book of Mormon, of wrestling too much, and of drinking when he was translating the Book of Mormon. Martin Harris repents, stating that he meant that these things happened before the book was translated. He is forgiven. Leonard Rich is also called before the council for breaking the Word of Wisdom and for selling revelations at extortionate prices. He confesses and is forgiven.

Feb. 17, 1834

The first stake of the Church is organized in Kirtland. The minutes of that first high council meeting are eventually published as D&C 102.

Feb. 18, 1834

Joseph reviews the minutes of the first high council meeting. He ordains two assistant presidents and 12 high councilmen. Joseph Smith, Sr., and John Johnson, Sr., give their sons special blessings.

Feb. 19, 1834

The first case is brought before the high council. Ezra Thayre accuses Curtis Hodges, Sr., of preaching so loudly and inarticulately that several of the people ran to the Church to see if someone was hurt. Hodges admits his error, repents, and says "he had learned more during this trial than he had since he came into the Church." He is forgiven. (HC 2:33-34.)

Feb. 20, 1834

At a meeting of the high council it is decided that no official member of the Church is worthy to hold an office if he breaks the Word of Wisdom once it has been properly explained to him. Three Saints in Missouri return to Jackson County briefly and are severely beaten with clubs by a mob.

Feb. 22, 1834

Parley P. Pratt and Lyman Wight arrive in Kirtland, Ohio, having traveled the eight hundred mile journey from Missouri on foot and in utter poverty.

Feb. 24, 1834

Elders Pratt and Wight report to the brethren in Kirtland that there has been no progress toward the recovery of Mormon possessions in Jackson County in the past three months; Gov. Dunklin promised to give the Saints an armed force to guard them while they returned to Jackson, but refused to keep that force in Jackson as a continued protection of them; unless some other force of the Saints were there, they would be driven out again. Twelve Mormon witnesses under protection of 50 members of the Liberty Blues (the militia ordered out by Gov. Dunklin at the request of the Mormons) assemble at Independence for court proceedings for their lost lands. They find that there is no hope of criminal prosecution in Independence against the Missourians. Joseph receives D&C 103, which commands him to organize a group of men to go down to Missouri.

Feb. 26-Mar. 28, 1834

Joseph goes east to obtain volunteers for the march to Zion.

Feb. 26 Joseph leaves Kirtland with Parley P. Pratt.

Feb. 27 They stay at Brother Roundy's. Joseph receives several letters from missionaries in Canada that tell him of their great success there.

Feb. 28 They stay with a kind stranger.

Mar. 1 They arrive in Westfield.

Mar. 2 Sunday. Parley P. Pratt preaches to the small branch in the morning. Joseph preaches in the afternoon.

Mar. 4 They travel to Villanova.

Mar. 5 They reach Brother Nickerson's. Joseph is filled with the spirit of prophecy; several volunteer to go to Zion.

Mar. 6 Another meeting is held at Brother Nickerson's. Some unbelievers cause the meeting to end in complete confusion.

Mar. 7 They reach Ellicotville. There is no place to stay, so they travel on another mile in the mud and rain.

Mar. 8 They reach Palmersville.

Mar. 9 Joseph preaches at the schoolhouse.

Mar. 10 They stop over with Warren A. Cowdery (Oliver's brother) in Freedom, N. Y. ; after preaching, one Methodist is baptized.

Mar. 11 Heman T. Hyde is baptized.

Mar. 12 They travel 36 miles to Father Bosley's.

Mar. 14 They stay at Father Beaman's (who had been a friend of Joseph's even before the Book of Mormon was published).

Mar. 17 A conference of elders is held in Avon, N. Y. Joseph outlines the purpose of the mission.

Mar. 19 They begin the journey back to Kirtland.

Mar. 20 Joseph finds a man in China, N. Y., who agrees to keep them for the night for money. Joseph comments that "there are more places for money than for the disciples of Jesus, the Lamb of God. "

Mar. 21 They reach six miles east of Springville. They reach Vinson Knight's in Perrysburgh.

Mar. 23 They arrive at Father Nickerson's in Perrysburgh; meeting is held.

Mar. 25 They reach Westfield.

Mar. 27 They meet Sidney Rigdon in Springfield.

Mar. 28 Joseph reaches Kirtland to find that his family is well; Parley P. Pratt continues his journeying with another companion. (HC 2:40-45; PPP 108-13 describes Elder Pratt's feelings about traveling with Joseph.)

Mar. 31, 1834

A young man, Ira J. Willis, goes into Jackson County, Missouri, looking for a stray cow. He is captured by Moses Wilson, who, with six other men, whips Willis in a cruel and savage way. Joseph writes, "May God reward Moses Wilson according to his works." (HC 2:46.)

Apr. 1-9, 1834

Joseph goes to Chardon, Ohio, for the court case of Philastus Hurlburt, who has threatened Joseph's life. Hurlburt loses the case and is forced to pay a $200 to $300 bond and keep the peace for six months.

Apr. 10, 1834

The Missouri Saints send a petition to the president of the United States with 114 signatures asking redress for the Jackson County expulsion. Between January 9 and May 15, 1834, the Saints send literally dozens of petitions and letters to various U. S. government officials (in accordance with D&C 101:79-90). (Copies of many of these are in HC 1:472-93.) The United Order in Kirtland is dissolved by order of the high council. Each person is given his own stewardship.

Apr. 11, 1834

Joseph attends a meeting wherein Brother Tyler is restored to the full fellowship of the Church.

Apr. 12, 1834

Joseph spends the day fishing near Lake Erie and visiting the brethren.

Apr. 13, 1834

Joseph is sick and unable to attend his Sunday meetings.

Apr. 15, 1834

Joseph hauls hay and plows and sows oats for Frederick G. Williams.

Apr. 17, 1834

Sidney Rigdon speaks in the Kirtland Temple about the redemption of Zion, and Joseph asks members to contribute all they can. They receive $29.68 for the redemption of Zion.

Apr. 18, 1834

Joseph travels to New Portage for conference. As he is about to stop to help a sick man on the road, he is warned by the Spirit and keeps going. The man is soon joined by two others who chase Joseph. He escapes safely, however.

Apr. 19, 1834

They travel to Norton, Ohio. Elders Sidney Rigdon, Oliver Cowdery, and Zebedee Coltrin give Joseph a blessing. Those present then lay their hands upon the head of Sidney and "confirm upon him the blessings of wisdom and knowledge to preside over the Church in [Joseph's] absence." Elders Cowdery and Coltrin are also given blessings. (HC 2:51.)

Apr. 21, 1834

A conference is held in Norton, Ohio. Joseph says, "Take away the Book of Mormon and the revelations, and where is our religion? We have none: for without Zion and a place of deliverance, we must fall." (HC 2:52.)

Apr. 22, 1834

Joseph returns to Kirtland.

Apr. 23, 1834

A high council meeting is held in Kirtland. Joseph receives D&C 104.

Apr. 24, 1834

The Missouri Saints inform Gov. Dunklin that a force of Saints from the East will be marching to Missouri to protect them when Gov. Dunklin fulfills his promise to restore them under guard to their lands in Jackson County.

Apr. 24-30, 1834

The old settlers in Missouri learn that the Saints are expecting an armed force from the East, and they begin permanent destruction of the Saints' remaining homes in Jackson County. About 170 houses are burned to the ground this week.

May 1, 1834

W. W. Phelps writes to Joseph Smith stating that the rumor of a Mormon army coming to Missouri has caused the mobs to burn the houses throughout Jackson County. Over 20 men from Kirtland with four luggage wagons travel to New Portage, 50 miles distant, to prepare for the March of Zion's Camp to Missouri. They wait there for the others to arrive from Kirtland.

May 3, 1834

A conference is held in Kirtland. The various terms by which people call the Church, such as "Mormonite," are discussed and it is decided that the name of the Church should be altered to "The Church of the Latter-day Saints. "

May 5-July 3, 1834

The march of Zion's Camp from Kirtland to Missouri: This group of Saints marches about nine hundred miles in three weeks to protect the Saints in Missouri from the other Missourians if and when Gov. Dunklin restores them to their Jackson County lands. Beginning with about 100 men, the numbers eventually swell to 204 men, 11 women, and 8 children. Joseph divides them into companies of 12 men each, and each company has 2 cooks, 2 firemen, 2 tentmen, 2 watermen, 2 wagoneers and horsemen, 1 runner, and 1 commissarian. A man marches in front of the group carrying a white flag with the red letters PEACE on it. They take whatever old weapons they can get. Joseph has the best weapons of all, including a good sword, rifle, a very aggressive bulldog, and a fine pair of silver-mounted pistols with brass barrels, which were captured in the War of 1812. Joseph travels incognito, calling himself Squire Cook. Every morning at four o'clock and every evening a trumpet blast signals for the men to kneel for their prayers.

May 5 Joseph and his company leave for Missouri with horses, wagons, firearms, etc. They make 27 miles the first day. George A. Smith's new boots blister his feet so Joseph gives him his own boots.

May 6 They reach New Portage, 50 miles from Kirtland, and are joined by other brethren. At this point, they all consecrate their money into the common fund to be divided up at the end of the trip.

May 7 The company now has 130 men and about 20 baggage wagons. The company is divided and organized into 12 companies, each to choose its own captain.

May 8 They travel 12 miles to Chippeway.

May 9 The Painesville Telegraph reports that Joseph has told his troops he is ready for martyrdom. The company reaches Wooster.

May 10 They reach Richfield township. A circular signed by Oliver Cowdery and Sidney Rigdon is sent to the Saints asking them to volunteer and join Zion's Camp. This circular states that Gov. Dunklin promised to use the state militia to reinstate the Saints.

May 11 Sunday. Elder Sylvester Smith preaches and the sacrament is passed. Eight more join the group.

May 12 They travel 35 miles.

May 13 The roads are very bad. They are forced to haul the wagons out of mud holes with ropes. Parley P. Pratt breaks his harness.

May 14 They reach Belle Fountain. Sylvester Smith begins to grumble because of a shortage of bread.

May 15 They come close to Springfield. Moses Martin falls asleep on guard duty.

May 16 Joseph says he is very depressed in this place because he senses there was a great deal of bloodshed here at one time; he says, "Whenever a man of God is in a place where many have been killed, he will feel lonesome and unpleasant, and his spirit will sink." Many of the men worry about milk sickness. They pass through Dayton, Ohio; some people ask them who they are, and they answer very evasively: they are from the East, they are going west, sometimes one leads them and sometimes another! There is a court-martial that evening for Moses Martin. He is acquitted, but Joseph gives him a stern warning. (HC 2:66-68.)

May 17 They travel 40 miles and camp across the Indiana state line. Guards are set up to watch for spies. Sylvester Smith is warned about his rebellious spirit. They are told to humble themselves so the Lord will not send a scourge.

May 18 It is Sunday morning. Many of the horses are found to be sick; only Sylvester Smith's horse dies. The sacrament is passed and there is preaching. About this time, the Saints in Clay County, Mo., begin making their own arms for their own defense.

May 19 They travel 31 miles to Henry County.

May 20 They travel 25 miles through terribly muddy roads, sometimes with mud coming over the tops of their boots. Once again they give evasive answers to strangers' questioning.

May21 They reach Indianapolis and are warned that they will not be allowed to pass through the city. They split up so that one or two of them walk through a back road at a time; thus no one in the city realizes that a whole company of men has passed through the city, and the townspeople are left wondering "when that big company would come along." (HC 2:70.)

May 22 They reach Belleville.

May 23 They reach four miles from Greencastle.

May 24 They cross the Wabash River on ferry boats and reach the Illinois state line by night.

May 25 No Sunday meeting is held, but they spend the day washing, baking, and preparing to continue the journey. A spy in disguise enters the camp and tells them that they will never cross the Mississippi River alive.

May 26 They cross a 16-mile prairie. They have to strain the "wigglers" out of their water before they can drink it. They finally come to a well of water, for which they all rejoice. They camp a mile west of the Embarras River. Joseph Smith tells the men not to hurt the rattlesnakes they find, stating that "men must become harmless, before the brute creation; when men lose their vicious dispositions and cease to destroy the animal race, the lion and the lamb can dwell together, and the sucking child can play with the serpent in safety." Brethren carry the snakes out on sticks. Joseph tells them not to kill any animal on the trip unless it is absolutely necessary for food. Joseph then shoots a squirrel. The brethren decide to cook it and eat it so that it will not be wasted, and Joseph is glad they listened to his precept more than his example, "which was right." Parley P. Pratt and Amasa Lyman return to the group bringing twelve new men. They see the reflection of the rising moon and think it is an enemy campfire. Everyone gets ready for battle until they realize their mistake and have a good laugh about it. (HC 2:71-72.)

May 27 The angels of God go before the group. One man falls asleep on a rattlesnake but is not harmed. When others want to kill the rattlesnake, the man, Solomon Humphreys, says, "You shan't hurt him, for he and I had a good nap together." (HC 2:74.)

May 28 They reach Decatur township, suffering for lack of food and water. One horse dies.

May 29 They are detained until noon, having to buy a new horse. Some murmur. To divert their attention, Joseph organizes the camp into three parts for a sham battle. Many of the captains show surprisingly good military sense; but Heber C. Kimball cuts his hand when grabbing another man's sword. Joseph chastizes Zebedee Coltrin for giving him (Joseph) good bread while some of the other brethren are forced to eat sour bread, stating that he wants no partiality in the food. The Missouri brethren write to Gov. Dunklin.

May 30 Two brethren go ahead in disguise to spy out circumstances in Missouri. Many of the horses become bloated from eating dried corn and prairie grass. Ezra Thayre makes a medicine of tobacco, copperas, cayenne pepper, and water or whiskey, which seems to cure the horses. The two spies return saying that people are somewhat excited.

May 31 A man asks them if they could use $100. An hour later, he returns with $100, wishing he could give them more. At noon a man comes into camp drunk; it turns out he is probably a spy faking drunkenness.

June 1 Sunday. They are camped near Jacksonville. Many of the townspeople, suspecting that this group is composed of Mormons, come to hear them preach. However, each elder preaches according to his own particular religious upbringing, and therefore the townspeople cannot decide whether these preachers are Baptists, Campbellites, Reformed Methodists, Restorationists, etc.

June 2 In spite of enemy threats, they are ferried across the Illinois River.

June 3 They travel past some ancient Indian mounds and Joseph tells about the ancient warriors and the Prophet Zelph (story of the white Lamanite) and Onandagus. Joseph also prophesies that a scourge will come upon the camp because of murmuring, and some will "die like sheep" unless they repent. Many murmur about the food, but Joseph's company gladly eats the partially spoiled hams that others refuse to eat. A double guard is posted for what turns out to be a false alarm. (HC 2:79-82.)

June 4 The group encamps on the banks of the Mississippi River and begins to cross it, which takes two days. During this time, Sylvester Smith complains bitterly about Joseph and his bulldog, finally stating, "If that dog bites me, I'll kill him." Joseph answers, "If you kill that dog, I'll whip you." Some brethren report that Sylvester and Joseph were about to start fighting until the brethren broke them up, and Brigham Young later reports that Joseph finally turned to the men and asked them if they were not ashamed of such an evil spirit, and said, "I am." (HC 2:82-83; DH 173.)

June 5 The elders in Clay County, Mo., write to Gov. Dunklin asking when he will supply the military guard to return the Saints to Jackson County.

June 6 Gov. Dunklin writes to Col. J. Thornton about the Mormon problem, stating that he wishes they could work out a peaceful compromise with their enemies, but he has limited powers to get involved in the conflict.

June 7 Zion's Camp reaches the Allred settlement of the Church members at the Salt River and stays until June 12.

June 8 Sunday. There is preaching in the morning. Hyrum Smith and Lyman Wight join the camp with volunteers from Michigan. The camp now totals 205.

June 12 Lyman Wight is elected general of the camp. Joseph chooses 25 lifeguards for himself, with Hyrum as captain and George A. Smith as armorbearer. Joseph sends Parley P. Pratt and Orson Hyde with a message to Gov. Dunklin to see if he will fulfill his promise to reinstate the Mormons in Jackson County to their lands.

June 13 H. C. Kimball's horse gets loose and the guards are chastized.

June 14 Two men are chased by "four suspicious fellows on horseback." Others ride throughout Jackson County yelling, "The Mormons are coming, the Mormons are coming!" and also setting fire to some houses. (HC 2:91-93.)

June 15 Parley P. Pratt and Orson Hyde return to camp with the message from Gov. Dunklin that he will not fulfill his promise to reinstate the Mormons to their lands. Bishop Partridge also visits the camp.

June 16 One man swears to kill the Mormons or else the buzzards can eat his flesh. His boat sinks, he drowns, and his body floats downstream until he gets lodged on an island; the buzzards end up eating his flesh. There is also a thunderstorm this day, which for the first time satisfies the men's thirst. Martin Harris begins to boast that he can handle snakes without fear, and he gets bitten and poisoned. Joseph reproves him, stating that if a man is bitten by accident he might ask in faith for the Lord to heal him; however, men should never provoke miracles from the Lord. In Liberty, Mo., the Mormons and non-Mormons gather at the courthouse. Both sides offer to buy each other out, but feelings are too intense and nothing is settled.

June 17 They cross the Wakenda River and Joseph proposes that they go eight or ten miles across the prairie; however, Lyman Wight, Sylvester Smith, and others oppose this because they want the comforts of water and wood by the shore of the river. There is much disputation in the camp.

June 18 Two brothers find that they have slept accidentally over rattlesnakes, but they remove the rattlesnakes without any harm. They go seventeen miles across the prairie before breakfast, and then proceed to Richmond. Joseph feels very unsafe about that location. Rumors are spreading that about 50 Jackson County men are coming to attack the Saints.

June 19 At dawn they march nine miles. A black woman along the road warns them that a company of men are lying in wait for them. A wagon breaks, and they camp between the Little Fishing River and Big Fishing River. A mob of over 300 begins to move toward Zion's Camp. However, during the night a huge hailstorm hits the area and the river rises 30 feet within 30 minutes, so that no one can possibly cross it, and the Saints are protected from the mobs across the river.

June 20 Zion's Camp moves five miles onto the prairie.

June 21 Col. Sconce and two others visit the camp asking why the men have come to Missouri. Joseph stands and tells them of the sufferings of the Saints in Jackson County, stating that "we had come one thousand miles to assist our brethren, to bring them clothing, etc. and to reinstate them on to their own lands; and that we had no intention to molest or injure any people, but only to administer to the wants of our afflicted friends; and that the evil reports circulated about us were false, and got up by our enemies to procure our destruction." After this speech the men congratulate Joseph and offer their help. (HC 2:105-6.) Ezra Thayre and Joseph Hancock come down with the cholera. Joseph states that because of murmuring, disobedience, and lack of humility before God, some in the camp "should die like sheep with the rot." The Clay County Saints write another letter concerning their grievances. (HC 2: 106-7.)

June 22 The sheriff of Clay County, Cornelius Gillium, enters the camp. Joseph reveals his identity for the first time. Gillium publishes the Saints' proposition for a peaceful compromise: that each side choose six men to decide what compensation is honestly due the Mormons. Joseph receives D&C 105.

June 23 When Zion's Camp gets within five or six miles of Liberty, at the pleadings of Gen. Atchison, the Saints' lawyer, they decide not to enter Liberty because of the feelings of the people there. They turn and cross the prairie going toward A. S. Gilbert's residence. A high priests council meets and calls Edward Partridge, W. W. Phelps, Isaac Morley, John Corrill, John Whitmer, David Whitmer, and numerous others to go to Kirtland to receive their endowments with power from on high. A. S. Gilbert says that he cannot do it. Some are very angry because Joseph turned away from Liberty and because they would not get a chance to fight. Some say they would prefer death to returning without a fight.

June 24 A severe outbreak of cholera hits the camp. The guards fall to the earth because of the sudden attack of this disease. Joseph tries to administer to heal several, "but I quickly learned by painful experience, that when the great Jehovah decrees destruction upon any people, and makes known His determination, man must not attempt to stay His hand." Joseph himself is hit with the disease whenever he tries to heal another. (HC 2: 114.)

June 25 Zion's Camp is separated into small bands, and several members disperse among the other Missouri Saints. Joseph writes to the lawyers Doniphan and Atchison stating that he has dispersed the camp. The neighbors will give them no water because they are afraid of the cholera. Several die the first day. Because there is no wood available on the prairie, dead Saints are buried in blankets. The attack lasts for four days. Sixty-eight get sick from the cholera and 14 die.

June 26 The Saints again write to Gov. Dunklin, stating that "the shedding of blood is, and ever has been, foreign and revolting to our feelings." (HC 2:117-18.)

June 29 A. S. Gilbert dies from the cholera. Although a faithful Saint, Gilbert lacked self-confidence concerning his public-speaking abilities, and had recently said that he would "rather die than go forth to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles." (HC 2:1 18-19.)

July 1 Young Jesse Smith, who had been placed in the care of his cousin Joseph, dies after Joseph labors long and hard with him. Jesse had been playing at the river with other young members of Zion's Camp when he said that he felt guilty having so much fun while others were sick and dying, and he died shortly thereafter. Joseph tells the camp that if they will humble themselves, the plague will be stopped from that moment forward. They do, and it ceases.

July 3 The second stake of the Church is organized in Clay County, Mo. David Whitmer is president with W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer as assistant presidents. Twelve high councilmen are also chosen. Joseph authorizes General Lyman Wight to officially discharge the members of Zion's Camp and give them permission to return home. The common funds are redistributed, amounting to $1.14 per person.

Various opinions have been expressed through the years about the planning and outcome of Zion's Camp. Some have said the plan to attack Jackson County and forcibly restore the lands to the Saints was a major failure. Others have justified it on the grounds that, although it did not restore the Saints to Jackson County, it gave future leaders of the Church "an experience that we never could have gained in any other way." (JD 13:158.) However, some recently discovered publications of that time seem to indicate that it was never the plan for Zion's Camp to restore the land to the Missouri Saints. Rather, having received the promise by Gov. Dunklin that he would use the state militia to restore the lands, the purpose of Zion's Camp was only to protect the Saints once they had already been restored. Because Gov. Dunklin never fulfilled his promise to restore the lands, Zion's Camp was helpless to do anything else but dissolve as it did. (For a complete discussion, see BYS, Su '74, 40620.)

July 8, 1834

Joseph meets in the eastern part of Clay County at the home of Thomas B. Marsh. According to several records, at this time Joseph ordained David Whitmer to succeed him as President of the Church. However, the testimony differs as to certain conditions set upon this ordination. (See BYS, W '76, 194; DH 183; HC 3:32.)

July 9, 1834

Joseph starts for Kirtland with his brother Hyrum, Frederick G. Williams, and others.

July 12, 1834

The high council of Zion sends out various leaders to visit the different branches of the Church.

July 31, 1834

About this time, many Church members were practicing various spiritual gifts, and Church courts were held on several different days to decide whether or not these gifts actually came from God.

Aug. 11, 1834

The Kirtland high council meets to investigate a charge by Sylvester Smith that, on the march of Zion's Camp, Joseph was a "Tyrant—Pope—King—Usurper—Abuser of men—Angel—False Prophet—Prophesying lies in the name of the Lord—Taking consecrated monies." This begins a long series of Church court proceedings with Joseph and Sylvester accusing each other of wrong actions. After several months the matter is finally resolved when Sylvester Smith publishes a public confession and apology of his shortcomings in the Messenger and Advocate, written on Oct. 28, 1834. (For a full discussion, see HC 2:142-60.)

August 16, 1834

Joseph writes the Missouri high council "to be in readiness to move into Jackson County in two years from the eleventh of September next, which is the appointed time for the redemption of Zion." (HC 2:145.)

Sept. 1, 1834

Joseph acts as a foreman in the temple's stone quarry and labors with his own hands.

Sept. 18, 1834

There is a conference at New Portage, Ohio. Joseph anoints with oil; heals and prays for a sister; and speaks about false spirits.

Sept. 24, 1834

The high council again tries to publish the Book of Commandments (which was being published when the press was destroyed on July 20, 1833).

Oct. 1834

Joseph's old enemy, Philastus Hurlburt, gets together with Eber D. Howe to publish Mormonism Unvailed [sic]. This includes many affidavits against the character of Joseph Smith, supposedly by people who knew him in his youth in New York. This also includes a new explanation for the writing of the Book of Mormon, claiming that Sidney Rigdon and Joseph Smith had stolen and republished a manuscript of a novel written by a Solomon Spaulding. This is the second anti-Mormon book published. The first was Delusions in 1832, a reprint of Alexander Campbell's 1831 articles in the Millennial Harbinger.

Oct. 1-15, 1834

Joseph works on the Lord's house. He decides to stop printing the Evening and Morning Star, as it was intended as a Missouri paper, and in its place, the Latter-day Saint Messenger and Advocate will be published. In the first issue, Oliver Cowdery makes a list of seven Latter-day Saint articles of faith. This magazine will be published until September 1837.

Oct. 16-20, 1834

Joseph travels with five others to Michigan. They have a good journey, and are amused when a man tells Oliver Cowdery that he has heard that Joseph Smith was dead. Joseph is greatly pleased with the preaching in Michigan. Afterwards they return to Kirtland.

Nov. 1834

Joseph writes that "no month ever found me more busily engaged than November. . . . I made this my rule: When the Lord commands, do it." He writes several letters of instruction to the high council. (HC 2:170-71.)

Nov. 25, 1834

Joseph is preparing for the reopening of the School of the Prophets and receives D&C 106.

Nov. 29, 1834

Joseph and Oliver unite in prayer and covenant that "if the Lord will prosper us in our business and open the way before us that we may obtain means to pay our debts . . . we will give a tenth to be bestowed upon the poor in His Church." Joseph also prays that the Lord might give him the prosperity he gave to Jacob and his other servants. (HC 2:174-75.)

Nov. 30, 1834

Joseph prophesies that the Lord will soon send assistance to deliver the Saints from debt.

Dec. 1, 1834

The School of the Elders is resumed and well attended. Joseph begins to deliver his seven lectures on theology (Lectures on Faith).

Dec. 5, 1834

Joseph ordains Oliver Cowdery to be an assistant president of the Church.

Dec. 9, 1834

Joseph and Emma receive their patriarchal blessings from Joseph, Sr. (For details of the blessings, see BYS, W '74, 206-8.)

Mid-Dec. 1834

A letter from Gov. Dunklin rekindles the hopes of the Missouri Saints. He says he will not reinstate them to their lands by force, but that they must go through the local courts. Kirtland High School is established, with the First Presidency as the trustees. The enrollment grows to 130, at which time the 30 youngest students are dismissed. Penmanship, arithmetic, English grammar, and geography are taught. Joseph writes that "the year closed without bringing anything to pass for the relief of the Saints in Missouri." (HC 2:178.)
