J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Jan. 1835

The School of the Elders meets all month and Joseph prepares the Lectures on Faith (theology) for publication in the book of Doctrine and Covenants, which the committee is now compiling. The School of the Elders also arranges for the calling of "Twelve Apostles" according to the revelation of June 20, 1829. (See D&C 18.)

Feb. 1835

The Northern Times, a weekly political paper in support of the Democratic party, is commenced by the Kirtland Saints. This paper will eventually favor the election of Martin Van Buren.

Feb. 8, 1835

Joseph meets with Brigham and Joseph Young on Sunday and tells them, "Brethren, I have seen those men who died of the cholera in our camp; and the Lord knows, if I get a mansion as bright as theirs, I ask no more." Joseph then asks them to gather the members of Zion's Camp for a special conference to be held the next Saturday. (HC 2:181.)

Feb. 14, 1835

A large meeting is held in Kirtland. Joseph speaks about the coming of the Lord, stating, "The coming of the Lord, which was nigh—even 56 years should wind up the scene." (In 56 years Joseph would have been 85 years old; see D&C 130:14-17.) The members of Zion's Camp are seated separately from the others. Chapter 15 of John is read. Joseph talks about calling of the Twelve. The three witnesses of the Book of Mormon pray, and choose 12 from the members of Zion's Camp: Lyman E. Johnson, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, David W. Patten, Luke S. Johnson, William E. McLellin, John F. Boynton, Orson Pratt, William Smith, Thomas B. Marsh, and Parley P. Pratt. Lyman E. Johnson, Brigham Young, and Heber C. Kimball are then set apart by the three witnesses, one witness each setting apart one apostle.

Feb. 15, 1835

Another meeting is held, where six more are ordained: Orson Hyde, David W. Patten, Luke S. Johnson, William E. McLellin, John F. Boynton, and William Smith. (Thomas B. Marsh and Orson and Parley P. Pratt are out of town at this time.)

Feb. 21, 1835

Parley P. Pratt is ordained to the Twelve. Oliver Cowdery gives instructions to the Twelve.

Feb. 27, 1835

Joseph meets with nine of the Twelve and stresses the importance of keeping records, expressing his own personal sorrow for not having kept a record of many of the important dates of earlier Church history, which he cannot remember. And if he had such records, "I would not part with them for any sum of money." (HC 2:198-200.)

Feb. 28, 1835

The Church is assembled and the seventies are called from those who went on the Zion's Camp march. Joseph Young is called to be the senior president; the other presidents are Hazen Aldrich, Levi W. Hancock, Sylvester Smith, Leonard Rich, Zebedee Coltrin, and Lyman Sherman. Several (about forty) are ordained by Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Oliver Cowdery.

Mar. 1, 1835

Joseph Smith preaches about taking the sacrament unworthily and ordains more seventies.

Mar. 8, 1835

More men are ordained to be seventies.

Mar. 12, 1835

Joseph meets with the Twelve; it is proposed that they take their first mission to the eastern states. An itinerary is drawn up.

Mar. 28, 1835

The Twelve meet together and confess their many shortcomings in regard to light-mindedness and vanity. They pray and ask Joseph to request a revelation to comfort them in their travels. Joseph receives D&C 107. The School of the Prophets closes in the last week of March.

Apr. 1835

Various conferences are held; work on the temple progresses.

Apr. 26, 1835

The Twelve and the Seventies meet in the unfinished temple. Joseph instructs them concerning their first mission. Orson Pratt and Thomas B. Marsh have finally arrived in Kirtland and are set apart as members of the Quorum of the Twelve.

May 2, 1835

Joseph seats the Twelve according to age for seniority, and instructs them, saying that they have no authority to go into Zion (Missouri) or into any of the stakes where there is a high council. Their duty is to go abroad. When the Twelve pass a decision, it is in the name of the Church; therefore it is valid.

May 4, 1835

The Twelve leave on their first missions for Pennsylvania and New York.

Mid-May 1835

Brethren arrive in Kirtland from Missouri. New assignments are made. John Whitmer replaces Oliver Cowdery as editor of the Messenger and Advocate. Frederick G. Williams is appointed editor of the Northern Times. W. W. Phelps moves in with Joseph to assist him in compiling the Doctrine and Covenants.

May 26, 1835

W. W. Phelps, having just arrived in Kirtland, writes to his wife about the remarkable unity of the Saints at that place, stating, "They keep the word of wisdom, drink cold water, and don't even mention tea and coffee; they pray night and morning." (DH 188.)

June 1835

The Messenger and Advocate publishes an article to the Missouri Saints outlining their duties: the high council is to administer the spiritual affairs of the Church, while the bishop should administer the temporal affairs. Joseph receives a brief visit from a Mr. Hewitt of the Irvingite Church in Scotland, which also believes in apostles, prophets, pastors, and gifts of tongues.

June 6, 1835

A conference is held in New Portage, Ohio, presided over by Oliver Cowdery. Some are tried for breaking the Word of Wisdom, and some new members are baptized.

June 18 1835

Joseph preaches on the evangelical (patriarchal) order.

June 25, 1835

There is a meeting in Kirtland for the purpose of collecting and subscribing money for the building of the temple. The amount of $6,232.50 is added to the list.

July 3, 1835

Michael Chandler comes to Kirtland to exhibit four Egyptian mummies and two rolls of papyrus. He brings them to Joseph for translation. Joseph interprets and Chandler gives Joseph a certificate saying Joseph's interpretation is the "most learned." (HC 2:235.)

July 5, 1835

Some of the Saints purchase the mummies, and Joseph commences translations on the papyrus with W. W. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery as scribes. "To our joy [we] found that one of the rolls contained the writings of Abraham, another the writings of Joseph of Egypt." (HC 2:235-37.)

July 9, 1835

Joseph goes to Cleveland for a Church court.

July 19, 1835

"The remainder of this month, I was continually engaged in translating an alphabet to the Book of Abraham, and arranging a grammar of the Egyptian language as practiced by the ancients." (HC 2:238.) On this same date, W. W. Phelps writes to his wife, "These records of old times, when we translate them and print them in a book, will make a good witness for the Book of Mormon." (BYS, Su '71, 394.) (In reference to the above Phelps letter, Hugh Nibley argues that because Phelps said "we translate them," all of Joseph Smith's notes, Egyptian grammars, etc., were not necessarily prepared by Joseph alone, if at all. Phelps apparently tried his hand at some of these things too, and scholars should be careful not to attack Joseph for the alphabet and grammar if they were, in fact, only vain attempts by W. W. Phelps. See BYS, Su '71, 350-99)

Aug. 17, 1835

A general assembly of the Church is held in Kirtland to present the Book of Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of the Latter-day Saints for approval. Two articles of beliefs of the Church are also approved at this time. One concerning marriage states that "inasmuch as this Church of Christ has been reproached with the crime of fornication and polygamy, we declare that we believe that one man should have one wife, and one woman but one husband, except in case of death, when either is at liberty to marry again." (HC 2:246-47.) Joseph Smith is not at this meeting, but is in Michigan preaching.

At this same conference, an article of beliefs concerning governments and laws in general is approved for publication and it becomes D&C 134.

Aug 19, 1835

Church court tries Almon W. Babbitt on charges of breaking the Word of Wisdom and stating that the Book of Mormon is not essential to salvation. He claims that he was only following the example of Joseph and others. He is reproved, and he finally repents and is forgiven.

Aug. 23, 1835

Joseph returns to Kirtland after visiting Michigan.

Aug. 28, 1835

Joseph preaches on the duties of wives. The Twelve hold a conference in Farmington, Maine.

Sept. 1, 1835

Joseph writes a letter to the elders of the Church, which is subsequently printed in the Messenger and Advocate. The message explains the beliefs of the Church and outlines the problems in Missouri. Joseph admits that some members may have caused some of the problems in Missouri because "many, having a zeal not according to knowledge, and not understanding the pure principles of the doctrine of the Church, have no doubt, in the heat of enthusiasm, taught and said many things which were derogatory to the genuine character and principles of the Church; and for these things we are heartily sorry, and would apologize, if apology would do any good." Joseph's message carried over into three issues of the Messenger and Advocate. (See HC 2:253-72.)

Sept. 2-8, 1835

Joseph goes to New Portage, Ohio, with Oliver and Sidney for a conference and to deal with many spiritual and temporal affairs of the Church.

Sept. 14, 1835

The high council convenes in Kirtland and decides to pay Joseph, Sr., $10 per week for the expenses he incurs as patriarch. Frederick G. Williams is to be paid the same as scribe. Oliver Cowdery is appointed as recorder of the Church. It is decided that Emma Smith will make a selection of sacred hymns to be printed by W. W. Phelps.

Sept. 16-19, 1835

Joseph attends to various Church courts and high council meetings.

Mid-Sept. 1835

The first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants (Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of the Latter-day Saints: carefully selected from the Revelations of God) comes off the press, bound and printed (including the "Lectures on Faith"). This is an expanded version of the Book of Commandments, which had been destroyed on July 20, 1833.

Sept. 23, 1835

Joseph receives many visitors during the day. He prays for the salvation of Ezra Thayre. A Brother Noah Packard donates one thousand dollars for the building of the temple. Joseph prays that Packard be blessed a hundredfold. Joseph prays for his own prosperity and freedom from debt: "My heart is full of desire today, to be blessed of the God of Abraham with prosperity, Until I shall be able to pay all my debts, for it is the delight of my soul to be honest. O Lord, that thou knowest right well. Help me, and I will give to the poor." (HC 2:281.)

Sept. 24, 1835

The high council meets at Joseph's home to discuss a plan to go to Zion (Missouri) for its redemption in the spring, "to live or die on our own lands." They begin to take a subscription of those who will go, hoping to get 800 or 1,000 emigrants. (HC 2:282.)

Sept. 26, 1835

The Twelve return from their missions to the East. The First Presidency meets with them to discuss some letters written about them, explaining several problems that occurred. They decide that the Twelve were justified and the complaints unfounded. Some confess; all are forgiven.

Oct. 1, 1835

Joseph labors on the Egyptian alphabet with Oliver Cowdery and W. W. Phelps, and comes to understand some of the principles of astronomy as understood by Abraham. (An alphabet and grammar has been published and Egyptian scholars have attacked its accuracy. But others argue it is the work of Phelps and Cowdery, not Joseph. See BYS, Su'71, 355, 359-62.)

Oct. 4, 1835

On Sunday morning Joseph goes with John Corrill to a meeting in Perry, Ohio; but because of a confusion in time, the meeting is not held. However, on the way they see two deer in the forest, and Joseph rejoices at the creations of God.

Oct. 5, 1835

Joseph is at home, fatigued from the long ride in the rain the previous day. He meets with the Twelve in the evening and instructs the men about going to Missouri with their families next season.

Oct. 7, 1835

Joseph goes to his father's home to administer some mild herbs to him. Joseph records a blessing on Bishop Whitney, for his generosity to the poor.

Oct. 8, 1835

Joseph stays with his father, about whom he is very worried.

Oct. 10, 1835

Joseph stays with his father again and finds him failing rapidly. Oliver Cowdery is elected as a delegate to the state gubernatorial nominating convention by the Geauga County Democratic Convention.

Oct. 11, 1835

After secret prayer Joseph hears the voice of the Lord: "My servant, thy father shall live." He is greatly relieved. (HC 2:289.)

Oct. 13, 1835

Joseph visits his father, who has very much recovered, which causes everyone to marvel at the miracle.

Oct. 15, 1835

Joseph labors in his father's orchard, gathering apples.

Oct. 16, 1835

Joseph baptizes Ebenezer Robinson.

Oct. 17, 1835

Joseph is troubled by domestic problems and dismisses his boarders.

Oct. 23, 1835

Joseph assembles with several others and they unite in a special prayer requesting release from their debts.

Oct. 26, 1835

Joseph goes to court in Chardon to contest the case of his brother Samuel, who is accused of avoiding military duty. Joseph feels that they would have won the case if they had brought the necessary evidence, but Samuel is fined $20 and has to sell his cow. Joseph writes, "The money which they have thus unjustly taken shall be a testimony against them, and canker, and eat their flesh as fire." (HC 2:292.)

Oct. 27, 1835

Joseph goes into the field to pray for Samuel's wife, who is on the verge of death as she tries to deliver a child. Dr. Frederick G. Williams arrives and helps her deliver the child successfully.

Oct. 29, 1835

A high council court is held at which Joseph and his brother William begin a series of serious disagreements. William has accused Brother and Sister Elliot of whipping their 15-year-old daughter. Joseph defends the Elliots, claiming that the child was at fault. Joseph returns home to converse with the parents of Bishop Whitney in hopes of baptizing them. When he returns to the high council, Joseph's mother, Lucy Mack Smith, testifies in the Elliot case. Joseph objects to her testimony, because the matter has already been settled. William Smith accuses Joseph of doubting their mother's testimony, and Joseph tells him he is out of order. Feelings are roused and they are on the verge of a fist fight when their parents intervene, and, after much debate, order is finally reestablished. The court finds both parents and daughter at fault, and they all confess.

Oct. 30, 1835

William Smith is censured by the high council.

Oct. 31, 1835

Hyrum Smith, in a spirit of meekness, tries to work with Joseph and William to settle the differences between them. Joseph offers to confess his faults if William will also confess his. William then becomes infuriated and begins to spread stories about Joseph. He convinces another brother, Samuel, that Joseph is wrong and William is right.

Nov. 1, 1835

Joseph receives a revelation chastizing Reynolds Cahoon for dishonesty. He preaches at Church and confirms a number of children who had been baptized.

Nov. 2, 1835

Plastering and the hard finishing on the outside of the temple have begun. Joseph is busy setting up the School of the Elders. He goes with Sidney Rigdon, Oliver Cowdery, and Frederick G. Williams to Willoughby College to hear a Dr. Piexotto lecture on physics. They learn that he will come to Kirtland to teach Hebrew. Joseph receives a revelation for Elder Williams, saying that he should go to New York to preach the gospel.

Nov. 3, 1835

Joseph receives a revelation for the Twelve, stating that they must humble themselves and be patient with his brother William. He then dedicates the School of the Elders, promising a "glorious endowment that God has in store for the faithful." (HC 2:300-301.)

Nov. 4, 1835

Joseph spends the day at school.

Nov. 5, 1835

Several of the Twelve have come to Joseph to hear and discuss the Nov. 3, 1835, revelation to the Twelve.

Nov. 6, 1835

Joseph meets a man from the East who is surprised that he looks just like any other man, having suspected a prophet to be ''something more than a man." Joseph reflects that "Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, yet he had such power with God, that He, in answer to his prayers, shut the heavens that they gave no rain for the space of three years and six months." (HC 2:302.)

Nov. 7, 1835

Joseph receives a revelation concerning Isaac Morley and Edward Partridge, stating that the Lord is well pleased with them and that they should tarry for a little while in Kirtland and attend the school.

Nov. 8, 1835

Joseph chastizes Emma for leaving the Sunday meeting before partaking of the sacrament. She weeps.

Nov. 9-11, 1835

Joseph receives visits from Joshua, the Jewish minister (Robert Matthias), who explains several interesting doctrines of his own. After several visits and lectures, Joseph tells him that his doctrine is of the devil. Joshua identifies his true identity as an ex-convict. Upon commandment of God, Joseph casts him from his home.

Nov. 14, 1835

Joseph receives a revelation to Warren Parrish, who is called to become Joseph's scribe.

Nov. 16, 1835

Joseph receives a letter from Harvey Whitlock, in which Harvey repents of his past sins. Joseph answers him, stating, "Let it suffice that I say that the very flood gates of my heart were broken up—I could not refrain from weeping. I thank God that it has entered into your heart to try to return to the Lord." He also sends him a revelation from the Lord stating that his sins have been forgiven and that he should return to the Church. (HC 2:312-16.)

Nov. 17, 1835

Joseph exhibits the alphabet of the ancient records to Mr. Holmes, and goes with him and Frederick G. Williams to see the mummies.

Nov. 18, 1835

Emma is sick. Joseph attends an elder's debate on the subject "Was it, or was it not, the design of Christ to establish His Gospel by miracles?" After a three-hour debate the negative side wins. Joseph feels that the debate is unhealthy because of too much passion; ill feelings are made manifest in defending one's own views whether right or wrong. (HC 2:317-18.)

Nov. 19, 1835

Joseph visits the workmen in the temple and spends the rest of the day translating the Egyptian record.

Nov. 20, 1835

Oliver Cowdery returns from New York and gives Joseph several Hebrew and Greek grammar books.

Nov. 21, 1835

Joseph spends the day studying the books, especially the Hebrew alphabet. In the evening, he meets with the Hebrew class to make arrangements for a Hebrew teacher. Joseph expresses his dissatisfaction with Dr. Piexotto.

Nov. 24, 1835

Joseph performs his first marriage ceremony, solemnizing the ceremony between Newel Knight and Lydia Goldthwaite. He remarks that marriage is an institution of heaven and began in the Garden of Eden, and that it needs the authority of the priesthood.

Nov. 27, 1835

Christian Whitmer (one of the Eight Witnesses) dies. He has been serving as a high councilor in Missouri.

Nov. 13-30, 1835

Joseph is involved with the Church courts, visitors, translations, letter writing, various Church business, and recovering from a cold caused from the extreme snow outside.

Dec. 2, 1835

Joseph is criticized and made fun of while on a family sleigh ride to Painesville.

Dec. 10, 1835

Joseph and David Whitmer administer to Angeline Works, who says she feels much better.

Dec. 11, 1835

Two fires erupt in the board kiln and shoemaker shop.

Dec. 12, 1835

Joseph spends a day in reading and translating and showing his Egyptian records to some hostile visitors. In the evening he attends a debate at William Smith's.

Dec. 13, 1835

Joseph attends church and later attends a marriage where he remarks on the subject of matrimony and on the duties of husbands and wives. He then seals the marriage.

Dec. 15, 1835

Orson Hyde visits Joseph to hand him a letter explaining certain grievances. He feels the temple committee store (the committee that was in charge of building the temple also ran a store in Kirtland) has been more lenient with credit toward William Smith than toward Hyde. He thought that the Twelve were to be equal in all things, either richness or poverty. Joseph is very upset about Hyde's complaint.

Dec. 16, 1835

Joseph exhibits the Egyptian records to several people, explaining Abraham's view of the planetary system. In the evening he goes to a debate at William Smith's. After the debate, there is some discussion about whether or not this sort of debate should continue. Joseph feels that the debates should be ended, but William Smith grows angry and wants to continue them. The argument finally breaks out into a fight, and William Smith "used violence upon my person." (HC 2:334-35.)

Dec. 17, 1835

Joseph talks with Orson Hyde. They work out their differences successfully so that Hyde's mind is satisfied. Joseph's parents visit him to discuss the difficulty between him and William.

Dec. 18, 1835

William Smith submits a letter to Hyrum, begging for forgiveness because of the fight with Joseph and asking to be released from his apostleship because of his temper. Joseph answers, encouraging him to keep his apostleship, to control his temper, and "if at any time you should consider me to be an imposter, for heaven's sake leave me in the hands of God, and not think to take vengeance on me yourself. . . . David sought not to kill Saul, although he was guilty of crimes that never entered my heart." (HC 2:338-43.)

Dec. 23, 1835

Joseph studies the Greek language.

Dec. 25, 1835

Joseph enjoys Christmas at home with his family, "the only time I have had this privilege so satisfactorily for a long period." (HC 2:345.)

Dec. 26, 1835

Joseph studies Hebrew. Lyman Sherman comes and asks for the word of the Lord concerning him. Joseph receives D&C 108.

Dec. 28, 1835

The Quorum of the Seventy meet to report on their missions "since they were ordained to that Apostleship." (HC 2:346.)

Dec. 29, 1835

William Smith is charged with speaking disrespectfully about Joseph and "attempting to inflict personal violence on President Joseph Smith, Jun." Joseph Smith, Sr., gives 15 patriarchal blessings. (HC 2:346-47.)

Dec. 31, 1835

Joseph records that some people have accused him of pretending to have the mummies of the bodies of Abraham and Joseph, which he denies. He describes the writings of the book of Abraham, "beautifully written on papyrus, with black, and a small part red, ink or paint, in perfect preservation." (HC 2:348. The papyri were rediscovered in 1966, and since that time scholars have translated several of them to determine whether or not they have any possible connection with Abraham. However, a papyrus fitting Joseph's above description has not yet been found.)
