J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Jan. 1, 1836

The Smith family meets with Martin Harris to help reconcile the differences between Joseph and William. Joseph Smith, Sr., opens with a powerful prayer. William confesses his faults and asks for Joseph's forgiveness. Joseph asks for forgiveness from William. The women are then called in and they all promise to support and uphold each other. "While gratitude swelled our bosoms, tears flowed from our eyes." Joseph closes the meeting with prayer. The men then unitedly lay their hands on the head of George A. Smith, and he is immediately healed of a very painful rheumatic infection that covered his body. (HC 2:353-54.)

Jan. 2, 1836

Church court is held against William Smith, but William confesses his faults and is forgiven.

Jan. 4, 1836

Joseph meets with others to organize a Hebrew School, but the contracted Dr. Piexotto is delayed and they decide not to use him. Elders McLellin and Hyde are appointed to find a new teacher. The completed upper west room of the temple is consecrated and dedicated by prayer as a translating room for Joseph and the others. In the evening, several meet at the temple to organize a singing school, and a committee of six is chosen to supervise the singing department.

Jan. 5, 1836

Joseph attends the Hebrew school, which is divided into classes. Orson Pratt argues with Joseph about the pronunciation of a Hebrew letter.

Jan. 6, 1836

Orson Pratt confesses his fault in arguing over something as trivial as pronunciation of a Hebrew letter. William E. McLellin hires a Hebrew professor, Dr. Joshua Seixas, for seven weeks for $320. Joseph records his views on the American Indians and his views on Andrew Jackson's policies concerning the Indians.

Jan. 7, 1836

Joseph attends a huge feast given by Newel K. Whitney. According to the instructions of the Savior, all the poor, lame, and blind are invited.

Jan. 8, 1836

The plastering and hard finishing on the exterior temple walls are completed.

Jan. 12, 1836

Joseph explains solemn assemblies to the First Presidency of the Church.

Jan. 13, 1836

Joseph meets in council with the Missouri and Kirtland stake presidencies. Various changes in assignments in priesthood are made at this time; vacancies are filled. New officers are then set apart. Sidney Rigdon is administered to and healed from an ailment. Sidney then speaks on the subject of endowment and the meeting is concluded. Joseph records, "This has been one of the best days that I ever spent." (HC 2:364-68.)

Jan. 14, 1836

The Hebrew class meets in anticipation of the arrival of the Hebrew professor, Dr. Seixas of Hudson, Ohio. Rules of order for the House of the Lord in Kirtland are then drawn up. These include such things as that no sermons are to be interrupted by the "ill manners or ill breeding, from old or young, rich or poor, male or female, bond or free, black or white, believer or unbeliever"; no one is to be insulted within the temple; no one is to run up and down the stairs or explore the House; no one is to carve in the wood with knives, pencils, etc. ; no children are to play inside the building; and all people should be treated with respect in the building. (HC 2:368-69.)

Joseph meets with the First Presidency and the Twelve and gives them special instructions concerning problems among them—too harsh language being used in chastening, the necessity of forgiveness, and so on. Joseph says, "The Twelve are not subject to any other than the first Presidency . . . and where I am not, there is no First Presidency over the Twelve." (HC 2:372-75.)

Jan. 17, 1836

A large meeting is held this Sunday. The quorums are arranged in order. After several speak, others begin to confess their faults, and "the gift of tongues came on us also, like the rushing of a mighty wind." (HC 2:375-76.) In the afternoon, Joseph performs the marriages of three couples.

Jan. 19, 1836

The School of the Prophets commences their reading of the Bible in Hebrew. Joseph records that he is very excited about this. He prays that the Lord will "speedily endow us with the knowledge of all languages and tongues." (HC 2:376-77.)

Jan. 20, 1836

Joseph performs the marriage of John Boynton and Susan Lowell.

Jan. 21, 1836

Joseph and the First Presidency meet in the attic story of the printing office, where they begin the ordinance of washing bodies in pure water. They also anoint their heads. Later, in the west schoolroom in the temple, they anoint their heads with holy oil. In the next room the other high Church councils meet, awaiting this ordinance. They bless Father Smith; he is anointed with oil and blessed as patriarch. Father Smith then blesses each member of the Presidency. At this time Joseph receives a vision of the celestial kingdom, now known as Joseph Smith's Vision of the Celestial Kingdom. Other brethren of the bishopric and high councils of the Church also share in these ordinances and visions, and the brethren sing and pray and rejoice until one or two o'clock in the morning.

Jan. 22, 1836

Joseph meets in the evening with the Twelve and the Presidency of the Seventy. Elder Thomas B. Marsh is set apart as President of the Council of the Twelve and anointed with oil; angels administer to them. Other gifts of the Spirit are witnessed. Gov. Dunklin writes a letter to the brethren in Kirtland stating that there is really nothing that he can do to help the Saints in Missouri, for "want of a constitutional power." (HC 2:383-84.)

Jan. 26, 1836

Mr. Seixas arrives from Hudson to begin teaching the Hebrew class.

Jan. 28, 1836

Another meeting is held in the temple in which several Church officers and counselors are anointed with oil. Once again the visions of heaven and angels are open to many.

Jan. 30, 1836

Joseph attends Hebrew school, and Mr. Seixas, the teacher, examines the record of Abraham and announces it original. Joseph attends Hebrew school six days a week during this time. (For the effect that the study of Hebrew had upon Joseph and his later writings, see DLG, Su '68, 41-55.)

Jan. or Feb. 1836

The first hymnal, A Collection of Sacred Hymns, for the Church of the Latter Day Saints, selected by Emma Smith, is published by F. G. Williams, & Co., at Kirtland (dated 1835). W. W. Phelps has been working on the collection since Sept. 11, 1835. It contains 90 hymns (words only, no music).

Feb. 1, 1836

Joseph attends Hebrew school. He later explains the gospel to Mr. Seixas, who listens cordially.

Feb. 6, 1836

Several councils of the Church are called together to receive the seal of their blessings in the temple. However, there is much confusion among several of the quorums, and the Spirit is not felt. The Quorum of the Seventy does enjoy "a great flow of the Holy Spirit . . . which was like fire in their bones." William Smith of the Twelve sees a vision of the Twelve and the Seventy in England.

Feb. 7, 1836

Joseph meets with the Presidency of the Church, in the presence of the Seventy, to choose a second Quorum of the Seventy.

Feb. 12, 1836

Joseph studies Hebrew in the day, and in the evening meets with several quorums in the temple school room. He talks about many members who bring persecution on the Church, "in consequence of their zeal without knowledge." (HC 2:394.)

Feb. 15, 1836

Hebrew school continues translating the Bible from Hebrew. Professor Seixas being absent in the afternoon, Joseph unites in prayer with the other brethren asking that, just as Seixas has been their teacher in Hebrew, they may become his teacher in the gospel, that he might believe the Book of Mormon and be baptized.

Feb. 16, 1836

Joseph continues translating, making good progress. "Extremely cold weather, and fine sleighing." (HC 2:396.)

Feb. 19, 1836

Joseph talks with Seixas about religion. He believes the Lord is striving with Seixas because he is a chosen vessel, and that he will eventually join the Church; "but I forbear lest I get to prophesying upon his head." (HC 2:397.)

Feb. 22, 1836

The lower room of the temple is ready for painting, and Brigham Young will superintend it. The sisters meet to begin making for the temple a white canvas curtain called the veil.

Mar. 1836

Throughout this month Joseph studies Hebrew six days a week, translating Genesis. Several people are baptized.

Mar. 3, 1836

Elijah Abel, a Negro, is ordained an elder and receives his patriarchal blessing from Joseph Smith, Sr.

Mar. 5, 1836

The board kiln burns again for the fifth or sixth time this winter.

Mar. 12, 1836

A drunk man freezes to death in the night. Joseph writes, "How long, O Lord, will this monster intemperance find its victims on the earth!" (HC 2:406.)

Mar. 13, 1836

Joseph meets with the Presidency and the Twelve to discuss leaving for Zion by May 15, 1836.

Mar. 23, 1836

Joseph attends school. Two persons are baptized. It is a pleasant day for sleighing.

Mar. 26, 1836

Saturday. Joseph meets with the Presidency to arrange for the solemn assembly to take place the next day.

Mar. 27, 1836

The Kirtland Temple is dedicated. The doors to the temple are open at seven A.M. Joseph seats the people. Almost 1,000 enter, many others are turned away. Contributions in excess of $950 are given. At nine A.M. Sidney Rigdon opens the service and speaks for two and a half hours on the need for belief in "present revelation," at one point drawing tears from many. He says that in spite of the many houses of worship built on the earth, this is the only one built by divine revelation. Songs of hosanna are sung. The audience rises to sustain the First Presidency. The Twelve are sustained "as Prophets, Seers, Revelators, and special witnesses to all nations of the earth." (HC 2:417.) The Presidents of the Seventy are sustained as "Apostles and special witnesses to the nations, to assist the Twelve in opening the Gospel kingdom among all people." Other officers are also sustained. "The vote was unanimous in every instance." (HC 2:418.) Another hymn is sung. Joseph offers the dedicatory prayer, which was given by revelation. It is recorded as D&C 109.

The dedication is then unanimously accepted and the Lord's Supper is administered. Others rise to speak. President Frederick G. Williams testifies that an angel entered the window. David Whitmer also testifies that he saw an angel. President Brigham Young gives a short speech in tongues, which David W. Patten interprets; Elder Patten then speaks in tongues himself. The meeting is adjourned at about four o'clock.

In the evening 416 brothers meet for the ordinance of the washing of feet. George A. Smith begins to prophesy, and a noise "like the sound of a rushing mighty wind" fills the temple; all arise and feel the invisible power, and experience visions, angels, the gift of tongues. People in the neighborhood hearing unusual noises and seeing the bright light above the temple run toward it to see what is happening. (HC 2:410-28.)

Mar. 29, 1836

Joseph attends the last lecture in Hebrew taught by Professor Seixas before Seixas leaves Kirtland. Joseph meets with other brethren in the Lord's House. They partake of the bread and wine of the Lord's Supper, tend to the ordinance of the washing of feet, and continue in the house all night, prophesying about the glory of God.

Mar. 30, 1836

About 300 brothers meet in the temple to attend to the ordinance of the washing of feet. A contribution is taken. The Lord's Supper is passed and their fast is broken. Joseph instructs the elders that "it was not necessary for them to be sent out, two by two, as in former times, but to go in all meekness, in sobriety, and preach Jesus Christ and Him crucified; not to contend with others on account of their faith, or systems of religion, but pursue a steady course. This I delivered by way of commandment, and all who observe it not, will pull down persecution upon their heads, while those who do, shall always be filled with the Holy Ghost; this I pronounced as a prophecy, and sealed with hosanna and amen." Joseph then tells the quorums that he has completed the organization of the Church, "that I had given them all the instruction they needed." (HC 2:430-32.)

Joseph returns to the temple about nine P.M. and continues with the brethren prophesying and speaking in tongues until five o'clock the next morning. The Savior appears to some; angels administer to others; and "it was a Pentecost and an endowment indeed." (HC 2:432-33.)

Mar. 31, 1836

The temple is again dedicated for those who could not enter the previous Sunday. The meeting progresses in a manner similar to that of March 27.

Apr. 1, 1836

Leman Copley, who had left the Church several years earlier and who had testified against Joseph in his suit with Philastus Hurlburt, returns to Joseph to repent and confess his wrongs. He puts his confession in writing and asks for baptism again. Joseph readily forgives him.

Apr. 2, 1836

The Presidency meets to discuss the raising of money for the redemption of Zion. Church publications are discussed.

Apr. 3, 1836

Joseph attends meetings in the temple. Thomas B. Marsh and David W. Patten speak in the morning. In the afternoon Joseph assists in distributing the Lord's Supper to the members. The veils are then dropped and Joseph and Oliver Cowdery retire to the pulpit behind them, bow themselves in prayer, and receive the vision recorded as D&C 110.

Apr. -May 1836

Joseph devotes his time to the "spiritual interests of the brethren; and particularly in devising ways and means to build up Kirtland." (HC 2:441.)

May 16, 1836

Joseph is involved in Church courts concerning a variety of charges, such as drinking, family neglect, adultery, unChristian-like conduct, and lying.

May 17 1836

Joseph's grandmother, Mary Smith, wife of Asael Smith, arrives in Kirtland after a 500-mile trip. She is 93 years old and its satisfied that Joseph is the prophet. Her husband, Asael, once predicted that a prophet would be raised up in their family.

May 27, 1836

Grandmother Mary Smith dies. Sidney Rigdon preaches the brief funeral sermon.

June 2, 1836

Oliver Cowdery receives a letter from W. W. Phelps noting that Far West, Missouri, is a good place for the Saints to settle.

June 16, 1836

Church courts are held in which two elders are tried for lack of charity and want of benevolence to the poor. Orson Hyde writes the "first genuine Mormon missionary tract," which is published in August 1836 in Toronto, Canada, under the title: "A prophetic warning to all the churches, of every sect and denomination, and to every individual into whose hands it may fall." (BYS, Su '72, 510-11.)

June 20, 1836

Frederick Granger Williams Smith is born to Joseph and Emma in Kirtland. He is named after Joseph's second counselor.

June 22, 1836

Joseph's father and uncle go on a mission to the East to give patriarchal blessings throughout the Church.

June 28, 1836

Elder Warren Parrish writes that several elders have been mobbed, arrested, and kicked out of Tennessee for preaching the gospel.

June 29, 1836

A public meeting is held in Liberty, Clay County, Missouri, in which the local citizens decide that to avoid a civil war the Saints must leave Clay County. They accuse the Saints of coming into the county friendless and penniless, of arriving in large numbers, of being nonslave holders, and of communicating with the Indian tribes.

July 1, 1836

The Mormons meet in Clay County to deny several of the charges that are made against them; however, under protest, they agree to leave.

July 18, 1836

Gov. Dunklin sends a letter to the Missouri Saints saying that although he sympathizes with them, the public considers them obnoxious and has determined to expel them; and it is therefore useless for him to go against the overwhelming public sentiment. He tells them that if they cannot convince their fellow inhabitants that they are totally innocent, they had better leave the county, because "all I can say to you is that in this Republic the vox populi is the vox Dei" (the voice of the people is the voice of God). (HC 2:461-62.)

July 25, 1836

Joseph and the First Presidency in Kirtland send a letter to the Missouri Saints advising them not to give any further offenses. Joseph, Hyrum, Sidney, and Oliver leave Kirtland for New York. From New York they go to Salem, Mass.

At this time the Church is in dire financial stress, the Kirtland Temple having cost between $40,000 and $60,000. A brother named Burgess comes to Joseph and says that he knows of a large amount of money hidden away in a cellar of a certain house in Salem, Mass., which had belonged to a widow. The woman has died, and he is the only person who knows of the whereabouts of the treasure. Joseph and the others take him at his word and decide to go to Salem to gain the treasure for the financial welfare of the Church. When they reach Salem, Burgess claims that the town has changed so much that he cannot find the house, and soon afterwards he leaves them there. Joseph hires a house in Salem and they stay there for approximately a month, visiting various sections of the surrounding country from time to time. While in Salem, Joseph records his thoughts concerning Puritanism and its terrible religious intoleration and persecution of other sects; burning of witches; torturing, whipping, and burning Catholics; and so on. He quotes the Savior's statement, "By their fruits you shall know them." (HC 2:464-65.)

Aug. 1836

Orson Hyde publishes his missionary tract, "A Prophetic Warning . . .," in Toronto, Canada.

Aug. 6, 1836

In Salem, Joseph receives D&C 111. Brigham Young and Lyman E. Johnson join the group in Salem. Brigham has been traveling with Joseph Young throughout the East and has baptized a good number of people. In Boston they baptized 17 people.

Aug. 11, 1836

The Rev. Truman Coe writes a description of Mormonism in the Ohio Observer, including the statement that "they believe that the true God is a material being, composed of body and parts; and that when the Creator formed Adam in his own image, he made him about the size and shape of God himself." This is one of the earliest recorded statements concerning the Mormon belief on this doctrine. (BYS, Sp '77, 354.)

Sept. 1836

Joseph returns to Kirtland sometime this month.

Fall 1836

Various members of the Twelve are on successful missions in the East and in Canada.

Oct. 1836

The Missouri Saints continue to gather at Shoal Creek, later known as Far West.

Oct. 2, 1836

Joseph's father and uncle return to Kirtland after a 2,400-mile trip visiting dozens of eastern branches.

Oct. 18, 1836

Sidney Rigdon deposits $12 for 2,000 shares of stock in the Kirtland Safety Society. He later receives another 1,000 shares and pays $818 by November 16, 1836.

Nov. 2, 1836

Several of the brethren meet in Kirtland and draw up the articles of the "Kirtland Safety Society," with Sidney Rigdon as president and Joseph Smith as cashier. They dispatch Orson Hyde to Columbus, Ohio, to gain a banking charter from the legislature. They dispatch Oliver Cowdery to go to Philadelphia to get printing plates for the printing of their banknotes.

Nov. 25, 1836

Wilford Woodruff returns to Kirtland from a mission in Missouri, Kentucky, Arkansas, and Tennessee, after baptizing over 100 people, many of whom immigrated to Kirtland.

Dec. 1, 1836

The Missouri Saints gather at Far West and petition for an act of incorporation for a new county exclusively for Mormons. Alexander Doniphan, the Saints' lawyer and a Missouri Democrat, introduces the bill into the state legislature.

Dec. 20, 1836

Elijah Abel is ordained a seventy by Zebedee Coltrin. Abel was apparently reordained on April 4, 1841.

Dec. 22, 1836

A special conference is called in Kirtland as a result of the financial embarrassment of the Saints in Kirtland. The branches abroad are instructed not to send only the poor people to Kirtland, for they have no monies with which to pay for things. The gathering to Kirtland is stopped, and donations and monies are requested from the other branches. At this time large tracts of land in Kirtland have been purchased and planned into lots. The long-range plan is for a large city. A printing establishment, sawmill, and tannery have been founded, all of which prove to be unprofitable. And the only people coming into Kirtland seem to be the poor converts, who only add to the problems of the Church.

Dec. 29, 1836

Gov. Boggs of Missouri signs into law a compromise bill forming two smaller counties out of a larger one; this forms Caldwell and Daviess counties. It is understood that Caldwell County will be reserved exclusively for the Mormons, although some of them also settle in Daviess County. In a short space of time, 4900 Saints move into Caldwell County and settle near Far West and other places.
