J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Jan. 1, 1837

Oliver Cowdery returns to Kirtland with the printing plates he has purchased in Philadelphia. At the same time, Orson Hyde returns from Columbus, Ohio, with the disappointing news that the bank charter has been rejected by the state legislature. Joseph records that the charter was denied "because we were 'Mormons.'" However, at this time the antibanking wing of the Democratic Party has just won control of the state legislature, and those in power are turning down all bank applications.

Jan. 2, 1837

The Kirtland Safety Society meets and revises its articles. They decide to go ahead with the bank in spite of the lack of legal charter from the state government, but they call it the "Kirtland Safety Society Anti-Bank-ing Company." (CHC 1:401.) They determine to have a capital stock of at least $4 million, with shares costing $50 each. There would be 32 managers. In the Messenger and Advocate Joseph prints a notice, to "take stock in our Safety Society . . . bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold (not their bank notes) with them, unto the name of the Lord thy God." (HC 2:473.)

Jan. 6, 1837

The new banknotes begin circulation. There is a short boom, but within three weeks the bank announces it will stop redeeming the notes in specie (gold).

Jan. 12, 1837

The local papers run a series of articles stating that there is a law fixing a $1,000 fine on anyone caught circulating unauthorized bank bills. A month later, one of the same papers editorializes that the 1816 law that stipulated the penalty is obsolete. Nevertheless, the earlier articles discouraged people from trading with the Kirtland money.

Jan. 23, 1837

Sidney Rigdon announces that the bank will no longer give out specie for the Kirtland banknotes. Many people in Kirtland have honored the notes, but no other bank will honor them, and when this is learned, there is a run on the bank.

Jan. 24, 1837

Local papers carry the notice that the Mormons are no longer redeeming their banknotes in gold coin, but will only exchange the notes for land. The notes have therefore only circulated freely for less than three weeks. After this date the Kirtland Anti-Banking Company notes are issued at a greatly decreased rate. The average price paid for a $50 share is about 26 1/4 cents. They were never sold at full face value of $50 per share.

Jan.-March 1837

Because so little hard cash is necessary to buy notes with such a high face value (for instance $52.50 would buy notes with a face value of $10,000), many begin to foolishly believe that they have made their fortune. City lots jump from $150 to $500-$1000. In the ensuing weeks and months, the spirit of speculation spreads through Kirtland.

The second edition (5,000 copies) of the Book of Mormon is printed in Kirtland. The Kirtland High School is held in the attic of the Kirtland Temple. Approximately 140 students attend in three different departments. H. N. Hawes, Esq., is the professor of Greek and Latin.

Feb. 1837

The Missouri Saints gather in Caldwell County to build houses and to prepare to plant crops.

Feb. 8, 1837

Samuel D. Rounds swears out a writ against Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and others, charging them with the civil action of banking without legal authority. This case is brought to court on March 24, 1837, and tried before a jury in October 1837. Sidney and Joseph are fined $1000 each, but appeal the case.

April 3-6, 1837

A conference of the Church is held in Kirtland, with a solemn assembly held on April 6 for the purpose of the washing of feet, anointing, and receiving various instructions. Other meetings are held by different quorums, leading up to a general meeting on April 6. The seventies who have previously been ordained high priests are released from their callings as seventies, and new seventies are called and ordained. Joseph explains that the Melchizedek Priesthood is "no other than the Priesthood of the Son of God." He also says, "After all that has been said, the greatest and most important duty is to preach the Gospel." He talks about "embarrassment, of a pecuniary nature," stating that $6,000 is still needed by the members in Missouri, and $13,000 is needed for the debts caused by the building of the Lord's House in Kirtland. The sacrament of the Lord's Supper is passed, using bread and water. This is the first mention of water being used in the sacrament instead of wine. (HC 2:475-80.)

April 3-5, 1837

W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer are accused by other members of the Church in Missouri of using Church funds to buy large sections of land in their own name and selling those sections to Church members for a profit. (Phelps and Whitmer have been the counselors to Stake President David Whitmer, who was absent. Elders David W. Patten and Thomas B. Marsh, among others, speak against them.)

April 7, 1837

Phelps and Whitmer agree to turn the land back over to the Church to be divided among the Saints. City plans for Far West are drawn up, and a committee is appointed for the building of a temple there.

April 24, 1837

David W. Patten prefers a charge against Lyman Wight in Missouri, accusing him of teaching false doctrine. Wight had said the Church was under a telestial law because the Lord does not use a whip under a celestial law. Wight then took some of the Church members outdoors to whip them "into shape." It is decided that Wight must acknowledge that he had been teaching abominable doctrines before he would be forgiven.

May 10, 1837

Eight hundred banks nationwide suspend payments about this time in the "Panic of 1837," as a depression hits the nation. Suspended payments in New York City alone amount to over $100 million. Within a week, the banks in Ohio suspend payment.

May 1837

With the great depressing of prices, poor Saints who had thought to get rich quick through speculation find themselves suddenly poor again. The spirit of apostasy hits every quorum in the Church. Many blame Joseph personally because he was deeply connected with the Kirtland Safety Society. At least five of the Quorum of the Twelve begin to speak against the Prophet.

May 28, 1837

The Presidency of the Church at Far West resolve unanimously not to fellowship any member of the Church who will not observe the Word of Wisdom literally.

May 29, 1837

Frederick G. Williams, David Whitmer, Parley P. Pratt, Lyman E. Johnson, and Warren Parrish are accused of pursuing a course that is considered injurious to the church of God. A Church court is called to try them. Referring to the charges against Pratt, Sidney Rigdon says he cannot sit in judgment and leaves the stand. Oliver Cowdery then does likewise. Williams leaves also. Confusion breaks out and the court is closed without a decision. Lyman E. Johnson and Orson Pratt bring charges against Joseph Smith for "lying and misrepresentation—also for extortion—and for speaking disrespectfully against his brethren behind their backs." (BYS, Su '71, 327.)

Late in May 1837 while Joseph is on a mission in Michigan, members of the Twelve and others meet in the temple to drop Joseph as prophet of the Church. They want to replace him with David Whitmer. Brigham Young and a few others defend the Prophet and are called a "lick skillet" for doing so. Jacob Bump, a former boxer, almost gets into a fist fight with Brigham, but the meeting breaks up in confusion. (IJB 342-43; JD 11:11.)

June 3, 1837

Grandison Newel takes Joseph to court in Painesville, accusing him of conspiring to take Newel's life. Joseph is put under a $500 bond to keep the peace, but at the next hearing he is discharged due to lack of evidence.

June 4, 1837

God reveals to Joseph that "something new must be done for the salvation of His Church." Joseph sets apart Heber C. Kimball to preside over the England Mission, "the first foreign mission of the Church of Christ in the last days." While Joseph is ordaining Elder Kimball, Orson Hyde comes in, repents of his negative feelings, and asks to be allowed to go to England also. He also is set apart.

June 8, 1837

Joseph transfers his shares in the Kirtland Safety Society to Oliver Granger and Jared Carter, as do many other shareholders between this date and June 20.

June 11, 1837

A high council meeting is held at Far West, Mo. The high councilors resolve that no Church member should sell spirituous liquors or trade with any person who does. Joseph meets to instruct those called to England (Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Joseph Fielding, and Dr. Willard Richards). They are told to preach only the first principles of the gospel, and not to teach about the gathering, the vision (D&C 76), or the book of the Doctrine and Covenants.

June 12-14, 1837

Joseph is sick, too sick to raise his head from his pillow to bid farewell to those leaving on their missions. While he is sick, enemies say he is suffering from the curse of God for teaching the Church things that are contrary to godliness. On June 14 Dr. Levi Richards gives Joseph some herbs and mild food, and suddenly his health is restored.

June 22, 1837

The elders going to England meet other elders in New York (for a total of seven) and engage passage on the ship Garrick.

July 1, 1837

The Garrick sails for Liverpool.

July 2, 1837

Last entry is made in the records of the Kirtland Safety Society. After this date the society did not operate. (For a discussion on the failure of the society, see BYS, Su '77, 391-472.)

July 3, 1837

Fifteen hundred Saints gather in Far West, Mo., to break ground for a temple. Their numbers increase daily, but anti-Mormon forces are also gathering in Daviess County.

Before July 7, 1837

Previous to this date, Joseph had resigned from his office in the Kirtland Safety Society, having turned over management to Warren Parrish and Frederick G. Williams. Joseph comments "that no institution of the kind, established upon just and righteous principles for a blessing not only to the Church but the whole nation, would be suffered to continue its operations in such an age of darkness, speculation and wickedness." (HC 2:497.) About this time Joseph accuses Parrish of stealing $25,000 from the Kirtland Safety Society, thus bringing about its ruin. When he goes to Williams to get a search warrant, Williams refuses and Joseph threatens to drop Williams from the Presidency. Williams still refuses, and Joseph drops him from the Presidency. There seems to be little evidence that Parrish did steal any amount in specie (hard cash) from the Safety Society; however, there is evidence that he did print notes without authorization. (For further discussion, see BYS, Su '77, 499; LJA 427-28; BYS, Su '72, 432-36.)

July 16, 1837

Orson Hyde preaches on board the Garrick. Heber C. Kimball secretly heals a sick child.

July 20, 1837

The Garrick anchors on the River Mersey at Liverpool, and the brethren go to Preston, 30 miles away.

July 23, 1837

Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, and others preach at the church of the Rev. James Fielding in Preston, England. (James Fielding is a brother of Elder Joseph Fielding, who had gone with Elders Kimball and Hyde to England.) This is the first instance of preaching outside the United States and Canada. On this same day, Joseph receives D&C 112.

July 26, 1837

In England, the Rev. Fielding begins to fear he will lose his flock if the elders continue to preach there. He does not allow them to preach any longer.

July 27, 1837

Joseph tries to leave for a Canadian mission, but is detained all day in a lawsuit at Painesville. A man who had wanted Joseph to pay for his cooking stove had sworn out a writ against him. Joseph gives his watch as security.

July 28, 1837

Joseph stays at home until night and then leaves Kirtland and travels 30 miles to Ashtabula, Ohio.

July 29, 1837

Joseph remains in Ashtabula. During the day he bathes at the beach, and in the afternoon he takes a boat to Buffalo.

July 30, 1837

Joseph separates from Brigham Young and Albert P. Rockwood and heads for Toronto with Sidney Rigdon and Thomas B. Marsh. On the morning of this day, in Preston, England, Elders Russell, Hyde, and Kimball have a terrible experience with the devil, being knocked about by an invisible force. They finally rebuke the evil spirit. At ten A.M. at the River Ribble they baptize nine members. George D. Watt runs a race with another for the honor of being the first to be baptized in England in this dispensation and wins; nine thousand spectators watch. Some years later when Heber Kimball told Joseph about the experiences with Satan, Joseph recorded, "When I heard of it, it gave me great joy, for I then knew that the work of God had taken root in that land. . . . The nearer a person approaches the Lord, a greater power will be manifested by the adversary to prevent the accomplishment of His purposes." (OFW 129-32.)

Aug. 1837

The Messenger and Advocate prints a warning: "Beware of speculators, renegades, and gamblers, who are duping the unwary and unsuspecting, by palming upon them those bills, which are of no worth here. I discountenance and disapprove of any and all such practices." (HC 2:507.) A newspaper to be called Elder's Journal is announced. Joseph Smith will be the editor.

Aug. 4, 1837

Jenetta Richards, daughter of the Rev. John Richards, is the first to be confirmed in England. The ordinance is performed by Heber C. Kimball. Jenetta will later marry Dr. Willard Richards while he is on a mission, which causes a great deal of bickering among the new English converts. The Saints also dislike her because she wears nice clothes (representing the upper class). She takes to wearing her worst clothes.

Aug 5, 1837

The Saints in Far West agree to build a relatively modest house of the Lord, with Bishop Partridge as treasurer for the venture. Elder Goodson in England, in direct violation of Joseph's orders, reads D&C 76 publicly, "which turned the current feeling generally, and nearly closed the door in all that region." (HC 2:505.)

Aug. 6, 1837

The elders in England begin to be persecuted, being called "thieves" and "sheep stealers" by other ministers. (HC 2:506.)

Aug. 28, 1837

The Ohio banks (except Kirtland) that had suspended payment because of the national depression resume payments at this time.

Late August 1837

Joseph returns to Kirtland, having preached, baptized, and blessed the Saints in Canada.

Sept. 3, 1837

A general conference is held in Kirtland. The body of the Church unanimously sustains Joseph as the president. Joseph presents Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams for a sustaining vote and Elder Williams is not sustained. Joseph introduces Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Smith, Sr., Hyrum Smith, and (Uncle) John Smith as assistant counselors, stating these, with the others, are to be considered as the heads of the Church. They are sustained unanimously. The Twelve Apostles are presented for a sustaining vote. Luke S. Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson, and John F. Boynton are rejected and disfellowshipped. Boynton, being the only one present, tries to confess his sins and explain his reasons, stating that he had been told that the bank had been instituted by the power of God and would never fail; so his faith was shaken when it did fail. Joseph states that he said the bank would survive only if it was conducted on righteous principles. Another vote is taken in Elder Boynton's case, but he still is not sustained. In other proposed sustainings, objections are made against Martin Harris, John Johnson, Joseph Coe, Joseph Kingsbury, and John P. Greene.

While Joseph was on his mission to Canada in August, dissension in the Church was everywhere. Calling themselves the "Old Standard," Warren Parrish, Martin Harris, Luke S. Johnson, John F. Boynton, and others claimed that they should lead the Church and should control the temple. The "Old Standard" arrived with weapons during one Sunday meeting and threatened to take the temple by force from Joseph Smith, Sr., who was presiding at that meeting. The congregation scattered in fear, the police came in and took out the offenders, and order was finally restored. A young woman who was staying at David Whitmer's home prophesied through a black stone that Joseph had fallen because of transgression, and Church leadership would fall on David Whitmer or Martin Harris. The apostates held many meetings with her and formed their new group. These are the reasons for the lack of sustainings at the September conference. (For further discussion, see IJB 350-52; LMS 241-43; CHC 1:403-4.) Although Joseph has Oliver Cowdery sustained at this time, he announces that Oliver is in transgression. Joseph hopes that he will humble himself.

Sept. 4, 1837

Joseph writes to Zion (Missouri), apologizing for the recent problems and stating, "Brethren, we have waded through affliction and sorrow thus far for the will of God, that language is inadequate to describe. Pray ye therefore with more earnestness for our redemption. You have undoubtedly been informed by letter and otherwise of our difficulties in Kirtland, which are now about being settled." (HC 2:508.) He receives a revelation stating that the Lord is not pleased with John Whitmer and W. W. Phelps.

Sept. 9, 1837

A high council is organized in Kirtland.

Sept. 10, 1837

A meeting is held at the Lord's House in Kirtland. Luke S. Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson, and John F. Boynton of the Twelve, and John P. Greene confess their sins; they are received back into fellowship and return to their former offices.

Sept. 17, 1837

A conference is held in Kirtland. One hundred nine missionaries are called on various missions.

Sept. 18, 1837

The Kirtland bishopric sends a letter to the other branches of the Church, explaining the financial embarrassment involved in the debt caused by building the house of the Lord, and asking the Saints to send a tithe in gold and silver for the relief of Kirtland and the building of Zion.

Sept. 27, 1837

Joseph, Sidney Rigdon, William Smith, and Vincent Knight leave Kirtland for Missouri.

Oct. 1837

The Elders' Journal begins publication, replacing the Messenger and Advocate. Only two issues will be published in Kirtland. In the case begun the previous February by Samuel D. Rounds, suing Joseph for his banking activities, a jury trial is held and Joseph and Sidney are fined $1,000 each.

Oct. 30, 1837

A plan is presented to the high council for the re-organization of the Church by a group that claims Moroni had appeared to Collins Brewster.

Nov. 1, 1837

About this time Joseph arrives in Far West, Mo.

Nov. 6-7, 1837

At a meeting in Far West it is decided that the building of the house of the Lord will be postponed until the Lord reveals that it is his will to have it commence. At a general conference on Nov. 7, Frederick G. Williams is again objected to as second counselor and he is replaced by Hyrum Smith, who is accepted unanimously. When David Whitmer is about to be sustained, there is some debate; but after Joseph's remarks about him, he is unanimously accepted as stake president. John Whitmer, after confessing his errors, is sustained as first assistant president. W. W. Phelps confesses and is sustained as the second assistant president. The apostles and the bishopric are also sustained, and the congregations ban trading with liquor, tobacco, coffee, tea shops, etc.

Nov. 10, 1837

About this time Joseph leaves Far West to return to Kirtland.

Nov. 20, 1837

The high council at Kirtland brings charges against several people who are following revelations given to Collins Brewster, supposedly translated by him from the book of Moroni. Moses Norris ordained Brewster a prophet. Fellowship is withdrawn.

Dec. 1837

John F. Boynton is excommunicated.

Dec. 6, 1837

The Far West high council approves a motion to pay themselves and other Church officials $1.50 per day for Church work.

Dec. 10, 1837

Joseph reaches Kirtland. While he was gone, Warren Parrish, John F. Boynton, Luke S. Johnson, Joseph Coe, and others had tried to overthrow the Church. Under the name "Church of Christ," and calling themselves the "Reformers" or the "Old Standard," they called those who supported Joseph heretics, took over the temple frequently, and tried to run Joseph's followers out of town. Those who defended Joseph are sharply criticized and, according to one testimony, "there were not 20 persons on earth that would declare that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God." (TFO 45.) At one point, someone claimed that Moses was a rascal, the prophets were tyrants, Jesus a despot, Paul a liar, and all religion "a fudge." (DH 214-15; IJB 353-54.) Shortly after returning to Kirtland, Joseph calls a meeting of elders in the temple. Joseph and Sidney give forceful speeches against the apostates. This group, led by Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer, and David Whitmer, as well as Boynton, Parrish, and the Johnsons, speak against Joseph. The meeting breaks up in confusion. Nearly 50 leaders of the apostates are excommunicated. Threats of violence continue.

Dec. 22, 1837

Brigham Young, as one of the most vocal defenders of Joseph, begins to fear for his life as the violence grows. He flees from Kirtland on horseback.

Dec. 25, 1837

In England the missionaries hire the "Cock Pit" for preaching. They meet there this Christmas day with 300 Saints for the first conference held in England. They teach the Word of Wisdom to the Saints, the first time that it is publicly taught in England. Joseph closes his record of this year with the comment, "Apostasy, persecution, confusion, and mobocracy strove hard to bear rule at Kirtland, and thus closed the year 1837." (HC 2:529.)
