J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Jan. 1838

"A new year dawned upon the Church in Kirtland in all the bitterness of the spirit of apostate mobocracy." (HC 3:1.) Grandison Newel has another warrant out for Joseph's arrest. This time it is on the charge of fraud. Joseph has been in constant legal difficulty in the past year. Foreclosures, warrants for his arrest, trials, seizure of property, and any other possible legal maneuvers have been used against him. Joseph's mother claims that this is either to gain his property or to get him put into jail. The "Reformers" plan to sue Joseph for debt, and if he is unable to pay, they will take over ownership of the Egyptian mummies being kept in the temple. They threaten to burn them.

Jan. 12, 1838

Joseph receives three revelations, the contents of which are now unknown. Joseph flees from Kirtland on his horse, "Old Charley," with Sidney Rigdon and rides 60 miles the first day. According to one story, a repentant apostate warns Joseph of a plot to assassinate him. The mob appears before Joseph can escape. He is quickly placed in a box nailed onto an ox cart. He is then driven out of town to safety, gets his horse, and rides off. (See IJB 355.)

Jan. 13, 1838

At Norton, Ohio, Joseph and Sidney wait 36 hours for their families to arrive.

Jan. 15-16, 1838

The printing press in Kirtland, formerly owned by the Church but attached for debt payment in December, burns down. Those loyal to Joseph blame the apostates. The apostates, of course, blame those loyal to Joseph.

Jan. 16, 1838

The families travel in wagons toward Far West, Mo. Joseph reaches Dublin, Indiana, where he stays for nine days with Brigham Young. Destitute, he asks Brigham Young if he has any advice for him. Joseph cuts wood to sustain himself, being totally without finances; a member sells his farm for $300 and donates it to him. His enemies chase him for two hundred miles, often crossing his tracks or looking for him when he is hidden in the same house with just a partition between them.

Feb. 5, 1838

A general assembly of the Church is held at Far West, Mo., to decide whether or not David Whitmer, John Whitmer, and W. W. Phelps should continue as the (stake) presidency of the Church in Missouri. The assembly is repeated at other Mormon settlements for the next four days. After lengthy arguments, there is an almost unanimous vote to reject these three as presidents. Whitmer and Phelps are accused of having used $1400 of Church funds to buy Missouri lands and then selling them to the Saints for a profit. They are also accused of having sold lands in Jackson County, which constituted a denial of the faith (because of the prophecies concerning the eventual return to Jackson County). David Whitmer has also been charged with breaking the Word of Wisdom.

Feb. 10, 1838

The high council meeting is held at Far West. It is recommended that several members volunteer for military duty even though, as licensed ministers, they are exempt. Thomas B. Marsh and David W. Patten are appointed to lead the Church until Joseph arrives. Joseph and Sidney Rigdon are, at this time, each leading a party by a different route toward Missouri.

March 1838

Joseph records the political motto of the Church, which praises the U. S. Constitution and democracy but warns, "woe to tyrants, mobs, aristocracy, anarchy, and toryism, and all those who invent or seek out unrighteous and vexatious law suits, under the pretext and color of law, or office, either religious or political. Exalt the standard of Democracy!" (HC 3:9.)

D&C 113 is recorded, which contains the Prophet's answers to certain questions concerning Isaiah.

March 14, 1838

Joseph and Emma, who is pregnant, arrive in Far West to the open arms of their eager friends. They move into the home of George W. Harris. Every few days more Saints arrive.

March 29, 1838

Joseph writes a letter to the Kirtland Saints saying that because of the many lawsuits in the past seven years he could not leave Kirtland in a good situation, "but if there are any wrongs, they shall all be noticed, so far as the Lord gives me ability and power to do so." (HC 3:9-12.)

Spring 1838

The town of Far West begins to develop, with 1,500 Saints, 150 houses, 6 stores, and 1 schoolhouse, which is also used for a church. Later, other Saints will arrive from Kirtland and the population will swell and spill over out of Caldwell into Ray, Daviess, and Carroll counties. Sidney Rigdon builds the biggest house, with double logs; it includes an endowment room. Of the 5,000 people living in Caldwell, 4,900 are Mormons.

April 4, 1838

Sidney Rigdon and his group reach Far West after suffering many afflictions along the way.

April 6-7, 1838

General conference is held at Far West, where they celebrate the anniversary of the organization of the Church. New appointments are made. Thomas B. Marsh is made stake president of Far West with Brigham Young and David Patten as his counselors. John Whitmer is asked to return the copies of the Church historical record that he had made, but he seems reluctant to do so.

April 11, 1838

Oliver Cowdery is accused in a Church court:

April 12, 1838

All charges except for four, five, and six are sustained, and Oliver Cowdery is excommunicated from the Church.

April 13, 1838

Five charges are brought against David Whitmer. He withdraws fellowship from the Church before they can cut him off. Elders Luke S. Johnson and Lyman E. Johnson are also cut off.

April 17, 1838

Joseph receives D&C 114. This same date he also receives a revelation for Brigham Young.

April 20, 1838

Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde leave Liverpool for America, leaving Joseph Fielding as mission president' and Willard Richards and William Clayton as his counselors. Since they arrived in Great Britain nine months earlier, about 1500 people have been converted and 26 branches established. Until the return of the Twelve two years later, almost as many would leave the Church in England as would join, due to a series of internal problems. (See WC 7-11.)

April 26, 1838

Joseph receives D&C 115.

April 27, 1838

Joseph begins writing the history of the Church from its beginning to this date.

May 1838

Joseph spends the month in writing his history, preaching sermons, attending Church courts, and traveling.

May 6, 1838

Sunday. Joseph preaches, cautioning the Saints to beware of men who come among them growling and whining for money. He also explains astronomy as understood by Abraham.

May 7, 1838

Elder Reynolds Cahoon and Parley P. Pratt arrive in Far West from New York City.

May 8, 1838

Joseph publishes in the Elders' Journal answers to frequently asked questions concerning basic Mormon beliefs, the origin of the Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith as a prophet, the communal order, polygamy, the Mormons' view of abolition, Joseph's reputation as a money digger (Joseph admits to it but says he only got $14 a month for it).

May 11, 1838

William E. McLellin is tried in a Church court for lustful desires and for lack of confidence in the Church leaders. (McLellin is eventually cut off from the Church; yet 50 years later he testifies, "I have no faith in Mormonism as an ism, even from its start . . . but when a man goes at the Book of Mormon he touches the apple of my eye. He fights against truth—against purity—against light—against the purest, or one of the truest, purest books on earth." BYS, Su '70, 486.)

May 18-June 1, 1838

Joseph leaves Far West and travels to the northern part of the state, comforting the poor, etc. He then returns to Far West.

May 19, 1838

Joseph marches across the Grand River to the mouth of Honey Creek and from there takes a boat 18 miles to Lyman Wight's home. Wight lives at the foot of Tower Hill, a name Joseph gives the hill because of some ruins, which he designates as an old Nephite altar or tower. One half mile from Lyman Wight's ferry, the brethren reach a place called Spring Hill; the Lord names it Adam-ondi-Ahman, "because, said He, it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the Prophet." (HC 3:34-35. For a discussion of the Nephite tower see BYS, Su '73, 553-76 and BYS, Aut '72, 27-35.) The above-quoted explanation of the name Adam-ondi-Ahman, is now found as D&C 116.

June 2, 1838

Alexander Hale Smith is born to Emma in Far West. He is named for Joseph's friend and lawyer, Alexander Doniphan, and is also given Emma's maiden name, Hale.

June 4, 1838

Joseph leaves Far West for Adam-ondi-Ahman with Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum.

June 5, 1838

They reach Col. Lyman Wight's house in the rain and survey the area for several days.

June 17, 1838

John D. Lee and wife, Aggatha, are baptized in Far West.

June 19 or 17 (?), 1838

Sidney Rigdon delivers the famous "Salt Sermon" based on Matthew 5:13. At this time there are so many dissenters in Missouri that many of the loyal Saints feel that the old settlers of Missouri will be stirred up against the Saints by the apostates. This sermon is Sidney's warning to the apostates that they, like the salt, "have lost his savour, . . . it is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out and to be trodden under foot of men." He implies that the apostates will be literally trodden under foot if they do not move out at once.

Shortly thereafter, a printed notice addressed to Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, John Whitmer, W. W. Phelps, and Luke E. Johnson is circulated, warning them to leave Missouri at once, under threat of physical violence. This is signed by 84 leading Saints, the first of whom was named Sampson Avard. Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon did not sign this petition. The apostates flee from Missouri at once, hoping their families will follow them shortly.

About this time, a secret oath-bound society of some of the Saints is formed with the intent of using unlawful violence against the enemies of the Church. They first form to drive out the dissenters and apostates; then they turn against nonmember Missourians living in the area. They swear themselves to secrecy, silence, and loyalty in hidden meetings with oaths and signs of recognition. They eventually adopt the name Danites. Their leader, Sampson Avard, turns from defending the Church to attacking it in November 1838. (For further details concerning the Danites, see BYS, Su '74, 421-50; BYS, Aut '72, 36-61; SB 215-86.)

June 28, 1838

The Adam-ondi-Ahman Stake is organized. John Smith, Joseph's uncle, is made stake president, with Reynolds Cahoon and Lyman Wight as counselors. "Adam-ondi-Ahman," a hymn composed by W. W. Phelps, is the meeting's closing song.

July 4, 1838

The Saints hold a Fourth of July celebration in Far West. The cornerstones for the temple are laid (in accordance with D&C 115:8). Sidney Rigdon gives a highly emotional speech declaring the Saints' "Declaration of Independence" from mobs and persecutions; he states, "We have not only when smitten on one cheek, turned the other, but we have done it, again and again, until we are weary of being smitten, and tired of being trampled upon. . . . We will never be the aggressors; we will infringe on the rights of no people; but shall stand for our own until death. . . . We this day then proclaim ourselves free, with a purpose and a determination, that never can be broken, No never! No Never! ! NO NEVER! ! ! " (This oration is published in a pamphlet; see BYS, Su '74, 517-27.)

July 6, 1838

Joseph receives a letter from Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde in Kirtland expressing good feelings. He also receives a letter from his brother, Don Carlos Smith, requesting funds for his group of people who are trying to travel from Kirtland. Don Carlos states that he sold all of Joseph's goods for $45.74, and now has $25 left over to get 28 people and 13 horses 500 miles.

July 6-Oct. 4, 1838

The Kirtland Camp of Saints travels from Kirtland to Adam-ondi-Ahman, Mo. On March 6, 1838, a meeting of the seventies in the Kirtland Temple had decided to move the Saints from Kirtland to Missouri. On July 6, 1838, a wagon train, over a mile long with over 500 Saints, leaves Kirtland for Missouri. Because of great suffering and discouragement, by the time the group reaches Springfield, Ill., about halfway, only 260 are left. They reach Adam-ondi-Ahman on October 4, 1838. (For a day-by-day account of the three-month journey, see HC 3:87-148.)

July 8, 1838

Tithing is instituted for the Church. Joseph prays inquiring how much property the Lord requires for a tithing, and receives D&C 119. Also given are D&C 120, 117, and 118. Another revelation is received: W. W. Phelps and Frederick G. Williams are told that because of transgressions, their former standing had been taken away; however, they may now be again ordained elders in the Church and preach the gospel. (Although Phelps does not take advantage of this revelation, Williams does.)

July 9, 1838

A conference is held in which the new members of the Twelve are officially notified and called into the quorum.

July 10, 1838

Joseph visits Adam-ondi-Ahman with several others. When the Saints are slow to consecrate their lands to the Church, he proposes an alternate plan wherein the Church would lease the property from 10 to 99 years without interest.

July 26, 1838

The First Presidency, high council, and bishops court meet at Far West to dispose of Church lands. It is decided that all Church lands will be put into the hands of the bishops. It is also decided that the traveling expenses of the First Presidency will be defrayed, and that the Church will use its influence to stop the selling of liquor in Far West.

July 28, 1838

Joseph leaves Far West for Adam-ondi-Ahman to help settle the brethren from Canada who have just moved there.

Aug. 6, 1838

A fight breaks out when the Mormons are prevented from voting in the election at Gallatin (near Adam-ondi-Ahman). Because of the rumored activities of the Danites, and because of the pamphlet publication and circulation of Rigdon's Fourth of July speech, anti-Mormon feeling had been building once again in Missouri. Two weeks before the election, Judge Joseph Morin warned Mormons that William Peniston, an anti-Mormon candidate, had threatened to use force to keep Mormons from voting against him. When several Saints come to Gallatin to vote, they are attacked and a fight breaks out. Although Gallatin, the Daviess County seat, has only ten houses and three saloons, rumors spread that two Mormons have been killed and that thirty Saints have beat off a mob of two hundred. Other rumors of both Mormon and mob vengeance circulate rapidly.

Aug. 7, 1838

Joseph, in Far West, receives the report from Gallatin that two or three Saints have been killed while trying to vote. He leaves for Gallatin with Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, and 15 or 20 others (who take arms for protection).

Aug. 8, 1838

Joseph and the others meet with Adam Black, justice of the peace, and ask him to sign a letter stating that he had nothing to do with the mobs at Gallatin. Black later testifies that he was forced to sign the documents under threat of violence, and others state that Sidney Rigdon pulled a sword on Black.

Aug. 10, 1838

William P. Peniston swears out a warrant to Judge Austin A. King against Joseph and Lyman Wight stating that they have an army of 500 armed men, and with a force of 120 have threatened the life of Justice Adam Black and forced him to sign the affidavit of August 8.

Aug 11, 1838

Joseph leaves Far West to visit the Canadian Saints at the Forks of the Grand River. A committee arrives in Far West accusing the Saints of disturbing the peace on Aug. 8. A general meeting is held at the city hall, where the Mormons and non-Mormons answer each others' accusations.

Aug. 13, 1838

Joseph and his men are chased 12 miles by a mob. Joseph learns that Judge King has issued a warrant for the arrest of both him and Lyman Wight because of the incident on Aug. 8.

Aug. 16, 1838

Judge Morin and a sheriff come to arrest Joseph. He says he is always willing to submit to the laws of the land, but asks not to be tried in Daviess County because of his many enemies there. The sheriff decides not to serve the writ. Lyman Wight, however, defies the sheriff's authority, and when the story is published, state officials take immediate action against the Saints.

Aug. 20, 1838

Joseph organizes the Saints into several agricultural companies.

Aug. 28, 1838

Joseph spends several days at home. Adam Black swears out an affidavit stating that 154 men threatened his life on Aug. 8. Joseph calls him a liar.

Aug. 30, 1838

Governor Boggs, having heard of Lyman Wight's defiance of the law officers, orders General Atchison (Joseph's former lawyer) to call out 400 of the militia in preparation against the Mormons. Joseph and Sidney Rigdon spend considerable time talking with John Corrill, who is on the verge of apostasy.

Fall 1838

Under the advice of Alexander Doniphan, the Saints form into "armies of Israel," which are two armed units organized and ordered into the field by General Doniphan in Caldwell County and General Parks in Daviess County (both are officers of the state militia). Thus, when these troops are ordered into battle in October, the Saints consider themselves as duly authorized state troops fighting against illegal mobs.

Sept. 1, 1838

The First Presidency, with the help of a surveyor, establish the city of Zion, 15 miles from Far West, as a place of safety to which the Saints can flee. Joseph records that the Saints have been very peaceable in spite of the rising storm about them.

Sept. 2, 1838

General Atchison of Liberty comes to Joseph to give him legal advice, convincing him to submit to trial.

Sept. 3, 1838

James Mulholland commences writing for Joseph as his scribe. Joseph begins dictating to him what will become Joseph's six-volume history of the Church, including the best-known version of the first vision. (For details about Joseph's previous and later scribes, see BYS, Sp '71, 439-73.)

Sept. 4, 1838

As rumors of mob violence increase, Joseph hires General Atchison and Alexander Doniphan to represent the Saints. Joseph and Sidney Rigdon commence studying law under them with the hope of passing the bar within 12 months.

Sept. 5, 1838

Joseph swears out an affidavit relating his side of the incident with Adam Black, claiming that he never threatened the man's life.

Sept. 7, 1838

Joseph stands trial for the incident with Adam Black before Judge Austin A. King (a Methodist whose brother had been killed in the anti-Mormon riots of Jackson County in 1833-FMM 90). Joseph is accused of having threatened Adam Black's life on Aug. 8, 1838. In spite of the lack of hard evidence, the judge gives in to fear of mobbers and fines Joseph and Lyman Wight a $500 security bond. William P. Peniston is the prosecuting attorney. Rumors reach Joseph that a mob has gathered to attack Adam-ondi-Ahman. A few brethren from Far West have left for Adam-ondi-Ahman to assist the Saints there.

Sept. 9, 1838

Captain William Allred and ten men learn of a wagon full of guns and ammunition that were going to the mob that was planning an attack on Adam-ondi-Ahman. Allred finds the wagon broken down, arrests three illegal gun carriers, and distributes the guns to the Saints for their protection. The three prisoners are taken to Far West for trial. At this time, the mob has also been taking prisoners from time to time and sending out rumors of torture, in order to "make us commit the first act of violence." (HC 3:74-75.)

Sept. 10, 1838

Judge King orders that the guns be returned to the government and that the prisoners be freed. He also advises General Atchison to take 200 men and to break up the gathering forces in Daviess and Caldwell Counties.

Sept. 12, 1838

The gunrunners are tried in Far West. Governor Boggs receives a communication from Daviess County charging the "Mormons" with every crime imaginable. Sixty or more mobbers enter the town of De Witt (Carroll County) and warn the Saints to leave at once.

Sept. 14, 1838

William Dryden tells Governor Boggs that he, with ten men as guards, has tried to serve a writ against certain Saints for the incident of Aug. 8 with Adam Black, but the "Mormons" are so well armed that it is impossible to enforce any laws in Caldwell or Daviess counties.

Sept. 15, 1838

Alexander Doniphan writes to Major General Atchison stating that he and his 200 men marched to Far West, received the confiscated weapons and the three prisoners from the Saints, and, to keep the peace, camped between the Saints' forces led by Lyman Wight and the mob forces led by a Dr. Austin of Carroll County.

Sept. 20, 1838

Dr. Austin, after much of his force has been disbanded, takes 100 to 150 men and goes 50 miles southwest to the town of De Witt and besieges that community until October 11, 1838. They give the citizens of De Witt an ultimatum to leave the state by October 1 or face extermination.

Sept. 24, 1838

Governor Boggs orders several generals to discharge their troops, having heard that peace has been restored in Daviess and Caldwell Counties.

Sept. 26, 1838

Lyman Wight and 15 to 20 Saints promise to go to trial at Gallatin. Two committees representing each party agree that the Saints will buy out the land owned by the non-Mormons in Daviess County.

Late Sept. 1838

Local newspapers debate the Mormon question, some stating that the Mormons have broken their promise to stay within Caldwell County by spreading to other counties. Other papers say that a law requiring that members of any religion stay within a certain county is unconstitutional.

Oct. 1, 1838

Generals Atchison, Doniphan, and Parks organize the mobs into militia units and then disband them. Many of them travel 50 miles southeast to De Witt in Carroll County and join Austin's mob surrounding that town.

Oct. 2, 1838

The mob surrounding De Witt, now about 300, opens fire on the town. The Kirtland Camp arrives at Far West, and reaches Adam-ondi-Ahman two days later.

Oct. 4, 1838

The mob fires on the Saints in De Witt, some of whom decide to return the fire in self defense. General S. D. Lucas (an enemy of the Saints since the Jackson County expulsion in 1833) writes to Governor Boggs that "if a fight has actually taken place, of which I have no doubt, it will create excitement in the whole of upper Missouri, and those base and degraded beings will be exterminated from the face of the earth. If one of the citizens of Carroll should be killed, before five days I believe there will be from four to five thousand volunteers in the field against the Mormons, and nothing but their blood will satisfy them." (HC 3:150.)

Oct. 6, 1838

Joseph travels through back roads with several volunteers and reaches De Witt. There he finds the Saints in desperate circumstances, with very few supplies left. He obtains several affidavits and sends an urgent plea for aid to Governor Boggs, asking for the protection of the state militia. On this same date a quarterly conference is held at Far West, Mo. John Taylor is sustained as one of the Twelve.

Oct. 9, 1838

Mr. Caldwell, who took the Saints' plea for help to the governor, returns with the governor's reply that because the quarrel is between the mob and the Mormons, they might "fight it out" on their own. Captain Samuel Bogart, a former mobber, is placed in control of the militia forces. Several of the Saints start to fight back against the mob.

Oct. 11, 1838

In a compromise move, the Saints agree to leave. They are never paid for their lands, and as they leave, they see many of their cattle killed and their homes burned; some Saints die during the journey.

Oct. 14, 1838

Seven are cut off from the Church in Preston, England. It is a time of pruning there; "the powers of darkness raged, and it seemed as though Satan was fully determined to make an end of the work in that kingdom." (HC 3:162.)

Oct. 15, 1838

The 70 wagons of the destitute De Witt Saints have, by now, reached and settled in Far West. Joseph organizes the Far West Saints into a company of 100 men, to operate as a legal unit of the state militia, under Lt. Colonel George M. Hinkle, who has been acting under orders of General Doniphan. They are very careful to be sure that all actions are in strict accordance with state law. Joseph addresses the Far West Saints in terrible anger, saying, "All are mobs; the governor is mob, the militia is mob, and the whole state is mob. . . . I am determined that we will not give another foot, and I care not how many come against us." (DH 231-32.)

Oct. 17-19, 1838

A snowstorm hits Missouri. Col. Hinkle and his 100 men march to Adam-ondi-Ahman to join forces with Lyman Wight. There they hear that the nearby town of Millport has been attacked and several houses burned. General Parks of the state militia gives Lyman Wight official orders to disperse any mobs around Adam-ondi-Ahman and Millport. Lyman Wight and Captain David Patten each command a force of about 60 men, and Wight takes his and heads for Millport, while Patten heads for Gallatin. Patten's men find a cannon left by the mobs. Houses and stores are burned, the mobs blaming the Mormons and the Mormons saying the mobs burned their own houses in order to blame the Mormons.

Oct. 19, 1838

Joseph, having been accused of running away and cheating his creditors in Kirtland, receives a card stating that his agent in Kirtland, Oliver Granger, has done his best to be honest in satisfying old debts. Joseph happily records this rare positive note in his record. Samuel Bogart, William P. Peniston, and several others swear out affidavits accusing the Saints of terrible robbings, burnings, etc. Orson Hyde leaves Far West (on his way to apostasy).

Oct. 22, 1838

Joseph returns to Far West, where he learns that several of the brethren have been taken prisoner by the mobs.

Oct. 23, 1838

The Saints flock into Far West until it is full of destitute citizens.

Oct. 24, 1838

Thomas B. Marsh, formerly president of the Twelve, goes to Richmond to swear out an affidavit against Joseph Smith. He accuses Joseph of secretly backing the Danites in their many works of destruction, saying that Joseph claimed "he would be a second Mohammed to this generation, and that he would make it one gore of blood from the Rocky Mountains to the Atlantic ocean; that like Mohammed, whose motto in treating for peace was, 'the Alcoran or the Sword.' So should it be eventually with us, 'Joseph Smith or the sword.' " Orson Hyde, sick with fever, also signs the affidavit stating that he believes most of Marsh's accusations to be true. (HC 3:166-68; twenty years later, Marsh repents and tells of his apostasy in JD 5:206-10.)

Oct. 25, 1838

The Battle of Crooked River. Rumors spread throughout the state that the Mormons are fighting back in strength. Citizens organize a militia under Samuel Bogart, who rides to drive the Mormons from the southern part of Caldwell County. When Captain David Patten (known as Captain Fear-Naught) hears this, he assembles 70 elders and marches to Bogart's camp on the Crooked River. At dawn they attack and Bogart's men flee across the river. The Saints take the supplies left behind by the Missourians, but seven Saints are wounded and three eventually die, including Patten himself, the first martyred apostle. When Patten dies two days later, some of his last words are, "Whatever you do else, O! do not deny the faith!" (HC 3: 169-72.)

Oct. 26, 1838

A mob of almost 2,000 begins to camp at Richmond, Mo.

Oct. 27, 1838

A funeral is held for David Patten. Joseph testifies, "There lies a man that has done just as he said he would—he has laid down his life for his friends." (HC 3:175.) Governor Boggs's exterminating order is issued. Hearing the many rumors of the destruction and insurrection of the Saints, Boggs orders that "the Mormons must be treated as enemies and must be exterminated or driven from the state, if necessary for the public good. Their outrages are beyond all description." (HC 3:175.)

Oct. 30, 1838

Haun's Mill Massacre. At about four P.M. approximately 240 men ride up to the small community of Haun's Mill (which has fewer than 15 buildings) and open fire on a flag of truce. Many of the Saints gather in the blacksmith's shop; guns are stuck through the cracks in the logs and fired until most in the building are dead. A few escape across the river into the hills. By the end of the massacre, 1600 rounds of ammunition have been fired at 40 people; 18 or 19 have been killed, and about 15 wounded. Among those killed are boys under 10 and men over 75 years old.

As soon as Governor Boggs's exterminating order is received, General Atchison withdraws from the army at Richmond, Mo. At evening a state militia force of about 2,000 approaches and surrounds the city of Far West. They are led by General Lucas. The Saints spend the night building up fortifications and preparing for a massive battle in the morning.

Oct. 31, 1838

Far West is surrounded by 2,000 troops, which are soon reinforced by 1500 more troops. The Saints are outnumbered by approximately five to one. However, neither side is eager to begin the battle, and the day is spent in a standoff, with each side trying to decide what to do. In the evening, Col. Hinkle goes out with a flag of truce to meet with the Missourians. Joseph, Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight, and George W. Robinson then go out to meet the flag and are taken prisoner. General Lucas marches them in front of the leering, screaming soldiers, who abuse them greatly. They are forced to sleep on the ground during a rainstorm while the guards mock them, asking Joseph to show them angels and miracles.

Nov. 1, 1838

Hyrum Smith and Amasa M. Lyman are added to the group of prisoners. A long court-martial is held, which lasts until midnight. During this time, the militia goes into various Mormon settlements, robbing, destroying, ransacking, and raping at will. After the court-martial, General Lucas orders Brigadier General Doniphan to "take Joseph Smith and the other prisoners into the public square of Far West, and shoot them at 9 o'clock tomorrow morning." Doniphan answers, "It is cold-blooded murder. I will not obey your order. . . . If you execute these men, I will hold you responsible before an earthly tribunal, so help me God." (HC 3:190-92. For details concerning General Doniphan and his heroic stand in defense of Joseph, see CHC 1:490-93; BYS, Su '73, 462-72.)

Nov. 2, 1838

Sampson Avard is captured and begins to testify that Daniteism is an order from the Church. Joseph and the other prisoners are taken into town to bid a quick goodbye to their wives and children. The Saints are ordered to surrender all arms and sign away all possessions. Hyrum, who is very sick, is forced to march with the other prisoners. General S. D. Lucas writes the details of the conquest to Gov. Boggs. Prisoners are then put in covered wagons for a 60-mile journey to Independence, where they are to be sentenced.

Nov. 3, 1838

Joseph prophesies to Parley P. Pratt: "The word of the Lord came to me last night that our lives should be given us, and that whatsoever we may suffer during this captivity, not one of our lives should be taken." (PPP 192.)

Nov. 4, 1838

General Clark arrives in Far West with 1600 men and 500 more on the way. (Six thousand men had thus visited Far West within a week, when it only had 500 men to defend it.) Clark forbids anyone to leave the city, and the starving Saints are forced to live on parched corn. Joseph and the other prisoners arrive in Independence. One lady asks which of the prisoners is the one the Saints worship as Lord and Savior. When Joseph replies that he is nothing but a man sent by Jesus Christ to preach the gospel, he is able to preach a sermon to the lady and the others, thus fulfilling his own prophecy of a few months previous that an elder would preach a sermon in Jackson County before the close of 1838.

Nov. 5, 1838

Joseph and the other prisoners are kept under a small guard. Parley P. Pratt escapes; but fearing reprisals against Joseph and the others, he decides to return voluntarily. General Clark arrives in Far West to arrest 56 additional prisoners.

Nov. 6, 1838

General Clark addresses the Saints in Far West, telling them that it is only out of kindness that he is allowing them to leave the state instead of murdering them, and that "as for your leaders, do not once think—do not imagine for a moment—do not let it enter your mind that they will be delivered, or that you will see their faces again, for their fate is fixed—their die is cast—their doom is sealed." He then takes the new prisoners from Far West and heads for Richmond under a large guard. (HC 3:202-4.)

Nov. 8, 1838

A snowstorm hits Missouri. General Wilson arrives at Adam-ondi-Ahman and surrounds the town with his guards so no one can leave or enter. A court of inquiry is instituted, with Adam Black a member of the bench (most of the problems began with him on Aug. 8, 1838). Joseph and the other prisoners are marched toward Richmond but because there are so few guards it is feared that they will come under mob violence, and more guards are sent for.

Nov. 9, 1838

Joseph and the other prisoners reach Richmond, Ray County, where they are put in double chains. After much abuse they are forced to sleep on the floor in the cold and rain. Joseph meets General Clark.

Nov. 10, 1838

The other 56 prisoners are put in Richmond jail with Joseph and his fellow prisoners. Joseph learns that during the mobbings about 30 Saints were killed, many more were wounded, 100 are missing, and approximately 60 prisoners are waiting trial at Richmond for an unknown charge. In Adam-ondi-Ahman a three-day board of inquiry concludes, Adam Black having been judge, and all Saints are honorably acquitted. General Wilson orders every family out of Adam-ondi-Ahman within ten days. He gives them permission to go to Caldwell County until spring, but says they must leave the state by then or be exterminated.

Nov. 11-28, 1838

Over 50 Latter-day Saint prisoners are kept in the Richmond jail, chained together in an unroofed courthouse. Sidney Rigdon gets very sick from exposure and loses his powers of reasoning. One night during this time the guards blaspheme and boast about their treatment, rapings, and murder of the Saints, and Joseph arises in his chains and rebukes the guards with might and power, causing them to quail and beg before him. (For a list of prisoners, see H C 3:209.)

Nov. 12, 1838

Joseph writes a touching letter to Emma, thanking her for her letter and praying that he might see his "lovely family" once again. He lists the prisoners he is chained to, stating "and thus we are bound together in chains as well as the cords of everlasting love." He also tells her that the lawyers Doniphan and Rees will defend them. (DH 247.)

Nov. 13-28, 1838

The 13-day mock trial is held at Richmond with Judge Austin A. King presiding. On Nov. 28 most of the prisoners are released. Lyman Wight, Caleb Baldwin, Hyrum Smith, Alexander McRae, Sidney Rigdon, and Joseph Smith are sent to Liberty jail, while Parley P. Pratt and four others are sent to Richmond jail to await further trials. During the trial Joseph's lawyer states, "If a cohort of angels were to come down, and declare we were innocent, it would all be the same." (HC 3:209-13.) Shortly after Avard testifies against the Danites, the society that had been led by him dies out altogether, having existed less than five months.

Nov. 30, 1838

Joseph and the other prisoners begin their trip to the Liberty jail. During this time former apostle Wm. E. McLellin and others rob the homes of some of the Saints, including that of Sidney Rigdon. McLellin asks for the privilege of flogging Joseph, but the sheriff only agrees to a fair fight between the two, and McLellin backs down.

Dec. 1, 1838

Joseph begins his stay in Liberty jail, which lasts almost six months. The jail is 22 feet square, with walls four feet thick. The food is filthy, and at one time the guards boast that they have fed the prisoners human flesh. At another point the prisoners are fed poison. However, some exciting things also occur during their prison stay. Parley P. Pratt writes poetry and a history of his life; Lyman Wight is blessed several times by Joseph and learns many things "yet unknown to the Church." George A. Smith is called to the apostleship; Brigham Young and others receive instructions about moving the Saints to Illinois; Joseph reveals several of the most important sections of the D&C.

Dec. 16, 1838

Joseph writes to the Church from Liberty jail, comforting the Saints in their afflictions and cautioning them to beware of those like Sampson Avard who would teach false doctrines in the name of the First Presidency.

Dec. 19, 1838

John Corrill presents a petition to the state legislature signed by Edward Partridge, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and others, which explains the history of the conflict in Missouri. A Mr. Turner submits a bill calling for a full investigation of the troubles in Missouri. A huge debate develops over the problem, but eventually nothing happens. After the Saints have completely left Missouri, $2,000 in relief funds is approved for the 12,000 Saints, while $200,000 is voted to pay the state militia for the expenses in the Mormon war.

John Taylor and John E. Page are ordained apostles at Far West.

Dec. 25, 1838

Don Carlos Smith and George A. Smith return to Missouri from missions in Kentucky and Tennessee, 1500 miles away. They are chased by a mob, and almost freeze to death, but arrive safely.

Dec. 27, 1838

Anson Call returns to Ray County to sell some property and is taken by a mob and beaten for four hours, until he escapes.
