J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Jan. 1839

Sidney Rigdon, due to ill health, is allowed out of Liberty jail to stand an early trial. He defends himself in a room full of Mormon haters. His speech is so eloquent that his former enemies are moved to tears, and they collect $100 for his benefit.

Jan. 7, 1839

Anson Call returns to his farm to secure his property, and is again captured and beaten with a stick.

Jan. 16, 1839

Mr. Turner introduces in the Missouri state senate a bill to investigate the recent disturbances in Missouri. About this time, President Brigham Young begins to make plans to help the poor and other Saints leave Missouri.

Jan. 24, 1839

Joseph petitions the Missouri legislature for justice, claiming "it is not our object to complain—to asperse any one. All we ask is a fair and impartial trial. We ask the sympathies of no one. We ask sheer justice." (HC 3:247-49.)

Jan. 26, 1839

A meeting of Church leaders is held in Far West to discuss the best way out of the present emergency. A committee of seven is appointed to seek relief for the poor.

Jan. 29, 1839

The brethren again meet at Far West to discuss how to best help each other. Brigham Young moves that they make an oath to never desert the poor until they are free from the state of Missouri. This passes.

Jan. 31, 1839

Turner's bill calling for an investigation passes the senate. Joseph sends a $100 bill from jail to the poor brethren trying to leave the state.

Feb. 4, 1839

Mr. Turner's bill of Jan. 16 is tabled until July 4 (by which time all the Saints will be out of the state). The bill is never taken up again.

Feb. 6-15, 1839

Emma, having visited Joseph twice since his imprisonment, leaves Missouri with her children, with the help of Stephen Markham. They walk 150 miles across Missouri to the east toward Illinois. When Emma crosses the frozen Mississippi on Feb. 15, she has her four small children with her and two cotton bags full of Joseph's most sacred papers hidden under her full skirts (including his inspired revision of the Bible). She crosses the river and reaches Quincy, Illinois, on the other shore, where she stays until Joseph is freed from prison.

Feb. 8, 1839

Joseph and the others make their first prison escape attempt, which fails because six Saints come to visit in the middle of the effort.

Feb. 14, 1839

Brigham Young (acting president of the Quorum of the Twelve, since Thomas B. Marsh's apostasy and David W. Patten's death) leaves Far West for Illinois because of bitter persecution against him.

Feb. 25, 1839

The citizens of Quincy, Ill., approve a resolution offering aid to the destitute Latter-day Saints.

Feb. 26, 1839

Dr. Isaac Galland, an admitted thief, counterfeiter, and gang member, writes to a Church member stating that he has several farms and lands for sale in Illinois and the Iowa territory. About this time, Sidney Rigdon is allowed to escape from jail. He had been released in January by the decision of a judge; however, because of his fear of mobs he decided to stay in prison until it was safer to leave the area. At this time his sufferings became too great; he became sick and declared that "the sufferings of Jesus Christ were a fool to his." The sheriff allows him to escape. He is chased by a mob, but finally succeeds in reaching Quincy, Ill. (HC 3:264.)

Feb. 27, 1839

Citizens of Quincy, Ill., adopt a resolution denouncing the Missouri mobs and Missouri state officials. Soon Gov. Thomas Carlin of Illinois and Iowa Territorial Governor Robert Lucas invite the Saints to settle in those areas. The Saints have been debating whether to gather in one place again or to scatter throughout the area, but Brigham Young and Joseph continue to promote the idea of the gathering.

Mar. 1839

One hundred and thirty families camp on the bank of the Mississippi waiting for the ice to thaw so they can cross into Illinois. Soon after this time, approximately 5,000 Saints move into western Illinois.

Mar. 3, 1839

Joseph makes his second escape attempt from Liberty jail by digging through the wall. The tools break before the wall does, but he is pleased because, to fix the wall, he states, "cost the county a round sum." (HC 3:292.)

Mar. 5, 1839

Edward Partridge writes to Joseph advising him not to make a deal with Dr. Isaac Galland.

Mar. 8, 1839

Alanson Ripley brings news from Joseph in Liberty jail that the Saints should sell all lands in Missouri, including the lands that they own in Jackson County. They make about $2700 from these sales, which greatly helps the poorer Saints in moving from Far West to Illinois.

Mar. 15, 1839

Joseph writes a letter of encouragement and friendship to Mrs. Norman Bull (Buell) who had tried to visit him in Liberty jail.

Mar. 17, 1839

A conference is held at Quincy, Ill., and George Hinkle, Sampson Avard, John Corrill, Reed Peck, W. W. Phelps, F. G. Williams, Thomas B. Marsh, Burr Riggs, and several others are excommunicated from the Church because they "left us in the time of our perils, persecutions and dangers, and were acting against the interests of the Church." (HC 3:283-84.) Parley P. Pratt's wife leaves the prison house, where she stayed with him voluntarily most of the winter.

Mar. 20-25, 1839

Between these dates Joseph writes a long letter to Bishop Edward Partridge in particular and the Saints in general. Parts of the letter are later extracted and form what is now D&C 121, 122, and 123. Besides these sections, the letter also encourages the Saints to have love, fellowship, and compassion on the orphans and the widows; expresses thanks for the letters he (the Prophet) has received; explains the reasons why the Lord tries his Saints; warns the Saints against pride; encourages the Saints to become friends with Isaac Galland; encourages abiding the law. (For the full text of the letter see HC 3:289-305 or TPJS 129-48.)

Apr. 4, 1839

Heber C. Kimball visits Joseph in Liberty jail. Joseph tells him to get the Saints away from Missouri as fast as possible. Joseph writes Emma from the jail describing his life "within the walls, grates, and screeking iron doors, of a lonesome, dark, dirty prison." He also advises Emma to be more gentle with the children: "don't be fractious to them, but listen to their wants." (ENS, Ap '77, 12.)

Apr. 5, 1839

A company of 50 men from Daviess County swear never to eat or drink again until they have murdered "Joe Smith. "

Apr. 6, 1839

Having been in Liberty jail since Dec. 1, 1838, Joseph and the other prisoners leave the prison for Gallatin jail in Daviess County, a two-day walk.

Apr. 8, 1839

Joseph and the other prisoners arrive in Daviess County, where they will again be held for trial.

Apr. 9, 1839

Joseph's trial begins before a drunken grand jury. Judge Morin visits him in Millport that evening and recommends that they escape to avoid enduring persecution.

Apr. 10, 1839

The trial continues without much progress. Sidney Rigdon writes a letter to Joseph from Quincy, Ill., stating that Governor Carlin and others are excited about Rigdon's plan to remove Missouri from the United States because she broke her constitutional duty to the Latter-day Saints.

Apr. 15, 1839

Joseph and others leave Daviess County for Boone County.

Apr. 16, 1839

Joseph's guard gets purposely intoxicated and tells Joseph he has been instructed never to reach Boone County with the prisoners. Three of the guards get drunk, while the fourth helps Joseph and the other prisoners saddle horses and escape. When the sheriff returns to Gallatin, the people become very angry, and ride the sheriff out of town on a rail. Joseph and the others head for Quincy, Ill.

Apr. 18, 1839

The last of the Saints in Missouri are harassed and threatened. They leave Far West within an hour.

Apr. 20, 1839

The last few Saints finally leave Far West.

Apr. 22, 1839

After a severe journey, Joseph crosses the Mississippi, and reaches Illinois, where he is reunited with Emma. He had paid lawyers in Missouri a total of $34,000 in cash and land for law fees there.

Apr. 24, 1839

Parley P. Pratt and others are brought before a grand jury at Richmond in Ray County. Two are released after six months in prison, so that only four prisoners are left alone in the state of Missouri. Joseph presides over a council meeting in Quincy, in which it is resolved that he and others will go to Iowa to look for a location for the gathering of the Saints.

Apr. 25, 1839

Joseph travels toward the head of the Des Moines River rapids, where he determines that the land on both sides of the Mississippi—Commerce on the east and Montrose on the west—will be the future gathering sites for the Saints.

Apr. 26, 1839

Shortly after midnight, several of the Twelve ride back to the temple site in Far West, Mo., where they hold a meeting and officially set out on their missions across the ocean, despite threats that they would be murdered if they tried to leave from Far West. This fulfills Joseph's revelation—D&C 118:5. Five of the Twelve (Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John E. Page, and John Taylor) meet with about 20 members and ordain two new men, Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith, to the Quorum of the Twelve. After prayer and songs, one elder lays the cornerstone of the future temple. The Saints ride off 39 miles before daybreak.

May 1, 1839

Joseph, in connection with the Church committee, buys the first Church land in Commerce, a 135-acre farm from Hugh White for $5,000 and a farm from Dr. Isaac Galland for $9,000. About this time Joseph receives word from England stating that Isaac Russell, who had become a self-appointed prophet and apostatized, had led many of the Saints astray, but Elder Willard Richards was working hard to get the Saints back into the Church.

May 4-6, 1839

General conference is held near Quincy, Ill. Sidney Rigdon is called to take affidavits and grievances to Washington, D. C., to lay before the government officials concerning the Missouri persecutions.

May 8, 1839

Joseph prepares to move to Commerce, Ill.

May 10, 1839

Joseph and Emma move into a small log cabin on the riverbank in Commerce. When the Saints begin to move to the Iowa territory across the river from Commerce, they find that Dr. Isaac Galland, from whom they bought the land, did not have legal title to the half-breed lands. They are therefore eventually forced to move back across the river to Commerce.

May 13, 1839

Parley P. Pratt, still in jail after seven months, writes to Judge Austin A. King requesting permission to either leave the state or have an immediate trial.

May 22, 1839

Parley P. Pratt, King Follett, and two others are given a change of venue. They leave Richmond, Mo., in handcuffs and are taken to Columbia, Boone County, Mo.

May 26, 1839

Elder Pratt and the others reach Boone County and are thrown into another dirty prison.

June 4, 1839

Joseph writes up a "Bill of Damages Against the State of Missouri on Account of the Suffering and Losses Sustained Therein." (See HC 3:368-74.)

June 11, 1839

Joseph commences dictating his personal history to his clerk, James Mulholland. This document will eventually become the basis of Joseph's History of the Church. Elder Theodore Turley raises the first house in Commerce that is built by the Saints themselves. Joseph records his impressions of the land about Commerce, stating that "the land was mostly covered with trees and bushes, and much of it so wet that it was with the utmost difficulty a footman could get through, and totally impossible for teams. Commerce was so unhealthful, very few could live there; but believing that it might become a healthful place by the blessing of heaven to the Saints, and no more eligible place presenting itself, I considered it wisdom to make an attempt to build up a city." (HC 3:375.)

June 24, 1839

Isaac Galland sells the whole town of Nashville, Iowa, together with 13,000 other acres of half-breed land, to the Saints for over $38,000. Because Galland has no clear titles to many of these lands, which had originally been designated by the government for half-breeds, many of the Saints who move here end up losing their money and their lands.

June 27, 1839

A conference of the Twelve is held, at which time Orson Hyde confesses his sins and is restored to his apostleship. Joseph gives detailed explanation about many doctrines, including faith, repentance, baptism, the gift of the Holy Ghost, tongues, resurrection and eternal Judgment, election, the two Comforters, and the spirit of revelation. (See HC 3:379-81.)

July 1839

The Saints, still mostly without homes, camp in tents along both sides of the river. The damp climate contributes to the spreading of malaria among thousands of them. Joseph's father is sick all summer. Joseph himself becomes sick and is finally healed with Emma's herbal remedies. Doctors Wiley and Pendleton go from bed to bed prescribing Sapinton's pills, a quinine compound. Many of the sick camp on Joseph's doorstep and stay in his house.

July 1, 1839

Parley P. Pratt is supposed to stand trial on this day, but since all his witnesses have been banished from the state, it is declared that he is not ready for trial and the trial is postponed until Sept. 23.

July 2, 1839

Joseph suggests naming the town in Iowa "Zarahemla." In the afternoon Joseph and Hyrum meet with the Twelve and counsel them before they leave on their foreign missions.

July 3, 1839

Joseph baptizes Isaac Galland and ordains him an elder.

July 4, 1839

Parley P. Pratt, King Follett, and Morris Phelps escape from Boone County prison after over seven months of imprisonment. King Follett is recaptured. Several days later, Pratt and Phelps arrive safely in Quincy, Ill.

July 7, 1839

Joseph holds a large farewell meeting with the Twelve before their departure to England.

July 8-10, 1839

Joseph spends much time with the Twelve, selecting hymns for a hymnbook. "About this time much sickness began to manifest itself among the brethren, as well as among the inhabitants of the place, so that this week and the following were generally spent in visiting the sick and administering to them; some had faith enough and were healed; others had not." (HC 4:3.)

July 22, 1839

Joseph records that "the sick were administered unto with great success, but many remain sick, and new cases are occurring daily." On this day he walks through the sick, healing almost everyone he touches. Wilford Woodruff borrows a silk bandana from Joseph and wipes it on the faces of sick twins, who are immediately healed. (For details of this miraculous day, see HC 4:3-5; IJB 439-40; CHC 2:18-22. For several diary accounts of this day, see NE, Mar '7 1, 16-1 8.)

July-Aug. 1839

Joseph spends most of these months recovering from sickness and visiting the sick. Dozens in Nauvoo die during the summer from disease.

Aug. 4, 1839

Joseph preaches at a Sunday meeting and the Church passes a resolution stating that the Twelve should leave for England as soon as possible.

Aug. 8, 1839

John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff are the first to leave for their missions to England. Both are terribly sick, and Wilford Woodruff says that "I feel and look more like a subject for the dissecting room than a missionary." (CHC 2: 22-26.)

Aug. 12, 1839

The third purchase of land in and around Commerce is made. Joseph, Hyrum, and Sidney sign a bond of $113,500 to a Mr. Hotchkiss for 400 acres. On this same day, for $2500, another 80 acres are bought.

Aug. 29, 1839

Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, and Hiram Clark leave Commerce for their missions to England. They are poverty stricken.

Aug. 30, 1839

The word Nauvoo appears officially in print, published on the city plat, for the first time. Some time previous to this the word had been chosen as the new name of Commerce.

Sept. 14, 1839

Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball leave their sick families in Commerce for their missions to England.

Sept. 21, 1839

George A. Smith and others leave for their missions to England.

Oct. 5-8, 1839

A general conference is held in Nauvoo. The city is divided into three wards.

Oct. 10, 1839

Parley P. Pratt in Detroit, on his way to England, publishes his history of the Missouri persecutions. He had written this during his long imprisonment in the Richmond jail, and had smuggled part of it out of the jail through his wife.

Mid-Oct. 1839

King Follett, the last prisoner in Missouri, is finally freed.

Oct. 20, 1839

A high council meeting is held in Nauvoo and it is decided that the council will disfellowship any person who allows any animal to destroy crops; Joseph Smith, Jr., shall go to Washington D. C., to seek redress for the Missouri persecutions; Joseph Smith, Jr., will be treasurer for the Church; Henry G. Sherwood should sell town lots in Nauvoo for approximately $500 per lot.

Oct. 29, 1839

Joseph, Sidney Rigdon, Judge Elias Higbee, and Orrin Porter Rockwell leave in a two-horse carriage for Washington, D. C., to lay grievances before Congress.

Nov. 15, 1839

The first issue of the Times and Seasons is published at Nauvoo.

Nov. 18, 1839

The roads are so bad and Sidney Rigdon's health is so poor that when the group reaches Columbus, Joseph leaves Brothers Rockwell, Rigdon, and Foster in Columbus until Sidney can recover his health. Joseph and Judge Higbee continue toward Washington alone.

Nov. 27, 1839

While Brigham Young is on the steamer Columbus on Lake Erie, the winds become so bad that Brigham Young commands, in the name of Jesus, that the winds and waves cease. They obey him and he gives glory to God; he arrives safely in Buffalo in the morning. The horses of Joseph's coach take fright and charge down a hill full speed. Joseph climbs out the door and successfully stops the horses before anyone is hurt. Everyone praises Joseph until they learn his name and what he claims to be, at which point all gratitude ends.

Nov. 28, 1839

Joseph and Judge Higbee arrive in Washington with a list of petitions and grievances.

Nov. 29, 1839

Joseph and Judge Higbee meet President Martin Van Buren. The president patiently reads some of the petitions but then says, "What can I do? I can do nothing for you! If I do anything, I shall come in contact with the whole state of Missouri. . . . Gentlemen, your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you." (HC 4:40, 80.) He asks Joseph how his religion differs from others. Joseph says it differs in mode of baptism "and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. We considered that all other considerations were contained in the gift of the Holy Ghost, and we deemed it unnecessary to make many words in preaching the Gospel to him." (HC 4:42.)

Dec. 5, 1839

Joseph spends several frustrating days in Washington trying to find allies. Henry Clay tells him, "You had better go to Oregon," and John C. Calhoun says, "It's a nice question—a critical question, but it will not do to agitate it." (HC 5:393.) He finally finds one sympathetic listener in Richard M. Young, a senator from Illinois. Joseph writes a letter to Hyrum, commenting on the hypocrisy of government officials in Washington, D. C. (See HC 4:39-42.)

Dec. 7, 1839

Richard M. Young speaks in favor of the Mormons to a room full of various delegates. It is decided that he should present the case of the Saints to Congress. The Saints ask for almost $2 million for losses in the state of Missouri. Missouri officials begin to gather affidavits claiming the Mormons had committed atrocities there.

Dec. 8, 1839

The high council in Nauvoo puts a notice in the Times and Seasons, advising the Saints not to move back to Kirtland, but adding, "We do not wish by this to take your agency from you." (HC 4:45.)

Dec. 21, 1839

Joseph decides to leave Washington, leaving Higbee there to try to continue the work of the Saints. He travels to and reaches Philadelphia, Pa., on this date, and preaches in Philadelphia until Dec. 30.

Dec. 29, 1839

The Nauvoo high council votes to print 10,000 copies of a new hymnbook and a new edition of the Book of Mormon.

Dec. 30, 1839

Joseph leaves Philadelphia with Orson Pratt to visit the Church in New Jersey for a few days.
