J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Jan. 4, 1840

The high council at Montrose votes to disfellowship any members who sue each other in law.

Jan. 9, 1840

Joseph returns to Philadelphia, where he continues to preach and visit among the members.

Jan. 13, 1840

John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and Theodore Turley reach Preston, England.

Jan. 14, 1840

Sidney Rigdon and Dr. Robert Foster reach Philadelphia and meet Joseph there.

Jan. 17, 1840

John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff hold a conference in Preston, England. It is decided that John Taylor and Joseph Fielding will return to Liverpool, where they convert 28 people by April 1840. Wilford Woodruff goes south to the county of Staffordshire, where he finds a branch of 66 Saints in the village of Burslen.

Jan. 30, 1840

About this time, Joseph leaves Philadelphia for Washington with Orrin Porter Rockwell, Judge Higbee, and Dr. Foster, having left Sidney Rigdon sick in Philadelphia. During his stay in Philadelphia, Joseph had met with some of the Twelve on their way to England, and had held a conference wherein he "arose like a lion about to roar; and being full of the Holy Ghost, spoke in great power. . . . The entire congregation were astounded; electrified, as it were, and overwhelmed with the sense of the truth and power by which he spoke, and the wonders which he related. . . . Multitudes were baptized in Philadelphia and in the regions around." (PPP 297-99.)

Feb. 5, 1840

Joseph preaches in Washington before a large congregation that includes several Congressmen. His sermon lasts over two hours. (For a detailed report of the sermon, see HC 4:77-80.) Shortly thereafter he decides that his remaining in Washington is useless, and he returns to Nauvoo, leaving Elias Higbee in Washington to pursue the interests of the Saints.

Feb. 20-26, 1840

Elias Higbee sends a series of letters to Joseph about progress in Washington. He relates his efforts in taking the Mormon case before the various congressional committees, and explains many of the opposing viewpoints and rumors he has run into (such as the Mormons had tried to take over the state, and the Mormons were the aggressors). His final letter states that "the decision is against us, or in other words unfavorable, that they believe redress can only be had in Missouri." (HC 4:81-88.)

Mar. 4, 1840

Wilford Woodruff arrives at the home of John Benbow, a member of the United Brethren religious organization, among whom he begins preaching with great success.

On this date Joseph arrives back in Nauvoo, having denounced the iniquity of Martin Van Buren on his trip home, and finally prophesying, "May he never be elected again to any office of trust or power, by which he may abuse the innocent and let the guilty go free." (HC 4:89.) On this date the Senate Judiciary Committee in the case of the Saints versus Missouri renders its judgment "that the case presented for their investigation is not such a one as will justify or authorize any interposition by this government." (HC 4:90-92.)

Mar. 6, 1840

Joseph attends a meeting of the Iowa high council, across the river from Nauvoo. He encourages them to stop trying to live the law of consecration.

In Herefordshire, England, John Benbow, his wife, and four others are the first of the United Brethren to be baptized, having been converted by Wilford Woodruff. Within the next five weeks, Woodruff converts 158 people, including 48 lay preachers. By the time he completes his mission in southern England, he will have been responsible for more than 1800 baptisms. (For details of these dramatic successes in England, see BYS, Su '75, 499-526; A&L 145-51; IJB 453-67.)

Mar. 8, 1840

While Wilford Woodruff is preaching at John Benbow's Hill Farm to over 1,000 people, the local rector preaches to only 15. The rector sends a constable to arrest Elder Woodruff for preaching without a license. When the constable learns that he has a license, he sits and listens to the sermon and requests baptism at the end of the meeting. The next day the rector sends two more people to spy on Elder Woodruff's preachings, and both of them request baptism.

Mar. 9, 1840

Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt, Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith, and others sail from New York on the ship Patrick Henry and arrive in Liverpool on April 6, 1840.

Mar. 24, 1840

Elias Higbee writes Joseph from Washington City: "Our business is at last ended here. Yesterday a resolution passed the Senate, that the committee should be discharged; and that we might withdraw the accompanying papers, which I have done." (HC 4:98-99.)

Mar. 25, 1840

Howard Coray is baptized. He later becomes a clerk in Joseph's office and writes some very interesting descriptions of Joseph. (See BYS, Sp '77, 341-47.)

Apr. 6-8, 1840

A general conference of the Church is held in Nauvoo. A motion is passed that Orson Hyde be sent on a mission to the Jews. Elder John E. Page will go with him. A committee of five is appointed to draft a resolution to be sent to Washington, D. C., expressing disappointment concerning the treatment of the Saints by the Congress. Frederick G. Williams humbly asks for forgiveness for his conduct in Missouri, and a motion is passed that Williams be accepted back into the Church.

Apr. 14, 1840

Willard Richards is ordained an apostle in England by the other Twelve who are there present.

Apr. 15, 1840

Orson Hyde leaves Nauvoo for Jerusalem.

Apr. 15-16, 1840

A general conference of the Church is held in Preston, England. There are now 1,686 members in England. The conference decides to publish a hymnbook and a monthly periodical. Brigham Young is chosen President of the Twelve. On April 16 Parley P. Pratt is appointed editor of a new paper to be called the Latter-day Saints Millennial Star.

May 1840

Don Carlos Smith and Robert Thompson, on missions to Philadelphia, report that there are no less than 400 Saints in Philadelphia (this area was opened by Joseph on his trip to Washington in December 1839).

June 1, 1840

By this time approximately 250 homes have been built in and around Nauvoo.

June 6, 1840

The first Saints from a foreign country leave to emigrate to America. Forty-one English Saints board the ship Britannia at Liverpool, with John Moon as the leader. Eventually more than 4700 will emigrate from England before the downfall of Nauvoo. (For John Moon's description of the crossing see BYS, Sp '77, 340-41.)

June 13, 1840

Don Carlos Smith is born to Emma and Joseph at Nauvoo.

June 14, 1840

Wilford Woodruff attends a meeting at the Gadfield Elm Chapel of the United Brethren, where they unanimously pass a resolution that henceforth they will be known as the Brand Green and Gadfield Elm Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Woodruff remains in this area until August, by which time he will have converted approximately 800 members.

June 18, 1840

Joseph asks the high council in Nauvoo to relieve him of his burdensome responsibility as chief land agent for the Church because he needs more time for the spiritual needs of the Church, such as his translation of the Bible and his translation of Egyptian.

June 29, 1840

W. W. Phelps writes a letter to Joseph humbly confessing his great errors in going against the Church in Missouri. Orson Hyde and John E. Page also write a letter to the presidency of the Church pleading in behalf of W. W. Phelps.

July 3, 1840

Joseph records that the Lord has begun to send plagues upon the nation because they are "guilty of murder, robbery and plunder, as a nation, because they have refused to protect their citizens, and execute justice according to their own Constitution." He goes on to list several hailstorms and other acts of God that are afflicting the nation at the present time. (HC 4:145.)

July 7, 1840

Four Saints are kidnapped from Hancock Co., Ill. and taken to prison in Missouri, where they are whipped and beaten. A group of Missourians had crossed the Mississippi in search of goods they claimed had been stolen from them, and having found a cache of them in the caves near the river bottoms on the Nauvoo side, they blamed the four Mormons, captured them, and beat confessions out of them. At this time there was a crime wave along the banks of the Mississippi, and many criminals would join the Church as a cover. When the four Mormons are kidnapped, Joseph protests loudly to Gov. Carlin about Gov. Boggs of Missouri. However, when the supposed theft is investigated, the cache of goods is found to be entirely too large to be the frame-up the Mormons had claimed it was, and Gov. Carlin begins to act less favorably toward the Saints. One of the Saints, Alanson Brown, is found guilty of the theft.

July 22, 1840

Joseph Smith writes a long letter to W. W. Phelps welcoming him back into the Church.

July 25, 1840

A Dr. John C. Bennett writes to the Saints stating his intention to move to Nauvoo and join the Saints. He will later become an influential member of the Church. He has the reputation of being both a genius and an imposter. In addition to being a professor, a preacher, a doctor, and a military leader, he is also claimed to be an abortionist, a wife deserter, and a traitor. When he gains Joseph's confidence, he helps draft the Nauvoo charter and push its passage through legislature, shows him how to drain the Nauvoo swamps, and administers quinine to the sick of Nauvoo, thus saving many lives. He later writes one of the most famous exposes against the Saints. In writing to Joseph a second time he states that "wealth is no material object with me. I desire to be happy." (HC 4:169-70.)

July 30, 1840

John C. Bennett writes to Joseph and Sidney Rigdon a third time, expressing his desire to join with the Saints and stating that his sympathies were with them during their bitter persecutions.

Aug. 1840

The number of Wilford Woodruff's converts in Herefordshire has, by now, reached 800. Heber C. Kimball, Elder Woodruff, and George A. Smith then open London to the gospel, although they are not as successful as in previous areas, due to troubles with local ministers.

In the state elections held this month, the Mormons generally vote for the Whig candidate, because Van Buren and Boggs were Democrats. To show they are nonpartisan, however, they decide to vote for one Democrat instead of one Whig. They choose a friendly Democrat named Ralston and vote for him instead of the bottom name on the Whig ballot. The one Whig the Saints do not vote for is Abraham Lincoln.

Aug 8, 1840

Joseph answers John C. Bennett's letters, stating, "My general invitation is, Let all that will, come, and partake of the poverty of Nauvoo freely." (HC 4:177-79.)

Aug. 10, 1840

Col. Seymour Brunson dies in Nauvoo. During his funeral sermon Joseph makes the first public mention of the doctrine of baptism for the dead. (Some say this funeral was on Aug. 15-IJB 488; some say it was Aug. 10-JFS 252.) The idea of preaching to the dead had been given on Feb. 16, 1832. (D&C 76:73.)

Aug. 15, 1840

The first baptisms for the dead take place. Jane Neyman promptly asks Harvey Olmstead to baptize her in the Mississippi for her dead son Cyrus. When Joseph hears the words that were used he pronounces the ceremony valid, Vienna Jacques having been a witness.

Aug. 21, 1840

Noah Rogers and Benjamin Boyce escape from a Missouri prison, having been kidnapped on July 7, 1840. The other two who were kidnapped that same date, Alanson Brown and James Allred, had escaped previously. (For a record of the hardships and torture to which Boyce and Rogers were subjected, see HC 4:180-81.)

Aug. 30, 1840

Elders Kimball, Woodruff, and Smith are forbidden to preach in the streets of London.

Sept. 5, 1840

Joseph prefers charges against Elder Almon W. Babbitt, accusing him of having spread rumors about Joseph and others implying that they had been extravagant in their monetary affairs.

Sept. 14, 1840

Joseph's father, Joseph Smith, Sr., dies in Nauvoo. All of his family except one daughter had been able to gather around him before his death, and he gave them each a final patriarchal blessing. As with every family in disease-ridden Nauvoo at that time, many of the Smith family suffered disease and death in 1840 and 1841, including Joseph's uncle Silas, Joseph's sister-in-law Mary, Joseph's brother Don Carlos, Joseph's youngest son named after Don Carlos, Hyrum's seven-year-old son Hyrum, and many others.

Sept. 15, 1840

The funeral for Joseph Smith, Sr., is held. (HC 4:191-97 includes the full funeral sermon.)

Governor Boggs of Missouri, having renewed his vengeance against Joseph because of Joseph's accusations against Boggs in Washington, and also because of the recent scandal concerning the kidnappings and river bottom thefts, asks Governor Carlin of Illinois to turn over Joseph, Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Parley P. Pratt, Caleb Baldwin, and Alanson Brown to Missouri officials, claiming they are escaped convicts and fugitives from justice.

Oct. 1840

During this month Orson Pratt, in Scotland, publishes a 31-page pamphlet titled "An Interesting Account of Several Remarkable Visions, and of the Late Discovery of Ancient American Records." This is the first known time that Joseph Smith's first vision is put into print.

Oct. 3-5, 1840

A general conference is held in Nauvoo. The conference moves to send some brethren to preside over the building up of Kirtland as the gathering place of the eastern Saints. Joseph speaks on the necessity of building a house of the Lord in Nauvoo, the newly disclosed doctrine of baptism for the dead, the two priesthoods, the ordinances, Adam and the keys of the presidency, the mission of Enoch, a need for sacrifice, the mission of Elijah, and the restoration of all ordinances. (See HC 207-12.) The building of the temple is authorized and building committees are appointed.

Oct. 6, 1840

General conference is held in Manchester, England. There are over 3700 members in England at this time.

Oct. 17, 1840

A conference is held in Philadelphia, with Orson Hyde presiding, and 896 persons in attendance.

Oct. 19, 1840

Joseph and Hyrum write to the Saints in Kirtland, encouraging them to be unified in the gospel. Joseph writes to the Twelve in Great Britain about several spiritual and temporal concerns, especially referring to the doctrine of baptism for the dead. (See HC 4:226-32.)

Dec. 9, 1840

A bill to incorporate the city of Nauvoo is passed by the state senate. One senator jokingly tries to amend the bill title to "A Bill for the Encouragement of the Importation of Mormons." This proposal is withdrawn. (BYS, Su '75, 493.)

Dec. 12, 1840

The bill is passed by the Illinois House.

Dec. 17, 1840

The Council of Revision passes the Nauvoo charter. It will take effect on Feb. 1, 1841. The charter is then signed by Governor Carlin. It includes provisions for the city of Nauvoo, the Nauvoo Legion, the University of the City of Nauvoo, and all other municipal necessities. In addition to Governor Carlin, Stephen A. Douglas, Illinois secretary of state, signs it. The charter was written by Joseph Smith, John C. Bennett, and Robert B. Thompson. Once the charter was complete, Bennett took it to the state legislature and pushed it through in 21 days. (The complete charter appears in HC 4:239-48.)
