J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Jan 1841

Brigham Young and Willard Richards publish a long article on election and reprobation in the Millennial Star, which Joseph calls "one of the sweetest pieces that has been written in these last days." (See HC 4:256-66.)

Jan 8, 1841

The First Presidency publishes a proclamation to the Saints scattered abroad, explaining and expressing gratitude for the Nauvoo charter. They say the advantage of the Nauvoo Legion is that "it will enable us to show our attachment to the state and nation, as a people, whenever the public service requires our aid, thus proving ourselves obedient to the paramount laws of the land, and ready at all times to sustain and execute them." The University of Nauvoo is also praised. The Presidency asks the Saints coming into Nauvoo from abroad to have patience with the imperfections of man. (See HC 4:267-73.)

Jan. 15, 1841

Joseph writes in the Times and Seasons that the Lord is not pleased with Orson Hyde and John E. Page because they have delayed their missions.

Jan. 19, 1841

Joseph receives D&C 124.

Jan. 24, 1841

In accordance with D&C 124, Hyrum Smith is ordained a Patriarch to the Church and is called an assistant president in the First Presidency (a calling formerly held by Oliver Cowdery). William Law replaces Hyrum as second counselor.

Jan. 30, 1841

In a special conference Joseph is elected sole trustee-in-trust for the Church. As trustee-in-trust he is entitled to receive, acquire, manage, and convey property in behalf of the Church. He will hold this office for life, and the First Presidency would be the successor to this position.

Feb. 1, 1841

The Nauvoo charter, which was passed the previous December, goes into effect. The first election for mayor and members of the city council takes place. John C. Bennett is elected mayor, with Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and several other leading Church officials elected to the city council. It is said that Joseph received less than $25 total pay for two years service as city councilman.

Feb. 3, 1841

Mayor John C. Bennett gives his inaugural address. The same day a bill officially organizing the University of the City of Nauvoo is passed. Another bill officially organizing the Nauvoo Legion is also passed. The Legion is divided into six companies, with Joseph Smith as the lieutenant-general.

Feb. 13, 1841

Orson Hyde, accompanied by George J. Adams, sails from New York to Liverpool, headed eventually for Jerusalem.

Feb. 15, 1841

Joseph, as chairman of the committee on vending of spirituous liquors, suggests a bill that would prohibit selling whiskey in smaller quantities than a gallon. After a long debate it is passed. Joseph says, "I spoke at great length on the use of liquors, and showed that they were unnecessary, and operate as a poison in the stomach, and that roots and herbs can be found to effect all necessary purposes." (HC 4:298-99.)

Mar. l, 1841

Work on the temple begins. Joseph presents a bill ensuring equal toleration of all religions within Nauvoo.

Mar. 10, 1841

Gov. Thomas Carlin officially commissions Joseph as lieutenant-general in the Nauvoo Legion.

Mar. 20, 1841

Upon inquiry by some local brothers, Joseph receives a revelation explaining the details for selling stock for the Nauvoo House. He also inquires about the will of the Lord concerning the Saints in Iowa, and receives D&C 125.

Apr. 6, 1841

In celebration of the twelfth anniversary of the Church, 16 companies of the Nauvoo Legion march in review before a huge crowd. Sidney Rigdon then gives a speech before those who have gathered to watch the parade. The southeast cornerstone of the temple, representing the First Presidency, is laid with great ceremony. (The basement of the temple was dug and walled before this time in readiness for the cornerstone.) The high priests then lay a second cornerstone; the high council lays the third cornerstone; and the bishops lay the fourth cornerstone.

Apr. 7-8, 1841

General conference is held in Nauvoo. Elder Lyman Wight is called to the Quorum of the Twelve, replacing David W. Patten. John C. Bennett is appointed as a temporary assistant president in the First Presidency during Sidney Rigdon's illness.

Apr. 21, 1841

Elders Young, Kimball, Orson Pratt, Richards, Woodruff, Smith, and Taylor sail from Liverpool with 130 Saints, arriving in New York on May 20, 1841. Parley P. Pratt remains behind in England to edit and publish the Millennial Star.

May 2, 1841

A teachers quorum is organized in Nauvoo. (For the history and evolution of the teachers quorum from its initial organization to its present-day functions, see BYS, Sp '76, 375-98.).

May 4, 1841

Joseph, still troubled about his Kirtland debts, writes to his agent, Oliver Granger, asking him to settle them as soon as possible. However, Granger dies in Kirtland on Aug. 25, 1841. Joseph exchanges a series of letters with Stephen A. Douglas about the Nauvoo Legion. Douglas had come to Nauvoo to inspect the Legion to determine whether or not Legion members should be exempt from other military duty. Joseph justifies the Legion on the grounds that it is not exclusively a Mormon legion, and that it is merely for self-preservation.

May 16, 1841

Joseph gives a sermon on free agency, the first principles of the gospel, the possibility of redemption for murderers, and the doctrine of election. (See HC 4:358-60.)

May 23, 1841

At a Kirtland conference, preservation of the Kirtland Temple is discussed. There are 300 to 400 Saints still living in Kirtland.

May 24, 1841

The First Presidency calls on all Saints to gather to Hancock County, Ill., or Lee County, Iowa. All stakes outside these areas are discontinued.

June 1, 1841

Sidney Rigdon is ordained a prophet, seer, and revelator. Joseph accompanies Hyrum Smith and William Law as far as Quincy on their mission to the East.

June 4, 1841

Joseph calls at the home of Governor Carlin in Quincy, Ill. The governor shows him great courtesy, and doesn't mention that Missouri has asked him to turn Joseph over to them. Within a few hours of Joseph's leaving the governor's mansion, Carlin sends a posse of law officers to capture him and turn him over to the Missouri authorities.

June 5, 1841

While Joseph is staying in a hotel 28 miles from Nauvoo, Sheriff King and his posse arrest him. Joseph obtains a writ of habeas corpus and appears before Judge Stephen A. Douglas, who happens to be in town.

June 9, 1841

The trial is held to see if Illinois should send Joseph back to Missouri. The actions of the young prosecuting attorney are so outrageous that the judge is forced to silence him. By the time Joseph's attorney, Mr. Browning, finishes his sad tale of the Saints being driven from Missouri and walking on bloody bare feet across the snow to Illinois, Judge Douglas himself is in tears.

June 10, 1841

Judge Douglas orders Joseph to be liberated. The Prophet returns to Nauvoo the next day.

June 15, 1841

Joseph receives a letter from Orson Hyde recounting his travels on the way to Jerusalem. Hyrum Smith and William Law, on a mission in Pittsburgh, learn that John C. Bennett has an estranged wife and child (he had claimed to be unmarried). This is reported to Joseph. Soon afterward, Joseph confronts Bennett with these facts, and Bennett takes poison in an attempted suicide. However, many assume that because he is a doctor, he knows how much he can consume and stay alive. At any rate, he does survive the suicide attempt. Joseph accepts his dramatic show of repentance and allows him to remain in power in the Church and in the city.

July 1841

Heber C. Kimball writes Parley P. Pratt in England that although there were not more than 30 buildings in Nauvoo when the Twelve left two years ago, now there are about 1200 completed buildings and hundreds more in progress.

July 1, 1841

Brigham Young, Heber Kimball, and John Taylor reach Nauvoo from their missions to England. Joseph meets with them until late at night, explaining the law of plural marriage.

July 3, 1841

At the Independence Day celebration the Nauvoo Legion comes out in parade and Joseph gives a patriotic speech, closing with the words, "I would ask no greater boon, than to lay down my life for my country." (HC 4:382.)

July 9, 1841

Joseph receives D&C 126.

July 13, 1841

George A. Smith reaches Nauvoo from his mission in England.

July 15, 1841

Joseph mentions all the lies and falsehoods that are being published about him in various newspapers.

Aug. 7, 1841

Twenty-six-year-old Don Carlos Smith, Joseph's youngest brother, dies in Nauvoo. He was the editor of the Times and Seasons and became sick while printing in a damp cellar. He leaves three daughters.

Aug. 12, 1841

Joseph preaches to a good number of Sac and Fox Indians who have come to visit him in Nauvoo.

Aug. 15, 1841

Joseph's 14-month-old son, Don Carlos, dies in Nauvoo. Death is becoming so widespread at this time in and around Nauvoo that Sidney Rigdon begins preaching a "general" funeral sermon.

Aug. 16, 1841

Willard Richards arrives in Nauvoo from his mission to England. Ebenezer Robinson succeeds Don Carlos Smith as editor of the Times and Seasons. Joseph calls a special conference, although he is absent because of his son's death. In the afternoon he tells the Twelve that "the Twelve should be called upon to stand in their place next to the First Presidency, and attend to the settling of emigrants and the business of the Church at the stakes. . . ." (HC 4:402-4.)

Aug. 22, 1841

Joseph preaches on the wars and desolations that await nations.

Aug. 25, 1841

Joseph exchanges letters with Horace R. Hotchkiss concerning tardy payments for the Nauvoo lands. Apparently both Joseph and Hotchkiss assume that the Saints might get some financial compensation for their losses in Missouri, with which they might pay for the Nauvoo lands. When this does not come about, Hotchkiss begins to get quite anxious about the payment due him for his land. Joseph, of course, has little or no money of his own with which to pay for the lands.

Sept. 4, 1841

Col. Charles C. Rich is elected brigadier-general of the Nauvoo Legion to replace Don Carlos Smith.

Sept. 25, 1841

Hyrum Smith, the seven-year-old son of Hyrum and Jerusha Smith, dies in Nauvoo.

Sept. 30, 1841

Joseph draws up a bill of expenses caused by his trial in Monmouth in June 1841 and sends it to the deputy sheriff of Adams County because he officiated in the arrest initiated by Gov. Boggs. Joseph includes a note asking that the $685 be refunded to him as soon as possible.

Oct. 1, 1841

George M. Hinckle, an apostate who had robbed Joseph's home when Joseph was imprisoned in Missouri, is passing through the area. Joseph places a suit against him for his lost goods, but Hinckle manages to have the suit put off until spring.

Oct. 2, 1841

The original handwritten manuscript of the Book of Mormon is placed in the southeast cornerstone of the Nauvoo House. Construction of the Nauvoo House begins on this date, but most of the effort is put into the temple, and the Nauvoo House is never completed above the first floor.

Oct. 2-5, 1841

An important general conference is held in the Grove at Nauvoo. Joseph gives a sermon on baptisms for the dead. He announces that "there shall be no more baptisms for the dead, until the ordinance can be attended to in the Lord's House; and the Church cannot hold another General Conference, until they can meet in said house. For thus saith the Lord!" A motion is passed that the Twelve write an epistle abroad to encourage the Saints to exchange, purchase, or donate monies or lands to satisfy the Hotchkiss debt. (HC 4:423-29.)

Oct. 6, 1841

Wilford Woodruff arrives in Nauvoo from his British mission.

Oct. 9, 1841

Joseph has more correspondence concerning the Hotchkiss land troubles.

Oct. 15, 1841

Grandmaster Jonas grants permission to George Miller to open a lodge of Free Masons in Nauvoo.

Oct. 24, 1841

Orson Hyde has reached Jerusalem and makes an altar of stones on the Mount of Olives and on Mount Moriah. He gives a prayer dedicating the land of Palestine for the return and gathering of the Jews. (For the complete prayer see HC 4:456-59.)

Oct. 30, 1841

In obedience to an order from the mayor, Joseph calls out two companies of the Nauvoo Legion to remove a grog shop kept in town.

Oct. 31, 1841

Hyrum Smith writes to the Saints who still remain in Kirtland. He disapproves of their plans to build up that place, and prophesies that a scourge will fall upon Kirtland.

Nov. 1, 1841

A small shack that has deteriorated into a graffiti-covered brothel is declared a nuisance by the city council and torn down. The owner becomes angered and demands payment for the damages. Joseph argues vigorously against making any such payments.

Nov. 7, 1841

When William O. Clark preaches, rebuking the Saints for a lack of sanctity and holiness, Joseph preaches against him, calling him a Pharisee and a hypocrite. Joseph tells the Saints not to follow the adversary in accusing each other, and says, "If you do not accuse each other, God will not accuse you. . . . If you will not accuse me, I will not accuse you. If you will throw a cloak of charity over my sins, I will over yours—for charity covereth a multitude of sins. What many people call sin is not sin; I do many things to break down superstition, and I will break it down." (HC 4:455-46)

Nov. 8, 1841

A temporary baptismal font is set up in the Nauvoo Temple basement. The basement is dedicated by Brigham Young.

Nov. 21, 1841

Baptisms for the dead commence in the Nauvoo Temple. Brigham Young and others of the Twelve baptize 40 persons for the dead.

Nov. 28, 1841

Joseph spends the day with the Twelve at Brigham Young's house and says, "I told the Brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book." (HC 4:461.)

Nov. 29, 1841

Joseph runs a notice in the Times and Seasons denouncing thieves and robbers. At this time many gangs of criminals were hiding out in the caves along the Mississippi River where they could strike across stream to Missouri and return quickly. Because some of them joined the Church as a cover-up, the Saints were getting a bad reputation as protectors of thieves.

Dec. l, 1841

A notice from the Twelve denouncing thievery and warning thieves appears in the Times and Seasons.

Dec. 2, 1841

Joseph receives a revelation for Nancy Marinda Hyde (Orson Hyde's wife), in which he is told that Ebenezer Robinson and his wife are to take in Nancy until Orson Hyde returns from his mission. Nancy is to hearken unto "the counsel of my servant Joseph in all things," and it shall be a blessing to her. (HC 4:467.)

Dec. 5, 1841

Joseph proofreads the Book of Mormon for a new edition.

Dec. 11, 1841

Joseph sits in his new store on Water Street. He records the difficulty he has keeping his journal and history up-to-date.

Dec. 13, 1841

Joseph records the history of an anti-Mormon society that has caused troubles in Warsaw, Ill. The Twelve draw up an epistle concerning baptism for the dead.

Dec. 14, 1841

Joseph begins to set up his new store.

Dec. 18, 1841

Joseph attends a city council and draws up a resolution thanking James Gordon Bennett for his "very liberal and unprejudiced course towards us as a people, in giving us a fair hearing in his paper." (HC 4:477-78.)

Dec. 20, 1841

Joseph publishes an article in the Times and Seasons in which he backs Adam W. Snyder for governor of Illinois. The election takes place in August 1842. Joseph says that "Douglas is a master spirit," and that since "Snyder and Moore are his friends—they are ours. . . . We will never be justly charged with the sin of ingratitude—they have served us, and we will serve them." (HC 4:479-80.)

Dec. 22, 1841

Joseph receives two revelations. John Snyder is told to go on a mission to the eastern continent. Amos B. Fuller is told to preach the gospel wherever the Holy Ghost leads him.

Dec. 26, 1841

Joseph gives a sermon on the gift of tongues, stating its value in the Church.

Dec. 28, 1841

Joseph baptizes Sidney Rigdon for his dead parents.

Dec. 30, 1841

Joseph prophesies in the name of the Lord "that the first thing toward building up Warsaw was to break it down." (HC 4:486-87.) George Miller, having been granted an official dispensation by Grandmaster Jonas, on Oct. 15, to meet with other Masons in Nauvoo, holds the first Masonic gathering in Nauvoo on Dec. 29, at the office of Hyrum Smith. Temporary officers are elected and by-laws are drafted. On Dec. 30 the second meeting of the Nauvoo Lodge is held. By-laws are approved and a petition with a list of names applying for new membership is submitted. Included among the applicants are Joseph Smith, Willard Richards, Brigham Young, Sidney Rigdon, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, and many other prominent Church leaders. No new members are actually admitted until the next formal installation on March 15, 1842.
