J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Jan. 5, 1842

Joseph opens his new store on Water Street. He works all day behind the counter serving the Saints. By March he ceases his active involvement in the store, but in his office on the second floor he translates, receives revelations, organizes the Relief Society, and introduces temple endowments.

Jan. 15, 1842

Joseph proofreads the Book of Mormon.

Jan. 18, 1842

Joseph revokes his power of attorney from Dr. Isaac Galland, who can now no longer transact business for the Church. Joseph rests in the afternoon, corrects the Book of Mormon, and debates John C. Bennett concerning the Lamanites and Negroes.

Jan. 19, 1842

Joseph writes Dr. Galland expressing his financial disagreements with him.

Jan. 25, 1842

The Nauvoo Legion parades in review before Lieutenant-General Joseph Smith. In the past year the Legion has grown from six companies to 26 companies, about 2,000 men.

Jan. 28, 1842

Joseph receives a revelation for the Twelve, which is printed in the Times and Seasons; the Twelve are to take over the editorial department of the Times and Seasons.

Feb. 3, 1842

A new national bankruptcy act becomes effective. Wilford Woodruff becomes superintendent of the printing office, and John Taylor is made editor of the Times and Seasons.

Feb. 4, 1842

In the evening Joseph attends one of the weekly debates being held in Nauvoo.

Feb. 6, 1842

A son is stillborn to Emma and Joseph in Nauvoo.

Feb. 10, 1842

Joseph is sick and stays in bed.

Feb. 15, 1842

Joseph's name appears as editor and publisher of the Times and Seasons. Ebenezer Robinson had been running the paper since Don Carlos Smith died in 1841, but now Joseph seems to have taken over, with John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff of the Twelve helping him.

Feb. 19-Mar. 18, 1842

According to some sources, Joseph translated the book of Abraham between these dates.

Feb. 28, 1842

A man sends Joseph a note stating that Joseph has been honest and fair in his financial dealings with the man. Joseph immediately publishes the rare but welcome compliment in the Times and Seasons.

Mar. 1, 1842

Joseph works in the printing office correcting the first plate or cut of the record of Abraham, in preparation for publishing it. The Times and Seasons carries facsimile No. 1 of the book of Abraham and Abraham 1:1—2:18. (It may have been published later than this date.) The famous Wentworth letter is also published on this date in the Times and Seasons, as a reply to the editor of the Chicago Democrat. It briefly explains the history and beliefs of the Latter-day Saints. This letter contains Joseph's recollection of his first vision, the history of the Church since then, and the Articles of Faith.

Mar. 4, 1842

Joseph exhibits the original book of Abraham to Reuben Hedlock so that he can prepare proper printing blocks for the Times and Seasons. Sarah M. Kimball and other women decide to make shirts for the men working on the temple. When they organize into a group, Joseph offers to help them. Eventually this small group will be organized as the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo.

Mar. 7, 1842

Joseph writes to John C. Bennett about slavery, stating that "it makes my blood boil within me to reflect upon the injustice, cruelty, and oppression of the rulers of the people." (HC 4:544-45, 548.)

Mar. 13, 1842

Joseph spends the day with his family.

Mar. 15, 1842

Joseph publicly announces that he is editor of the Times and Seasons and will be responsible for all material published in the paper from this day forward. The second half of the book of Abraham (2:19—5:21, and facsimile No. 2) is published in the March 15 Times and Seasons (which, like the previous issue, may have come out a few days late). The Masonic Lodge of Nauvoo has now grown to 33 members, and more than 50 others have made application to become Masons. (See Dec. 30, 1841.) The meeting on Feb. 17, 1842, decided upon this date as the formal installation date of all new Masons in Nauvoo. Abraham Jonas, "Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of the State of Illinois," comes to Nauvoo with several other prominent Masons from throughout the state. The Nauvoo Lodge of Free Masons is officially installed. Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon are installed as Apprentice Masons. Jonas gives special permission to confer the three degrees of Ancient York Masonry on Joseph and Sidney "as speedily as the nature of the case will admit." (DM 101-3.)

Mar. 16, 1842

In the morning Joseph and Sidney receive the second degree of masonry. At two P.M. they rise to the sublime degree. By May 6, 65 other prominent men have become Masons, 54 having risen to the third degree. Other lists indicate as many as 145 or 250 other Saints may have become Masons around this time. (See DM 103-4.)

Mar. 17, 1842

The organization of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo commences this day, and is completed on March 24, 1842. Joseph Smith, John Taylor, and Willard Richards meet with 18 women in the Masonic Hall. (Eight other women not present were also accepted as members on the first day.) Emma Smith is made president, with Elizabeth Ann Whitney and Sarah M. Cleveland as her counselors. Eliza R. Snow is made secretary. Joseph states, "I will organize the sisters under the priesthood after the pattern of the priesthood," and later adds, "[the] Church was never perfectly organized until the women were thus organized." (IJB 504-8.)

Mar. 20, 1842

On this Sunday Joseph preaches to a large congregation in the grove near the temple lot. After the sermon, he personally baptizes 80 people in the Mississippi River, including Emma Smith's nephew, the first of her family to embrace the gospel. Joseph then confirms about 50 of those people. While this is taking place, baptisms for the dead are being performed in the temple font.

Mar. 24, 1842

Joseph attends to the completion of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo. He comments that a great number of sisters attend the meetings and that "they will fly to the relief of the stranger; they will pour in oil and wine to the wounded heart of the distressed; they will dry up the tears of the orphan and make the widow's heart to rejoice." (HC 4:567-68.) By September 1842, the membership of this society increases to 1,142; it increases 200 more during the following 18 months.

Mar. 27, 1842

After a sermon on baptism for the dead, Joseph baptizes 107 persons in the Mississippi River. On the same date 170 English Saints reach Nauvoo, and $3,000 worth of goods are donated for the building of the temple and Nauvoo House.

Mar. 30, 1842

Joseph addresses the Female Relief Society, commending them on their zeal but saying that "sometimes their zeal was not according to knowledge." (HC 4:570.)

Apr. 1842

Several eastern newspapers carry articles about Joseph's book of Abraham.

Apr. 1, 1842

Joseph publishes an editorial in the Times and Seasons titled "Try the Spirits," in which he talks about discerning of spirits by the power of the priesthood, the difference between the body and the spirit, various false prophets and false sects, and the manifestations of Satan. (See HC 4:571-81.)

Apr. 6-8, 1842

A special conference is held in Nauvoo, in which 275 brethren are ordained elders. According to the Council of Fifty minutes of 1880, on Apr. 7, 1842, Joseph received a revelation outlining how the kingdom of God would eventually have political power. (For further developments of this idea, see Mar. 11, 1844.)

Apr. 9, 1842

Joseph gives a funeral sermon for Ephraim Marks, son of stake president William Marks.

Apr. 10, 1842

Sunday. Joseph preaches in the grove against adulterers and fornicators and "those who have made use of my name to carry on their iniquitous designs." He says, "If you wish to go where God is, you must be like God . . . for if we are not drawing towards God in principle, we are going from Him and drawing towards the devil. Yes, I am standing in the midst of all kinds of people. Search your hearts, and see if you are like God. I have searched mine, and feel to repent of all my sins. . . . A man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge . . . hence it needs revelation to assist us, and give us knowledge of the things of God." (HC 4:587-88. His reference to people using his name to carry on their own unvirtuous activities probably refers to his growing disenchantment with John C. Bennett, which will be made manifest in May 1842.)

Apr. 14, 1842

Calvin A. Warren is hired by Joseph to explain and investigate the technicalities of the Federal Bankruptcy Law, which had gone into effect on Feb. 1, 1842. Joseph records, "The justice or injustice of such a principle in law, I leave for them who made it, the United States. Suffice it to say, the law was as good for the Saints as for the Gentiles, and whether I would or not, I was forced into the measure by having been robbed, mobbed, plundered, and wasted of all my property, time after time, in various places, by the very ones who made the law, namely, the people of the United States." (HC 4:594-95.)

Apr. 16, 1842

The Wasp, edited by Joseph's brother William, is published for the first time in Nauvoo as a miscellaneous weekly newspaper. Subscription price is $1.50 per year.

Apr. 18, 1842

Joseph, Hyrum Smith, and Samuel Smith go to Carthage to declare bankruptcy before the county commissioner's court. Other leading Latter-day Saints file similar papers at the same time. According to the law, Joseph's goods, except for a $300 exemption, would then be turned over to pay old debts. However, before a person is declared bankrupt, a long investigation must take place. Seven months later, in December, Joseph is still waiting the approval of his declaration of bankruptcy. He never does record whether he is awarded the bankruptcy judgment or not.

Apr. 20, 1842

Joseph, suspecting betrayal by John C. Bennett, records that he feels there is a conspiracy against the peace of his household.

May 2, 1842

An editorial in the Times and Seasons encourages the rapid building of the temple.

May 4, 1842

Joseph teaches the full endowment ceremony for the first time. He meets with James Adams, Hyrum Smith, Newel K. Whitney, George Miller, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Willard Richards to instruct them "in the principles and order of the Priesthood, attending to washings, anointings, endowments, and the communication of keys pertaining to the Aaronic Priesthood, and so on to the highest order of the Melchizedek Priesthood." (HC 5:1-2.) He and Hyrum give the endowments to the other six men, and on the next day they receive the endowment from the others (except James Adams, who had returned to Springfield).

May 6, 1842

In Missouri ex-Governor Lilburn W. Boggs is shot in the head by an unknown assassin. He lingers on the edge of death but finally recovers from the wound. A man named Tompkins is charged with the shooting at first, but is later released. When Boggs learns that Orrin Porter Rockwell has recently been in Missouri with his pregnant wife, he begins to suspect that Rockwell has been sent there to shoot him under orders from Joseph Smith. He therefore begins to press charges.

May 7, 1842

Twenty-six companies and 2,000 men of the Nauvoo Legion march in review and fight a sham battle. John C. Bennett urges Joseph to take his place on a horse in a prominent place among the troops, and Joseph thinks that Bennett plans to use a real bullet to assassinate him during the proceedings. Stephen A. Douglas and Gov. Carlin are both in Nauvoo on this date. Joseph records, "If General Bennett's true feelings toward me are not made manifest to the world in a very short time, then it may be possible that the gentle breathings of that Spirit, which whispered me on parade, that there was mischief concealed in that sham battle, were false; a short time will determine the point." (HC 5:3-5.)

May 10, 1842

An unknown delegation of Saints in Washington, D. C., presents a petition to the House Judiciary Committee, setting forth grievances about the Missouri persecutions.

May 11, 1842

John C. Bennett is disfellowshipped from the Church for immorality, among other things.

May 14, 1842

Joseph attends a city council meeting in which he advocates suppressing all "houses and acts of infamy in the city." This act is passed and published in the Wasp. (HC 5 8.)

May 16, 1842

Joseph publishes facsimile No. 3 from the Book of Abraham on the front page of the Times and Seasons.

May 17, 1842

John C. Bennett swears an affidavit before Alderman Daniel H. Wells stating that Joseph Smith never authorized or taught John C. Bennett either in public or in private that "an illegal, illicit intercourse with females, was under any circumstances justifiable, and that I never knew him to so teach others." (Bennett then resigns from the office of mayor of Nauvoo.) (HC 5:11-12.)

May 19, 1842

John C. Bennett, having spread immorality supposedly with Joseph's authorization, testifies before the city council of Joseph's uprightness and swears that he (Bennett) was never taught anything immoral by the Prophet. After Bennett's resignation, Joseph is elected mayor of Nauvoo by the city council, and Hyrum Smith is elected vice-mayor. During the election Joseph receives a revelation stating that Hiram Kimball has been insinuating evil about Joseph and the Lord will punish him if he continues. Joseph writes down the revelation and hands it to Kimball, one of the councilors. Joseph speaks about the evil reports that are spreading throughout the city concerning him and asks for a night watch, which is approved.

May 22, 1842

Joseph publishes an article in the Wasp, addressed to the editor of the Quincy Whig, refuting the claim that Joseph had prophesied Bogg's death by violent means the previous year.

May 25, 1842

John C. Bennett is officially notified that fellowship has been withdrawn from him. Upon Bennett's urgent request that the matter not be published, "for his mother's sake," the notice is not published in the paper as had been intended. (HC 5:18.)

May 26, 1842

John C. Bennett confesses his guilt before 100 Masons in the Masonic Lodge in Nauvoo. Joseph addresses the Female Relief Society and tells them not to be too zealous or rigid, to have the spirit of forgiveness, and to guard against the spreading of rumors.

May 27, 1842

Joseph is sick and stays in bed, taking medicine.

May 28, 1842

Joseph speaks to the Female Relief Society and tells the sisters how they can have the blessings and gifts of the priesthood, such as healing the sick and casting out of devils. The Wasp, published by Joseph's brother William, prints the news that "Boggs is undoubtedly killed according to a report but Who did the Noble Deed remains to be found out." (HC 5:xxii.)

June 1, 1842

A conference is held in England presided over by Parley P. Pratt. There are now over 7500 members there.

June 3, 1842

Joseph sells one lot of property and goes on a horseback ride with Emma and others.

June 9, 1842

Joseph speaks to the Female Relief Society in the grove. He tells the sisters that they must be more particular in accepting new members and should accept no one unless they present a petition signed by at least two or three other members. Joseph tells the sisters that they need better fellowship, more mercy and compassion, and less self-righteousness (which is a principle of the devil), and that there must be no strife among them.

June 14, 1842

Joseph buys three-quarters of a section of land from Hiram Kimball.

June 15, 1842

Joseph publishes an editorial on the gift of the Holy Ghost. (See HC 5:26-32.)

June 16, 1842

The Masonic Lodge publishes a bulletin confirming that John C. Bennett is an expelled Mason.

June 17, 1842

William Law publishes a defense of the morality of the Saints in Nauvoo. Joseph comments on it, saying, "There is no city . . . that can compare with the city of Nauvoo. You may live in our city for a month, and not hear an oath sworn; you may be here as long and not see one person intoxicated. So notorious are we for sobriety, that at the time the Washington convention passed through our city a meeting was called for them, but they expressed themselves at a loss what to say, as there were no drunkards to speak to." (HC 5:32-34.)

June 18, 1842

Joseph begins speaking and publishing rebuttals to the lies being spread abroad by John C. Bennett.

June 23, 1842

Joseph publishes an order of excommunication against John C. Bennett, which had been drawn up on May 11.

June 24, 1842

Joseph sends a letter to Gov. Carlin explaining the controversy with John C. Bennett.

June 28, 1842

Joseph visits Sidney Rigdon's family, who have had unpleasant feelings because of the lies spread by John C. Bennett.

June 29, 1842

Joseph is married to Eliza R. Snow. Eliza records her lonely and unsure feelings on this day. (See BYS, Su '75, 392-395)

June 30, 1842

Gov. Carlin writes back to Joseph Smith, stating the reasons for his uncertain feelings in regard to the Mormons.

July 2, 1842

The Wasp publishes Joseph Smith's phrenology chart, which purports to describe Joseph's character according to the bumps in his head.

July 3, 1842

This Sunday Joseph preaches to 8,000 in the grove.

July 4, 1842

A grand parade of the Nauvoo Legion is led by Wilson Law. Two are fined $10.25 for selling whiskey.

July 8, 1842

John C. Bennett publishes the first of his anti-Mormon articles in the Sangamon Journal, stating that he will expose the Prophet and the Saints. "I write you now from the Mormon Zion, where I am threatened with death by the Holy Joe, and his Danite band of murderers." Elsewhere in this Springfield paper it is stated: "The Mormons are so constituted that in these temperate times, the world will be divided between the Pope and the Catholics on one side and Joseph Smith and the Mormons on the other. The oyster is opening and will soon be equally divided. There are now approximately 30,000 of these war-like fanatics." Bennett's letters appear intermittently for the next three months, after which he publishes a book on the same subject. His most famous accusation is that the Saints have an elaborate "spiritual wife" system of plural marriage. (FMG 293; DM 131-32.)

July 15, 1842

The Times and Seasons publishes an article on the government of God, stating that it differs from the government of man mostly because it promotes peace and not war.

July 17, 1842

Brigham Young writes to Parley P. Pratt about Orson Pratt's recent troubles. He writes that Orson believes the word of Mrs. Pratt and John C. Bennett over that of Joseph. Brigham writes that "we will not let Br. Orson go away from us. He is too good a man to have a woman destroy him." (OPJ 561-62.)

July 22, 1842

The Council of the Twelve meets to draw up a letter stating that John C. Bennett is lying about Joseph Smith's character. Orson Pratt opposes the action, but when asked if he has any knowledge about Joseph's immorality, he says he has none.

Aug. 1842

Gubernatorial elections are held in Illinois. Snyder, the pro-Mormon Democratic candidate, died suddenly in May 1842. His more neutral successor, Thomas Ford, defeats the anti-Mormon Whig candidate, Joseph Duncan. (For details on the involvement of the Saints in these political events, see Dec. 8, 1842, the date of Ford's inauguration.)

Aug. 6, 1842

Joseph prophesies that "the Saints would continue to suffer much affliction and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains, many would apostatize, others would be put to death by our persecutors or lose their lives in consequence of exposure or disease, and some of you will live to go and assist in making settlements and build cities and see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains." (HC 5:85-86.)

Aug. 8, 1842

After working diligently with Orson Pratt for 12 days, the Twelve decide to cut him off from the Church for believing his wife and John C. Bennett over Joseph Smith. The action officially takes place August 20.

A deputy sheriff of Adams County and two assistants arrest Joseph in Nauvoo. They have a warrant from Gov. Carlin that is based upon a requisition from Gov. Reynolds of Missouri, which, in turn, was based upon an affidavit of ex-Governor Boggs. Boggs accused Joseph of ordering Orrin P. Rockwell to shoot Boggs. A Nauvoo court, under Hyrum Smith, issues a writ of habeas corpus allowing the prisoners to be released temporarily. This begins approximately four months of arrest attempts against Joseph, in which he spends much of his time hiding out. It is reported that anywhere from $200 to $1300 is offered as a reward for Joseph's arrest. Joseph, knowing that Gov. Carlin would allow him to be extradited to Missouri (and knowing he would never return alive if he were ever taken to Missouri), refuses to submit to the law. On this date the city of Nauvoo passes a special ordinance that would quash all writs based upon religious prejudice. This seems like special legal maneuvering and arouses more opposition to the Saints.

Aug. 10, 1842

Deputies return to arrest Joseph and Rockwell, but they are in hiding. The sheriffs threaten Emma and others. Joseph is across the river in Zarahemla, Iowa, in the house of his uncle John Smith.

Aug. 11, 1842

After dark, Joseph meets with Emma and several of the brethren on an island in the middle of the Mississippi River. After much discussion it is decided that Joseph should go upriver in a skiff, which he does. He then stays at the home of Edward Sayers.

Aug. 12-16, 1842

Joseph hides out and moves from place to place, visiting Emma and his friends whenever possible. An article on persecution appears in the Times and Seasons.

Aug. 16, 1842

Joseph writes a tender love note to Emma. He records his affection and gratitude and love for Emma, Hyrum, Newel K. Whitney, and others. James Arlington Bennett writes to Joseph from New York, stating that most people are being convinced by John C. Bennett's articles against the Prophet. Bennett also suggests that the newspaper, the Wasp, be given a milder title.

Aug. 19, 1842

Joseph returns home at night.

Aug. 20, 1842

The Twelve carry out their decision of August 8 and excommunicate Orson Pratt and his wife. Amasa M. Lyman is ordained to the apostleship in Pratt's place. John C. Bennett is officially deposed as chancellor of the University of the City of Nauvoo. (Pratt will be reinstated into the Twelve on Jan. 20, 1843.) The high council of Nauvoo decides to divide the city into ten wards with a bishop over each. (This does not take place until Dec. 4, 1842.)

Aug. 21, 1842

Sunday. Sidney Rigdon preaches in the grove. He has begun to oppose Joseph bitterly. However, his daughter, Eliza, whom doctors had pronounced dead, has risen up in bed and said to her elder sister Nancy, "It is in your heart to deny this work; and if you do, the Lord says it will be the damnation of your soul." Because of this miraculous healing, Rigdon announces that rather than denounce the faith and call Joseph a fallen prophet, as many have been saying Rigdon believes, he wants instead to testify to the miracle of God and restate that his faith in Joseph is still strong. The Saints, having heard so many recent negative things about Joseph, are greatly rejuvenated in spirit by Sidney's testimony. (HC 5:121-23.)

Aug. 22, 1842

Joseph, still in hiding, records his love for the Joseph Knight family, Orrin Porter Rockwell, and his own family.

Aug. 27, 1842

Joseph prepares affidavits for the press, including an article on happiness, which states, "God said, 'Thou shalt not kill'; at another time He said, 'Thou shalt utterly destroy. ' This is a principle on which the government of heaven is conducted—by revelation adapted to the circumstances in which the children of the kingdom are placed. Whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may not see the reason thereof till long after the events transpire." (HC 5:134-36.) A footnote on HC 5:134 states, "It is very likely that the article was written with a view of applying the principles here expounded to the conditions created by introducing said [plural] marriage system. "

Aug. 29, 1842

A special conference is held wherein Joseph speaks publicly for the first time after three weeks of hiding out. Three hundred and eighty elders volunteer to go on missions to refute the lies of John C. Bennett. Orson Pratt again disappears, and many people fear he will attempt suicide.

Aug. 31, 1842

Joseph speaks to the Female Relief Society, stating that the Church will prevail against all enemies, and that "although I do wrong, I do not the wrong that I am charged with doing." He also remarks that a recorder must be an eyewitness to all baptisms for the dead. (HC 5:139-41.)

Sept. 1, 1842

Joseph writes an epistle concerning baptism for the dead, which is now D&C 127.

Sept. 3, 1842

Joseph, still in hiding, comes to see Emma, who has been sick (she had been baptized in the Mississippi River several times for recovery). Joseph invites John F. Boynton, an apostate apostle, to dinner. While dining, Deputy Sheriff Pitman arrives to arrest the Prophet. Boynton detains Pitman in the front room while Joseph runs out the back through a corn patch and hides in Bishop Whitney's home. Pitman rips the house apart looking for Joseph.

Sept. 6, 1842

Joseph writes another epistle concerning baptism for the dead, which later becomes D&C 128.

Sept. 7-12, 1842

Joseph returns home at times, undetected, and corresponds with various people concerning his legal problems.

Sept. 25, 1842

Sunday. Joseph preaches in the grove for more than two hours on the subject of persecution.

Sept. 29, 1842

Joseph stays with Emma, who is sick all day. The Female Relief Society holds its seventeenth and last meeting of the year in the grove. By this time the membership has grown to 1,189.

Oct. 1, 1842

Orson Pratt publishes a letter in the Wasp, refuting John C. Bennett's claim that the Pratts would be leaving the Church. Orson further states that he and his wife "intend to make Nauvoo our residence, and Mormonism our motto." (HC 5:167.)

Oct. 2, 1842

The Quincy Whig publishes notices that Gov. Carlin of Illinois and Gov. Reynolds of Missouri have offered $200 and $300 rewards for Joseph and Orrin Porter Rockwell. The non-Mormon Masons of Illinois, hearing of the rapid growth of the Masonic lodge in Nauvoo, meet on this day to discuss this growth. The original dispensation granted by Grandmaster Jonas the previous October (which was to last only one year) is not renewed, and the Nauvoo lodge is placed under suspension until further investigation can be made. When the investigative committee reports its findings in October of 1843, the Saints are accused of advancing new Masons too rapidly, nominating and advancing a whole group of men without any indication of individual worthiness. Joseph Smith is also accused of copying Masonic ritual in the temple ordinances, and when the endowments are given to women, he is accused of initiating women into Masonry. Joseph's comment concerning this is that "free masonry was the apostate religion." In October 1844 the Grandmaster decides that the Nauvoo Lodge has still not reformed; therefore, all official fellowship is cut off with the Nauvoo lodges. Thus, when Joseph is murdered by a mob, some of whom were certainly Masons, Joseph has been cut off from all official Masonic vows of fellowship and loyalty. (DM 104-5.)

Oct. 5, 1842

Emma, very sick, is rebaptized twice in the river for her health. (BYS, W '78, 226-32, explains the practice of rebaptism in Nauvoo.)

Oct. 7-20, 1842

Joseph is again in hiding, coming to see Emma when possible, sneaking in and out after dark. Emma is very ill at this time, and at one point he fears she might die.

Oct. 10, 1842

Frederick G. Williams dies in Quincy, Ill., of a hemorrhage of the lungs.

October 13, 1842

Several brethren return from the pineries in Wisconsin with 90,000 feet of boards and 24,000 cubic feet of timber to be used in building the temple and the Nauvoo House.

Oct. 15, 1842

The Times and Seasons announces that the Book of Mormon and hymnbook have just been published and are for sale.

Oct. 28, 1842

The temporary floor and seats of the temple are completed. About this time a 37-page pamphlet titled "An Israelite, and a Shepherd of Israel. An Extract from a Manuscript entitled The Peace Maker, or the Doctrines of the Millennium" is published in Nauvoo by "J. Smith, printer." The pamphlet uses the scriptures to defend the practice of polygamy, and is published about a month after John C. Bennett's expose of Mormonism (with its lurid tales of "spiritual wifery") has been published. The author of the pamphlet, Udney Hay Jacob, is a nonmember. When there is a negative uproar about the contents of the pamphlet, Joseph Smith, on Dec. 1, 1842, denies that he knew the content of the pamphlet before publication, but defends the author's right to publish his opinions.

Nov. 1842

Joseph spends time with Emma, who is sick; watches the construction of the temple; preaches; meets with visitors, including several Indian dignitaries; and visits sick members.

Nov. 1, 1842

While on a carriage ride with his family, Joseph's carriage overturns. He hurries to see if any of his children have been killed, but F. G. W. Smith has only been bruised on his cheeks, and all the others are safe.

Nov. 15, 1842

Joseph publishes a valedictory notice in the Times and Seasons as John Taylor takes over as editor.

Nov. 21, 1842

The Council of the Twelve votes to suspend until further notice printing of the Millennial Star and other publications in England.

Dec. 1, 1842

Orrin P. Rockwell writes Joseph a letter from Philadelphia, where he has gone to escape the law officers who were seeking his arrest. Rockwell, sad and lonely, asks Joseph to write him as soon as it is safe for him to return.

Dec. 7, 1842

Orson Hyde arrives in Nauvoo from his mission to Palestine and dines with Joseph Smith.

Dec. 8, 1842

Thomas Ford is inaugurated as governor of Illinois, replacing Gov. Carlin. During the elections the previous summer, the Whig candidate, Joseph Duncan, ran on a furiously anti-Mormon campaign, urging repeal of the Nauvoo charter and the Nauvoo Legion. Because of John C. Bennett's articles against Joseph Smith, the anti-Mormon feeling in the state had been rising. It was thought that the Democratic nominee, Adam Snyder, who had been friendly to the Saints, would lose the election. When Snyder died suddenly, the Democrats took the opportunity to choose a candidate from northern Illinois, Thomas Ford, who could honestly claim he was neither for nor against them. The Saints voted overwhelmingly for Thomas Ford and he was elected, although he made no special concessions to the Mormons. Ford's basic campaign promise was to improve the miserable economy of the state. During these elections the Saints were often accused of voting as a bloc, but as they saw it, when one candidate was devoutly against Mormonism, they had no choice.

Dec. 9, 1842

Joseph chops wood all day. His brother Hyrum is still working on their application for bankruptcy. Joseph's brother William, having been elected as a representative of Hancock County, Ill., speaks in the state legislature in defense of the Nauvoo Charter.

Dec. 10, 1842

William Smith resigns as editor of the Wasp, and John Taylor takes over.

Dec. 14, 1842

Joseph sends a delegation to Springfield. They call on Gov. Ford to present an affidavit from Joseph. Ford, who interprets the law much more literally than his predecessor, Gov. Carlin, states that in his interpretation the writ against Joseph by Carlin is illegal. Joseph, feeling he can trust Ford not to extradite him (as Carlin had tried to do), now feels free to come out of hiding.

Dec. 17, 1842

Gov. Ford writes to Joseph, advising him to submit to the laws and have a court in Springfield decide if the writ of extradition to Missouri is legal or not. Ford assures Joseph that it is his duty to ensure Joseph's safety.

Dec. 21, 1842

Willard Richards is appointed Church historian.

Dec. 26, 1842

Joseph, having been assured of safety by Gov. Ford, allows himself to be arrested on the requisition from Missouri by General Wilson Law of the Nauvoo Legion. This ends the period of Joseph's hiding from law officers. Before going to Springfield, Joseph visits a Sister Morey, who is ill, and prescribes lobelia for her, which he recommends as an excellent remedy.

Dec. 27, 1842

With several other brethren, Joseph leaves for trial in Springfield, Ill.

Dec. 30, 1842

Joseph reaches Springfield, having traveled from Nauvoo with 40 brethren. On the journey, when the brethren cannot find a place to stay in Paris, Ill., Joseph becomes angry and tells the local townspeople, "We will stay; but no thanks to you. I have men enough to take the town; and if we must freeze, we will freeze by the burning of these houses." With many apologies the taverns are then opened up hospitably. (HC 5:209-12.) In Springfield Joseph explains to Judge Adams that during the millennium Christ and the resurrected Saints "will not probably dwell upon the earth but will visit it when they please, or when it is necessary to govern it. There will be wicked men on the earth during the thousand years." (HC 5:212.)

Dec. 31, 1842

Joseph meets in Springfield with Justin Butterfield, the attorney who will defend him. After discussing legal matters, they visit Gov. Ford. During dinner, Mr. Butterfield tells Joseph that he (Butterfield) is no religionist. Joseph replies, "I told him I had no creed to circumscribe my mind; therefore, the people did not like me." (HC 5:213-14.) Joseph also meets with James Collins Brewster, a teenage boy, who shows him a book of revelations he has been writing. Joseph replies, "If God ever called me, or spake by my mouth, or gave me a revelation, he never gave revelations to that Brewster boy or any of the Brewster race." (HC 5:214.) (The Brewsters had been disfellowshipped on charges of receiving false revelations on Nov. 20, 1837.)

Sometime in 1842

During this year Charles Dickens publishes his first comments about Mormons. In A Child's History of England and American Notes he suggests an insane lady should be committed to an asylum, and suggests it would be just as good "to shut up a few false prophets of these latter times," beginning with "a Mormonist or two." (Twenty years later when Dickens actually boards an emigrant ship filled with Mormons "to bear testimony against them if they deserved it, as I fully believed they would; to my great astonishment they did not deserve it. . . . I went over the Amazon's side, feeling it impossible to deny that, so far, some remarkable influence had produced a remarkable result, which better known influences have often missed." (See BYS, Sp '68, 325-34.)
