J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Jan. 1, 1843

Joseph meets with Mr. Butterfield, Judge Stephen A. Douglas, and others and explains that the difference "between the Latter-day Saints and Sectarians was, that the latter were all circumscribed by some peculiar creed, which deprived its members the privilege of believing anything not contained therein, whereas the Latter-day Saints have no creed, but are ready to believe all true principles that exist, as they are made manifest from time to time." He also explains that he professes to be a prophet because "the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." (HC 5:215.)

Jan. 2, 1843

Orson Hyde asks Joseph about the situation of the Negro. The Prophet replies, "Change their situation with the whites and they would be like them. They have souls, and are subjects of salvation. . . . The slaves in Washington are more refined than many in high places, and the black boys will take the shine off many of those they brush and wait on." He also explains, "If I raised you to be my equal, and then attempted to oppress you, would you not be indignant and try to rise above me?" He says he would "confine them by strict law to their own species and put them on a national equalization." He also prophesies, "In the name of the Lord, that I should not go to Missouri dead or alive." (HC 5:216-18.)

Jan. 4, 1843

Joseph stands trial in Springfield, accused of being an accessory to the shooting of ex-Governor Boggs. Judge Pope comes in the courtroom accompanied by several ladies. (Some say that this was the judge's joke about the rumors of polygamy.) Mr. Butterfield, Joseph's attorney, jokingly announces, "It is a momentous occasion in my life to appear before the Pope, in defense of a prophet of God, in the presence of all these angels." The case boils down to whether or not Joseph can be taken from Illinois to Missouri to be tried for a crime that, if committed, was committed in Illinois. The judge rules that it is illegal, and Joseph is freed. (DH 321-22.)

Jan. 6, 1843

Gov. Ford gives Joseph some advice, telling him that he "should refrain from all political electioneering." Joseph says he always acts upon that principle. (HC 5:232.)

Jan. 7-10, 1843

Joseph travels back to Nauvoo after his trial. The axle on the carriage breaks and they all agree that Gov. Boggs should pay the damage. Many friends assemble to greet Joseph back in Nauvoo.

Jan. 17, 1843

This day is set apart as a day of humility, praise, fasting, prayer, and thanksgiving for Joseph's deliverance from the courts of law.

Jan. 18, 1843

Joseph talks with Orson Pratt and Sidney Rigdon about a letter of Jan. 10, written to them by John C. Bennett. In the letter Bennett had tried to conspire with them to get Joseph back to Missouri, where he would be executed on the Boggs's shooting charge. Because Orson Pratt had delivered the letter to Joseph in the first place, Joseph trusts Orson but suspects Sidney Rigdon (because he did not show the letter to Joseph).

Jan. 20, 1843

Orson Pratt goes into the Mississippi River, "from the ice," to be baptized with his wife by Joseph Smith. Joseph then reordains Orson Pratt into the Quorum of the Twelve. He tells the Twelve to reinstate Pratt into the Quorum, and that he (Joseph) will take Amasa Lyman (who had replaced Pratt) into the First Presidency. He also prophesies that once the temple is built, "we will have means to gather the Saints by thousands and tens of thousands." (HC 5:255-56).

Jan. 22, 1843

Joseph preaches at the temple on the kingdom of God, stating that "where there is a Prophet, a priest, or a righteous man unto whom God gives His oracles, there is the Kingdom of God; and where the oracles of God are not, there the Kingdom of God is not." (HC 5:256-59.)

Jan. 23, 1843

Joseph publishes in the Wasp that he is revolted by the idea of having anything to do with politics, and that he wishes only to be left alone to attend to the spiritual affairs of the Church.

Jan. 28, 1843

Joseph plays ball with the brethren. The city council approves paying him $500 a year as mayor and $3 a day when he sits as justice of the municipal court.

Jan. 29, 1843

Sunday. Joseph preaches, explaining why the Savior considered John the Baptist to be the greatest prophet.

Late Jan. 1843

A group of young people gather at Heber C. Kimball's home. Their "loose style of morals" was made evident because they wasted time with "too frequent attendance at balls, parties, etc." Elder Kimball offers to give them some instruction. Soon they begin meeting regularly. This leads to the formation of the "Young Gentlemen and Ladies Relief Society," a forerunner of future Church youth organizations. (HC 5:320-22; BYS, Su '75, 469.)

Feb. 1, 1843

In the Times and Seasons, John Taylor announces that he expects to print "further extracts from the Book of Abraham" by Joseph Smith. (This never happens.)

Feb. 3, 1843

Joseph studies and reads German and proofreads the Doctrine and Covenants.

Feb. 6, 1843

City elections are held and Joseph is elected mayor by a unanimous vote.

Feb. 8, 1843

Joseph studies German and tells a visiting couple from Michigan "that a prophet was a prophet only when he was acting as such." In the afternoon he goes sliding on the ice with his son. (HC 5:265.)

Feb. 9, 1843

Joseph receives D&C 129.

Feb. 10, 1843

In mayor's court, Joseph sentences a man who claimed to have been visited by the "Ancient of Days" several times; he is charged with having stolen some goods from a store. He is sent to Carthage jail because he cannot pay the $5,000 bail.

Feb. 11, 1843

Joseph interviews the Sidney Rigdon family and finds that good feelings prevail.

Feb. 12, 1843

Joseph answers several inquiries concerning the end of the world in the coming spring as predicted by William Miller. The Prophet says that Millerism is false because the prophecies that must precede Christ have not all yet been fulfilled.

Feb. 14, 1843

Joseph proofreads the Doctrine and Covenants with W. W. Phelps, studies German, and sells Willard Richards a cow.

Feb. 15, 1843

Joseph publishes the parable "The Lions of the Press," satirizing the various publishers and writers who constantly treat Mormonism. Some writers are symbolized by lions and other animals

Feb. 18, 1843

At dinner Joseph tells his family that "when the earth was sanctified and became like a sea of glass, it would be one great urim and thummim, and the Saints could look in it and see as they are seen." This is the first mention of this doctrine, which will be given in more detail in D&C 130. (HC 5:279.)

Feb. 20, 1843

Seventy brethren help Joseph chop, split, and pile logs in his yard. He studies German. He sees two boys fighting with clubs and stops the fight. He lectures the onlookers for not stopping the fight immediately and tells them that "nobody was allowed to fight in Nauvoo but myself." (HC 5:282-83.)

Feb. 21, 1843

Joseph addresses the 300 workmen who are constructing the temple. He encourages them to continue the work, and says, "It is our duty to concentrate all our influence to make popular that which is sound and good, and unpopular that which is unsound. 'Tis right, politically, for a man who has influence to use it, as well as for a man who has no influence to use his. From henceforth I will maintain all the influence I can get. In relation to politics, I will speak as a man; but in relation to religion I will speak in authority." (HC 5:284-87.)

Mar. 1, 1843

Joseph loans Orson Hyde his horse, "Joe Duncan," for a ride. Brigham Young, speaking for the Twelve, writes a letter to the Saints at Ramus, Ill., asking the Saints to donate food and other supplies to Joseph Smith so he can dedicate more time to "the bringing forth of revelations, translations, and history . . . one or two good new milch [sic] cows are much needed also." (HC 5:292-93.)

Mar. 3, 1843

The Illinois legislature passes a bill to repeal part of the Nauvoo Charter.

Mar. 4, 1843

Joseph speaks to the city council encouraging them to accept only hard cash, gold, or silver, and not paper money. George A. Smith debates about capital punishment, stating that imprisonment is better than hanging. Joseph replies that he too is opposed to hanging, but advises shooting or decapitation so that the man's blood will be spilled. Joseph notes later that the battle of Gog and Magog will be after the millennium.

Orrin Porter Rockwell, having been hiding out in Philadelphia, returns to Nauvoo by way of St. Louis. He gets off the steamboat in St. Louis, and while there is recognized and captured. This begins a Missouri prison stay lasting over nine months. During his imprisonment he tries to escape by stripping off his clothes and squeezing up a narrow stovepipe into an unlocked cell on the upper floor. Although he does reach the upper cell, he is so weak that he is unable to open the unlocked door. He climbs back down into the lower cell to regain his strength. When he again attempts this escape method, he passes out in the upper cell and is discovered. He will finally be tried in December of 1843, be sentenced to five minutes in prison (which will last five hours), and then be freed to walk back to Illinois. He reaches Nauvoo, having walked the skin off his feet, on Christmas night, 1843.

Mar. 10, 1843

Joseph and others see wondrous lights in the heavens.

Mar. 13, 1843

Joseph wrestles with William Wall, the best wrestler in Ramus, and throws him. That evening he blesses 19 children and records, "Virtue went out of me, and my strength left me, when I gave up the meeting to the brethren." The next day he explains the reason for this virtue going out of him. He states that he saw the influence of Lucifer and strove with all his might to protect the children against it. For this reason he becomes weak and has still not recovered by the next day. (HC 5:303.)

Mar. 15, 1843

Joseph prophesies "in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that Orrin Porter Rockwell would get away honorably from the Missourians." (HC 5:305.) The name of the Wasp is changed to the Nauvoo Neighbor, and a prospectus is published.

Mar. 18, 1843

Joseph writes, "About noon, I lay down on the writing table, with my head on a pile of law books, saying, . . . 'I am going to study law, and this is the way I study it'; and then fell asleep." (HC 5:307.)

Mar. 21, 1843

"Young Gentlemen and Ladies Relief Society of Nauvoo" is officially organized and a charter of 12 rules is drawn up. "If the youth throughout our land would follow this good example and form themselves into such societies, there would be much less sin, iniquity, misery, and degradation among the young people than there is at the present day." (Times and Seasons, Apr. 1, 1843.)

Mar. 25, 1843

Joseph, as mayor, issues a proclamation against the secret gangs of thieves who are hiding out along the Mississippi River. He promises protection to anyone who will volunteer the names of the criminals.

Mar. 27, 1843

Joseph writes a letter to Sidney Rigdon stating that he believes that Rigdon had conspired with John C. Bennett against Joseph. Sidney immediately sends a return letter, denying the charge.

Apr. 2, 1843

Sunday. Orson Hyde preaches on the coming of the Savior, stating that "he will appear on a white horse as a warrior. . . . Our God is a warrior. It is our privilege to have the Father and Son dwelling in our hearts. . . ." Joseph waits until dinnertime to correct Orson's mistaken comments. (HC 5:323.) These instructions are recorded as D&C 130. Later, Joseph explains the beast in the book of Revelation of John, and explains that John's record is very different from Daniel's prophecy: one refers to things in heaven, and the other to a figure of things on earth.

Apr. 3, 1843

This is the day William Miller had predicted the world would end. As the supposed last day of the world, Joseph comments that the day "is too pleasant for false prophets." (HC 5:326, 272.)

Apr. 6, 1843

Joseph records in his personal journal, "If I had not actually got into this work, and been called of God, I would back out. But I cannot back out, I have no doubt of the truth." (DH 344.)

Apr. 6-9, 1843

General conference is held on the unfinished temple floor in Nauvoo.

Apr. 10, 1843

A special conference is called in Nauvoo in which 115 elders are called on missions and given instructions by the Twelve.

Apr. 13, 1843

Joseph preaches at the temple to 250 Saints who arrived the previous day from England. He tells them which part of the town is the most healthy for them to settle. He explains the reason he has sold some lots at a profit, saying, "Suppose I sell you land for ten dollars an acre, and I gave three, four or five dollars per acre; then some persons may cry out, 'You are speculating. ' Yes. I will tell how: I buy other lands and give them to the widow and the fatherless. If the speculators run against me, they run against the buckler of Jehovah." (HC 5:354-57.)

Apr. 16, 1843

Joseph receives a letter supposedly by the order of John Tyler, the president of the United States, which accuses him of high treason. It turns out to be a farce. He preaches on the death of Lorenzo D. Barnes. He explains the importance of burial, some details about the resurrection, and forbids anyone from leaving a meeting just before it closes: "I don't care who does it, even if it were the king of England. I forbid it." (HC 5:360-63.)

Apr. 19, 1843

Joseph meets with the Twelve and calls most of them on missions to the eastern states; he says, "Take Jacob Zundall and Frederick Moeser, and tell them never to drink a drop of ale, wine, or any spirit, only that which flows right out from the presence of God; and send them to Germany; and when you meet with an Arab, send him to Arabia; when you find an Italian, send him to Italy. . . . Send them to the different places where they belong . . . to all Spanish America; and don't let a single corner of the earth go without a mission. Write to Oliver Cowdery and ask him if he has not eaten husks long enough? If he is not almost ready to return . . . ?" (HC 5:366-68.)

Apr. 23, 1843

Six brass plates are found near Kinderhook, Pike County, Ill., by a Robert Wiley and others. They are given to Joseph to see if he can translate them. He says, "I have translated a portion of them, and find they contain the history of the person with whom they were found. He was a descendant of Ham, through the loins of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and that he received his kingdom from the Ruler of heaven and earth." Joseph never publishes a record of the plates, but the facsimile of the plates themselves is published in the Times and Seasons in April 1843. (HC 5:372-79.

Apr. 25, 1843

Lyman Wight and Justin Brooks go to Pittsburgh to buy a steamboat with which to transport the Kirtland Saints to Nauvoo.

May 3, 1843

The Nauvoo Neighbor (formerly the Wasp) is first issued. John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff are editors.

May 9, 1843

Joseph and 100 others go aboard the steamboat Maid of Iowa, take a trip up to Fort Madison, Wisconsin, and return in the evening.

May 11, 1843

Joseph rebaptizes Louisa Beaman, Sarah Alley, and others. He meets with the Twelve and calls Capt. Dan Jones on a mission to Wales, James Sloan to Ireland, and other elders to other parts of Great Britain. Elders Addison Pratt, Noah Rogers, Benjamin F. Grouard, and Knowlton F. Hanks are called on missions to the Pacific Isles (Society Islands).

May 12, 1843

Joseph purchases half ownership in the steamer Maid of Iowa, and Capt. Dan Jones begins renting her as a ferryboat between Nauvoo and Montrose, Iowa.

May 13, 1843

John Taylor publishes an article in the Nauvoo Neighbor encouraging the building of a pottery factory in Nauvoo.

May 14, 1843

Sunday. At Yelrome, Joseph preaches on salvation through knowledge. He explains the meaning of salvation, states that there can be no salvation except through a physical tabernacle, and explains the doctrine of the "more sure word of prophecy," or "calling and election made sure," as explained in 2 Peter. He also advises that in times of trouble it is best to counsel with "wise men, experienced and aged men." He adds that "handsome men are not apt to be wise and strong-minded men; but the strength of a strong-minded man will generally create coarse features." (HC 5:387-90.)

May 16-17, 1843

Joseph travels toward Carthage, Ill., with George Miller, William Clayton, Eliza and Lydia Partridge, and others. They stop at Ramus, and Joseph gives instruction to Brother and Sister Benjamin F. Johnson, explaining the necessity of being married in the everlasting covenant. The next morning he preaches about 2 Peter and states, "Paul saw the third heavens and I more. Peter penned the most sublime language of any of the apostles." (HC 5:391-92.) Other instructions given on these two days are found in D&C 131.

May 18, 1843

Joseph dines with 30-year-old Judge Stephen A. Douglas in Carthage and relates the details of his trip to Washington to gain redress for the Missouri persecutions. He says, "I prophesy in the name of the Lord God of Israel, unless the United States redress the wrongs committed upon the Saints in the state of Missouri . . . the government will be utterly overthrown and wasted, and there will not be so much as a potsherd left. . . . Judge, you will aspire to the presidency of the United States; and if ever you turn your hand against me or the Latter-day Saints, you will feel the weight of the hand of Almighty upon you; and you will live to see and know that I have testified the truth to you; for the conversation of this day will stick to you through life." (HC 5:393-94. For the outcome of this prophecy, see IJB 581-82; CHC 2:183-92; HC 5:393-98.)

May 20, 1843

Joseph writes an article for the Times and Seasons on the derivation of the word Mormon. "The word Mormon, means literally, more good." (HC 5:399-400.)

May 21, 1843

Sunday. Joseph preaches at the temple to a large crowd. He gives his famous sermon on 2 Peter, explaining three keys with which to understand chapter one. (See HC 5:401-3)

May 24, 1843

The Boston Bee carries a detailed article describing Joseph. It surprises him that a newspaper would actually publish something about him that is not slanderous. Thomas Rancliff complains to Joseph that he (Rancliff) has been swindled by William and Wilson Law and Dr. Robert Foster.

May 28, 1843

Joseph meets with six associates "to attend to ordinances and counseling." He prays that Orrin Porter Rockwell might be delivered from prison and James Adams might be delivered from his enemies. He says that of the original Twelve Apostles, "there have been but two but what have lifted their heel against me—namely Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball." (HC 5:412.)

June 2, 1843

Joseph closes the contract whereby he becomes half-owner of the steamboat Maid of Iowa for $1,375. This will serve as the ferryboat across the Mississippi.

June 8, 1843

Elias Higbee dies unexpectedly in Nauvoo. Joseph records his affection for him. Emma Smith is ill.

June 10, 1843

Gov. Ford of Illinois receives a letter from Missouri stating that upon the urgings of John C. Bennett, Gov. Reynolds of Missouri will soon be asking Gov. Ford to arrest Joseph Smith and send him back to Missouri to stand trial for the 1838 charge of treason.

June 11, 1843

Sunday. Joseph preaches on various topics.

June 13, 1843

Joseph, Emma, and their four children leave Nauvoo on a much-needed vacation. They begin traveling toward the home of Emma's sister, Mrs. Wasson, who lives near Dixon, Lee County, over 200 miles north of Nauvoo.

June 16, 1843

At night, Judge James Adams of Springfield sends an urgent message to Nauvoo that Gov. Ford plans to issue a writ to take Joseph back to Missouri, based on the requisition from the Missouri governor.

June 18, 1843

Hyrum Smith receives the message from James Adams and immediately sends William Clayton and Stephen Markham to warn Joseph.

June 19-21, 1843

Leaving at midnight, Clayton and Markham ride at a furious pace and cover 212 miles in 66 hours; they reach the Wasson home in the afternoon of June 21. Learning that Joseph has gone to Dixon, they follow, catch him, and return with him to the Wassons'.

June 23, 1843

Meanwhile, Joseph H. Reynolds, the Jackson County sheriff, and law officer Harmon T. Wilson of Carthage reach that area to arrest Joseph. Joseph sends Clayton to the town of Dixon to get information. Halfway there, Clayton runs into Reynolds and Wilson. Clayton fails to recognize them, as they are disguised as Mormon elders. In Dixon, Reynolds and Wilson learn of Joseph's whereabouts and ride to the Wasson home. They capture Joseph, arresting him illegally at gunpoint. Brutal jabbings with their guns cause Joseph's chest to turn black and blue with an 18-inch bruise. They swear and threaten to shoot him. Joseph tells them to go ahead, but says he is willing to submit to any legal papers they may have. When they throw him in a wagon, Stephen Markham attempts to hold the horses. They level their guns at Markham, threatening to kill him. Markham lets go of the horses. They ride off just as Emma throws Joseph his hat and coat. Markham rides to Dixon immediately to report the kidnapping. When Reynolds and Wilson reach the town, eight miles away, they lock Joseph in a room while they change horses on the wagon. Joseph yells out the window for help from a lawyer and a writ of habeas corpus. When a few lawyers arrive, Reynolds claims he plans to take Joseph to Missouri without interference and threatens to shoot anyone who tries to stop him. However, as the crowd grows, Reynolds compromises, agreeing to allow 30 minutes for the writ of habeas corpus. Joseph sends messages to several lawyers, including Cyrus H. Walker, a Whig candidate for Congress, who has been electioneering nearby. During this time, Markham swears out a writ against Reynolds and Wilson for threatening his life. The two are then arrested on two counts: for threatening Markham's life and for illegally arresting and threatening Joseph. Reynolds and Wilson as well as Joseph are all locked up overnight so that the complications can be sorted out the next morning.

June 24, 1843

Joseph sends William Clayton on an early morning steamer back to Nauvoo. Cyrus Walker arrives and tells Joseph he will help him in exchange for Joseph's vote in the upcoming election. When Joseph promises, Walker says to Stephen Markham, "I am now sure of my election, as Joseph Smith has promised me his vote, and I am going to defend him." Reynolds and Wilson are again arrested on charges of false imprisonment, but getting a writ of habeas corpus for themselves, they are freed into the custody of the Lee County sheriff. Reynolds and Wilson then take Joseph to Pawpaw Grove, 32 miles away. Cyrus Walker sends Lee County Sheriff Campbell to stay the night with Joseph and protect him from abuse by Reynolds and Wilson.

June 25, 1843

In the morning, crowds gather and threaten to harm Reynolds and Wilson if they harm Joseph. Joseph is allowed to speak in public. He preaches for an hour and a half on marriage. Emma and the children begin their return to Nauvoo at this time. The Ottawa judge is out of town, so they are unable to serve the writ of habeas corpus. They return to Dixon for another writ. Stephen Markham has the writ worded so that trial can be held at the nearest tribunal. Joseph and his lawyers and friends decide to take the writ to the court of Judge Stephen A. Douglas at Quincy, 260 miles away. They plan to set out in the morning by stagecoach. Joseph also sends Markham to arrange a meeting place with Gen. Wilson Law, hoping that Law will bring dozens of men with him.

At this time in Nauvoo, the cornerstone for the proposed Masonic temple is laid by "Worshipful Master Hyrum Smith." Several Pottawatamie Indians also call at the Nauvoo House and temple, but can't communicate well. William Clayton arrives in Nauvoo with the news of Joseph's capture. Three hundred men set out at once to rescue him. Seventy-five go upriver on the steamboat Maid of Iowa. One hundred seventy-five ride out with Gen. Wilson Law and his brother William, taking different routes.

June 26, 1843

Joseph, with his lawyers and friends, sets out under guard of Reynolds and Wilson, heading south toward Quincy.

June 27, 1843

In the afternoon Joseph meets the first of the men on horseback from Nauvoo. Letting his tears go, Joseph cries, "I am not going to Missouri this time. These are my boys." These men have all been riding frantically from Nauvoo, sometimes forcing whiskey down their horses' throats just to keep them going. Emma and the children reach Nauvoo at night. (HC 5:451-52; DH 328.)

June 28, 1843

By this time dozens of men have joined Joseph and his captors on their ride to Nauvoo (having decided that the Nauvoo court is closer than the Quincy court). Reynolds and Wilson think they will never leave Nauvoo alive if forced to go there, and as more and more men surround them, they become increasingly nervous. They draw their guns on Stephen Markham as a hostage, but are convinced by Sheriff Campbell that such action is foolish. They surrender their arms and ride toward Nauvoo.

June 30, 1843

Joseph and the company arrive in Nauvoo triumphantly about noon. The whole town turns out to give them a hero's welcome, including a brass band, cannon fire, a line of decorated carriages, and streets lined with cheering people. Joseph has a feast at his home with fifty friends. He seats Reynolds and Wilson at the head of the table. The Nauvoo Municipal Court convenes that afternoon, and Reynolds is forced to turn over his prisoner, Joseph, to the city marshal. At 5 P.M., 10,000 people assemble at the grove to listen to Joseph's tale of the adventure. Joseph exuberantly states, "I feel as strong as a giant. I pulled sticks with men coming along, and I pulled up with one hand the strongest man that could be found. Then two men tried, but they could not pull me up, and I continued to pull mentally, until I pulled Missouri to Nauvoo. . . . Thank God, I am now a prisoner in the hands of the municipal court of Nauvoo, and not in the hands of Missourians. . . . But before I will bear this unhallowed persecution any longer—before I will be dragged away again among my enemies for trial, I will spill the last drop of blood in my veins, and will see all my enemies in hell! To bear it any longer would be a sin." He claims that the Nauvoo court has power to free him, and while he is speaking, Reynolds and Wilson leave for Carthage, threatening to raise a militia to again arrest him. (HC 5:458-73.)

July 1, 1843

Joseph is tried before the Nauvoo Municipal Court on the writ of habeas corpus and is discharged from the previous arrest warrant. Despite the fact that the previous arrest was made illegally, the warrant has still been issued by the governor of the state. Thus, the city of Nauvoo has, in effect, overruled an order by the state. This will have future unfortunate implications as Gov. Ford and other once friendly neighbors begin to distrust the political power of Nauvoo. Heber C. Kimball and Orson Pratt start on missions to the East (the rest of the Twelve are to meet them in Pittsburgh).

July 2, 1843

Joseph petitions the governor not to issue any more writs, and has the petition signed by 150 citizens. He has an interview with the Pottawatamie chiefs who have come to visit him while he was away. He explains the gospel, kills an ox for them, and gives them some horses. The Maid of Iowa returns with the men who had gone to look for Joseph. He greets them, welcoming them home.

July 3, 1843

Joseph meets with the Twelve to call about 100 elders to go on special missions throughout Illinois to counteract the widespread negative feelings resulting from Joseph's escaping his arrest. Charles C. Rich and 25 others return to Nauvoo having traveled 500 miles in seven days looking for Joseph during his kidnapping.

July 4, 1843

A huge Fourth of July celebration is held. Steamers from as far away as St. Louis arrive in Nauvoo, bringing about 1,000 visitors for the day. 15,000 people assemble in the grove in the afternoon to listen to sermons by Joseph and others.

July 6, 1843

Gov. Ford writes to Joseph H. Reynolds that he should not make any attempts to rearrest Joseph Smith until Ford's representative in Nauvoo can report on the rumors of a Mormon military force in Nauvoo.

July 7, 1843

Ford's agent in Nauvoo, Mr. Brayman, meets with the Saints to get affidavits about the recent arrest, escape, and rescue by a military force. While Governor Ford is trying to decide whether or not to use a militia to rearrest Joseph, a heated congressional campaign is occurring between the Whig, Cyrus Walker (to whom Joseph had promised his vote), and the Democrat Joseph Hoge. The two most influential Church leaders other than Joseph, Hyrum Smith and William Law, are in disagreement about the candidates. The Democrats try to convince the Mormons that Gov. Ford will send out the militia against Joseph if the Mormons vote for the Whigs.

July 8, 1843

Brigham Young, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, and others start on eastern missions to hold conferences and collect funds for building the temple and Nauvoo House. Most of the Twelve had been called on eastern missions April 19, 1843.

July 9, 1843

Sunday. Joseph speaks in the grove on the subject of love and toleration.

July 13, 1843

The Prophet writes: "I was in conversation with Emma most of the day." (HC 5:509.)

July 14, 1843

"Spent the day at home." (HC 5:509.)

July 15, 1843

"Spent the day at home." (HC 5:510.)

July 16, 1843

Sunday. Joseph preaches in the grove, stating that "the same spirit that crucified Jesus is in the breast of some who profess to be Saints in Nauvoo. I have secret enemies in the city intermingling with the Saints, etc. Said I would not prophesy any more, and proposed Hyrum to hold the office Prophet to the Church, as it was his birthright." (HC 5:510.)

July 18, 1843

"I was making hay on my farm." (HC 5:511.)

July 19, 1843

The Nauvoo Neighbor publishes a recent article from the Illinois State Register titled "Was the Arrest of the Prophet a Political Trick?" This article claims that Joseph's arrest may have been a Whig conspiracy to make the Democratic Governor Ford look bad by having to extradite Joseph Smith at election time. This would hopefully cause the massive Mormon vote to go for the Whigs. The Saints apparently give some credence to this accusation against the Whigs, because in the election they vote Democratic in spite of Joseph's promise to give his vote to the Whig candidate, Cyrus Walker.

July 23, 1843

Sunday. Joseph preaches on the burdens of his calling: "It has gone abroad that I proclaimed myself no longer a prophet. I said it last Sabbath ironically. . . . It was not that I would renounce the idea of being a prophet, but that I had no disposition to proclaim myself such. . . . I only said it to try your faith; and it is strange, brethren, that you have been in the Church so long, and not yet understand the Melchizedek Priesthood." Joseph rejoices at his friends who would sacrifice their lives for him and comments that "the burdens which roll upon me are very great. My persecutors allow me no rest, and I find that in the midst of business and care the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. . . . I am subject to like passions as other men, like the prophets of olden times. Notwithstanding my weaknesses, I am under the necessity of bearing the infirmities of others . . . but when I am in trouble, few of them sympathize with me. . . . I see no faults in the Church, and therefore let me be resurrected with the Saints, whether I ascend to heaven or descend to hell, or go to any other place. And if we go to hell, we will turn the devils out of doors and make a heaven of it." He also speaks on friendship as one of the "grand fundamental principles of 'Mormonism,'" which will "revolutionize and civilize the world." (HC 5:516-18.)

July 24, 1843

Joseph meets with Mr. Hoge, the Democratic candidate for Congress. He also receives some money owed him by William and Wilson Law.

July 25-30, 1843

Joseph is sick all week, his "lungs oppressed and overheated through preaching last Sunday." Hyrum Smith, William Law, and Willard Richards administer to him, and many others of the Twelve visit him.

July 31, 1843

Joseph's health improves, and he sells 100 acres of prairie land.

Aug. 1, 1843

Joseph is sick again in the morning. Candidates Hoge and Walker each give long speeches for the upcoming election. Joseph has an argument with Walter Bagby, a tax collector. Bagby throws a stone at Joseph, "which so enraged me that I followed him a few steps, and struck him two or three times." After the fight is broken up, Joseph gladly pays the assault fine. Bagby hereafter becomes a relentless enemy of Joseph, inspiring Carthage meetings and stirring up other old enemies against him. (HC 5:523-24.)

Aug. 5, 1843

Several thousand persons attend a meeting in which Hyrum Smith and William Law speak on the upcoming election. Hyrum says that the Mormons must support the Democrat, Hoge, because God has revealed it to him. William Law says that this is impossible because Joseph has promised his vote to the Whig, Cyrus Walker.

Aug. 6, 1843

Sunday. Joseph makes some comments about the election; he says, "The Lord has not given me a revelation concerning politics. I have not asked Him for one. I am a third party, and stand independent and alone." Joseph then says that Cyrus Walker is a good man and that he will vote for him, as promised. However, he also states, "Brother Hyrum tells me this morning that he has had a testimony to the effect it would be better for this people to vote for Hoge; and I never knew Hyrum to say he ever had a revelation and it failed. Let God speak and all men hold their peace. I never authorized Brother Law to tell my private feelings, and I utterly forbid these political demagogues from using my name henceforth and for ever." (HC 5:526.)

Aug. 7, 1843

The state elections are held. The Saints accept Joseph's word that, although he is voting for Walker, they should follow Hyrum's example and vote for Hoge. Hoge gets 2,000 Nauvoo votes and wins by only 700 statewide. It is thus the Nauvoo vote that elects Hoge, and the Saints as well as their enemies begin to realize that they can have enormous influence in state politics. Walker and the Whigs are, of course, furious with Joseph, having presumed that when he promised his own vote he would also deliver the whole Mormon vote. The Democrats also become suspicious of the Mormon strength in Illinois. Enemies outside Nauvoo begin to realize that something must be done about the Mormons.

Aug. 12, 1843

Emma returns to Nauvoo from St. Louis. (She had gone there on business on Aug. 6.) Robert D. Foster, having been elected school commissioner in the recent election, goes to Carthage to take the oath of office. He is met by 12 to 15 armed men who want to stop him from taking office. They are terribly angry over the election results and give notice of an anti-Mormon meeting to be held in one week.

Aug. 13, 1843

Joseph preaches on the death of Judge Elias Higbee. He praises the great man and gives important details about the spirit after death and the doctrine of election and sealing.

Aug. 14, 1843

Former Illinois Gov. Thomas Ford writes to Missouri Governor Thomas Reynolds explaining why he has decided not to call out the militia or to try to rearrest Joseph.

Aug. 19, 1843

The anti-Mormon meeting is held in Carthage. Walter Bagby and others address the group. A committee of six is appointed to draw up articles against Joseph Smith.

Aug. 26, 1843

Jonathon Dunham returns to Nauvoo after having been sent to explore the western areas of Iowa, 800 miles west of Nauvoo. This is the first example of Joseph's sending out scouts to explore routes to the West for a possible removal of the Church to those parts.

Aug. 27, 1843

The Quorum of the Twelve meets with the Saints in New York in conference.

Sunday. Joseph states that two weeks earlier a vote had been taken to disfellowship Sidney Rigdon. And although Gov. Carlin now denies any conspiracy with Rigdon, Joseph still believes there has been such a conspiracy. After these comments, Joseph gives a doctrinal sermon. Rigdon then takes the stand to defend himself, stating that he has seen Gov. Carlin only three times in his life and has never talked to a soul about the subject of a conspiracy to arrest Joseph. Sidney asks pardon for doing anything that would make Joseph come to this conclusion.

Aug. 31, 1843

Joseph begins moving into the Nauvoo Mansion. Up until this time the Smiths (Joseph, Emma, and four children) have been living in the same log house Joseph purchased from Hugh White in 1839. The mansion is a 22-room L-shaped building. The Smith family takes over six rooms and the rest are for entertaining visitors to Nauvoo. Fifteen days after moving into the mansion, Joseph gives notice that he is no longer able to provide free facilities, but thereafter the mansion will operate as a hotel. Joseph lives at the mansion until his death. At this time the men in Nauvoo are donating one day out of ten to work on the temple and Nauvoo House. The sisters are donating 1 percent of their weekly money for those structures.

Sept. 2, 1843

A "Notice of Expulsion" appears in the Lee County Democrat at Ford Madison, Wis., announcing a meeting that was held in Hancock County in which the citizens "declared the Mormons shall either peaceably leave the state or they will forcibly be driven away. It is said that the notices to that effect have been posted in public places in the county." (PHC 316.)

Sept. 4, 1843

The New York Sun carries a description of Joseph Smith. "This Joe Smith must be set down as an extraordinary character, a prophet-hero, as Carlyle might call him. He is one of the great men of this age, and in future history will rank with those who, in one way or another, have stamped their impress strongly on society." The article ends by stating, "That his followers are deceived, we all believe. . . . A great military despotism is growing up in the fertile West, increasing faster in proportion, than the surrounding population, spreading its influence around, and marshalling multitudes under its banners, causing serious alarm to every patriot." (HC 6:3.)

Sept. 6, 1843

An anti-Mormon meeting is held at Carthage. A preamble and ten resolutions are drawn up and approved that state generally that the signers of this resolution will stick together in opposing the Latter-day Saints. "We are therefore forced to the conclusion that the time is not far distant when the citizens of this county will be compelled to assert their rights in some way. . . . We pledge ourselves in the most solemn manner to resist all the wrongs which may be hereafter attempted to be imposed on this community by the Mormons, to the utmost of our ability,—peaceably, if we can, but forcibly, if we must." They pledge to oppose any candidates sympathetic to Mormons, to aid any law officers attempting to remove Joseph Smith to Missouri. (HC 6:4-8.)

Sept. 13-14, 1843

Joseph attends two lectures in the grove by Mr. John Finch, a socialist from England. After Finch's speeches, Joseph makes a few remarks in which he recalls the actual inequality that existed in the supposed equal communitarian societies once set up by Alexander Campbell and Sidney Rigdon and reveals, concerning socialism, "I said I did not believe the doctrine." (HC 6:32-33.)

Sept. 15, 1843

Joseph puts up a sign in front of the Nauvoo Mansion stating that because of "cruel and untiring persecution," he is no longer able to provide free room and board to so many visitors, as he has been doing in the mansion. "I have been reduced to the necessity of opening 'The Mansion' as a hotel. I have provided the best table accommodations in the city; and the Mansion, being large and convenient, renders travelers more comfortable than any other place on the Upper Mississippi." The mansion also has a 75-horse stable. (HC 6:33.)

Sept. 24, 1843

Sunday. Joseph preaches on the second chapter of Acts, "designing to show the folly of common stock. In Nauvoo everyone is steward over his own." (HC 6:37-38.)

Sept. 28, 1843

Joseph meets in the upper room of his store and, later, in the front upper room of the mansion with ten or twelve brethren. "By the common consent and unanimous voice of the council, I was chosen president of the special council." He prays that he might live long enough to fulfill his mission, that his household, the Church, and the world will be blessed, and that he might have dominion over his enemies. (HC 6:39.) (Because three days after the meeting of this "special council" the Times and Seasons ran an article entitled "Who Shall Be Our Next President?," some have surmised that Joseph may have first discussed running for president of the United States during this Sept. 28 meeting. See KJH 59, 74. It is unclear exactly what this "special council" is, but it may have been a forerunner of the "Council of Fifty," which would be officially organized on March 11, 1844, for the administering of the political kingdom of God on earth. DH 367.)

Oct. 3, 1843

A gala dinner party is held at the grand opening of the Nauvoo Mansion. One hundred couples attend. The guests unanimously approve a series of resolutions made at the party, including tributes to "General Joseph Smith, whether we view him as a Prophet at the head of the Church, a General at the head of the Legion, a Mayor at the head of the City Council, or as a landlord at the head of his table, if he has equals, he has no superiors." Toasts are also made to the 15,000 citizens of Nauvoo, the Nauvoo Legion, the Nauvoo Charter, and Gov. Thomas Ford. (HC 6:42-43.)

Oct. 7-9, 1843

A special conference is held in Nauvoo. Joseph addresses the congregation to try to convince them that he is dissatisfied with Sidney Rigdon as counselor, and that he thinks Sidney has done a poor job in the management of the post office, has had secret connections with John C. Bennett, and conspired with ex-Gov. Carlin when Joseph was arrested and almost taken back to Missouri on June 23. Joseph says the rift between himself and Sidney has grown too wide, and he does not want him as his counselor anymore. Sidney Rigdon then stands and pleads his case in a highly emotional manner, claiming that he is innocent of any ill feelings toward Joseph, and has never conspired with either John C. Bennett or Gov. Carlin. The weather deteriorates and the meeting is adjourned until the next day, Oct. 8, when Rigdon continues his appeal, listing the many sufferings and trying experiences he and Joseph have gone through together throughout the history of the Church. Elder Almon W. Babbitt and Joseph's second counselor, William Law, each speak in defense of Rigdon. Hyrum Smith also asks for mercy for Rigdon. Hyrum Smith seconds a motion by stake president William Marks that Sidney Rigdon be retained as counselor in the First Presidency. It is passed in spite of Joseph's objections. Joseph rises and says, "I have thrown him off my shoulders, and you have again put him on me. You may carry him, but I will not." (HC 6:47-49. For the history of Joseph's growing distrust of Sidney, see FMM 115-24.)

Oct. 9, 1843

At the final session of conference Joseph speaks in commemoration of the late Gen. James Adams, praising him, describing the glory his spirit must now be in, and urging the Saints to work with all possible diligence on the building of the temple. Joseph says, "Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject." (HC 6:50-52.)

Oct. 13, 1843

Joseph allows a phrenologist to examine the bumps on his head for an hour.

Oct. 14, 1843

Joseph has a long discussion with a physiologist and a mesmeriser.

Oct. 15, 1843

Sunday. Joseph preaches at the temple on the Constitution, the Bible, and finances.

Oct. 22, 1843

Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and George A. Smith return to Nauvoo from their missions to the East, after nearly four months' absence. "I was very glad to see them," Joseph writes. (HC 6:60.)

Nov. 2, 1843

Joseph sits in council with Hyrum, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards, John Taylor, William Law, and William Clayton. They decide to write letters to five candidates for the presidency of the United States to find out what the candidates might do for the Mormons in regard to the rights that were denied them in Missouri.

Nov. 4, 1843

Joseph carries out his decision of Nov. 2, 1843, and writes letters to John C. Calhoun, Henry Clay, Martin Van Buren, Richard M. Johnson, and Lewis Cass.

Nov. 13, 1843

Joseph replies to a letter of James Arlington Bennett written on Oct. 24, 1843, which suggested a secret deal between them that might put Bennett in the governor's chair of Illinois. Bennett calls his recent baptism by Brigham Young "a glorious frolic in the clear blue ocean," and says, "I am capable of being the most undeviating friend, without being governed by the smallest religious influence . . . my mind is of so mathematical and philosophical a cast, that the divinity of Moses makes no impression on me, and you will not be offended when I say that I rate you higher as a legislator than I do Moses . . . go ahead: you have my good wishes. You know Mahomet had his 'right hand man. ' . . . In short, I expect to be yet, through your influence, governor of the State of Illinois." Joseph is not terribly impressed with Bennett's bravado, and answers him, "The boldness of my plans and measures can readily be tested by the touchstone of all schemes, . . . truth; for truth is a matter of fact; and the fact is, that by the power of God I translated the Book of Mormon from hieroglyphics, the knowledge of which was lost to the world, in which wonderful event I stood alone, an unlearned youth, to combat the worldly wisdom and multiplied ignorance of eighteen centuries, with a new revelation. . . . Your good wishes to go ahead, coupled with Mohamet and a right hand man, are rather more vain than virtuous. Why, sir, Caesar had his right hand Brutus, who was his left hand assassin—not, however, applying the allusion to you. . . . I combat the errors of ages; I meet the violence of mobs; I cope with illegal proceedings from executive authority; I cut the gordian knot of powers, and I solve mathematical problems of universities, with truth—diamond truth; and God is my 'right hand man. ' "

In spite of this fascinating, if somewhat hostile, exchange of letters, Joseph suggests on Mar. 4, 1844, that James Arlington Bennett become his vice-presidential candidate. Bennett, however, having been born in Ireland, is ineligible. (These letters appear in HC 6:71-78, with abridgements. NC 7-14 carries the complete versions.)

Nov. 15, 1843

Willard Richards suggests to Joseph the idea of preparing an Egyptian grammar.

Nov. 23, 1843

Joseph inspects the river shore and suggests the idea of petitioning Congress for money to either make a canal or a dam, in order to divert the water so it will be more useful for mills and other machinery. (This is finally done in 1877. See HC 6:80.)

Nov. 25, 1843

In a Church court, a man is accused of seduction, which he claims he learned from Joseph Smith. The charge is not sustained. Joseph speaks to this charge, "exhorting them to practice virtue and holiness before the Lord; told them that the Church had not received any permission from me to commit fornication, adultery, or any corrupt action; but my every word and action has been to the contrary. If a man commit adultery, he cannot receive the celestial kingdom of God. Even if he is saved in any kingdom, it cannot be the celestial kingdom. . . . I condemned such action in toto, and warned the people present against committing such evils." (HC 6:81.)

Nov. 26, 1843

Joseph, Hyrum, and the Twelve, among others, meet with Col. Frierson concerning sending a petition to Congress for the redress of grievances and losses in Missouri. Frierson is a representative of John C. Calhoun, who is suddenly interested in helping the Mormons now that he (Calhoun) is running for U. S. President.

Nov. 29, 1843

A meeting is held over Joseph Smith's store to discuss the petitions to be given to Frierson and to discuss the grievances concerning Missouri in general. Joseph has prepared an appeal to his home state of Vermont, a pamphlet titled "An Appeal to the Freemen of the State of Vermont, the 'Brave Green Mountain Boys,' and Honest Men," in which Joseph remembers his birth in Vermont, relates the persecutions in Missouri, remarks on the lack of protection from the government, relates his imprisonment in Missouri, "where they tried to feed us with human flesh," and ends with an appeal for understanding from the "Green Mountain Boys" of his native state. (HC 6:88-93; unabridged version in NC 15-20.) The other brethren then become overly enthusiastic about the past wrongs they have suffered. Parley P. Pratt confesses that "he was wrong in one thing in Missouri; that is, he left alive, and left them alive; and asked forgiveness, and promised never to do so again." Brigham Young, John Taylor, Joseph Smith, and others each ask forgiveness for having been so merciful and restrained in Missouri. Joseph moves that every man write a similar pamphlet to his home state. (HC 6:88-97.)

Dec. 2, 1843

A prayer meeting is held in the assembly room over Joseph's store. Orson Hyde, Parley P. Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, and Orson Spencer receive their endowments, with 35 people present. About this time some women receive their endowments also. Bathsheba W. Smith, wife of George A. Smith, receives her anointings in a room in Emma's house. Emma is the first female ordinance worker, and Elizabeth Ann Whitney is the second.

Daniel Avery and his son, Philander, who live in Warsaw, Ill., are kidnapped by Levi Williams of Warsaw, John Elliott, and others, and are taken across the Mississippi to Missouri. They are imprisoned in Clark County while a Joseph McCoy looks for witnesses to prove that Daniel Avery had stolen a mare from him. Philander escapes and returns to Illinois, but his father remains a prisoner and suffers great cruelty in Missouri. He too is finally released on a writ of habeas corpus. Violent acts like this seem to be increasing between the Mormons and the non-Mormons in Hancock County at this time. Gov. Ford is notified of all acts of violence, but remains unconvinced that there is any real danger, refusing to order out any militia for protection.

Dec. 7, 1843

The citizens of Nauvoo meet to draw up petitions against the Missouri kidnappings of the two Avery men and others.

Dec. 8, 1843

The Nauvoo City council passes a law stating that any officer bringing a writ against Joseph Smith based on a Missouri charge will be subject to life imprisonment, "which convict or convicts can only be pardoned by the Governor, with the consent of the Mayor of said city." (Joseph Smith himself is, of course, the mayor.) The Nauvoo Legion is also ordered to be ready to protect the rights of Nauvoo citizens. Affidavits are drawn up in protest of the recent kidnappings (HC 6:103-7.)

Dec. 13, 1843

In Missouri, Orrin Porter Rockwell has been in prison for over nine months, never having had a trial. Recently, however, his mother visited him and gave him $100, with which he could afford to hire Mr. Doniphan as counsel. Within two weeks Doniphan got him into court. There being no evidence that could convict Rockwell on the charge of shooting Boggs, he was charged with breaking the Independence jail. In spite of the fact that the Missouri law states that in order to break a jail, "a man must break a lock, a door, or a wall" (and all Porter had done was to walk out when the door was open), Judge King nevertheless orders that Porter has broken jail. He is sentenced to five minutes in the county jail. He is kept there five hours while the Missouri lawmen try to bring another charge against him. Failing to do so, they finally free him at 8 P.M. on Dec. 13, 1843. Doniphan warns him not to walk in daylight or on any known road. Rockwell, having only ragged clothes and shoes, walks three or four days toward Illinois. His feet become so raw that at times he pays people 50 cents or 75 cents to carry him on their backs for several miles. After riding on horseback or walking the 150 miles, he finds a small boat in which he can cross the Mississippi to Nauvoo. (HC 6:135-42.)

Dec. 14, 1843

Joseph receives a letter from Governor Ford stating that he will not call out the state militia for the general protection of Nauvoo, except on rare and very specifically defined occasions. He tells Joseph not to worry about past offenses by the state of Missouri, and says, concerning any affidavits about their wrongs in Missouri given to him by the Mormons the previous August, "I have not yet read them and probably never will." Joseph records his personal anger at Ford's letter. (HC 6:113-15.)

Dec. 16, 1843

Joseph meets with several others to officially sign the memorial to Congress for the redresses of the losses in Missouri. In discussion, Joseph prophesies "by virtue of the holy Priesthood vested in me, and in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that, if Congress will not hear our petition and grant us protection, they shall be broken up as a government." (HC 6:116.)

Dec. 18, 1843

A constable, King Follett, returns to Nauvoo, having gone with ten men to arrest John Elliott, a schoolmaster, on the charge of kidnapping Avery and his son. Elliott is put under a $3,000 bond. Joseph, however, pleads in Elliott's behalf for a reduction in the amount of bail. In spite of Joseph's emotional and eloquent speech, Elliott threatens Joseph's life, and Joseph charges Elliott with making threats. At this time, rumors of a warlike force gathering in Warsaw hit Nauvoo, and Joseph orders out a 100-man detachment of the Nauvoo Legion for military purposes.

Dec. 19, 1843

The 100-man detachment of the Nauvoo Legion parades near the temple for inspection in readiness against the mob possibly forming in Warsaw. One man is wounded when his own gun accidentally discharges. Josiah Stowell, the man who had originally hired Joseph as a "money digger" in 1825, writes Joseph from New York, stating "his faith is still good concerning the work." (BYS, Sp '70, 377.)

Dec. 21, 1843

The city council sends to the Congress of the United States a petition that explains the abuses suffered by the Saints in Missouri and the unwillingness of the state of Illinois to protect the Saints. They therefore ask Congress to make the City of Nauvoo an independent sovereign territory, free from the control of the state of Illinois, to be governed as the Congress governs any other territory. Joseph instructs the police force to clean the streets of carrion, to stop boys from fighting in the streets, to keep children from floating on ice, and to correct anything else out of order; he also offers to build the city jail.

Dec. 22, 1843

A member's house is burned at Ramus, Ill. Foul play is suspected.

Dec. 25, 1843

At one o'clock on Christmas morning, a family of English converts sings Christmas carols under Joseph's window. Joseph's family and boarders in the Mansion House are awake and listen to the music. Joseph blesses the singers. In the afternoon Joseph has 50 couples over for Christmas dinner. During the evening a long-haired man breaks in and acts "like a Missourian." The police are called, but when Joseph sees the man, he realizes, to his "great surprise and joy untold," it is Orrin Porter Rockwell, just returned to Nauvoo from his Missouri imprisonment. (HC 6:134-42.) Rockwell then eats and drinks and relates his Missouri experiences, after which Joseph blesses him, saying, "I prophesy, in the name of the Lord, that you—Orrin Porter Rockwell—so long as you shall remain loyal and true to thy faith, need fear no enemy. Cut not thy hair and no bullet or blade can harm thee!" (HC 6:134-42; HS 1089.) Daniel Avery, who had been kidnapped and taken to Missouri, is released by habeas corpus. The First Presidency sanctions a plan that the sisters will donate one cent or a half-penny per week for the building of the temple.

Dec. 29, 1843

W. W. Phelps gives Joseph and others a lesson on eloquence. Joseph relates his early revelations to Dr. Bernhisel and John H. Jackson (a man who recently became a close friend, but will soon turn against Joseph). Jackson states he is almost persuaded to join the Church. Joseph, as mayor, calls 40 extra policemen to be on guard throughout the city. Relating his fear that there are Saints in Nauvoo working against him, he tells the policemen, "My life is more in danger from some little dough-head of a fool in this city than from all my numerous and inveterate enemies abroad. I am exposed to far greater danger from traitors among ourselves than from enemies without. . . . I can live as Caesar might have lived, were it not for a right-hand Brutus. . . . Judas was one of the Twelve . . . and we have a Judas in our midst." (HC 6:149-52.)

Dec. 31, 1843

Joseph writes: "At midnight, about 50 musicians and singers sang Phelps' New Year's Hymn under my window." (HC 6:153.)
