J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Jan. 1, 1844

A large party and New Year's supper is held at Joseph's house, with music and dancing till morning.

Jan. 2, 1844

Joseph writes a "strong" letter to John C. Calhoun. (He had written Calhoun on Nov. 4, 1843, and Calhoun had answered on Dec. 2, 1843, stating that the redress of the Saints "does not come within the jurisdiction of the Federal Government. ") Joseph tells Calhoun, "If the Latter-day Saints are not restored to all their rights and paid for all their losses . . . God will come out of His hiding place, and vex this nation with a sore vexation: yea the consuming wrath of an offended God shall smoke through the nation. . . ." (HC 6:155-60.)

Jan. 3, 1844

The city council holds a trial most of the day. William Law, Joseph's second counselor, said that some policemen told him Joseph had called Law a "Judas," and that "he must be taken care of." Law believes that Joseph has threatened his life. The policemen who told him this, and several others, testify throughout the day as to the source of this story. Law realizes that the policemen had only supposed that Law was the "Judas" of whom Joseph had spoken. Law promises to stand by Joseph to the death. (HC 6:162-65.)

Jan. 4, 1844

Joseph dines with Emma and W. W. Phelps. When Joseph praises Emma for cooking in great quantities, Phelps says that Joseph should do as Bonaparte did and just have a small table. Emma says, "Mr. Smith is a bigger man than Bonaparte; he can never eat without his friends." Joseph says, "That is the wisest thing l ever heard you say." (HC 6:165-66.)

Jan. 5, 1844

Joseph dreams of "2 serpents swallowing each other tail foremost." During the cold night some people had built a fire on the shore opposite Stake President William Marks's house. Marks swears before the city council that the fire was a warning against his life. It is charged that Joseph's statement about a "Judas" was a signal to the forty special policemen to take certain action against traitorist brothers. Thirty policemen swear that they were never given any special or private instructions. After many testimonies, Wilson Law says, "I am Joseph's friend: he has no better friend in the world: I am ready to lay down my life for him." Joseph records his own thoughts: "What can be the matter with these men? Is it that . . . hit pigeons always flutter, that drowning men catch at straws, or that Presidents Law and Marks are absolutely traitors to the Church, that my remarks should produce such an excitement in their minds. Can it be possible that the traitor whom Porter Rockwell reports to me as being in correspondence with my Missouri enemies, is one of my quorum?" (HC 6:166-70.)

Jan. 10, 1844

Joseph ordains his uncle John Smith as a patriarch. Francis M. Higbee sends Joseph a letter charging him with slandering his (Higbee's) character. He does not deny the supposed charges Joseph made against him.

Jan. 13, 1844

The ten policemen who were not present on Jan. 5 to swear in the supposed threats against William Marks and William Law testify that they have never received any private instructions from Joseph Smith against any of his supposed enemies.

Jan. 16, 1844

Francis M. Higbee is tried before the municipal court for "slanderous and abusive language." During the trial Higbee and Joseph are reconciled, and Higbee states that the difficulties between him and Joseph are buried and that they are friends forever. An "Ordinance concerning the Sale of Spirituous Liquors" is also passed by the city council. (HC 6:178-79.)

Jan. 21, 1844

Sunday. Joseph preaches on the sealing power of the priesthood and the mission of Elijah.

Jan. 23, 1844

Joseph leases the Mansion House (except for three rooms reserved for his own family and stables) for $1,000 a year to Ebenezer Robinson. He also sells his printing office to John Taylor.

Jan. 28, 1844

A Millennial Star editorial advises all elders to keep journals.

Jan. 29, 1844

Joseph meets with the Twelve and others to consider whom to support for the presidency of the United States. Henry Clay (who had told the Saints, "You had better go to Oregon for redress") and Martin Van Buren are the only candidates. It is decided that "it is morally impossible for this people . . . to vote for either candidate." Willard Richards moves that Joseph Smith be a candidate for president on an independent ticket. The motion is carried unanimously. Joseph suggests that missionaries be sent throughout the country to advocate his candidacy. He says, "Tell the people we have had Whig and Democratic Presidents long enough; we want a President of the United States. If I ever get into the presidential chair, I will protect the people in their rights and liberties. . . . The Whigs are striving for a king under the garb of democracy. There is oratory enough in the Church to carry me into the presidential chair the first slide." He works on his political platform with W. W. Phelps. (HC 6:187-89).

Gov. Ford sends a letter to the people of Hancock County, stating that he has been called upon to intervene in the increasing problems in the county, but refusing to either aid the Mormons or take away the arms from the Nauvoo Legion. "I believe that there has been nothing like war among you . . . let a state of war ensue, and I will be compelled to interfere with executive power . . . against those who shall be the first transgressors." (HC 6:189-90.)

Jan 31, 1844

Joseph contributes over three dozen volumes of personal books to the Nauvoo Library and Literary Institute (a group of at least 74 members organized earlier in the month). (For a list of the books Joseph donated, see BYS, Sp '74, 386-89.)

Feb. 4, 1844

Joseph comments on the 144,000 mentioned by John the Revelator, "showing that the selection of persons to form that number had already commenced." (HC 6:196.)

Feb. 5, 1844

William Weeks, the architect of the temple, argues with Joseph about the possibility of putting round windows in the temple. "I told him I would have the circles, if he had to make the temple ten feet higher than it was originally calculated; that one light at the centre of each circular window would be sufficient to light the whole room; that when the whole building was thus illuminated, the effect would be remarkably grand. 'I wish you could carry out my designs. I have seen in vision the splendid appearance of that building illuminated.' " (HC 6:196-97.) Joseph works on his political platform with W. W. Phelps and John M. Bernhisel.

Feb. 7, 1844

Joseph meets with the Twelve and completes and signs his "views of the powers and policy of the government of the United States." In this platform policy he reviews American leaders from Benjamin Franklin to John Tyler. He then makes eight propositions:

(DLG, Au '68, 17-27 compares Joseph's platform with other platforms of the day, calling it "an intriguing blend of ante bellum political rhetoric, Whig economic doctrines, Democratic expansionism, abolitionism, and the original and wide-range constitutional and political ideas of Joseph Smith himself." See also DLG, Sp '70, 23-36; DM 137-39; A&L 187-90.)

Feb. 8, 1844

Mayor's court is held. In the evening W. W. Phelps reads Joseph's political platform, and Joseph comments, "I would not have suffered my name to have been used . . . as President of the United States . . . if I and my friends could have had the privilege of enjoying our religious and civil rights as American citizens. . . . I feel it to be my right and privilege to obtain what influence and power I can, lawfully, in the United States, for protection of injured innocence; and if I lose my life in a good cause I am willing to be sacrificed on the altar of virtue." (HC 6:210.)

Feb. 9, 1844

Gov. Reynolds of Missouri shoots himself through the head, having written that although he has tried to carry out his duties, he has not been able to escape "the slanders and abuse of my enemies, which has rendered my life a burden to me." Many assume that Reynolds is referring to criticisms of him because he had not been able to return Joseph Smith to Missouri for trial. (BYS, Sp '71, 292.)

Feb. 17, 1844

Anti-Mormons hold a convention in Carthage and draw up various resolutions, one of which is to declare March 9, 1844, as a day of fasting and prayer for the downfall of Joseph Smith.

Feb. 20, 1844

Joseph meets with the Twelve and tells them to send out delegations to California and Oregon to "hunt out a good location, where we can remove to after the temple is completed, and where we can build a city in a day, and have a government of our own, get up into the mountains, where the devil cannot dig us out." (HC 6:222.)

Feb. 21, 1844

Another meeting is held for "selecting a company to explore Oregon and California, and select a site for a new city for the Saints." Four men volunteer to go West, and four more are called to go West. (HC 6:223.) An anti-Mormon meeting is held in Warsaw, in which the people resolve to drive the Mormons from Hancock County.

Feb. 23, 1844

Joseph meets with Hyrum, Sidney Rigdon, and the Twelve to further discuss the exploration of the West by at least twenty-five men.

Feb. 25, 1844

Sunday. Joseph prophesies "that within 5 years we should be out of the power of our old enemies, whether they were apostates or of the world." (HC 6:225.)

Feb. 27, 1844

Joseph mails his political platform, "Views of Powers and Policy . . ." to all national elected officials, newspapers, postmasters, etc.

Mar. 1, 1844

Times and Seasons publishes Joseph's name publicly for the first time as candidate for the United States presidency.

Mar. 4, 1844

Joseph proposes James Arlington Bennett of Long Island, N. Y., as candidate for vice-president. It is also decided to let the Nauvoo House remain unfinished until the temple is completed, "as we need the temple more than anything else." (HC 6:230-33.)

Mar. 7, 1844

Joseph and the Twelve meet at the temple with about 8,000 Saints for a special meeting. Joseph speaks about his candidacy: "We have as good a right to make a political party to gain power to defend ourselves, as for demagogues to make use of our religion to get power to destroy us. . . . When I get hold of the Eastern papers, and see how popular I am, I am afraid myself that I shall be elected." (HC 6:236-44.)

Mar. 8, 1844

Joseph writes an article titled "A Friendly Hint to Missouri." He learns that James Arlington Bennett, having been born in Ireland, is ineligible for the vice-presidency. He then suggests that Colonel Solomon Copeland of Tennessee should be approached as candidate for vice-president.

Mar. 9, 1844

King Follett dies. While working on a well, a rope breaks and a bucket of rocks falls on him.

Mar. 10, 1844

Joseph preaches on the mission of Elijah, Elias, and the coming of the Savior. He talks about the impossibility of murderers receiving forgiveness without going through hell, and states, "The Lord once told me that what I asked for I should have. I have been afraid to ask God to kill my enemies, lest some of them should, peradventure, repent." He also prophesies the Lord will not come in forty years. (HC 6:249, 253.) He receives a letter from Lyman Wight and his expedition company, which suggests that the south and southwestern area of the United States, as well as Texas, Mexico, and Brazil, be opened to the gospel.

Mar. 11, 1844

Joseph meets in the lodge room over Henry Miller's house with 23 brethren "whom I organized into a special council" to consider the recent letters by Lyman Wight concerning a place in the West where the Saints might establish a permanent home. This council continues to meet at intervals, and comes to be known as the Council of Fifty, because of its approximate number. Its name and purpose, however, are kept secret, and one member writes the letters backwards—YTFIF—in an attempt to camouflage the name. Although most of the leading brethren of the Church attend (some such as Rigdon, Law, and Marks are not invited at first), it is not primarily a Church council. Set up to have nonmembers also participate, it is formed for the purpose of setting up and controlling the political kingdom of God on earth. The immediate purpose of the council is to help elect Joseph Smith as U. S. president, but if that fails it will help organize the reestablishment of the Saints in the West, where they might be safe from their enemies and have a government of their own. However, the council's ultimate goal is to politically rule the world in preparation for Christ's return and reign on earth. Reports eventually spread that Joseph has been ordained a king and the Saints are planning a political as well as a religious takeover. Hostility against the Saints from nearby areas begins to increase rapidly.

Mar. 12-15, 1844

On these days and every few days for the next several weeks, Joseph meets in his "special council." (HC 6:262-64.)

Mar. 16, 1844

A meeting of the Female Relief Society of Nauvoo is held. This turns out to be their last meeting in Nauvoo. The membership has, by this time, reached 1,341.

Mar. 20, 1844

Articles begin to appear in several newspapers commenting on Joseph's candidacy for the U.S. Presidency.

Mar. 24, 1844

Sunday. Joseph preaches at the temple, accusing several people by name of conspiracy against him—especially Dr. Robert D. Foster, Joseph H. Jackson, William and Wilson Law, and Chauncey L. Higbee. Sidney Rigdon also preaches, and then Joseph concludes: "Did I ever exercise any compulsion over any man? Did I not give him the liberty of disbelieving any doctrine I have preached, if he saw fit? Why do not my enemies strike a blow at the doctrine? They cannot do it: It is truth, and I defy all men to upset it. . . . Henceforth the ax is laid unto the root of the tree; and every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, God Almighty (and not Joe Smith) shall hew it down and cast it into the fire." (HC 6:272-74.)

Mar. 26, 1844

Joseph, having recently become aware that President Tyler has asked Congress to establish military posts to protect pioneers going on the Oregon Trail, petitions Congress to empower him as a military officer to raise 100,000 volunteer troups to open up the unsettled sections of the American West and to protect American borders. On Mar. 30, 1844, Joseph sends a similar petition to Pres. Tyler. Orson Hyde takes both petitions to Washington. On May 25, 1844, John Wentworth of Chicago tries to present the bill to Congress, but Wentworth's motion to suspend certain rules so that the petition might be read is defeated.

Mar. 27, 1844

Several affidavits are filed that testify that secret meetings were held about March 15 for the purpose of formulating an opposition to Joseph Smith.

Apr. 1, 1844

Several minor lawsuits are held concerning the Higbees, Foster, and others.

Apr. 4, 1844

Orson Hyde leaves Nauvoo for Washington in order to assist Orson Pratt and John E. Page in interesting President Tyler in Joseph's offer to raise 100,000 volunteers to control national boundaries.

Apr. 5, 1844

The Masonic Temple is dedicated, with 550 Masons from various parts of the world attending. The Nauvoo Brass Band parades from Henry Miller's house to the hall. Worshipful Master Hyrum Smith dedicates the building; Erastus Snow, Dr. Goforth, and Joseph Smith also address the assembly.

Apr. 6, 1844

General conference begins. Joseph states that he will not speak until the next day "in consequence of the weakness of my lungs." Sidney Rigdon and John Taylor speak. (HC 6:287-97.)

Apr. 7, 1844

Sunday. Sidney Rigdon, having stopped in the middle of his sermon yesterday due to lack of lung power, completes his sermon this morning. During intermission 35 people are baptized. Hyrum Smith speaks, encouraging the rapid building of the temple, and says, "It is better not to have so much faith, than to have so much as to believe all the lies." (HC 6:297-301.)

Joseph Smith delivers the King Follett funeral sermon before 20,000 people. It is one of his greatest sermons. He goes back to the beginning, stating that "God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens!" He says the Saints must understand how God came to be God. He once dwelt on an earth, the same as the Savior, because the Bible says that the Son has done only what he has seen the Father do. (John 5:19.) "You have got to learn how to be gods yourselves, and to be kings and priests to God, the same as all gods have done before you, namely, by going from one small degree to another." (See HC 6:302-17.)

Apr. 8, 1844

Conference continues. Joseph wants to continue his sermon, but "it is just as impossible, for me to continue the subject of yesterday as to raise the dead. My lungs are worn out." He does, however, state that "the whole of America is Zion itself from north to south." He also speaks on the "washings and anointings, and . . . those last and more impressive ordinances." He urges the completion of the temple, but is physically unable to speak any longer. Another elder preaches for three hours, then Hyrum Smith speaks. (HC 6:318-21.)

Apr. 9, 1844

Conference continues. Brigham Young, Hyrum Smith, and Heber C. Kimball speak.

Apr. 13, 1844

Joseph is in municipal court with Dr. Robert D. Foster. He asks Foster to tell him of any wrongs he (Joseph) has committed against Foster so that he might ask Foster's forgiveness, but Foster refuses to make any testimony. Joseph therefore swears out a complaint against Foster "for unchristianlike conduct in general, for abusing my character privily, for throwing out slanderous insinuations against my peace and safety, for conspiring against my life." (HC 6:332-33.)

Apr. 14, 1844

Sunday. Because it is raining, the normal meeting is canceled, and Joseph preaches on board the Maid of Iowa.

Apr. 15, 1844

The Twelve draw up a list of upcoming conferences throughout the East and appoint over 300 missionaries to go on political missions throughout those states electioneering for Joseph. By this date, Dr. Foster is told that he will be tried in a Church court on the charges made by Joseph on April 13. The trial is to take place April 20, 1844. Foster begins gathering witnesses to testify in his behalf.

Apr. 18, 1844

Joseph meets with 32 leading Church brethren (22 of whom belong to the Council of Fifty) to make a ruling about certain Church dissidents. Robert D. Foster, Wilson Law, William Law, Jane Law, and Howard Smith are excommunicated for "unchristianlike conduct." These men did not reject Mormonism, but regarded Joseph as a fallen, not a false, prophet, and planned to set up their own church. They made various charges against Joseph's character. William Law accused Joseph of propositioning Law's wife. Joseph claimed that when he told Jane Law that her husband, William, was unworthy of celestial sealing due to admitted adultery, she then begged to be sealed to Joseph. Several months later Jesse Price would testify that on April 18, 1844, William Law had gone out with pistols determined to blow Joseph's "infernal brains out," saying that he was determined to kill Joseph at first opportunity. (HC 7:227.)

Apr. 20, 1844

Emma starts for St. Louis to purchase some goods. Joseph and Dr. Bernhisel ride through the green prairie with Joseph's sons, Frederick and Alexander. According to Robert D. Foster, as he was gathering 41 witnesses to testify in the Church court, which was supposed to be held on this date, he received notification that he had been excommunicated two days earlier.

Apr. 25, 1844

Emma returns from St. Louis. During rainstorms, the Mississippi River rises higher than at any time within memory. The Council of Fifty adjourns to disperse throughout the United States to campaign for Joseph's presidency.

Apr. 26, 1844

When Augustine Spencer assaults his brother Orson, Joseph, as mayor, orders Augustine arrested. Augustine refuses to go with Joseph, Orrin Porter Rockwell, and Marshal J. P. Greene. Joseph tells Greene to get some other citizens to help. Greene asks help from the first people he sees—Chauncey L. Higbee and Charles and Robert Foster. When they refuse, Joseph orders them arrested. A fight follows and Charles Foster pulls a gun on Joseph, swearing and threatening. Rockwell wrests the gun away, and several other policemen arrive to arrest the three. They are fined $100 each, which they appeal. Robert D. Foster accuses Willard Richards of trying to seduce his (Foster's) wife.

Apr. 27, 1844

Robert Foster's trial begins in the municipal court. Joseph tries to make a peaceful settlement with Foster, but Foster refuses. Joseph announces that he will no longer make overtures toward Foster: "The skirts of my garments were free from his (Foster's) blood; I have made the last overtures of peace to him; and then delivered him into the hands of God, and shook my garments against him as a testimony thereof." (HC 6:345.)

Apr. 28, 1844

While Hyrum Smith is preaching that "there were prophets before, but Joseph has the spirit and power of all the prophets," William and Wilson Law, Higbee, Foster, and others meet at Wilson Law's home to begin a new, "reformed" church. Calling Joseph a fallen prophet, they choose a replacement. William Law is made president of the new church, Austin Cowles and Wilson Law are made counselors, and a Council of the Twelve is called. They decide to order a press to publish their own views (HC 6:346-47.) They have about 200 followers.

Apr. 29, 1844

Robert D. Foster comes up for trial. He objects to the jurisdiction of the court, the informality of the writ, and several other items. Major-General Wilson Law is suspended, awaiting a court-martial by the Nauvoo Legion, and Charles C. Rich replaces him temporarily. Orson Hyde writes to Joseph from Washington stating that settling in Texas, which acts as a buffer between Mexico and the United States, could put the Saints in a very dangerous position.

Apr. 30, 1844

Joseph attends several plays, including Pizarro, at the Masonic Hall, which is decorated nicely.

May 3, 1844

Lucien Woodworth returns to Nauvoo from Texas to report to the Council of Fifty about a possible settling place for the Saints in Texas. (According to one report, the purpose of this expedition was to find a place where the Saints could settle in case Joseph did not win the U. S. presidency.)

May 6, 1844

The Council of Fifty votes to send Almon W. Babbitt on a mission to France and Lucien Woodworth back to Texas. Sidney Rigdon is nominated as Joseph's vice-presidential candidate. Francis M. Higbee swears out a warrant for Joseph's arrest, asking $5,000 damages, but does not state the charge. Joseph receives a writ of habeas corpus and is released.

May 8, 1844

Joseph is tried before the municipal court on Higbee's charge. He is acquitted, and Higbee pays the court costs.

May 9, 1844

Court-martial is held for the trial of Major-General Wilson Law. The charge is sustained and Wilson Law is released. Joseph attends the theater in the evening. Joseph blesses Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith, who are starting for their missions to Illinois, Indiana, and Michigan, electioneering for Joseph. They will travel with Elders Jedediah M. Grant and Ezra Thayre.

May 10, 1844

The prospectus of the Nauvoo Expositor is distributed by the press of the reformed church among Nauvoo residents. Their prospectus advocates "Disobedience to Political Revelations," and denounces moral imperfection in all people, even in a "Self-Constituted Monarch. "

May 12, 1844

Sunday. Joseph preaches on various topics, then says, "The Savior has the words of eternal life. Nothing else can profit us. . . . My enemies say that I have been a true prophet. Why, I had rather be a fallen true prophet than a false prophet. . . . False prophets always arise to oppose the true prophets and they will prophesy so very near the truth but they will deceive almost the very chosen ones. . . . I calculate to be one of the instruments of setting up the kingdom of Daniel by the word of the Lord, and I intend to lay a foundation that will revolutionize the whole world. . . . It will not be by sword or gun that this kingdom will roll on; . . . it may be that the Saints will have to beat their ploughs into swords, for it will not do for men to sit down patiently and see their children destroyed." (HC 6:363-67.)

May 13, 1844

Joseph receives a letter from Orson Hyde in Washington and discusses it in general council. Orson Hyde writes that Joseph's proposal that he be empowered to raise 100,000 volunteers will probably not be passed. However, Orson Hyde does have several discussions with prominent legislators who give him good advice about the possibility of moving to Oregon or Texas, or even California. Unfortunately, however, since many Missourians are moving to Oregon, Hyde says that the move, if it is to be made, must be made at once. Hyde also describes his meeting with President Tyler, whom he describes as a "very plain, home spun, familiar, farmer-like man." Stephen A. Douglas recommends Oregon and says "he would resign his seat in Congress if he could command the force that Mr. Smith could, and would be on the march to the country in a month." Elder Hyde also hints of the probable coming war with Mexico, if Texas is admitted into the Union, and says that Orson Pratt and Elder Hyde himself submitted a bill asking for $2 million in relief for the sufferings in Missouri. (HC 6:369-76.)

On this date Joseph answers Henry Clay's reply of Nov. 15, 1843. Joseph once again meets a noncommittal answer with a strong rebuke: "Honest men of every clime, and the innocent, poor and oppressed, as well as heathens, pagans and Indians, everywhere, who could but hope that the tree of liberty would yield some precious fruit . . . have long since given up all hopes of equal rights, of justice and judgment, and of truth and virtue, when such polluted, vain, heaven-daring, bogus patriots, are forced or flung into the front rank of government." (NC, "The Voice of Truth," 51-59.)

May 15, 1844

Two prominent Bostonians, Josiah Quincy (who will become mayor of Boston the next year) and Charles Francis Adams (who will become Lincoln's Minister to England in the Civil War), visit Joseph Smith all day during a rainstorm in Nauvoo. In 1883, Quincy will describe this visit, beginning with the oft-quoted, "It is by no means improbable that some future textbook . . . will contain a question something like this: What historical American of the ninteenth century has exerted the most powerful influence upon the destinies of his countrymen? And it is by no means impossible that the answer . . . may be thus written: Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet." Quincy describes Joseph's appearance: "A hearty, athletic fellow, with blue eyes standing prominently out upon his light complexion, a long nose, and a retreating forehead. He wore striped pantaloons, a linen jacket, which had not recently seen the wash tub, and a beard of some three days' growth." (WMRM 131-42.)

May 23, 1844

Joseph's clerk tells him that an officer is coming to arrest him; William Law has accused him of adultery. When Joseph hears of another false charge that is being brought against him, he sends Aaron Johnson and Orrin Porter Rockwell to Carthage to swear out a complaint of perjury against Dr. Foster, who had made the false charge.

May 24, 1844

Joseph H. Jackson also swears out a writ against Joseph. Rockwell and Johnson reach Carthage to find that a jury has already been called for Joseph's case, and it is too late to change the warrant.

May 25, 1844

Joseph learns that two indictments have been sworn out against him. William Law has charged Joseph with polygamy; Robert D. Foster and Joseph H. Jackson have charged him with false swearing. The high council in Nauvoo begins its counterattack against those attacking the character of Joseph Smith. They publish the sworn testimony of four Nauvoo women who claim that "Chauncey L. Higbee had brought about their ruin by deceit" by seducing them with the supposed approval and authorization of Joseph Smith. "The character of Chauncey L. Higbee is so infamous, and his exertions such as to destroy every principle of righteousness, that forbearance is no longer a virtue." (HC 6:407.)

Sidney Rigdon resigns the office of postmaster of Nauvoo and recommends Joseph Smith as his successor. (Apparently Joseph had been pressuring Sidney to resign ever since their disagreement the previous year in which Joseph charged him with corresponding and conspiring with John C. Bennett against Joseph. He had also suspected Sidney, as postmaster, of reading—and not delivering—some of Joseph's personal mail.)

May 26, 1844

Joseph speaks out against the apostates and recounts his many trials and persecutions. "I should be like a fish out of water, if I were out of persecutions. Perhaps my brethren think it requires all this to keep me humble. The Lord has constituted me so curiously that I glory in persecution. . . . When facts are proved, truth and innocence will prevail at last." Joseph then counterpoints each charge and each apostate—Mr. Simpson, Dr. Foster, Chauncey Higbee, William Law, Joseph Jackson, and Wilson Law. Joseph concludes, "I am the same man, and as innocent as I was fourteen years ago. . . . As I grow older, my heart grows tenderer for you. I am at all times willing to give up everything that is wrong, for I wish this people to have a virtuous leader." (HC 6:408-12.)

May 27, 1844

Joseph starts out toward Carthage on horseback with several friends to meet the indictments head on. Soon after the Prophet reaches Hamilton's hotel, Charles A. Foster catches up with him, telling him there is a conspiracy against his life. He decides to leave for home as soon as he gets his bail. Samuel H. Smith of Montebello, hearing that Joseph is being held prisoner in Carthage, rides there immediately with twenty-five men. Joseph arrives home the next day.

June 5, 1844

Joseph rides out to the prairie to show some land. It is 94 1/2 degrees in the shade. He receives a book titled An Original History of the Religious Denominations at Present Existing in the United States, for which he wrote the article on Mormonism.

June 6, 1844

Dimick B. Huntington comes to Joseph saying that Robert D. Foster wants to repent and return to the Church. Joseph says that if Foster truly withdraws all his suits against the Saints, he can be restored. Joseph also runs a notice warning Saints not to pass the old "Kirtland Safety Society" paper bills.

June 7, 1844

Robert D. Foster calls on Joseph and says he wants to talk to him in private. Joseph does not trust a private interview with any of the apostates, and says he will only meet with him in the presence of several other people. Their proposed meeting and settlement dissolves.

The first and only issue of the Nauvoo Expositor is published; Sylvester Emmons is editor. The four-page paper contains a short story, some poetry, some advertisements, and some national news. However, the vast majority of the paper is a direct attack on Joseph Smith and Mormonism. The attack has three bases: (1) religion (the Church was true once, but since introducing such doctrines as plurality of wives, plurality of gods, and unconditional scalings into eternal life, Joseph has become a fallen prophet); (2) politics (Joseph had combined Church and state, abused the right of habeas corpus, overstepped his bounds with his "views on the powers and policy" and his candidacy for U. S. president); (3) morality (Joseph had "taught secretly and denied openly" the doctrine of polygamy by which young, foreign girls were brought thousands of miles to America, and then told to submit their own will to God's for the gratification of the Prophet and his devotees). The newspaper does not deny the possibility of using force against the Mormons, "if it is necessary to make show of force, to execute legal process, it will create no sympathy in that case to cry out, we are mobbed." The paper also promises to be unrestrained in the future publications: "We intend to tell the whole tale and by all honorable means to bring to light and justice, those who have long fed and fattened upon the purse, the property, and the character of injured innocence." (ULR, Winter 1965, pp. 868-73.)

June 8, 1844

From 10 A.M. to 1 P.M. and from 3 P.M. to 6:30 P.M., Joseph discusses with the city council what to do about the Nauvoo Expositor. They first discuss the men behind the Expositor, stating that they were immoral, were diseased, had sued Joseph when he was in prison, and had hired a man to kill Joseph. In the afternoon Joseph suggests that the council pass an ordinance against libelous publications. He rails against R. D. Foster again, remembering his several immoralities and his threats against Joseph's life. Joseph says such papers "are calculated to destroy the peace of the city, and it is not safe that such things should exist, on account of the mob spirit which they tend to produce." After discussing the conspiracy of these men, the council adjourns until Monday morning. (HC 6:430-31, 434-43, 470, 7:62-63.)

June 9, 1844

Sunday. The Prophet writes: "My health not very good, in consequence of my lungs being impaired by so much public speaking. My brother Hyrum preached at the Stand." (HC 6:431.)

June 10, 1844

The city council meets again for over six hours to discuss the Nauvoo Expositor. Joseph reads from the Expositor and asks, "Is it not treasonable against all chartered rights and privileges, and against the peace and happiness of the city?" John Taylor says no city on earth would allow such a thing, that it is a threat to the security of the city. Councilor Stiles reads Blackstone and says that a nuisance is anything that disturbs the peace of the community. Hyrum Smith suggests smashing the press and scattering the type. Councilor Warrington, a nonmember, suggests fining the paper $3,000 for every case of libel, but Joseph answers that in order to take a man to court for libel, he would have to go to Carthage. The last time Joseph went to Carthage, he was almost killed. Therefore, the Saints have no legal recourse. (One historian states that there were 16 instances of violence between 1832 and 1867 to presses or editors who had expressed highly controversial views contrary to the public consensus, including one murder of an antislavery editor. Therefore, destroying a press at this time was not unusual.)

An ordinance concerning libelous publications is passed. The city council unanimously resolves that "the printing-office from whence issues the Nauvoo Expositor is a public nuisance and also all of said Nauvoo Expositors which may be or exist in said establishment." These ordinances are passed about 6:30 P.M. Joseph then orders City Marshal John P. Greene to carry out the order. Greene summons troops under Jonathan Dunham, acting major-general of the Nauvoo Legion. By 8 P.M. they destroy the press, scatter the type throughout the streets, and burn all the copies of the second issue. (HC 6:444-48; 7:61-64.)

June 11, 1844

Joseph issues a proclamation stating that he has destroyed the Nauvoo Expositor, which he considered a nuisance (and therefore had the legal right to destroy, just as he would any nuisance).

News of the action against the press travels quickly. A mass meeting of anti-Mormons assembles in Carthage. A resolution is adopted, stating, "We hold ourselves at all times in readiness to cooperate with our fellow citizens in this state, Missouri, and Iowa to exterminate—UTTERLY EXTERMINATE, the wicked and abominable Mormon leaders, the authors of our troubles. . . . A WAR OF EXTERMINATION SHOULD BE WAGED, to the entire destruction if necessary for our protection, of his adherents." (DLG, Su '69, 47.)

June 12, 1844

Thomas Sharp begins publishing in the Warsaw Signal violent calls for anti-Mormon action: "DIABOLICAL OUTRAGE—EXPOSITOR AFFAIR . . . war and extermination is inevitable. Citizens, Arise, One and All! ! Can you stand by and suffer such Infernal Devils! to rob men of their property and rights, without avenging them? We have no time to comment: every man will make his own. Let it be made with powder and ball! ! !" (CHC 2:236.) Joseph and seventeen brethren are arrested by Constable Bettisworth and charged with committing "a riot" by breaking and destroying the Nauvoo Expositor press. Joseph notices that the writ of arrest contains the words "before me or some other justice of the peace of said county." He therefore refuses to go to Carthage, but volunteers to go to the Nauvoo justice of the peace. Constable Bettisworth becomes furious. Joseph takes out a writ of habeas corpus, appearing before Aaron Johnson. The court decides that he "acted under proper authority in destroying the establishment of the Nauvoo Expositor," and he is released. (HC 6:453-58). At this time William Law is claiming that his store was completely gutted, with losses of $30,000. When Bettisworth returns to Governor Ford without Joseph as prisoner, most people in the surrounding area become infuriated.

June 13, 1844

The several brethren who were arrested by Bettisworth with Joseph take out writs of habeas corpus and are released. In the evening Joseph relates a dream in the Seventies Hall in which his enemies, Foster and Higbee, are symbolized as two large snakes who are locked together so tightly that they cannot get any power over Joseph. The dream also refers to the plans of William and Wilson Law being overcome.

The Warsaw Signal carries a story about an anti-Mormon meeting held on the night of June 13 in which several resolutions are drawn up to immediately drive any sympathizers of the Saints from the state. The Signal's editor, Thomas C. Sharp, accuses Hyrum Smith of planning to destroy the Signal press and of threatening his own life. A committee is drawn up to "notify all persons in our township suspected of being the tools of the prophet to leave immediately on pain of instant vengeance." (HC 6:462-66.)

June 14, 1844

Joseph Smith, John M. Bernhisel, Sidney Rigdon, and others write letters to Governor Ford explaining their reasons for destroying the Nauvoo Expositor press. Joseph explains that the city council had declared the press a nuisance and had carried out the order to destroy it "without riot, noise, tumult, or confusion." He asks the governor to be aware of the many slanderous stories going around about "'mob at Nauvoo,' . . . 'blood and thunder,' . . . 'two men were killed. '" Joseph reaffirms his willingness to report before Judge Pope or any other legal tribunal at Springfield. (HC 6:466-71).

June 15, 1844

Rumors reach Joseph that men and arms are being gathered at Carthage and Warsaw. He tells the brethren that "when they gave up their arms, to give up their lives with them as dearly as possible." (HC 6:471-72.)

June 16, 1844

Sunday. Joseph preaches, but is interrupted by a severe rainstorm. He explains the doctrine of the plurality of the Gods, stating, "It is all over the face of the Bible. . . . I say there are Gods many and Lords many, but to us only one, and we are to be in subjection to that one, and no man can limit the bounds or the eternal existence of eternal time." He also testifies, "I have reason to think that the Church is being purged. I saw Satan fall from heaven." (HC 6:473-79.)

Joseph meets with forty men from Madison who have come to inquire about the Nauvoo Expositor episode. He explains it and they are satisfied; then he asks them to go throughout the area to explain the truth of the situation to their neighbors. Joseph writes Governor Ford, citing the rumors of mobs of 1500 men gathering at Carthage to attack Nauvoo. He states that the Nauvoo Legion is at Ford's service if he needs it. Joseph exchanges letters with Saints who are living outside of Nauvoo and have been troubled by mobs recently. He calls a couple of dozen men throughout the area to go on missions to calm the public concerning the Mormons. He also issues a proclamation stating, "If, then, our charter gives us the power to decide what shall be a nuisance, and cause it to be removed, where is the offense? What law is violated?" (HC 6:479-85.)

June 17, 1844

Hyrum Smith writes to Brigham Young and explains the recent great excitement around Nauvoo with the mass meetings by mobs drawing up resolutions to "utterly exterminate the Saints." He recommends that the Twelve return without delay and advises, "A word to the wise is sufficient; and a little powder, lead and a good rifle can be packed in your luggage very easy without creating any suspicion." (HC 6:486-87.)

Joseph and 15 others are arrested on this day on the charge of "riot." They appear before Daniel H. Wells (who will later be baptized) and are discharged. Stephen Markham brings warning that mobs are joining together all around Nauvoo in preparation to attack. Joseph notifies both the police and the Nauvoo Legion to be prepared. He hears a rumor that the Law brothers will try to burn the Nauvoo Neighbor office this night, so a strong police force is placed on the premise.

June 18, 1844

Joseph proclaims martial law in the city of Nauvoo. The Legion and the police force are ordered out, and the 5,000 men of the Nauvoo Legion line up close to the Mansion House. Joseph stands on the top of the frame of the building in full uniform to address them, which he does for an hour and a half. This is his last public oration. He notes that the Saints are innocent of the charges that are being put against them. But he says that as American citizens, it is time to stand up for their rights. He draws his sword and raises it to heaven and says, "I call God and angels to witness that I have unsheathed my sword with a firm and unalterable determination that this people shall have their legal rights, and be protected from mob violence, or my blood shall be spilt upon the ground like water, and my body consigned to the silent tomb. . . . I do not regard my own life. I am ready to be offered a sacrifice for this people; for what can our enemies do? Only kill the body, and their power is then at an end. Stand firm, my friends; never flinch. Do not seek to save our lives, for he that is afraid to die for the truth, will lose eternal life." (HC 6:498-500.)

June 19, 1844

With a posse, David Bettisworth travels toward Nauvoo to arrest Joseph again. As he tries to pick up men on his way, they refuse to go with him, saying his orders are forgeries. Joseph orders General Dunham to put guards completely around the city and on all roads leading out of town. All powder and lead are readied for use by the legion. Joseph estimates that there are approximately 600 men surrounding Nauvoo at this time.

June 20, 1844

At daybreak Joseph inspects the city with Major-General Dunham to plan out the strongest areas of defense. He writes a letter to President Tyler of the United States noting that in a situation like this—of "insurrection and rebellion"—he has constitutional powers to interfere and stop the slaughter. Several Saints file petitions that Aaron Johnson, a supposed justice of the peace, has been trying to recruit them as well as everyone else to join his mob. At this time only two of the apostles are in Nauvoo—John Taylor and Willard Richards. Joseph writes to the others of the Twelve, who are on missions in the East, telling them to come home immediately. Theodore Turley asks Joseph if he should set up an ammunition supply in one of the buildings. Joseph answers, "I told him in confidence that there would not be a gun fired on our part during the fuss." He also tells his brother Hyrum to take his family to Cincinnati. Hyrum answers, "Joseph, I can't leave you." Joseph says, "I wish I could get Hyrum out of the way, so that he may live to avenge my blood." (HC 6:507-20.)

Willard Richards writes James Arlington Bennett on behalf of Joseph, asking for his help, stating, "All the horrors of Missouri's murders are crowding thick upon us. . . . [We] invite you to come to our assistance with as many volunteers as you can bring. . . . Will you come? . . . If you do not, your turn may come next; and where will it cease?" (DH 398.)

June 21, 1844

Gov. Ford finally arrives in Carthage to get a closer look at the situation. Ford realizes the violent anti-Mormon feeling around and says that even the non-Mormons who wanted to compromise, called "Jack Mormons," have been threatened by the anti-Mormon mobs. Ford writes to Joseph, stating that he needs more information. Joseph immediately assembles several affidavits to send to Gov. Ford, and expresses his wish that Ford come to Nauvoo.

June 22, 1844

Joseph sends a letter to Gov. Ford containing all the affidavits showing the Saints' side of the conflict. The Nauvoo Legion continues to prepare to defend Nauvoo, digging ditches, pitching tents, and setting up camp. Late the night before, John Taylor and Dr. John M. Bernhisel had gone to Carthage to meet with Ford, and had spent a terrified night, as the town was full of anti-Mormon rejoicing and celebration. Early on the morning of June 22, Taylor and Bernhisel meet with Ford, but find him surrounded by William and Wilson Law, the Higbees, the Fosters, etc. Whenever Taylor or Bernhisel try to explain their side of the Expositor story, they are immediately contradicted, and communication is almost totally blocked. After a five-hour wait, they receive a letter from Gov. Ford to take to Joseph Smith. It states that Joseph has committed one illegality after another and should plan to come to Carthage at once. Ford says, "I will also guarantee the safety of all such persons as may thus be brought to this place from Nauvoo either for trial or as witnesses for the accused." Joseph begins to write a reply to Ford, having decided that only the United States president, John Tyler, could truly decide the legality in a matter like this. He ends his letter to Ford with the statement, "We again say, if anything wrong has been done on our part, and we know of nothing, we will make all things right if the Government will give us the opportunity. Disperse the mob, and secure to us our constitutional privileges, that our lives may not be endangered when on trial." However, the more Joseph thinks about Ford's reply, the more he realizes, "There is no mercy—no mercy here." Hyrum adds, "No; just as sure as we fall into their hands we are dead men."

Unsure of what to do, Joseph gets a sudden idea. "It is clear to my mind what to do. All they want is Hyrum and myself. . . . Let them search; they will not harm you in person or property, and not even a hair of your head. We will cross the river tonight, and go away to the West." Joseph prepares to cross the river, and as his final recorded quote in his personal life's record, he writes, "I told Stephen Markham that if I and Hyrum were ever taken again we should be massacred, or I was not a prophet of God. I want Hyrum to live to avenge my blood, but he is determined not to leave me." (HC 6:525-46. HC 6:546 and PHC xiii-xvi state that, in regard to Joseph's final quotes, Hyrum was to be ordained to succeed Joseph as prophet, if he had not insisted on dying with him.)

The Prophet prepares to flee to the West, and to put his and Hyrum's families on the Maid of Iowa. Joseph, Hyrum, and Willard Richards wait on the banks of the Mississippi and as they do, they instruct W. W. Phelps to take their families to Cincinnati, and from there to petition the president of the United States. At midnight, Joseph, Hyrum, Willard Richards, and Orrin Porter Rockwell get in the boat, and at 2 A.M. Rockwell rows them across the Mississippi in a leaky skiff. Hyrum and Joseph bail water all the way.

June 23, 1844

Sunday. They reach the Iowa side at daybreak. Joseph immediately writes Emma a note asking her to let him know her whereabouts. They send Rockwell back across the river. He finds Nauvoo full of confusion, with people unsure whether to defend or flee the city. A posse arrives to arrest Joseph, but they cannot find him. When the news that he has fled fills the town, many who had thought themselves in great danger now consider him a coward. (Gov. Ford later says that he thought Joseph had taken the best solution.) Dr. Bernhisel and Reynolds Cahoon cross the river to see Joseph. At 1 P.M. Emma sends Porter Rockwell back across the river to beg Joseph to return to Nauvoo. Reynolds Cahoon and others accuse Joseph of cowardice, holding that, inasmuch as Gov. Ford has promised him a fair trial, he has nothing to worry about. When Joseph hears that he is considered a coward, he says, "If my life is of no value to my friends it is of none to myself. . . . What shall I do?" Rockwell says, "You are the oldest and ought to know best; and as you make your bed, I will lie with you." Joseph asks Hyrum for advice. Hyrum says, "Let us go back and give ourselves up, and see the thing out." After a few moments, Joseph says, "If you go back I will go with you, but we shall be butchered." Hyrum says, "No, no; let us go back and put our trust in God, and we shall not be harmed. The Lord is in it. If we live or have to die, we will be reconciled to our fate." Joseph writes a letter to Ford stating that he will give himself up. They head back in the afternoon, but Joseph says, "It is of no use to hurry, for we are going back to be slaughtered." He desires to speak to his people one more time, and Rockwell offers to get them out by starlight, but when Joseph sees his family, he decides to spend the eveing with them. (HC 6:548-52.)

June 24, 1844

Monday. Sidney Rigdon, having prophesied that Joseph would die and that Nauvoo would fall, leaves for Pittsburgh with his family.

4:00 A.M. Jedediah M. Grant and Theodore Turley reach Nauvoo from Carthage with a message from an angry Gov. Ford that Joseph must be in Carthage by 10:00 A.M., and that he would not be given an escort by the state to protect him.

6:30 A.M. Joseph and the seventeen others named on the arrest warrant (charged with riot) ride from Nauvoo with several others. As they pass the temple, Joseph says, "This is the loveliest place and the best people under the heavens; little do they know the trials that await them." Joseph tells Daniel H. Wells, "I wish you to cherish my memory, and not think me the worst man in the world either." (HC 6:554.)

9:50 A.M. They are met by Captain Dunn and a militia of 60, four miles west of Carthage. Joseph says, "Do not be alarmed. . . . They can only kill the body." Dunn brings an order from Ford that all state arms of the Nauvoo Legion are to be turned over. Joseph sends one of his men to carry out the order. He then says, "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter, but I am calm as a summer's morning. I have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward all men. If they take my life I shall die an innocent man, and my blood shall cry from the ground for vengeance, and it shall be said of me 'He was murdered in cold blood!' " Captain Dunn then requests that Joseph return to Nauvoo and aid in the surrendering of the arms. (HC 6:554-55.)

2:30 P.M. Joseph and his men reach Nauvoo and help in gathering the arms at the Masonic Hall. The Nauvoo citizens are frightened and respond very unwillingly.

6:00 P.M. Three cannons and 200 firearms (although rumors claim 30 cannons and 600 firearms) are collected. Joseph goes twice to bid farewell to his family. Before he leaves Emma the last time, she requests a blessing from him. He tells her to write the best one she can think of and he will sign it. In her long handwritten letter, she requests a "fruitful, active mind," "the spirit of discernment," "wisdom to bring up all the children . . . in such a manner that they will be useful ornaments in the kingdom of God," "prudence that I may not through ambition abuse my body and cause it to become old and care-worn, but that I may wear a cheerful countenance," and several other things. Tradition says that after this Emma did not see Joseph again. (More complete versions are in BYS, W '74, 216; and DH 350.) Joseph finally leaves for Carthage. At the Masonic Hall, he says, "Boys, if I don't come back, take care of yourselves; I am going like a lamb to the slaughter." When he passes his farm he says, "If some of you had got such a farm and knew you would not see it any more, you would want to take a good look at it for the last time." He later tells Hyrum, privately, "Do not go another foot, for they say they will kill you, if you go to Carthage." When the others ride up, they continue their ride to Carthage. (HC 6:558.)

9:00 P.M. They stop at a house four miles west of Carthage for 30 minutes and eat.

11:55 P.M They reach Carthage and go to Hamilton's tavern. The town is full of more than 1400 drinking, celebrating, excited militia troops from nearby towns, including 30 Carthage Greys. They shout curses and threats at the Mormons, until Gov. Ford leans out the window and says, "I know your great anxiety to see Mr. Smith. . . . You shall have that privilege tomorrow morning, as I will cause him to pass before the troops upon the square." The Laws, Higbee, and others are also at Hamilton's tavern. (HC 6:559-60.)

June 25, 1844 Tuesday

8:00 A.M. Joseph and Hyrum are arrested for treason by Constable David Bettisworth.

8:30 A.M. The troops fall in line in the public square to listen to an excited speech by Gov. Ford.

9:15 A.M. Gov. Ford marches Joseph in front of a line of soldiers.

9:53 A.M. Joseph, Hyrum, Elders Richards, Taylor, and Phelps, and Gen. Deming march in front of the Carthage Greys and the other soldiers. Deming introduces Joseph and Hyrum as "general," at which time the soldiers break into shouting and throwing their hats and swords. Gov. Ford tells the soldiers that they shall have "full satisfaction." (HC 6:564.)

10:30 A.M. News reaches the hotel that the Carthage Greys have revolted and have been put under guard by Gen. Deming.

10:50 A.M. The Greys are restored to order.

11:15 A.M. News arrives that the Warsaw militia has marched to Carthage.

12:48 P.M. Joseph tells Gov. Ford that he wants Nauvoo to be protected; he has heard rumors that the apostates are going there to plunder.

1:30 P.M. Mark Aldrich visits Joseph.

2:30 P.M. Gov. Ford tells Joseph he has sent a man to protect Nauvoo. Joseph writes Emma expressing hope of an early release. He also writes Orrin Porter Rockwell, warning him to stay away from Carthage and not allow himself to be arrested.

3:00 P.M. Joseph asks several military officers if they think he looks like a desperate character. They answer that they cannot see into his heart. He replies, "Very true, gentlemen, you cannot see what is in my heart, and you are therefore unable to judge me. . . . I can see what is in your hearts, and will tell you what I see. I can see that you thirst for blood, and nothing but my blood will satisfy you. It is not for crime of any description that I and my brethren are thus continually persecuted. . . . You and the people thirst for blood, I prophesy, in the name of the Lord, that you shall witness scenes of blood and sorrow to your entire satisfaction. Your souls shall be perfectly satiated with blood, and many of you who are now present shall have an opportunity to face the cannon's mouth from sources you think not of. . . . They shall seek for peace, and shall not be able to find it. Gentlemen, you will find what I have told you to be true." (HC 6:565-66, CHC 2:256-57, 270-73 records the fulfillment of this prophecy.)

3:48 P.M. Joseph hears that the apostates have said "that there was nothing against these men; the law could not reach them but powder and ball would, and they should not go out of Carthage alive." He, Hyrum, and thirteen others are taken before Robert F. Smith, a justice of the peace and captain of the Carthage Greys. H. T. Reid and James W. Woods defend the Mormons and argue that this should be a civil, not a criminal, case. (HC 6:566-68.)

5:00 P.M. Bail is set at $500 each ($7,500 total). The Saints claim that the judge is trying to set bail at a higher amount than they can afford, but the amount is paid, and the defendants are freed.

6:00 P.M. Captain Dan Jones says he has overheard Wilson Law say that after so much work to get Joseph here alive, they will arrest him on one charge after another and will not allow him to leave. Jones tells Joseph that he witnessed Joseph H. Jackson touch his pistol and say, "the balls are in there that will decide his case." (HC 6:568-69.)

7:30 P.M. Most of the brethren leave for Nauvoo. Joseph and Hyrum go to Gov. Ford for an interview.

8:00 P.M. Constable Bettisworth arrives with a mittimus, a warrant committing Joseph and Hyrum to jail on a charge of treason (a different charge from the one for which they had paid bail). Joseph's lawyers, Reid and Woods, argue that such an order without a preliminary investigation or a possibility of paying bail is illegal. Woods requests that he be given time to appeal the order to Gov. Ford. Bettisworth says he will wait five minutes.

9:00 P.M. Woods returns from Gov. Ford, saying that Ford has told him that an executive cannot interfere in a civil judicial process; therefore he will not intervene. Robert F. Smith, who issued the illegal mittimus, is also a captain of the Carthage Greys, and this makes the Mormons highly suspicious of the fairness and legality of these proceedings. Governor Ford has told John Taylor that although he is sorry the order has been issued, "he thought that the best thing to be done in the premises was to let the law take its course. . . . It was a matter over which he had no control, as it belonged to the judiciary; that he, as the executive could not interfere with their proceedings, and that he had no doubt but that they would be immediately dismissed." Justice Robert F. Smith later says he committed Joseph to jail because he did not think the hotel was safe. Captain Dunn and 20 men escort Joseph and Hyrum together with Willard Richards, John Taylor, John P. Greene, Stephen Markham, and four others to jail. As they march through town, they fight off several drunks with their walking sticks. The jailor, George W. Stigall, puts them in the small criminal's cell, but later moves them to the large, more comfortable debtor's apartment, where the ten men spend the night. (This room, however, has several windows and a door that cannot be locked, and is therefore less secure.) (HC 6:570-74.)

June 26, 1844 Wednesday

7:00 A.M. The prisoners eat breakfast.

7:30 A.M. Joseph sends several messages to Gov. Ford, requesting a change of venue to Quincy, Adams County.

8:00 A.M. The jailor tells Joseph that Carthage citizens expected 9,000 people to attack Nauvoo, but only 200 show up.

8:10 A.M. Joseph again sends a messenger to Ford requesting an interview.

8:30 A.M. Messengers return to Joseph stating that Gov. Ford has apologized and will come for an interview very soon.

8:50 A.M. Mr. Reid arrives, gives Joseph some legal advice, and lists the witnesses he plans to call in the trial.

9:27 A.M. Gov. Ford arrives at the jail. For over an hour Joseph and Ford discuss the recent problems, each giving his point of view. Joseph says, "If it is deemed that we did a wrong in destroying that press, we refuse not to pay for it. We are desirous to fulfill the law in every particular, and are responsible for our acts." He says he had not wanted to come to Carthage, the most dangerous of all places, for trial. Gov. Ford doubts if Joseph is in any danger in Carthage or anywhere else, but promises that if he goes to Nauvoo tomorrow, he will take Joseph with him. (HC 6:576-85. For the actual legality of Joseph's action against the Nauvoo Expositor, see ULR 862-903.)

10:15 A.M. Gov. Ford leaves, after again promising the protection of Joseph.

12:00 noon Joseph remarks, "I have had a good deal of anxiety about my safety since I left Nauvoo, which I never had before when I was under arrest. I could not help those feelings, and they have depressed me." Joseph and the others take turns preaching to the guards, many of whom become so impressed with Joseph's innocence that they feel guilty guarding him, so they leave. Joseph also comments, "Could my brother, Hyrum, but be liberated, it would not matter so much about me. Poor Rigdon, I am glad he has gone to Pittsburg out of the way; were he to preside he would lead the Church to destruction in less than five years." Joseph's lawyer argues for his release but is turned down. (They cannot be freed until bail is set, and bail for treason, a capital crime, can only be set by a circuit judge. The nearest is at least a day's ride away.) (HC 6:592-93.)

12:30 P.M. Dr. Bernhisel arrives at the jail.

1:00 P.M. Several threats—"If the law will not reach them, powder and ball must"—are circulated in the presence of Gov. Ford during lunch. (HC 6:594.)

2:30 P.M. Constable Bettisworth demands that the jailor, Stigall, release the prisoners to him. Stigall refuses on the grounds that by law the justice of the peace can only imprison people, not free them. Threats are made to enforce Justice Robert F. Smith's orders by bringing out his troops, the Carthage Greys. Joseph sends a message to Gov. Ford.

2:40 P.M. Dr. Bernhisel returns from Ford and says that the governor is doing all he can.

3:00 P.M. Joseph writes his lawyers concerning Bettisworth's recent attempt to take the prisoners.

3:40 P.M. The constable arrives with the Carthage Greys and demands with threats that Joseph be turned over to him. He is. They march Joseph and Hyrum to the courthouse. Joseph, expecting to be shot momentarily, locks arms with the worst mobocrat he can find, and marches with him.

4:45 P.M. After almost an hour of debate about legalities, it is determined that court will be postponed until noon the next day. Subpoenas are granted to get witnesses from Nauvoo (20 miles away).

5:30 P.M. Joseph and Hyrum return to jail with others. Patriarch John Smith, Joseph's uncle, having traveled through several threatening mobs, visits Joseph.

6:00 P.M. Joseph receives several letters.

7:45 P.M. They eat supper.

8:00 P.M. Lawyers Woods and Reid and John P. Greene visit the jail and say that the governor has decided to leave for Nauvoo at 8 o'clock the next morning with all his troops except his 50 most trustworthy. The trial is therefore postponed until June 29. During this time Dan Jones and Stephen Markham try to repair the door latch so it can be shut securely in case of attack.

9:00 P.M. Woods, Reid, and Greene return to Hamilton's hotel.

9:15 P.M. John Taylor prays. Willard Richards, Stephen Markham, Dan Jones, John S. Fullmer, and John Taylor stay with Joseph and Hyrum. Hyrum reads from the Book of Mormon about imprisoned prophets, and Joseph bears his testimony to the guards about the Book of Mormon, the restoration of the gospel, the administration of angels, and the reestablishment of the kingdom of God on earth. He claims these are the real reasons for which he is imprisoned, not because he has broken any law. Willard Richards, to whom Joseph has been dictating during the day, continues to write until the last candle goes out. When a gun fires later in the night, Joseph leaves his bed and lies on the floor between Dan Jones and John Fullmer. During the next few minutes he makes such comments as, "Lay your head on my arm for a pillow, Brother John. . . . I would like to see my family again. . . . I would to God that I could preach to the Saints in Nauvoo once more." Fullmer tries to cheer him up. Willard Richards takes Joseph's place on the one bed and falls asleep. Joseph asks Dan Jones, "Are you afraid to die?" Dan replies, "Has that time come, think you? Engaged in such a cause I do not think that death would have many terrors." Joseph replies, "You will yet see Wales, and fulfill the mission appointed you before you die." (HC 6: 600-601.)

June 27, 1844 Thursday

5:00 A.M. John P. Greene and W. W. Phelps visit the jail on their way to Nauvoo.

5:30 A.M. The prisoners arise. Joseph asks Dan Jones to find out about the gunshot last night. Jones talks with Frank Worrel, one of the Carthage Greys. Worrel says, "We have had too much trouble to bring Old Joe here to let him ever escape alive, and unless you want to die with him you had better leave before sundown. . . . You'll see that I can prophesy better than Old Joe, for neither he nor his brother, nor anyone who will remain with them will see the sun set today." Joseph sends Dan Jones to report what he has heard to Gov. Ford. On the way, Jones hears others plotting to kill Joseph. Ford tells him he is "unnecessarily alarmed" and claims that "the people are not that cruel." Jones also records that he demanded that Ford protect Joseph because Joseph was a Master Mason, and promised that if Joseph was killed, he would testify to the world that Ford knew about it beforehand. Gov. Ford also refuses to give passes to Jones and others, so they cannot pass in and out of the prison. (HC 6:602-4.)

7:00 A.M. Joseph and four others eat breakfast.

8:00 A.M. Cyrus H. Wheelock receives a pass from Gov. Ford.

8:20 A.M. Joseph writes to Emma. He tells her that he will not be going to Nauvoo with Gov. Ford as he had previously assumed. He adds a postscript, "I am very much resigned to my lot, knowing I am justified, and have done the best that could be done. Give my love to the children and all my friends." (HC 6:605.)

9:40 A.M. Mr. Woods and Mr. Reid come to the jail. Dr. Southwick reports that he was in a meeting in which delegates from almost every state had met to discuss the best way to stop Joseph Smith's political career, saying, "If he did not get into the Presidential chair this election, he would be sure to the next time." Captain Dunn and his men are ordered to accompany Gov. Ford to Nauvoo. The Carthage Greys are selected by Ford to guard the prisoners in the jail. Ford disbands over 1200 other men at Carthage and a couple of thousand camped eight miles away. Ford tells Cyrus H. Wheelock, "I was never in such a dilemma in my life; but your friends shall be protected. . . . In this pledge I am not alone; I have obtained the pledge of the whole of the army. . . ." Wheelock visits the prison and slips a pepper box revolver into Joseph's pocket. Joseph gives a single-barrel pistol to his brother Hyrum and says, "You may have use for this." Hyrum answers, "I hate to use such things or to see them used." Joseph replies, "So do I, but we may have to, to defend ourselves." Hyrum takes the pistol. Joseph then says that even Jesus did not at times think it wise to reveal all he knew because of physical danger. "So it is with the Church. . . . We have the revelation of Jesus, and the knowledge within us is sufficient to organize a righteous government upon the earth, and to give universal peace to all mankind . . . but we lack the physical strength, as did our Savior when a child, to defend our principles, and we have of necessity to be afflicted, persecuted and smitten, and to bear it patiently until Jacob is of age, then he will take care of himself." A list of proposed witnesses is read, but Alpheus Cutler and Reynolds Cahoon are crossed off. Dr. Richards records notes dictated by Joseph and Hyrum and addressed to their families. Joseph relates a dream he had in Kirtland in which his enemies tried to destroy him but ended up destroying themselves. Both Joseph and Hyrum bear their testimonies of the divinity of the work. Joseph writes a postscript to Emma, telling her that the troups have been disbanded and Governor Ford will come to Nauvoo to give a speech. He then sends his letter off. John P. Greene tells Gov. Ford that there is a conspiracy to take the lives of Joseph and Hyrum. Ford replies, "Marshal Greene, you are too enthusiastic." One journal records that Joseph also sent a note to Jonathan Dunham requesting that the Nauvoo troupe come to Joseph's rescue. Dunham, however, either never received or never acted upon the request. (HC 6:605-11.)

10:30 A.M. Gov. Ford and his troops leave for Nauvoo. Joseph sends Dan Jones to request a pass for Willard Richards.

11:00 A.M. John S. Fullmer leaves for Nauvoo to help Cyrus Wheelock gather witnesses for the upcoming trial. James W. Woods, Joseph's lawyer, leaves Carthage for Nauvoo.

11:20 A.M. Dan Jones returns with the pass for Willard Richards, but cannot get one for himself.

11:30 A.M. Almon W. Babbitt comes to the jail and reads a letter from Oliver Cowdery. Joseph and others try to get Dan Jones past the guards but cannot.

12:20 P.M. Joseph sends a letter to a lawyer named Browning asking him to be Joseph's attorney in the upcoming trial. Babbitt gives the letter to Jones and directs him to take it to Quincy, Ill. The guard thinks it is a letter for Nauvoo and claims that "Old Joe" has sent orders to raise the Nauvoo Legion. Dozens of men try to ambush Jones to get the letter, but he accidentally goes the wrong way and eludes them.

1:15 P.M. Joseph, Hyrum, Willard Richards, John Taylor, and Stephen Markham eat lunch.

1:30 P.M. Willard Richards gets an upset stomach. When Stephen Markham is sent out for medicine, the Carthage Greys throw him on a horse and run him out of town at bayonet point.

3:15 P.M. The guards become "more severe" and argue among themselves. John Taylor sings the full seven verses of "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief." Joseph asks him to sing it again, but John does not feel like doing so. Hyrum tells him, "Oh, never mind: commence singing and you will get the spirit of it." He sings. Hyrum reads extracts of Josephus. (HC 6:614-15; CHC 2:284.)

4:00 P.M. The guard is changed. Only eight guards remain at the jail, while the remainder camp a quarter mile away. (Some later testified that by this time the jailers' guns were only loaded with blanks.) Gov. Ford arrives in Nauvoo. The Saints assemble and he speaks to them. Among other things he says, "A great crime has been done by destroying the Expositor press and placing the city under martial law, and a severe atonement must be made, so prepare your minds for the emergency. . . . I know there is a great prejudice against you on account of your peculiar religion, but you ought to be praying Saints, not military Saints. Depend upon it, a little more misbehavior from the citizens, and the torch, which is already lighted, will be applied, the city may be reduced to ashes, and extermination would inevitably follow." At the end of his speech he asks for a show of hands as to who would obey the law even in opposition to the Prophet, and the Saints vote unanimously that they would sustain the law. (CHC 2:278-79; HC 6:623.)

4:15 P.M. Joseph talks to the guards about Joseph H. Jackson, William Law, Wilson Law, and others.

5:00 P.M. Jailor Stigall returns to the jail and tells the prisoners that Stephen Markham has been run out of town. Stigall suggests that the prisoners would be safer in the cell, and Joseph says that they will go in after supper. About this time a mob of about 150, made up of the disbanded militia and others, begins to march to Carthage chanting:

"Where now is the Prophet Joseph? Where now is the Prophet Joseph? Where now is the Prophet Joseph? Safe in Carthage Jail!" (CHC 2:281.)

Joseph asks Willard Richards if he wants to go into the cell with him, and Richards answers, "Brother Joseph, you did not ask me to cross the river with you—you did not ask me to come to Carthage—you did not ask me to come to jail with you—and do you think I would forsake you now? But I will tell you what I will do; if you are condemned to be hung for treason, I will be hung in your stead, and you shall go free." Joseph says, "You cannot." Richards answers, "I will." The jailer's son brings in some water. The guard sends him for some wine. Soon afterwards, the guard brings in some wine and pipes. Joseph, John Taylor, and Willard Richards taste it and give the bottle back to the guard. (HC 6:616.)

5:16 P.M. The guard is called downstairs, where there is a sudden noise and a cry of surrender, followed by two or three gunshots. Willard Richards looks out the window and sees a hundred men with painted faces. The guards fire at the mob (some say they fired above the mob; others say their guns had blanks). The mob runs up the stairs, opens the door, and begins firing. At the same time shots come through the window. The four prisoners push the door shut, and try to knock down the guns sticking through the door. John Taylor uses Markham's large hickory cane, called "the rascal-beater," and Willard Richards uses Taylor's cane. Joseph grabs his six-shooter, and Hyrum grabs his single barrel. A bullet goes through the door and hits Hyrum on the left side of the nose. He falls back saying, "I am a dead man!" Another ball coming through the window hits him in the back almost simultaneously. Two other balls also hit him as he falls dead. Joseph cries "Oh dear, brother Hyrum!" He fires his six-shooter down the stairway; two or three shots misfire. The mobbers retreat momentarily and then come back up the stairs and open fire again. John Taylor tries to fight off the rifles and bayonets with his cane, but he is hit time after time. He eventually falls and rolls under a bed for safety, but not until he is hit with five balls. One pierces his stopwatch, stopping it at 5:16. Joseph is also hit with one or two balls. He jumps to the window, pauses for a moment, and cries, "Oh Lord, my God!" and falls. Some reports state that he was still alive when he hit the ground, that he lifted himself up and was shot again. Others state that a man tried to cut off his head but his arm was paralyzed. The cry goes up that "he's leaped the window!"

The mob runs down the stairs to see him. During this time, Willard Richards pulls John Taylor's body into the next cell and hides him under a mattress. In all of the shooting, Richards has only been nicked in the ear, which, it is said, fulfills a prophecy given by Joseph over a year previously that "balls would fly around him like hail, and he should see his friends fall on the right and left, but . . . there should not be a hole in his garment." (HC 6:616-22. Several have argued that Joseph's final words were a Masonic distress signal. See CHC 2:287; BYS, W '68, 213-14; CEM 15-30.)

Some go back up into the room but cannot find Willard Richards or John Taylor. The cry goes up that "the Mormons are coming!" and the mob flees to the woods. Most of the town joins them before dawn. Eventually Richards carries Joseph's body back into jail. Ten of the twelve apostles at this time were in various cities in the East. Several of them record that they had definite feelings of depression at a certain time, and later found it to be the same time Joseph had been shot.

6:30 P.M. In Nauvoo, Gov. Ford and his men leave town after a great show of military discipline. Orrin Porter Rockwell later testified that he had overheard one of Ford's men telling him, "The deed is done before this time." Two or three miles from Nauvoo Ford meets two men riding to Nauvoo with the news. Ford holds them until he can get farther away from Nauvoo in case there is a fanatic reaction against him. (HC 6:623-24; HS 135.)

8:05 P.M. Willard Richards sends a notice to Nauvoo bearing the news of Joseph and Hyrum's death. On Elder Taylor's request he says that Taylor is wounded "not very badly." He also says that he believes it was a band of Missourians, and the citizens have left for fear of Mormon reprisals. "I promised them no!" At midnight Richards sends a second notice, once again urging the Saints not to take any vengeance. (HC 6:621-24.)

June 28, 1844

Willard Richards and Samuel H. Smith, Joseph's brother, take the bodies of Hyrum and Joseph back to Nauvoo in two wagons. They are taken to the Nauvoo Mansion, where the doors are closed and the thousands of mourners are told they will be able to see the bodies the next day. Dimick B. Huntington, William Marks, and William D. Huntington wash the bodies and dress them in white. Emma (four months pregnant) and Mary Fielding Smith and children are then admitted to see the bodies. Emma screams and falls back, and is caught by Dimick B. Huntington. She then falls forward onto Joseph's face and kisses him, calling him by name and begging him to speak to her once more. Mary Fielding Smith holds back her grief and keeps her composure. During this time Willard Richards and several others speak to eight or ten thousand Saints who have gathered, telling them to keep the peace and trust in the law to punish the assassins of Joseph and Hyrum.

June 29, 1844

Ten thousand people view the bodies throughout the day. The bodies are then removed from the caskets in private, bags of sand are put in their places, and the caskets are closed. A public funeral is held, with W. W. Phelps preaching the sermon. The caskets are buried in a prominent place. Around midnight the coffins containing the real bodies are buried in the basement of the unfinished Nauvoo House. The ground is smoothed over to hide the actual place, and a rainstorm that night helps eradicate the footprints completely. This is all done to prevent the desecration of the bodies by enemies. (In the fall, the bodies were moved and buried side by side near the Mansion. The bodies of Joseph's and Hyrum's deceased children were soon moved to be next to them.)
