J. Christopher Conkling, Joseph Smith Chronology ( 1979)

Epilogue

Thus ended the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith. But his death did not bring the demise of the Church his detractors had predicted. In many ways it further strengthened the unity of his followers. As the Church moved from the leadership of its founder to that of Brigham Young, a convert, Church members doubtless came to understand as never before that Jesus Christ is the leader of the Church, working through men He calls.

In the month and a half that followed the death of the Prophet, the Twelve gradually returned to Nauvoo. On August 8, 1844, a special meeting of the Church was held to determine who the new leader of the Church should be. Sidney Rigdon, who had returned to Nauvoo from Pittsburgh, preached for an hour and a half, presenting his claims to leadership. Then Brigham Young spoke, and, for many, became transfigured with the appearance and voice of Joseph Smith. Following the speeches a vote was taken, and the Saints unanimously voted to follow Brigham and the Twelve. A month later Sidney, still rebellious against the Twelve, was cut off from the Church.

But he was not alone in his apostasy. In the next few years, apostles William Smith, John E. Page, and Lyman Wight were among those who fell away and were excommunicated.

While the internal changes were taking place in the Church, persecution continued. Brigham Young had to go into hiding for a time to protect his life; the Nauvoo Charter was repealed on January 27, 1845; mobs burned 175 houses at Morley Settlement near Nauvoo in September 1845. Eventually the mobs drove the Saints from the area, taking over the town and the recently dedicated temple, but not before many of the Saints were able to receive their endowments.

Just a month after Joseph was killed, his younger brother Samuel died from overexertion and exposure suffered on the night of the martyrdom. On November 17, 1844, Emma bore Joseph's last son, David Hyrum Smith. In April 1845, at a general conference of the Church, Brigham Young proposed that Nauvoo be renamed "The City of Joseph." The motion was passed unanimously.

Perhaps the best final comment on the life of Joseph Smith was made by John Taylor:

"Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it. In the short space of twenty years, he has brought forth the Book of Mormon, which he translated by the gift and power of God, and has been the means of publishing it on two continents; has sent the fulness of the everlasting gospel, which it contained, to the four quarters of the earth; has brought forth the revelations and commandments which compose this book of Doctrine and Covenants, and many other wise documents and instructions for the benefit of the children of men; gathered many thousands of the Latter-day Saints, founded a great city, and left a fame and name that cannot be slain. He lived great, and he died great in the eyes of God and his people; and like most of the Lord's anointed in ancient times, has sealed his mission and his works with his own blood." (D&C 135:3.)
