When Jesus Christ lived on the earth, He taught His gospel and organized His Church. He gave each Apostle the priesthood by the laying on of hands. Because people would not believe the gospel and killed the Apostles, the Church was taken from the earth. In these latter days, the Lord called Joseph Smith to restore the gospel, the priesthood, and the Church.

As members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we receive many blessings that help us be happy. Reading the scriptures on this year’s poster and sharing them in family home evening will help you learn about the blessings and responsibilities that come from being a member of the Church. Your faith in Jesus Christ and desire to keep His commandments will become stronger too.

1.  Open the staples, remove the poster from the magazine, and then reclose the staples.

2.  Cut out the puzzle pieces and place them in an envelope.

3.  At the beginning of each month, find the correct puzzle piece for that month in the envelope. Read the theme and the scripture for that month. Glue the puzzle piece in place. Plan with your parents when you can present in family home evening what you have learned.

Additional copies of the poster are available from Church distribution centers.

© 2003 by Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

“Now, what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness!” (D&C 128:19). (Illustration by Paul Mann.)

January
I belong to the Church of Jesus Christ.
Read 3 Ne. 26:21.

February
I belong to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
Read D&C 115:4.

March
I know who I am.
Read Ps. 82:6.

April
I believe in the Savior, Jesus Christ.
Read Matt. 16:16.

May
The prophet speaks for the Savior. I can follow the prophet today.
Read D&C 1:38.

June
I know God’s plan.
Read Moses 1:39.

July
I’ll follow Him in faith.
Read Gal. 3:26.

August
I’ll honor His name.
Read Mosiah 5:8.

September
I’ll do what is right.
Read Deut. 6:18.

October
I’ll follow His light.
Read John 14:6.

November
Teachings of the prophet.
Read Amos 3:7.

December
His truth I will proclaim.
Read Mosiah 18:9.
