Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Preface

A Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants is designed to be of maximum use to the reader and student of the Doctrine and Covenants. It is arranged to provide helpful background and supplementary information on the sacred scripture as it is read page by page and section by section.

Part I provides information on the purpose and coming forth of the Doctrine and Covenants. A few of the subjects discussed are the principles of revelation; the importance of this method of communication of God with his prophets; the relationship of prophecy to scripture; a definition of scripture—spoken, written, and canonized; why, how, when, and where the revelations recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants were received; the procedures followed in publishing A Book of Commandments and the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. Several topics concerned with the historical background of the Doctrine and Covenants are also discussed in this first part.

Part II provides basic and essential information on each of the sections in the Doctrine and Covenants. The following order is used in providing this information:

The Appendixes will save the student of the Doctrine and Covenants hundreds of hours of research in finding resource materials related to the Doctrine and Covenants. Appendix A includes definitions, explanations, selected quotations, and selected scriptural references on over 200 key words and terms that are used frequently throughout the Doctrine and Covenants. These key words and terms are listed alphabetically for ease in quick reference. Appendix B contains a list of all the persons who are referred to in the Doctrine and Covenants or for whom a section in the Doctrine and Covenants is given. Biographical information is also given on 50 persons, particularly those mentioned several times in the revelations.

This Companion does not include verbatim the text from the Doctrine and Covenants. The reader will probably want to read a particular section in the Doctrine and Covenants first; then he may wish to refer to this Companion for additional helps pertaining to the contents of that particular section. In the discussions of the verses of that section, references may also be included to additional information in the Appendixes concerning key words, key terms, or individuals. If this book is properly used in this manner, it should truly be a companion to your study of the Doctrine and Covenants.
