Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Acknowledgments

Two firm convictions helped the author determine the format and decide on the contents of this volume.

When the author was first asked to prepare this volume, his original intent was to write most of the material himself and to include only a few brief selected quotations from the General Authorities to supplement, reinforce, and strengthen his own explanations and commentaries. However, it soon became apparent that the General Authorities throughout the decades have thoroughly covered most of the topics he intended to cover. In addition, the special gift of discernment enjoyed by them was evident in the quality and thoroughness of the choice quotations. Some of these resource materials were difficult to find, however, as they were scattered throughout scores of volumes and publications and were often interspersed with other materials not directly related to the Doctrine and Covenants.

The challenge then became to select, compile, and arrange the numerous resource materials so they would be readily available and to organize them so they would be of most use to the student and teacher of the Doctrine and Covenants.

To help accomplish these purposes, the author read thousands of pages of material from the sermons and writings of the General Authorities in such publications as Conference Reports, Church magazines, Journal of Discourses, compilations of statements by the presidents and other leaders of the Church, and their personal books. Materials from these voluminous sources that were related to the Doctrine and Covenants and its teachings were then carefully selected and organized. More than 3,000 pages of these selections were then abridged and trimmed, maintaining the original words and meanings of the author to form these volumes.

Of necessity, this research has criss-crossed the paths of those who have published earlier materials on the Doctrine and Covenants. Because of the thorough research of these earlier writers and compilers, it was not unusual to find the same choice statement from a General Authority in several compilations and publications. This not only helped confirm the author's feeling on the significance of the statement, but verified the importance of the utterances of authorized servants who have spoken by the power or under the direction of the Holy Ghost.

Special appreciation is expressed for the following publications: Church History and Modern Revelation, by Joseph Fielding Smith; Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, by Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl; Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants, by Roy W. Doxey; Doctrine and Covenants: Institute of Religion Self-instruction Program, published by the Church Educational System.

Appreciation is gratefully extended to—

My wife, Luene, and our three daughters who are still at home—Kathy, Shauna, and Michelle—for their invaluable help, support, and understanding. Particular thanks to Kathy for her hundreds of hours of around-the-clock typing during the last two months of preparation of the manuscript.

Gary Gillespie for being such a perceptive and supporting associate for several years, and for his editorial skills and thoughtful, helpful comments in regard to this manuscript.

Eleanor Knowles for editorial assistance and for her astute insights and many hours of work.

Lowell M. Durham, Jr., for his stabilizing influence and good common sense.

Wm. James Mortimer for his encouragement, mature judgment, refreshing good humor, and close friendship.
