Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

PART I

Introduction to the Doctrine and Covenants

The Principle of Revelation

First and foremost, the Doctrine and Covenants is a book of revelations. Primarily its sections consist of revelations from God to his prophet upon the earth, and because it was first assembled and published during the lifetime of Joseph Smith, most of the revelations therein are revelations from God to him.

Latter-day Saints believe in and are deeply committed to the principle of revelation. One of our Articles of Faith indicates, "We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation" (A of F 1:7), while another one states, "We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God" (A of F 1:9).

Our living prophet has declared: "Of all things, that for which we should be most grateful today is that the heavens are indeed open and that the restored church of Jesus Christ is founded upon the rock of revelation. Continuous revelation is indeed the very lifeblood of the gospel of the living Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1977, p. 76.)

Revelation is one of the gifts of the Holy Ghost and is available to every worthy member of the Church. Each righteous person is entitled to revelation in his or her own personal life and in any responsibilities he or she may have. The Prophet Joseph Smith said: "It is also the privilege of any officer in this Church to obtain revelations, so far as relates to his particular calling and duty in the Church." (HC 2:477.) He also declared: "No man can receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelations. The Holy Ghost is a revelator." (TPJS, p. 328.)

Accordingly, those who are saints indeed, those who have been born again, those who are so living as to be in tune with the Spirit—they are they who receive revelation, personal revelation, revelation which is the mind and will of God to them as individuals. They know there are apostles and prophets directing the kingdom who receive revelation for the Church and the world. But they as individuals receive personal revelation in their own affairs.

And there are no restrictions placed upon them; there are no limitations as to what they may see and know and comprehend. No eternal truths will be withheld, if they obey the laws entitling them to receive such truths.

Joseph Smith and the prophets had revelation. They saw God, viewed the visions of eternity, entertained angels, came upon Mount Zion, stood in heavenly places, and had communion with the general assembly and Church of the Firstborn.

Of these very experiences Joseph Smith said:". . . God hath not revealed anything to Joseph, but what He will make known unto the Twelve, and even the least Saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them."(TPJS, p. 149.)

. . . Revelations are not reserved for a limited few or for those called to positions of importance in the Church. It is not position in the Church that confers spiritual gifts. It is not being a bishop, a stake president, or an apostle that makes revelation and salvation available. These are high and holy callings which open the door to the privilege of great service among men. But it is not a call to a special office that opens the windows of revelation to a truth seeker. Rather it is personal righteousness; it is keeping the commandments; it is seeking the Lord while he may be found.

God is no respecter of persons. He will give revelation to me and to you on the same terms and conditions. I can see what Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon saw in the vision of the degrees of glory—and so can you. I can entertain angels and see God, I can receive an outpouring of the gifts of the Spirit—and so can you.

There are goals to gain, summits to climb, revelations to receive. In the eternal scope of things we have scarcely started out on the course to glory and exaltation. The Lord wants his saints to receive line upon line, precept upon precept, truth upon truth, revelation upon revelation, until we know all things and have become like him. (Bruce R. McConkie, IE, December 1969, p. 85.)

God is a God of order. He recognizes the right of each person to receive revelation directly from him and from and through those in authority over that person. However, as far as revelation for the Church is concerned, the channel of communication is from the top down.

In statements of our prophets we find the following:

I will inform you that it is contrary to the economy of God for any member of the Church, or any one, to receive instruction for those in authority, higher than themselves; therefore you will see the impropriety of giving heed to them; but if any person have a vision or a visitation from a heavenly messenger, it must be for his own benefit and instruction; for the fundamental principles, government, and doctrine of the Church are vested in the keys of the kingdom. (Joseph Smith, TPJS, p. 21.)

God gave revelations unto this Church in exceeding great plainness, and there was one principle that was emphatically dwelt on and enforced, namely, that there was but one channel, one channel alone, through which the word of God and the commandments of God should come to this people. The word of God was not to come from the people up. It was not vox populi, vox dei, but it was to be vox dei, vox populi—that is, the voice of God and then the voice of the people—from God downward through the channel that he should appoint, by the means that he should institute. (George Q. Cannon, JD 24:362-63.)

When visions, dreams, tongues, prophecy, impressions or any extraordinary gift of inspiration, convey something out of harmony with accepted revelations of the Church or contrary to the decisions of its constituted authorities, Latter-day Saints may know that it is not of God, no matter how plausible it may appear. Also, they should understand that directions for the guidance of the Church will come, by revelation, through the head. All faithful members are entitled to the inspiration of the Holy Spirit for themselves, their families, and for those over whom they are appointed and ordained to preside. But anything at discord with that which comes from God through the head of the Church is not to be received as authoritative or reliable. (First Presidency, IE, Sept. 1913, p. 1148.)

The president of the Church stands in the Church as Moses did to the children of Israel, according to the revelations. (John Taylor, TS 6:22.)

Only the Prophet and President of the Church can receive revelation for the Church. Thus, every faithful Latter-day Saint should be anxious to hear and follow the inspired teachings of the living prophet so he can receive blessings in his own life and better discharge his responsibilities to his family and any responsibilities he might have in the Church. The Savior taught that we should live "by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." (Matt. 4:4.) Modern-day prophets have declared:

The first thing necessary to the establishment of His [the Lord's] kingdom . . . is to raise up a prophet and have him declare the will of God; the next is to have people yield obedience to the word of the Lord through that prophet. . . .

How does faith required as the first principle in the plan of salvation or the gospel come? Let Paul answer: "So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God." (Rom. 10:17.) It is not the letter then that bringeth faith, but hearing the word of God dispensed by a living oracle or minister of God, clothed upon with power from on high. It is not a recorded gospel, but a preached word which emanates with power from a man of God inspired by the Holy Ghost. (John Taylor, GK, pp. 214, 332.)

Faith comes by hearing the word of God, through the testimony of the servants of God; that testimony is always attended by the Spirit of prophecy and revelation. (Joseph Smith, HC 3:379.)

If we talk about the living oracles and want to pay respect to them, how shall we do this? Shall we do it by never reading their words—by paying no attention to that which they say? That is a very poor way of doing. We ought to listen to their words. When we cannot hear their words, we should read them; for they are the words of the authorized servants of God. I feel that there is a great neglect among us in this respect. (George Q. Cannon, CR, 1897, p. 38.)

A Latter-day Saint who truly believes in the principle of continuous revelation and recognizes that the inspired words of the living prophet are the mind and will of God will want to do everything he can to learn and to live the teachings of the living prophet. President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., stated: "We do not lack a prophet; what we lack is a listening ear by the people and a determination to live as God has commanded. That is all we need. The way has been made perfectly clear." (CR, October 1948, p. 80.) And President Marion G. Romney declared: "'He that receiveth my servants receiveth me.' Who are his servants? They are his representatives in the offices of the Priesthood—the General, Stake, Priesthood Quorum, and Ward officers. It behooves us to keep this in mind when we are tempted to disregard our presiding authorities, bishops, quorum and stake presidents, etc., when, within the jurisdiction of their callings, they give us counsel and advice." (CR, October 1960, p. 73.)
