Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

What Is Scripture?

The basic dictionary definition of scripture is "the sacred writings of a religion" or "a body of writings considered as authoritative." The definition listed first in the dictionary is "the books of the Old and New Testaments or either of them, the Bible." In this sense, a scripture might also be "a passage from the Bible." Thus, according to the standard dictionary definitions, scriptures must be written.

However, in a revelation in this dispensation, the Lord indicated that when he has authorized servants on the earth, scripture might also be spoken, and would not necessarily be written. Speaking of those who have been ordained "to proclaim the everlasting gospel, by the Spirit of the living God, from people to people, and from land to land . . . whose mission is appointed unto them to go forth" (in other words, in today's terminology, "speaking of the General Authorities"), the Lord has said: "And whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation." (D&C 68:4.)

In this more general sense, scripture today includes that which is stated or written by the General Authorities and also includes the approved standard works or officially recognized (canonized) scriptures.

What is the place, then, of spoken or written scripture in the Church that has never been canonized and is not part of the standard works? This is what our prophets, seers, and revelators have told us:

We believe that God is as willing today as He ever has been to reveal His mind and will to man, and that He does so through His appointed servants—prophets, seers, and revelators—invested through ordination with the authority of the Holy Priesthood. We rely therefore on the teachings of the living oracles of God as of equal validity with the doctrines of the written word. (James E. Talmage, AF, p. 7.)

We of the Latter-day Saints have our own Scriptures. We have the Scriptures which other Christian sects use, namely, the Bible, including the Old and New Testaments, but we also have the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, and the Living Oracles of the Church. (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., CN, Dec. 17, 1960, p. 14.)

So we invite all men everywhere to be willing to listen to the living prophets that God has raised up in this dispensation so that they can be taught correct principles and not be tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine. (LeGrand Richards, CR, April 1965, p. 120.)

The older I get and the closer the contact I have with the President of the Church, the more I realize that the greatest of all scriptures which we have in the world today is current scripture. What the mouthpiece of God says to His children is scripture. It is intended for all the children of God upon the earth. It is His word and His will and His law made manifest through scripture, and I love it more than all other. It applies to me today specifically, and to you all. (Henry D. Moyle, BYU Fireside, January 1963, pp.7-8.)

The very moment that we set aside the living oracles we set aside the revelations of God. Why? Because the revelations of God command us plainly that we shall hearken to the living oracles. Hence, if we undertake to follow the written word, and at the same time do not give heed to the living oracles of God, the written word will condemn us. (Orson Pratt, JD 7:373.)

The prophets Joseph Smith and Brigham Young also emphasized the importance of receiving living (current) scripture from the living prophet, as indicated in the following statement by Wilford Woodruff:

I will refer to a certain meeting I attended in the town of Kirtland in my early days . . . some remarks were made . . . with regard to the living oracles and with regard to the written word of God . . . a leading man in the church . . . talked upon the subject, and said: "You have got the word of God before you here in the Bible, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants; you have the written word of God, and you who give revelations should give revelations according to those books, as what is written in those books is the word of God. We should confine ourselves to them."

When he concluded, Brother Joseph turned to Brother Brigham Young and said, "Brother Brigham, I want you to take the stand and tell us your views with regard to the living oracles and the written word of God." Brother Brigham took the stand, and he took the Bible, and laid it down; he took the Book of Mormon, and laid it down; and he took the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, and laid it down before him, and he said: "There is the written word of God to us, concerning the work of God from the beginning of the world, almost, to our day." "And now," said he, "when compared with the living oracles those books are nothing to me; those books do not convey the word of God direct to us now, as do the words of a Prophet or a man bearing the Holy Priesthood in our day and generation. I would rather have the living oracles than all the writing in the books." That was the course he pursued. When he was through, Brother Joseph said to the congregation, "Brother Brigham has told you the word of the Lord, and he has told you the truth. "

. . . The Bible is all right, the Book of Mormon is all right, the Doctrine and Covenants is all right, and they proclaim the work of God and the word of God in the earth in this day and generation until the coming of the Son of Man; but the Holy Priesthood is not confined particularly to those books, that is, it did not cease when those books were made. (Wilford Woodruff, CR, October 1897, pp. 22-23.)

The statement of the Lord concerning scripture indicates that the words of the General Authorities must be spoken as "moved upon by the Holy Ghost" before those words can be considered scripture. The question naturally arises, how can a member of the Church know when a General Authority is speaking by the power of the Holy Ghost? Presidents J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and Harold B. Lee have provided the following answers.

I have given some thought to this question, and the answer thereto so far as I can determine, is: We can tell when the speakers are "moved upon by the Holy Ghost," only when we, ourselves, are "moved upon by the Holy Ghost." In a way, this completely shifts the responsibility from them to us to determine when they so speak. (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., CN, July 31, 1954, p. 9.)

We can know, or have the assurance that they are speaking under inspiration if we so live that we can have a witness that what they are speaking is the word of the Lord. There is only one safety, and that is that we shall live to have the witness to know. (Harold B. Lee, ASIF, July 8, 1964, p. 14.)

The importance of spoken or noncanonized written scripture cannot be overemphasized, because it is the source of all canonized scripture. The usual pattern for the development of canonized scripture is that it is first given by the Lord to his living prophet, who teaches it to the people; then the prophet either writes the teachings himself or has another write for him so the people can refer back to the exact words. The written words are then presented to the members of the Church, usually in a general conference, for their vote as to whether or not they are willing to accept the statement as part of the official scripture. Once the scripture is voted upon and accepted, it is said to be canonized and becomes part of the official written scripture or standard works.

Thus it is readily evident that when people refuse to accept the words of the living prophet, they in effect cut themselves off from the opportunity of receiving additional canonized scripture.

The procedure for canonizing scripture was illustrated in the April 1976 annual conference of the Church when two revelations were presented to and accepted by the membership of the Church. President N. Eldon Tanner made the following statement:

President Kimball has asked me to read a very important resolution for your sustaining vote. At a meeting of the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve held in the Salt Lake Temple on March 25, 1976, approval was given to add to the Pearl of Great Price the following two revelations:

First, a vision of the celestial kingdom given to Joseph Smith, the Prophet, in the Kirtland Temple, on January 21, 1836, which deals with the salvation of those who die without a knowledge of the gospel.

And second, a vision given to President Joseph F. Smith in Salt Lake City, Utah, on October 3, 1918, showing the visit of the Lord Jesus Christ in the spirit world and setting forth the doctrine of the redemption of the dead.

It is proposed that we sustain and approve this action and adopt these revelations as part of the standard works of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. All in favor please manifest it. Contrary, if there be any, by the same sign. Thank you. President Kimball, the voting seems to be unanimous in the affirmative.

These revelations are now part of the official written scripture of the Church and are published as part of the Pearl of Great Price.

In answer to the question "What is scripture?" it might be said that canonized scripture is written scripture that has been formally voted upon and received by the members of the Church. Such canonized scripture becomes the standard by which the other teachings of the Church can be tested; hence, the books containing canonized scripture are known as the standard works.

In addition, the talks and writings of General Authorities when they "are moved upon by the Holy Ghost" are also scripture, and faithful members of the Church pay as much attention to these scriptures as to the standard works.

The official magazines of the Church contain many of the talks and writings of the General Authorities, and presently the Ensign contains copies of all the talks given at the annual and semiannual general conferences. These talks, of course, should be carefully studied.

Does canonized scripture come only to the prophet and president of the Church?

Yes. No one except the prophet and president is authorized to receive scripture for the entire church, as is explained in these statements:

The Presidents or Presidency are over the Church; and revelations of the mind and will of God to the Church, are to come through the Presidency. This is the order of heaven, and the power and privilege of this Priesthood. (Joseph Smith, TPJS, p. 111.)

Here we must have in mind—must know—that only the President of the Church, the presiding High Priest, is sustained as Prophet, Seer, and Revelator for the church, and he alone has the right to receive revelations for the church, either new or amendatory, or to give authoritative interpretations of scriptures that shall be binding on the Church, or change in any way the existing doctrines of the church. He is God's sole mouthpiece on earth for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the only true Church. He alone may declare the mind and will of God to his people. No officer of any other church in the world has this high right and lofty prerogative. (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., CN, July 31, 1954, p. 10.)

Revelations given of God through his prophets, however, are not subject to an approving or sustaining vote of the people in order to establish their validity. Members of the Church may vote to publish a particular revelation along with the other scriptures, or the people may bind themselves by covenant to follow the instructions found in the revealed word. But there is no provision in the Lord's plan for the members of the Church to pass upon the validity of revelations themselves by a vote of the Church. . . . Revelation is revelation. When the Lord speaks, he has spoken. His word is to be accepted and obeyed if men expect to receive salvation. To reject the word of the Lord is to reject the Lord himself to that extent. (Bruce R. McConkie, MD, p. 150.)

Are scriptures intended for the whole world or only for members of the Church?

Every person who has ever lived on this earth, who is now living on this earth, or who will yet live on this earth is either a son or daughter of God, our Heavenly Father. He is interested in the welfare of each of his children and wants to teach each one what he should know and do in order to be happy and to have joy. He has revealed his teachings to his prophets, and they are part of his scriptures. The scriptures are intended for the whole world.

Because we are all sons and daughters of God, who is our loving Father in heaven, and he is vitally concerned with our welfare, all of us should be anxious and eager to read the scriptures and then to apply the principles of the scriptures to our lives.

The adversary of God and of all righteousness—whose names and titles include Lucifer, Satan, and the devil—does not want us to read the scriptures. Therefore, either the adversary himself or one of his emissaries tries to convince us the scriptures are not important ("they are ancient history"; "they were written only for another people of another time"; "they do not apply to you today") or that we do not have time to read, study, and ponder the scriptures. In the case of the Doctrine and Covenants, the adversary would like to convince members of the Church that this volume of scripture is only for earlier members and to assure nonmembers that the teachings are false and do not pertain to them.

Unfortunately, some members have fallen into the belief that the Doctrine and Covenants is intended only for them. This belief might result because of several reasons, including the fact that only a few scriptures from the Doctrine and Covenants are included in the standard missionary discussions. It has also been noted that the opening words of the first verse in section 1 are "Hearken, O ye people of my church." Before that first verse is completed, however, the Lord addresses himself to the "people from afar" and those upon "the islands of the sea," which could, and probably does, include those who are nonmembers. The statement of the Lord in verse two definitely includes nonmembers: "For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape." (D&C 1:2.)

The prophets of the Lord in this dispensation have also declared that the Doctrine and Covenants is intended for the entire world. President Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

It seems a strange thing that many good brethren in the Church seem to think that the Lord never intended that the Book of Mormon, and more especially the Doctrine and Covenants, should go forth to the world. We hear the expression from time to time, that these, and especially the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants are intended solely for members of the church, but the Lord in his instructions has counseled otherwise. They were intended to be a warning to all the world. [D&C 1:4-7.] (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:41-42.)

The Lord has given so many revelations, in our own day. We have this Doctrine and Covenants full of them, all pertaining unto the Latter-day Saints and to the world. For this is not our book alone. This Doctrine and Covenants is my book and your book; but more than that, it belongs to all the world, to the Catholics, to the Presbyterians, to the Methodists, to the infidel, to the non-believer. It is his book if he will accept it, if he will receive it. The Lord has given it unto the world for their salvation. If you do not believe it, you read the first section in this book, the preface, and you will find that the Lord has sent this book and the things which it contains unto the people afar off, on the islands of the sea, in foreign lands, and his voice is unto all people, that all may hear. And so I say it belongs to all the world, not only to the Latter-day Saints, and they will be judged by it, and you will be judged by it. We will all be judged by it, by the things which this book contains and by the things which the other books contain which are holy scripture, which the Lord has given unto us; and if we fail to comprehend these things, if we will not search, if we will not study, if we will not take hold on the things which the Lord has revealed unto us, then his condemnation shall rest upon us, and we shall be removed from his presence and from his kingdom. And I say that in all soberness, because it is true. (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, October 1919, p. 146.)

Why is the reading of scripture so important?

Inasmuch as scripture is the mind and will of God to man, every person should be vitally interested in searching the scriptures and studying them diligently. The Savior and his ancient and modern prophets have all emphasized the importance of studying the scriptures and of living according to the teachings contained therein.

In the New Testament the Savior counseled, "Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me." (John 5:39.)

And to the peoples of the Book of Mormon he commanded, "Search these things diligently." (3 Ne. 23:1.)

The importance of reading, pondering, and living the truths of the scriptures has been emphasized by all the prophets, ancient and modern. President Spencer W. Kimball has indicated that "no father, no son, no mother, no daughter should get so busy that he or she does not have time to study the scriptures." (Ensign, May 1976, p. 47.) In a special First Presidency message prepared for the September 1976 Ensign, President Kimball counseled:

Brethren and sisters, my purpose in preparing this message is to encourage you to study the scriptures. As the Lord has said, "Search the scriptures; for . . . they are they which testify of me." (John 5:39 )

Perhaps you will have noticed that for many years the General Authorities have urged us all with increasing frequency and in a spirit of love to adopt a program of daily gospel study in our homes, both as individuals and as families. Also, the standard works have replaced all other materials as texts in the adult curriculum of the church, and scarcely a meeting comes to a close without an inspired admonition from priesthood leaders to read and study the scriptures. . . .

Nevertheless, we are saddened to learn, as we travel about the stakes and missions of the Church, that there are still many of the Saints who are not reading and pondering the scriptures regularly, and who have little knowledge of the Lord's instructions to the children of men. . . .

Besides the almost constant encouragement and prompting which we receive from our present-day Church leaders, the prophets of old seem to cry out to us in almost every page of the scriptures, urging us to study the word of the Lord, the holy scriptures, "which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus." (2 Tim. 3:15.) But we do not always hear, and we might well ask ourselves why.

Sometimes it seems we take the scriptures too much for granted because we do not fully appreciate how rare a thing it is to possess them, and how blessed we are because we do have them. . . .

Lest the foregoing be lightly passed over, let me pause here to point out a common error in the mind of man—that is, the tendency, when someone speaks of faithfulness or success in one thing or another, to think "me," and when someone mentions failure or neglect, to think "them." But I ask us all to honestly evaluate our performance in scripture study. It is a common thing to have a few passages of scripture at our disposal, floating in our minds, as it were, and thus to have the illusion that we know a great deal about the gospel. In this sense, having a little knowledge can be a problem indeed. I am convinced that each of us, at some time in our lives, must discover the scriptures for ourselves—and not just discover them once, but rediscover them again and again.

Other prophets have also counseled us to study the scriptures, individually and as families:

The Old and New Testaments, the Book of Mormon, and the book of Doctrine and Covenants . . . are like a lighthouse in the ocean or a finger-post which points out the road we should travel. Where do they point? To the fountain of light. . . . That is what these books are for. They are of God; they are valuable and necessary: by them we can establish the doctrine of Christ. (Brigham Young, JD 8:219.)

In our homes . . . it is our privilege, nay, it is our duty, to call our families together to be taught the truths of the Holy Scriptures. In every home, children should be encouraged to read the word of the Lord, as it has been revealed to us in all dispensations. We should read the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price; not only read it in our homes, but explain it to our children, that they may understand the hand dealings of God with the peoples of the earth. (George Albert Smith, CR, April 1914, p. 12.)

I cannot impress upon the . . . Church too much the importance of reading the Scriptures and of trying to learn their meaning. They are told to us in clear enough language so that we can always be reasonably certain when we are in the true paths. . . .

Read your Scriptures, read them early and read them late, read them in your youth and do not abandon them when you get older. (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., in a pamphlet prepared for the youth of the Church, December 1960, pp. 11-12, 14.)

Search the scriptures—search the revelations which we publish, and ask your Heavenly Father, in the name of His Son Jesus Christ, to manifest the truth unto you, and if you do it with an eye single to His glory nothing doubting, He will answer you by the power of His Holy Spirit. You will then know for yourselves and not for another. You will not then be dependent on man for the knowledge of God; nor will there be any room for speculation. No; for when men receive their instruction from Him that made them, they know how He will save them. Then again we say: Search the Scriptures, search the Prophets and learn what portion of them belongs to you. (Joseph Smith, TPJS, p. 11.)
