Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

The Doctrine and Covenants

From the earlier discussion of what is scripture, it is evident that when the revelations and other teachings of the prophets contained in the Doctrine and Covenants were first received from the Lord through the power of the Holy Ghost, they were scripture. When these things were taught to or published for the members of the Church, they became scripture for the Church. When they were formally accepted by the membership of the Church, they became part of the canonized scripture or standard works of the Church. Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written the following concerning this process:

Any message, whether written or spoken, that comes from God to man by the power of the Holy Ghost is scripture. If it is written and accepted by the Church, it becomes part of the scriptures or standard works and ever thereafter may be read and studied with profit. Much of what is in the scriptures was given orally in the first instance and was thereafter recorded either by the uttering prophet or an inspired scribe. Other portions of what is in holy writ were written by the inspired authors by way of revelation and commandment. (MD, p. 682.)

The Doctrine and Covenants is one of the standard works of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, together with the Bible (both Old Testament and New Testament), the Book of Mormon, and the Pearl of Great Price.

The beginning of the Doctrine and Covenants story is really the First Vision of the Prophet Joseph Smith, for at that time the iron ceiling of heaven was shattered after an apostasy that had lasted for hundreds of years. The account of the First Vision is found in the Pearl of Great Price (Joseph Smith—History) and should be carefully read by every student of the Doctrine and Covenants.

The various appearances of the Angel Moroni to the Prophet Joseph Smith also provide important background to a serious study of the Doctrine and Covenants. Although the accounts of these heavenly visitations are not in the Doctrine and Covenants, they are available in the Pearl of Great Price (JS-H 1:29-60) and in the History of the Church (1:9-22).

Also, the words of the angel in which he paraphrased the promise of Malachi concerning the return of Elijah the prophet comprise section 2 in the Doctrine and Covenants; chronologically, this section is the earliest revelation contained in the present Doctrine and Covenants.

The next section chronologically is section 3 (July 1828), which is concerned with the loss of 116 pages of manuscript, and from that time forth the materials for the various sections are revealed rather frequently. The materials for seventeen sections were received by the end of 1829; another nineteen sections were received in 1830; and in the following two years (1831-32) the materials for fifty-three were received.

Once the Church was established and the Lord had revealed the principles, practices, and procedures that should guide his kingdom upon the earth, it is natural that the number of revelations necessary to establish and run the Church should diminish. However, the material for an additional forty-five revelations or sections was received before the death of the Prophet. The final two sections were published to announce the martyrdom of the Prophet and his brother (section 135) and to "give the Word and the Will of the Lord" through his prophet Brigham Young concerning the organization of the Saints as they were preparing for the migration to the West (section 136).

Primarily, however, the Doctrine and Covenants is a book of revelations. Most of the sections contain direct revelations from God to his prophets (primarily Joseph Smith), but other sections contain information derived from revelations, such as answers to scriptural questions (sections 77, 113), items of instruction (sections 130, 131), letters (sections 127, 128), inspired translation of earlier scripture (section 7), and prayers, including the dedicatory prayer for the Kirtland Temple (sections 13, 65, 109).

Both the Preface (section 1) and the Appendix (section 133) were received by revelation, although they were given for a specific purpose. Other sections are almost pure prophecy (sections 87, 121), while others include the minutes of a high council meeting (section 102), a declaration of belief concerning government (section 134), historical information on the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith (section 135), and instructions concerning the organization of the Saints for migration to the West (section 136). The "Official Declaration" concerning the cessation of polygamy (the Manifesto) is also published with each copy of the Doctrine and Covenants.

The question might be asked, Have any sections been added to the Doctrine and Covenants since the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith except for sections 135, 136, and the Manifesto? The answer is, Yes. Sections 2, 13, 77, 85, 87, 103, 105, 108-32 were not published in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants (some of them had not even been received at that time), but were published in later editions after being accepted by the Church as canonized scripture.

Elder John A. Widtsoe has answered the question "What does the Doctrine and Covenants contain?" in the following words:

The first thing to be remembered is that the revelations contained in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants are answers to questions. If that is kept in mind it will help to a better understanding. . .

In the History of the Church you will find that the Prophet says, "I inquired of the Lord." The revelation follows. In each the answer to a question is a dominating part of the revelation. Sometimes it is an answer amplified and an explanation of an existing condition. That explains the somewhat disjointed nature of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. Since each revelation is an answer to a special question, there could not be a consecutive developing treatment of any one theme. If the question is known, then this supplementary material of the revelation is better understood. As one reads carefully from the first to the last, a developing purpose and increasing thought will be found fitting the spiritual development and temporal needs of the Prophet and his associates. Another important thing should be remembered, that the very earliest revelations foreshadow everything that is found in the book. With the knowledge we have today, we can take the earliest fifteen revelations in the book and read into them practically every doctrine, principle and project that characterized the succeeding revelations. The Mind that gave the revelations possessed the whole plan. But it was given piecemeal to the Church as required. (MDC, pp. 4-9.)

Who is the source of the revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants?

All revelations come from the Lord. Concerning prophecy, the apostle Peter said that it "came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (2 Pet. 1:21.) The same might also be said of revelation. When a person reads the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants, he is literally reading the mind and will of the Lord as given through his prophets.

The Giver of all the revelations is Jesus Christ. The God spoken of in the Doctrine and Covenants is Jesus of Nazareth. Apparently the Father does not speak in them. He speaks through his Son. It is a fundamental doctrine of Mormonism that God the Father has commissioned his Son Jesus Christ to do certain work. He is the one that looks after the affairs of this earth, and all things pertaining to the Church are done by him. God the Father has appeared very few times upon the earth, at the beginning of the dispensations. He appeared in the Garden of Eden. He spoke out of heaven at the time of the Savior's baptism. He appeared in the grove to the Prophet Joseph Smith. (John A. Widtsoe, MDC, pp. 4-9.)

At whose request were the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants given?

The Prophet Joseph Smith requested the help from the Lord. Often the Prophet prayed for guidance and help for himself, in behalf of the Church, or for specific groups within the Church. Sometimes individual members (or even individuals who were still investigating the Church) would ask Joseph Smith to pose a particular question of the Lord; usually the request would be to determine the mind and will of the Lord concerning that particular person.

Either the person and/or the Lord might have one of several reasons for requesting or giving a particular revelation, including general instruction, personal guidance, scriptural enlightenment, prophecy, law, etc.

Elder Widtsoe has written the following concerning the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants.

The language, with the exception of the words actually spoken by heavenly beings, is the language of the Prophet. The ideas were given to Joseph Smith. He wrote them in the best language at his command. He was inspired at times by the loftiness of the ideals so that his language or words are far above that ordinarily used by a backwoods boy of that day.

There are four classes of revelations:(1) those given to individuals, (2) those given to the Church for doctrinal information, (3) those given for organization purposes and (4) those dealing with miscellaneous subjects.

There are two kinds of teachings in the Doctrine and Covenants. One is "special" in its nature, pertaining, say, to the organization of the united order in Missouri, or how baptism should be performed, or what blessing to ask upon the bread and water. The second kind are of general application, dealing with the principles which are eternal, applicable at all times and under all conditions. (MDC, pp. 4-9.)

Where and when were the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants received?

Most of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants were received between 1829 and 1832, which was the period just before the Church was organized and during its early formative years. During this time Joseph Smith was living in New York and Ohio, so most of the revelations were given in these two states.

By what means were the revelations requested and received?

The Lord has counseled all his children to request blessings and return thanks to him in prayer: "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened." (Matt. 7:7-8.)

Thus it might be said in general that the only form of inquiry used by the Prophet in requesting the help that resulted in the revelations to him was prayer. However, prayer may take many different forms, as is suggested by one of the hymns of the Church, "Prayer Is the Soul's Sincere Desire" (Hymns, no. 220):

Prayer is the soul's sincere desire, Uttered or unexpressed, The motion of a hidden fire, That trembles in the breast. Prayer is the burden of a sigh, The falling of a tear, The upward glancing of an eye, When none but God is near. Prayer is the simplest form of speech, That infant lips can try, Prayer, the sublimest strains that reach The Majesty on high.

The Lord has chosen various means of answering the prayers of his prophets and communicating with them throughout the centuries. At times, he has spoken with his prophets "face to face" or in a personal visit. (See 2 Ne. 11:2-3; Ether 3:6-16; 12:39; the First Vision of Joseph Smith in JS-H 1:14-20; D&C 76.)

At other times, he has spoken to his prophets but has not shown himself to their physical sense of sight. (Read 3 Ne. 1:12; 9:1-22; Ether 2:14; D&C 130:12-13.) At still other times, he has spoken to his prophets in the "still small voice of the Spirit," which might include the impressions of the Spirit upon the mind of the receptive prophet. (See Enos 1:10; D&C 85.)

He has also spoken to his prophets through angels or other heavenly messengers. (See 1 Ne. 3:29; 11:21; Mosiah 27:11; 3 Ne. 19:14; D&C 2; 13; 27:1-4; 110.) And sometimes he communicates to his prophets through visions and dreams. (Read 1 Ne. 1:8; 2:2; D&C 76; 107:93.)

Virtually all of these methods of communication to his prophets were employed by the Lord in the revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants.

We are also told that some of the revelations were received as Joseph Smith inquired "through the Urim and Thummim," and these revelations may have employed several of these methods of communication.

Were all the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants received through the Urim and Thummim?

No. Many of the early revelations (such as those contained in sections 3, 6, 7, 11, 14-17) were received through the use of the Urim and Thummim, but probably most of the revelations were received without the use of those sacred stones. Of course, the Prophet may have received some revelations through the Urim and Thummim in addition to those that he specifically mentioned were received through that means.

We are not certain of the exact function of the Urim and Thummim in requesting or receiving revelations. The Prophet simply stated that he "inquired through the Urim and Thummim."

Elder John A. Widtsoe has suggested that the Urim and Thummim may have helped the Prophet to concentrate his spiritual powers toward the Lord during the early years until he learned how to use his faith directly in receiving answers to his requests:

When the Prophet was young and inexperienced, he had in his possession as a help the Urim and Thummim. The Urim and Thummim were stones set in a silver bowl—not spectacles, but apparently means by which he was able to concentrate, to focus attention upon the subject under consideration until he became so in harmony with the spiritual forces about him that the thing under consideration became clear to him. We do not know the process. . . . Probably the Urim and Thummim were means by which the Prophet was able to concentrate upon a subject. He says often in his journal when problems arose, "I inquired of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim."

As the Prophet became stronger spiritually, he had no need of the Urim and Thummim, and they were taken from him. He then says, "I inquired of the Lord." He acquired power over himself until he was able to concentrate sufficiently to put himself in tune with spiritual forces and then to obtain the necessary answers. A number of revelations were given by such direct inspiration. (John A. Widtsoe, MDC, pp. 4-9.)

What determined the order in which the revelations were printed in the Doctrine and Covenants?

In the main, Joseph Smith and others assigned to prepare the revelations for publication decided to print them in the chronological order in which they were received. However, there were several deviations from this general pattern, perhaps the most notable of which were—

—the placement of what is now section 1 at the beginning of the record, even though the particular revelation in that section was not received until November 1, 1831. However, in giving this particular revelation, the Lord indicated that it was to be a "Preface" to his other revelations that were to be printed in the same volume.

—the placement of what is now section 133 near the end of the book. This section was also given the first part of November (the 3rd) 1831, but was identified as the "Appendix" and has been part of the end of the revelations received by Joseph Smith.

Sections 10 and 134 are examples of other revelations known to be printed out of chronological sequence.

Because the revelations are usually printed in chronological order, the reader and student of the Doctrine and Covenants can more easily relate each revelation to the events in Church history that usually precipitated the question leading to that particular revelation.

What is the relationship of the Doctrine and Covenants to Church history?

Most, if not all, of the revelations and other teachings in the Doctrine and Covenants were received as answers to prayers. Naturally, the Prophet Joseph Smith was praying about those problems and situations with which he was immediately concerned in his everyday life or in the current life of the Church. The revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants were thus given by the Lord to help solve the problems of his prophet and of his growing, emerging church. Because these revelations are vitally linked with Church history, they can be best understood in the context of the particular time and/or place that prompted the questioning prayer of the Prophet and in turn resulted in the subsequent revelation.

Are all the revelations given to Joseph Smith included in the Doctrine and Covenants?

No. Joseph Smith received many revelations in addition to those included in the Doctrine and Covenants. Some of these he was specifically commanded not to include. For some others, he was commanded to include only portions of the revelation. (See D&C 76:114-19.) Other revelations were not published either because it was not necessary to publish them at that particular time or because the message of the revelation was so personal to the individual that the principles therein may not have had general application.

It is an erroneous thought to believe that the Prophet selected all of the revelations he had received and placed them in the collection which was to become the Book of Commandments. Each of the revelations selected for that volume was placed there because the Prophet considered that it had some value to the Church in regard to its teachings. There are some revelations still in possession of the Church which were not included. Some of these we can readily believe were not included because the inspiration of the Prophet was that it was not necessary, or because some of them had an application which was not intended for publication and to be sent to an unbelieving world. (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:20.)

Are revelations being received by the prophets today? If so, why are they not included in the Doctrine and Covenants?

As indicated in the chapter titled "What Is Scripture?" there are two major types of scripture in the Church today:( 1) the canonized scripture, which is written and contained in the standard works of the Church (Old Testament, New Testament, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price) and (2) the spoken or written noncanonized scripture that comes initially as the General Authorities speak or write when "moved upon by the power of the Holy Ghost." Of course, this latter type of scripture, which is initially revealed through the mind of the General Authority, is often subsequently written down and published throughout the Church, either in conference reports, Church magazines, or other publications of the Church.

Both types of scripture are equally binding upon the membership of the Church; therefore, it is not necessary that every new revelation or inspired teaching of the Prophet or of the other General Authorities be published as part of the canonized scripture such as the Doctrine and Covenants.

When the Lord has a revelation to be placed in the Doctrine and Covenants he will indicate it. The Doctrine and Covenants does not contain all the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is a "selection" of revelations which contain doctrines and commandments covering every phase of salvation, which, if we will follow them, will direct us to the celestial kingdom. The Lord has given revelation to each of the presidents of the Church, but it is unnecessary that every word revealed should be added to that volume. President Wilford Woodruff said:

"I have had the administration of angels in my day and time, though I never prayed for an angel. I have had, in several instances, the administration of holy angels. . . . The Lord revealed to me by vision, by revelations, and by the Holy Spirit, many things that lay before me."

President Brigham Young had similar experiences, and the revelations of the Lord were with him in directing the pioneers across the plains. He had the revelations from the Lord in the building of colonies and cities throughout the western territory and in sending forth men and women to colonize them. The history which is written gives evidence of that inspiration. . . .

Can you tell me why some members of the Church are clamoring for more revelation to be placed in the Doctrine and Covenants, when most of those who do are not keeping the commandments of the Lord that are already revealed? What privilege does a person have to ask for more revelation, when he does not conform his life to the commandments already given? There is a very significant statement in Section 59 of the Doctrine and Covenants as follows:

"And they (the Saints who are faithful) shall also be crowned with blessings from above, yea, and with commandments not a few, and with revelations in their time—they that are faithful and diligent before me." (D&C 59:4.) . . .

Let us one and all take an inward look. Perhaps it is because we have not humbled ourselves; because we have failed to heed the commandments and to accept and abide in the revelations already given, that there is not more given to us. It is my humble opinion that we are receiving council by inspiration, or revelation, at every general conference of the Church. Would it not be wise for the members of the Church to pay more heed to these counsels and prepare ourselves for more to come? (Joseph Fielding Smith, AGQ, 2:202-5.)

It has been observed that the people want revelation. This is revelation; and were it written, it would then be written revelation, as truly as the revelations which are contained in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. I could give you revelation about going to California, for I know the mind of the Lord upon that matter. I could give you revelation upon the subject of paying your tithing and building a temple to the name of the Lord; for the light is in me. I could put these revelations as straight to the line of truth in writing as any revelation you ever read. I could write the mind of the Lord, and you could put it in your pockets. But before we desire more written revelation, let us fulfil the revelations that are already written, and which we have scarcely begun to fulfil. (Brigham Young, JD 6:319.)

Concerning the question "Are revelations being received by the prophets today?" the answer is a definite yes. The following testimony of the living prophet is a stirring witness to the Church and to the world concerning this vital question:

Of all things, that for which we should be most grateful today is that the heavens are indeed open and that the restored church of Jesus Christ is founded upon the rock of revelation. Continuous revelation is indeed the very lifeblood of the gospel of the living Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.

We proclaim to the world in one of our Articles of Faith, "We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God." (Ninth Article of Faith.)

From the scripture of ancient time comes this ringing declaration: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.)

If the Bible were "the end of the prophets," then it was through lack of faith and belief, and that is the reason the heavens at times were closed and locked and became as iron, and the earth as brass. When the heavens are sealed, the spiritual darkness that follows is not unlike that physical darkness in Nephite history, when "neither candles, neither torches; neither could there be fire kindled with their fine and exceedingly dry wood." (3 Ne. 8:21.)

The Lord will not force himself upon people, and if they do not believe, they will receive no revelation. If they are content to depend upon their own limited calculations and interpretations, then, of course, the Lord will leave them to their chosen fate.

Speaking of miracles and revelation, the Book of Mormon prophet Moroni states this:

"If these things have ceased, then has faith ceased also; and awful is the state of man, for they are as though there had been no redemption made." (Moro. 7:38.)

In the meridian of time, the Son of God, the Light of the World, came and opened the curtains of heaven, and earth and heaven were again in communion.

But when the light of that century went out, the darkness was again impenetrable; the heavens were sealed and the "dark ages" moved in.

I bear witness to the world today that more than a century and a half ago the iron ceiling was shattered; the heavens were once again opened, and since that time revelations have been continuous. . . .

A young lad, Joseph Smith, of incomparable faith, broke the spell, shattered the "heavens of iron" and reestablished communication. Heaven kissed the earth, light dissipated the darkness, and God again spoke to man, revealing anew "his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.) A new prophet was in the land and through him God set up his kingdom, never to be destroyed nor left to another people—a kingdom that will stand forever.

The foreverness of this kingdom and the revelations which it brought into existence are absolute realities. Never again will the sun go down; never again will all men prove totally unworthy of communication with their Maker. Never again will God be hidden from his children on the earth. Revelation is here to remain. . . .

There are those who would assume that with the printing and binding of these sacred records, that would be the "end of the prophets." But again we testify to the world that revelation continues and that the vaults and files of the Church contain these revelations which come month to month and day to day. We testify also that there is, since 1830 when The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized, and will continue to be, so long as time shall last, a prophet, recognized of God and his people, who will continue to interpret the mind and will of the Lord. . . .

. . . I say, in the deepest of humility, but also by the power and force of a burning testimony in my soul, that from the prophet of the Restoration to the prophet of our own year, the communication line is unbroken, the authority is continuous, and light, brilliant and penetrating, continues to shine. The sound of the voice of the Lord is a continuous melody and a thunderous appeal. For nearly a century and a half there has been no interruption.

Man never needs to stand alone. Every faithful person may have the inspiration for his own limited kingdom. But the Lord definitely calls prophets today and reveals his secrets unto them as he did yesterday, he does today, and will do tomorrow; that is the way it is. (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1977, pp. 76-78.)

The discontinuance of publishing the revelations of the living prophets in the Doctrine and Covenants should not be interpreted to mean that revelations have ceased in the Church.

A good example of modern revelation is the announcement of the First Presidency on June 9, 1978, of the revelation that "has confirmed that the long-promised day has come when every faithful, worthy man in the Church may receive the holy priesthood . . . without regard for race or color." The full printed text announcing the revelation follows:

As we have witnessed the expansion of the work of the Lord over the earth, we have been grateful that people of many nations have responded to the message of the restored gospel, and have joined the Church in ever-increasing numbers. This, in turn, has inspired us with a desire to extend to every worthy member of the Church all of the privileges and blessings which the gospel affords.

Aware of the promises made by the prophets and presidents of the Church who have preceded us that at some time, in God's eternal plan, all of our brethren who are worthy may receive the priesthood, and witnessing the faithfulness of those from whom the priesthood had been withheld, we have pleaded long and earnestly in behalf of these, our faithful brethren, spending many hours in the upper room of the temple supplicating the Lord for divine guidance.

He has heard our prayers, and by revelation has confirmed that the long-promised day has come when every faithful, worthy man in the Church may receive the holy priesthood, with power to exercise its divine authority, and enjoy with his loved ones every blessing that flows therefrom, including the blessings of the temple. Accordingly, all worthy male members of the Church may be ordained to the priesthood without regard for race or color. Priesthood leaders are instructed to follow the policy of carefully interviewing all candidates for ordination to either the Aaronic or Melchizedek Priesthood to insure that they meet the established standards for worthiness.

We declare with soberness that the Lord has now made known His will for the blessing of all His children throughout the earth who will hearken to the voice of His authorized servants, and prepare themselves to receive every blessing of the gospel.

Sincerely yours,

Spencer W. Kimball

N. Eldon Tanner

Marion G. Romney

The First Presidency

Why is a study of the Doctrine and Covenants so important?

The Doctrine and Covenants is unique among the standard works of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It was revealed in this dispensation and is intended primarily for people who will live on the earth during this dispensation.

The Old Testament was revealed to prophets in ancient times primarily to prepare the people of those days for the first coming of the Savior. Gospel principles in the Old Testament, of course, are beneficial and instructive for all people of all ages.

The New Testament was written as a witness and testimony of the divinity of Jesus Christ, and as such it is important for all people of all times. The latter part of the New Testament, however, consists of letters and other instructions concerned primarily with the branches and members of the Church in the meridian of time.

The Book of Mormon was written and compiled by prophets in ancient times, but this book is primarily intended for people of this dispensation as a second witness of the Bible and of the divinity of Jesus Christ.

The Pearl of Great Price contains some of the writings and teachings of ancient prophets as well as the history and testimony of Joseph Smith and doctrinal instructions by other prophets of this dispensation.

More than any of the other canonized scriptures, the Doctrine and Covenants has largely been revealed to and written by the prophets of this dispensation for the instruction and edification of the people of these times. Concerning the importance of the Doctrine and Covenants, President Joseph Fielding Smith has written:

In my judgment there is no book on earth yet to come to man as important as the book known as the Doctrine and Covenants, with all due respect to the Book of Mormon, and the Bible, and the Pearl of Great Price, which we say are our standards in doctrine. The book of Doctrine and Covenants to us stands in a peculiar position above them all.

I am going to tell you why. When I say that, do not for a moment think I do not value the Book of Mormon, the Bible, and the Pearl of Great Price, just as much as any man that lives; I think I do. I do not know of anybody who has read them more, and I appreciate them; they are wonderful; they contain doctrine and revelation and commandments that we should heed; but the Bible is a history containing the doctrine and commandments given to the people anciently. That applies also to the Book of Mormon. It is doctrine and the history and the commandments of the people who dwelt upon this continent anciently.

But this Doctrine and Covenants contains the word of God to those who dwell here now. . . . More precious than gold, the Prophet says we should treasure it more than the riches of the whole earth. I wonder if we do? If we value it, understand it, and know what it contains, we will value it more than wealth; it is worth more to us than the riches of the earth. (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 3:198-99.)

The preface to the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary also suggests that the Doctrine and Covenants is distinctly different from the other scriptures:

The Doctrine and Covenants is different from these three volumes. [Bible, Book of Mormon, Pearl of Great Price.] It is in every respect a modern book. It contains revelations given during a period extending from 1823 to 1847. It covers the rise and development of the Church, restored in our day. It enables us to follow the tender watchcare of God over the infant Church, during its days of numerical weakness and the incessant assaults of the adversary, in the form of persecution, temptations, and apostasy, and to watch the retreat of the people of God into the wilderness. It contains "doctrines," "covenants," and predictions, all of the utmost importance to every nation and every individual on earth. . . . The Doctrine and Covenants has been given to us for our instruction and salvation. We are interested in it, and should study it diligently and intelligently. (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. xiii.)
