Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Additional Information

Soon after some of the revelations were received, members of the Church or other interested individuals were naturally interested in knowing exactly what the revelations said. Often the revelation was written down and circulated, even if it were given primarily for the benefit of a particular person or group of people, much the same way as patriarchal blessings might be recorded and distributed today, even though they are for the personal benefit and instruction of the person receiving the blessing.

In time, copies of several of the revelations were in circulation, and, as would be normal, some persons started to make a collection of these revelations. Missionaries traveling away from the headquarters of the Church particularly were interested in having complete and correct copies of these revelations, particularly if the revelations could assist them in their missionary efforts.

Because of growing interest in and demand for the revelations, the matter of their possible publication received special attention at a conference of the Church held during November 1831, where a specific request of the Lord was made. It was during the proceedings of this conference that sections 1 and 133 were received. After a vote by the members at the conference, it was decided to go ahead with the publication of 65 of the revelations in a book to be entitled A Book of Commandments.

At this special conference at Hiram, Ohio, November 1, 1831, the Lord gave the revelation to the Prophet that he said was to serve as the preface "unto the book of my commandments." (D&C 1:6.) The History of the Church contains the following account from the Far West Record:

The same afternoon, the following occurred: "Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., said that inasmuch as the Lord had bestowed a great blessing upon us in giving commandments and revelations, he asked the conference what testimony they were willing to attach to these commandments which would shortly be sent to the world. A number of the brethren arose and said that they were willing to testify to the world that they knew that they were of the Lord."

In the second day's proceedings of the conference it is recorded: "The revelation of last evening read by the moderator [this was Oliver Cowdery]. The brethren then arose in turn and bore witness to the truth of the Book of Commandments; after which Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., arose and expressed his feelings and gratitude concerning the commandments and preface received yesterday." (HC 1:222.)

Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer were given the responsibility of taking the 65 revelations selected to Jackson County, Missouri, where they were to be printed by the W. W. Phelps and Company printing press. Initially ten thousand copies were to be printed; this was later changed to three thousand copies.

A number of copies of all 65 chapters had been printed—but none bound into books—when a mob destroyed the press and most of the printed contents July 20, 1833. The books were never made widely available. The title page stated: "A Book of Commandments for the Government of the Church of Christ, Organized According to Law, on the 6th of April, 1830. Zion: Published by W. W. Phelps & Co. 1833."

Why and how was the title Doctrine and Covenants selected?

Information is not provided in History of the Church as to why the name A Book of Commandments (1833) was changed to Doctrine and Covenants (1835). However, thirty-seven additional revelations were proposed to be included in the new publication, and the brethren may have felt it desirable to have a more comprehensive, inclusive, and descriptive title. It is also of some interest to note the following entry from Joseph Smith concerning the revelation now printed as section 133: "On the third day of November, 1831, I inquired of the Lord and received the following important revelation, which has since been added to the book of Doctrine and Covenants, and called the Appendix." (HC 1:229.)

The following statements discuss the meanings of doctrine and covenants and indicate the appropriateness of the title:

As the name implies, this volume of Scripture contains doctrine and covenants. "Doctrine" means "teaching," "instruction." It denotes more especially what is taught as truth, for us to believe, as distinct from precepts, by which rules, to be obeyed, are given. "Doctrine" refers to belief; precept to conduct.

In the Doctrine and Covenants our Lord teaches us what to believe concerning the Godhead, the Church, the Priesthood, the Millennium, the resurrection, the state of man after death in eternal glory, or the opposite, and many other subjects about which it is necessary to have true information.

The word "covenant" is a term by which God indicates the settled arrangement between Him and His people. . . . The nature of this covenant is revealed to us in this precious volume of the word of God. It shows us what obligations we take upon ourselves in baptism, and what blessings we secure; what covenants we renew by partaking of the Sacrament, and what promises accompany that ordinance. In one word, it teaches us how to worship God in Spirit and in truth, and reveals to us the way opened up, back to the presence of God. (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. xiii-xv.)

DOCTRINE: Gospel teachings or positions which have such general acceptance as to be considered settled and therefore authoritative; statements of the fundamental revealed message of salvation through Jesus Christ; gospel truths; the system of principles, rules, and laws under which the Church operates.

The instructional aspect of the gospel through which one may come to know God and eternal truths respecting the purpose of life and the means of salvation.

COVENANTS: The revealed terms and conditions upon which a person may qualify himself to receive promised blessings from God through entering into agreements to be obedient; a binding contract or mutual promise between God and man; the revealed conditional promises of the Lord.

The operational or practical side of living the gospel by those who have faith in God's promises and are willing to agree to live his way in order to achieve the promised blessings. (Institute Self-Instruction Course, p. 51.)

The term "covenant" signifies the settled arrangement between God and man, whereby the eternal Father undertakes to save His children. This arrangement is also called His "oath," His "counsel," and His "promise" (Ps. 89:3, 4; Heb. 6:13-20). "Commandments" are the laws, or rules man must obey as a condition of obtaining salvation. (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 4.)

Why is the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants considered to be so important?

First, it was the first time these revelations were published under the title "Doctrine and Covenants." Thus, in a sense, the 1835 edition might be considered the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Second, A Book of Commandments contained only sixty-five chapters; and since virtually all of the copies of this earlier publication were destroyed by the mob, it was never widely circulated in the Church. The 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants contained 102 sections, and it was widely distributed.

Briefly, the history of the 1835 edition is that after most of the copies of A Book of Commandments were destroyed by the mob, the Church leaders decided to try to publish these revelations and include some revelations not included in the earlier publication. The Lord had designated a committee of stewards over the revelations, consisting of Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Oliver Cowdery, and Frederick G. Williams.

At a general assembly of the Saints August 17, 1835, the proposal was accepted to publish 102 sections in a volume to be named the Doctrine and Covenants.

The title page of the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants reads: "Doctrine and Covenants of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: Carefully Selected from the Revelations of God, and Compiled by Joseph Smith, Junior, Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, Frederick G. Williams, [Presiding Elders of said Church.] Proprietors. Kirtland, Ohio. Printed by F. G. Williams & Co. for the Proprietors. 1835."

This edition consisted of the following:

Following is the text of the Preface to the 1835 edition:

To the members of the church of the Latter Day Saints—

DEAR BRETHREN:

We deem it to be unnecessary to entertain you with a lengthy preface to the following volume, but merely to say, that it contains in short, the leading items of the religion which we have professed to believe.

The first part of the book will be found to contain a series of Lectures as delivered before a Theological class in this place, and in consequence of their embracing the important doctrine of salvation, we have arranged them into the following work.

The second part contains items or principles for the regulation of the church, as taken from the revelations which have been given since its organization, as well as from former ones.

There may be an aversion in the minds of some against receiving any thing purporting to be articles of religious faith, in consequence of there being so many now extant; but if men believe a system, and profess that it was given by inspiration, certainly, the more intelligibly they can present it, the better. It does not make a principle untrue to print it, neither does it make it true not to print it.

The church viewing this subject to be of importance, appointed, through their servants and delegates the High Council, your servants to select and compile this work. Several reasons might be adduced in favor of this move of the Council, but we only add a few words. They knew that the church was evil spoken of in many places—its faith and belief misrepresented, and the way of truth thus subverted. By some it was represented as disbelieving the bible, by others as being an enemy to all good order and uprightness, and by others as being injurious to the peace of all governments civil and political.

We have, therefore, endeavored to present, though in few words, our belief, and when we say this, humbly trust, the faith and principles of this society as a body.

We do not present this little volume with any other expectation than that we are to be called to answer to every principle advanced, in that day when the secrets of all hearts will be revealed, and the reward of every man's labor be given him.

With sentiments of esteem and sincere respect, we subscribe ourselves your brethren in the bonds of the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Kirtland, Ohio, February 17, 1835. JOSEPH SMITH jr.

OLIVER COWDERY.

SIDNEY RIGDON.

F. G. WILLIAMS.

What are the Lectures on Faith?

The seven Lectures on Faith were prepared initially for use in sessions of the School of the Prophets that were held in Kirtland, Ohio, during the winter of 1834-35. It was decided to include them in the Doctrine and Covenants in 1835 in order to make them available in printed form to the members of the Church. They were never presented to nor voted upon by the members of the Church to be included as canonized scripture, and were intended only to be theological lectures or lessons.

The footnote in History of the Church 2:176 indicates the following concerning the Lectures on Faith:

They are not to be regarded as of equal authority in matters of doctrine with the revelations of God in the Doctrine and Covenants, but as stated by Elder John Smith, who, when the book of Doctrine and Covenants was submitted to the several quorums of the Priesthood for acceptance, (Aug. 17, 1835) speaking in behalf of the Kirtland High Council, "bore record that the revelations in said book were true, and that the lectures judicially were written and compiled, and were profitable for doctrine." The distinction which Elder John Smith here makes should be observed as a marking the difference between the Lectures on Faith and the revelations of God in the Doctrine and Covenants.

The Lectures on Faith were printed in subsequent editions of the Doctrine and Covenants until 1921, when it was decided to publish them separately and not include them under the same cover with the Doctrine and Covenants.

Why was the article on marriage that was published in the editions of the Doctrine and Covenants from 1835 to 1876 deleted from all subsequent editions?

This article was not a revelation and was never approved as a revelation. It was written originally by Oliver Cowdery and presented to and approved by the general assembly of the Church August 17, 1835, for publication with the revelations. Neither Joseph Smith nor Frederick G. Williams, one of the counselors in the First Presidency, was present at this assembly, as they were in Michigan. (HC 2:243.)

Also, it should be remembered that this article was prepared by Oliver Cowdery before some of the revelations were received and/or recorded concerning the eternal nature of the marriage covenant. For example, the article suggested "that all marriages in this church . . . should be solemnized in a public meeting . . . and that the solemnization should be performed by a presiding high priest, high priest, bishop, elder, or priest." (Page 251 of the 1835 edition.)

On July 12, 1843, the revelation of the Lord to his prophet was recorded, which indicated that marriage (which he identified as "a new and everlasting covenant") was intended to be eternal and should be performed only by a person who has been "appointed on the earth to hold this power" that can bind husband and wife together "both . . . for time and for all eternity." (D&C 132:7.) The members of the Church then understood that if a marriage is to be eternal, it must be performed in the proper place (today, a temple) and by the proper authority (an ordained officiator in the temple who has received the keys of sealing from the prophet and president of the Church).

Because of new revelation and procedures, the earlier instructions in the article on marriage were out-of-date, and the article was deleted from the 1876 edition and all subsequent editions of the Doctrine and Covenants. (For further information on this subject, see DS 3:194-98.)

What is the origin of the "Testimony of the Twelve Apostles," which has been published in each copy of the Doctrine and Covenants?

At a general assembly held in Kirtland, Ohio, in August 1835, further consideration was given to the publication of some of the revelations received by Joseph Smith. Many persons bore individual testimonies that they knew the revelations were true and represented the mind and will of the Lord. W. W. Phelps then read a written testimony of the Twelve, the wording of which is as follows:

TESTIMONY OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES TO THE TRUTH OF THE BOOK OF DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS

The Testimony of the Witnesses to the Book of the Lord's Commandments, which commandments He gave to His Church through Joseph Smith, Jun., who was appointed by the voice of the Church for this purpose:

We, therefore, feel willing to bear testimony to all the world of mankind, to every creature upon the face of the earth, that the Lord has borne record to our souls, through the Holy Ghost shed forth upon us, that these commandments were given by inspiration of God, and are profitable for all men and are verily true.

We give this testimony unto the world, the Lord being our helper; and it is through the grace of God the Father, and His Son, Jesus Christ, that we are permitted to have this privilege of bearing this testimony unto the world, in the which we rejoice exceedingly, praying the Lord always that the children of men may be profited thereby.

THOMAS B. MARSH ORSON HYDE WILLIAM SMITH

DAVID W. PATTEN WM. E. M'LELLIN ORSON PRATT

BRIGHAM YOUNG PARLEY P. PRATT JOHN F. BOYNTON

HEBER C. KIMBALL LUKE S. JOHNSON LYMAN E. JOHNSON

This testimony has been included in every copy of the Doctrine and Covenants that has been published. In the 1835 edition, the testimony was published on page 256 as part of the minutes of the general assembly of August 17, 1835, without the printed names of the individual members of the Council of the Twelve.

Subsequently it was decided to publish the testimony on a separate page near the front of the volume, and to add the names of the Twelve "in the order in which they stood in the quorum." (HC 2:245.)

How many major editions of the Doctrine and Covenants have been published in English?

Usually only five major editions are listed in English: 1833, 1835, 1844, 1876, and 1921. The 1879 edition is listed below because that edition used footnotes for the first time. Here is a rundown on the various English-language editions:

The 1921 edition is the same as the current (1978) edition. Thus, the current edition is essentially the same as the 1876 edition except for the omission of the Lectures on Faith and for the addition of (1) introductions (superscriptions) to the sections, (2) a double-column page format, (3) revised footnote references, and (4) an index.

Into what non-English languages has the Doctrine and Covenants been published?

Non-English languages into which the complete Doctrine and Covenants has been published, as of September 1978, include:

Armenian 1941 Korean 1968

Chinese 1975 Maori 1919

Danish 1852 Norwegian 1957

Dutch 1908 Portuguese 1950

Finnish 1955 Samoan 1963

French 1958 Spanish 1948

German 1876 Swedish 1888

Hawaiian 1914 Tahitian 1965

Italian 1965 Tongan 1959

Japanese 1957 Welsh 1851

The Doctrine and Covenants was also printed in 1948 in Braille for the use of the blind, and is presently (summer 1978) being translated into Hungarian, Icelandic, Indonesian, Thai, and Vietnamese.
