Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

PART II

A Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants

Section 1

Background information on section 1

"Section one in the Doctrine and Covenants is not the first revelation received, but it is so placed in the book because the Lord gave it as the preface to the book of his commandments. The Doctrine and Covenants is distinctively peculiar and interesting to all who believe in it that it is the only book in existence which bears the honor of a preface given by the Lord himself. This, however, is consistent and should be the case, for it is as he declares his book. It was not written by Joseph Smith, but was dictated by Jesus Christ, and contains his and his Father's word to the Church and to all the world that faith in God, repentance from sin and membership in his Church might be given to all who will believe, and that once again the New and Everlasting covenant might be established.

"This revelation known as section one, was given at the wonderful conference held in Hiram [Ohio], November 1 and 2, 1831, when the publication of the commandments was under consideration." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:251-52.)

"The conference lasted two days. In the afternoon of the first day of the conference, according to the minutes of the meeting, the preface to the Book of Commandments was 'received by inspiration.' The same afternoon, the following occurred: 'Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., said that inasmuch as the Lord had bestowed a great blessing upon us in giving commandments and revelations, he asked the conference what testimony they were willing to attach to these commandments which would shortly be sent to the world. A number of the brethren arose and said that they were willing to testify to the world that they knew that they were of the Lord.'

"In the second day's proceedings of the conference it is recorded: 'The revelation of last evening read by the moderator [this was Oliver Cowdery]. The brethren then arose in turn and bore witness to the truth of the Book of Commandments; after which Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., arose and expressed his feelings and gratitude concerning the commandments and preface received yesterday.'" (Footnote, HC 1:222.)

"I returned from the conference at Orange, to Hiram; and as Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer were to start for Independence, Missouri, a special conference was appointed for the first of November, at which I received the following: [Section 1, quoted.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:221-22.)

1:2

"the voice of the Lord is unto all men"

The introductory salutation "O ye people of my church" should not be interpreted to mean that the Doctrine and Covenants is intended only for members of the Church. In this same verse the Lord also addresses "ye people from afar; and ye that are upon the isles of the sea."

The second verse makes it clear that these revelations are intended for all men: "For verily the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear, neither heart that shall not be penetrated." (D&C 1:2.)

The universal application of these revelations is also indicated in verse 4 ("the voice of warning shall be unto all people"), verse 6 ("unto you, O inhabitants of the earth"), verse 11 ("the voice of the Lord is unto the ends of the earth, that all that will hear may hear"), and verse 34 ("I the Lord am willing to make these things known unto all flesh").

"It seems a strange thing that many good brethren in the Church seem to think that the Lord never intended that the Book of Mormon, and more especially the Doctrine and Covenants, should go forth to the world. We hear the expression from time to time, that these, and especially the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants are intended solely for members of the Church, but the Lord in his instructions has counseled otherwise. They were intended to be a warning to all the world." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:271.)

"So our message is a world message. It is intended for all of our Father's children. When God the Father and his Son Jesus Christ saw fit to come here to earth and appear to a boy prophet, surely such a visitation was intended to bless all of our Father's children." (Ezra Taft Benson, CR, April 1961, p. 1 13.)

1:2

"there is none to escape"

"You cannot go anywhere but where God can find you out." (Joseph Smith, HC 6:366.)

1:3

"the rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow"

"This expression [the rebellious] refers to every soul who rejects the everlasting Gospel. When the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was established, this position was made clear to all the world. When the light comes, they can no longer hide their errors, their iniquities, their secret acts. The light reveals these things. That is the true cause of the enmity toward the Church. They want the light extinguished. It hurts them." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 5.)

"Every soul that is deprived of hearing in this mortal world, shall have the privilege of hearing in the world of spirits where the Gospel also is declared. . . . The elders shall go forth and none shall stay them until the Lord declares it is enough. We have all been witnesses to some of the terrible destructions which have been poured without measure, because men have rejected divine truth." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:253.)

1:3, 10, 12

Reasons for publication of the Doctrine and Covenants

The Lord indicates in numerous places throughout the Doctrine and Covenants that one of the major purposes for giving and publishing these revelations is to prepare the people of the earth for forthcoming judgments, including the final judgment. In this one revelation alone, the Lord includes the following admonitions concerning coming judgments:

1:6

"preface unto the book of my commandments"

As indicated in the background information on this section, many of the revelations now included in the Doctrine and Covenants were first published as the Book of Commandments in 1835. This revelation (section 1) served as the preface to the Book of Commandments just as it does for the Doctrine and Covenants.

1:10

"the Lord shall . . . recompense unto every man"

"In the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants we read: [1:10 quoted]."This teaching deserves the most careful consideration, for on judgment day the Lord will mete out to us precisely as we have dealt with our fellowmen, unless we have fully repented. It is a staggering thought, and yet it is an integral factor in the Lord's method of judgment. Do we realize its broad significance? Do we see how we shall reap what we sow?

"This principle, showing the manner by which God will judge us, puts a new light upon the commandment to love our neighbors as ourselves, and should persuade us to take that law seriously.

"It also helps us to understand the deep meaning of the Golden Rule: 'All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them. 'This is a commandment, and to further emphasize it the Lord said: 'This is the law and the prophets.' (3 Ne. 14:12.)" (Mark E. Petersen, Ensign, May 1977, p. 74.)

1:12

"prepare ye for that which is to come"

"The coming of the Lord is nigh, and his anger is kindled against all who reject his word and his mercy. The day is soon to come when all who will not hear the voice of the Lord, or his servants, the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people. This will be a terrible thing. It has been predicted since the days of Moses. It was spoken of by Nephi (1 Ne. 22:20-22); and by our Savior to the Nephites (3 Ne. 20:23-24; 21:11); by Peter to the Jews (Acts 3:22-23); which words of Peter were quoted by Moroni to the Prophet Joseph Smith (P. of G. P., p. 51), who said it was soon to be fulfilled. We must not think that this has reference merely to those who reject the Gospel, but it is also to those who have professed the name of Christ but who are unwilling to heed the word of the servants of the Lord. They are to be cut off from among the people of the covenant. (3 Ne. 21:11.) The Savior declared that, 'The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity.' (Matt. 13:41.) His kingdom is the Church. Even today the cleansing process is going on, but eventually it will come with dreadful suddenness, and none who work iniquity shall escape." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:254.)

1:13

"the anger of the Lord is kindled"

"God is long-suffering, and infinitely patient, but His anger is now kindled, and He has unsheathed His sword. It is 'bathed in heaven.' This is a very expressive term from Isaiah 34:5, where it is used to signify the pouring out of the indignation of the Lord upon all nations and His fury upon their armies, delivering them to destruction and slaughter." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 5.)

"I prophesy, in the name of the Lord God of Israel, anguish and wrath and tribulation and the withdrawing of the Spirit of God from the earth await this generation, until they are visited with utter desolation. This generation is as corrupt as the generation of the Jews that crucified Christ; and if He were here today, and should preach the same doctrine He did then they would put Him to death." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:68.)

1:16

"Babylon "

The ancient city of Babylon became a symbol for wickedness, rebellion, and depravity which has continued in the scriptures to this day. See Babylon in Appendix A.

1:17

"I the Lord, knowing the calamity"

"The law must take its course, and when men refuse the offer and tender the Lord has given by which they may be saved, they cannot blame the Lord if calamities, judgments and destructions come upon them. The Lord cannot avert it, it must take its course, and yet our Father in his kindness and mercy has offered the way and the means of escape. [Sec. 5:18-19; 133:16.] . . .

"I understand from this [Sec. 1:17-18, 22-24 that the Lord plainly knew the condition of the world, what it was in 1830, and what it would be today. . . . Knowing the calamities that were coming to his children, unless they changed their course, knowing their disposition that there would be no repentance in their hearts, and yet with a great desire to save them, he called upon his servant, Joseph Smith, to warn men, to call repentance, and others to join in this great proclamation to all men: 'Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand.' [Sec. 33:10; 42:7. ] And not only to warn men that there was peril and danger ahead, but to offer the means of escape from the perils that would come. . . . " (Melvin J. Ballard, CR, October 1923, pp. 30-31.)

1:19, 23, 24

"weak things of the world"

See Weak things of the world in Appendix A.

1:24

"that they might come to understanding"

"It is the duty of the members of this Church to make themselves familiar with the revelations as they have been given and with the commandments as they have been taught in these revelations, or have been presented in them and given to the people, that they might know the truth which makes us free. And if we will study them, if we will put them into practice, if we will keep the commandments of the Lord, we will know the truth and there shall be no weapon formed against us that shall prosper. [Sec. 71:9-11.] There shall be no false doctrines, no teaching of men that will deceive us. . . .

"If you treasure up the word of the Lord, if you study these revelations, not merely those that are in the Doctrine and Covenants, but those that are in all the standard works of the Church, and you put into practice the commandments that are here found, you will not be deceived in these perilous times, but you shall have the spirit of discernment and you will know the truth and shall know falsehood, for you shall have power to know the spirits of men and to understand the Spirit of the Lord." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, October 1931, pp. 17-18.)

1:29

Translation of the Book of Mormon

Joseph Smith never gave in great detail the exact procedures he followed in translating the Book of Mormon. As advised by the Lord, the Prophet simply stated, "Through the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated the record by the gift and power of God." (Times and Seasons, Mar. 1, 1842.)

On October 25, 1831, a conference was held at the home of Brother Sirenes Burnett of Cuyahoga County, Ohio, and the minutes of the meeting indicate that Joseph Smith said that "it was not intended to tell the world all the particulars of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon" and also that "it was not expedient for him to relate these things." (Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America 1:194.)

1:30

"out of obscurity and out of darkness"

The Church of Jesus Christ has existed on the earth in previous dispensations, both on the eastern continent (as indicated in the New Testament) and on the western continent (as taught in the Book of Mormon). These churches had gone into apostasy, and for hundreds of years the peoples of the earth had gone through the era that even the historians refer to as the Dark Ages.

The Renaissance and the Reformation started the world back toward the enlightenment possible in the true gospel. In the first vision of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the iron ceiling of heaven was again shattered and the rays of revelation started to illuminate the earth. Angels from the presence of God came with messages and scriptures (Moroni) and with priesthood authority and keys (John the Baptist, Peter, James, and John), until once again men upon the earth had power and were commissioned "to lay the foundation of this church, and to bring it forth out of obscurity and out of darkness, the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth." (D&C 1:30.)

See (1) Church, and (2) Darkness in Appendix A.

1:30

"the only true and living church"

The expression the only true and living church contains two terms that are uniquely appropriate in referring to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It is the true church because it was organized under the direction of God himself under the supervision of angelic messengers who restored to the earth the priesthood authority and keys necessary for the establishment of the kingdom of God upon the earth. It is the living church because it was founded by the "only true and living God" (D&C 20:19); because it has a living prophet at its head upon the earth; and because it is a vital, expanding, growing, developing organization.

See Church in Appendix A.

"The position that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the only true Church upon the face of the earth is fundamental. . . . Now to those who think us uncharitable, we say that it was not devised by us; it was declared by Him, for he gave commandments to the early brethren, and I quote: [D&C 1:30 quoted.]

"Now this is not to say that the churches, all of them, are without some truth. They have some truth—some of them very much of it. They have a form of godliness. Often the clergy and adherents are not without dedication, and many of them practice remarkably well the virtues of Christianity. They are, nonetheless, incomplete. By his declaration, '. . . they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof.' (JS-H 1:19.)

"Now we do not say they are wrong so much as we say they are incomplete. The fullness of the gospel has been restored. The power and the authority to act for Him is present with us. The power and the authority of the priesthood rests upon this church. The Lord revealed: [D&C 84:19-21 quoted.]" (Boyd K. Packer, CR, October 1969, p. 37.)

"We constitute a Church that has been organized and named by the Lord Jesus Christ. . . . This Church was not formed on man's initiative, it was not called into being because of some brilliant leader who stepped forward with a new plan; and therefore we cannot, we have not the power nor the authority to make any kind of affiliation with any other church; let me say with equal earnestness, no other denomination, no sect can ever affiliate as such with this, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. There have been overtures made by some religious bodies to find out the terms under which they probably could come in with us; and the answer has been: Come in as every member of this Church has come in through the door; and note that the door is just wide enough to admit you, one at a time, the door of baptism, that ye may receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. [Sec. 20:37; 22; 33:11-13.]" (James E. Talmage, CR, April 1920, pp. 103-4.)

1:30

"speaking unto the church collectively and not individually"

"Please mark his words: 'The only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth, with which I the Lord am well pleased.' But that is not the end of the sentence or paragraph: 'with which I the Lord am well pleased, speaking unto the church collectively and not individually.'

"There lies a vital distinction. It is expressed, but we often overlook it. It is a distinction that should be heeded in all our organizations within the Church and without; the difference between the collective status or conditions or achievements and the work of the individual. . . .

"We as individuals are not doing all that could be done, all that should be done. I have no concern for the Church as a whole; its destiny is foretold, it is going on to glorious victory. [Sec. 65.] But that does not say that each of us who are members of the Church will go on to glorious victory; we may be left behind entirely. What are we doing individually?" (James E. Talmage, CR, October 1928, p. 118.)

1:35

"the devil shall have power"

"During the last one hundred years, or since these words [D&C 1:34-36] were spoken, more light and knowledge has come into the world in the realm of science, through the laboratory, and otherwise, than in all the ages that have preceded it, and if this were all used for the alleviation of human suffering, peace and prosperity could be here, and poverty abolished.

"But when we see men and nations spending their wealth to use the gas engine, the laboratory, the airplane, as means of human destruction, surely the devil has seized the blessings and privileges the Almighty intended to use to bring about peace, and is using them to destroy that which he presently shall lose the right to rule over. If the devil is not in the character of warfare that goes over the front-line trenches, swoops down upon the poor helpless women and children, drops its deadly bombs and assassinates them, then I do not know anything that has ever happened in this world that is so like the work of the devil as that. He is ruling in the midst of them." (Melvin J. Ballard, CR, October 1938, pp. 105-6.)

1:36

"the Lord shall . . . come down "

"In our day, we have been told some similar things about the power of the Lord among his peoples. In the very first revelation, or the preface to the revelations, the Lord said: [Sec. 1:35-36, quoted.]

"One of the ways by which 'he comes down among his people' is clearly explained in the revelation in which he defines certain gifts of the Spirit. He enumerates some of the gifts of the Spirit which men might enjoy; knowledge, and faith, and discernment, and the gift of tongues, and the testimony of knowledge that Jesus is the Son of God, and then he says this: '. . . unto such as God shall appoint and ordain to watch over the church, . . . are to have it given unto them to discern all those gifts. . . .' (D&C 46:27.)" (Harold B. Lee, CR, October 1960, p. 16.)

1:36

"Idumea, or the world"

"Idumea or Edom, of which Bozrah was the principal city, was a nation to the south of the Salt Sea, through which the trade route (called the King's Highway) ran between Egypt and Arabia. The Idumeans or Edomites were a wicked non-Israelitish people; hence, traveling through their country symbolized to the prophetic mind the pilgrimage of men through a wicked world. Idumea therefore meant the world." (Bruce R. McConkie, MD, p. 374.)

1:37

"Search these commandments"

"All members of the Church are commanded to search and obey these commandments. This is also true of all others. If we fail to do so and remain ignorant of the doctrines, covenants and commandments the Lord has given us, we shall stand condemned before his throne in the day of judgment when the books are opened. It behooves us to search that we may know the will of the Lord and thus grow in faith, knowledge and wisdom. (Alma 12:9; D&C 76:1-10)." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:256.)

1:38

"whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same"

In his second epistle, the apostle Peter indicated that "prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost." (2 Pe. 1:21.) When a prophet speaks under the influence of the Holy Ghost, in actuality he is not speaking his own words, but the words of God. See Voice of the Lord in Appendix A.
