Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 93

Background information on section 93

"On the 4th of May, 1833, a meeting of High Priests was held at Kirtland, for the purpose of considering ways and means for the building of a house in which to accommodate the School of the Prophets (Sec. 90:6-9). Hyrum Smith, Jared Carter, and Reynolds Cahoon were appointed a committee to obtain subscriptions for that purpose. The Saints were few and far from wealthy, and an undertaking of that kind must have seemed stupendous to them, but the leaders of the Church were men of God, and their faith was of the practical kind, by which mountains are removed. When this important step had been taken, two instructive Revelations were given on the same date." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 587-88.)

93:1-3

"every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me . . . shall. . . know that I am"

"Every Latter-day Saint is entitled to this witness and testimony. If we have not received this witness and testimony . . . I want you all to remember that the fault is ours, and not the Lord's; for every one is entitled to that witness through faith and repentance, forsaking all sin, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, and the reception of the Holy Ghost through the laying on of hands. Now, if any of our brethren and sisters have lived for years without really knowing, being thoroughly satisfied and thoroughly convinced, just as positive as of anything in life, that this work is of God, if they have lacked that witness and testimony it is their fault, for it is not possible for a man to do the will of the Father and not know the doctrine." (Francis M. Lyman, CR, April 1910, pp. 29-30.)

"I consider this is a most precious promise. We who were raised in the world, were subject to priestcraft, and false doctrine, and evil influences, but the Lord, in His loving kindness and tender mercy, and in the wonderful dispensations of His providence, brought us into His Church. He drew us into the fold. . . .

"The Apostle Paul said 'the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God' [1 Cor. 2:11], showing that it is necessary for us to be taught of God by His Spirit. Jesus promised that whoso would do the will of the Father should know of the doctrine. [John 7:17.] He also said, 'Not every one that saith unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven.' [Matt. 7:21.] The Latter-day Saints have received, and are continually receiving testimonies." (George Teasdale, CR, October 1903, pp. 48-50.)

93:3

"the Father and I are one"

See Godhead in Appendix A.

"The saying which appears in the Book of Mormon (Mosiah 15:1-5) and in some of the revelations including Section 93, that Jesus Christ is both the Father and the Son has been a mystery, if not a stumbling block, to some. The question has been asked how Joseph Smith could reconcile his Vision with these sayings. A careful reading of verses 3-4, Sec. 93, will give a clear explanation of this apparent mystery. Here the Savior says he is the Father because his Father gave him of his fulness, and he is the Son of the Father because he was born into the world. Jesus Christ is our Father because he gave us life—eternal life—through his sacrifice. He is the Father because of his everlasting and presiding power—the fulness which he holds as one of the Godhead. He never did say that he and his Father are the same personage, but always that his Father is greater than he. (See John 14:28 and 1 Cor. 15:27-28.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:399.)

93:3-5

The titles "Father" and "Son" as they pertain to Jesus Christ

See Jesus Christ in Appendix A.

93:12

"he received not of the fulness at the first"

"When Jesus lay in the manger, a helpless infant, He knew not that He was the Son of God, and that formerly He created the earth. When the edict of Herod was issued, He knew nothing of it; He had not power to save Himself; and His father and mother had to take Him and fly into Egypt to preserve Him from the effects of that edict. Well, He grew up into manhood, and during His progress it was revealed unto Him who He was, and for what purpose He was in the world. The glory and power He possessed before He came into the world was made known unto Him." (Lorenzo Snow, CR, April 1901, p. 3.)

93:18

"you shall receive a fulness of the record of John"

"Mormon says, concerning these three [Nephite disciples] that were to tarry, that great works shall be wrought by them before the great day of the Lord shall come. Then he says, that if you had all the Scriptures, you would know that these things would be fulfilled. We would know a great many things if we only had these Scriptures and revelations. [3 Nephi 28:33.] They are to be revealed to fill our earth with the knowledge of God, as the waters cover the great deep.

"Not only the records of the ancient inhabitants of the land are to come forth, but the records of those who slept on the eastern hemisphere. The records of John, him who baptized the lamb of God, are yet to be revealed. We are informed in the book of Doctrine and Covenants [93:18] that the fulness of the record of John is to be revealed to the Latter-day Saints." (Orson Pratt, JD 16:57-58.)

93:19

"that you may. . . know how to worship, and. . . what you worship"

See Worship, God, and Jesus Christ in Appendix A.

93:21

"I. . . am the Firstborn"

See Firstborn in Appendix A.

93:22

"church of the Firstborn"

See same title in Appendix A.

93:23

"Ye were also in the beginning with the Father"

See Pre-earthly existence in Appendix A.

93:24

Definition of truth

See Truth in Appendix A.

"This definition of truth was given by the Lord and is very comprehensive. For ages men have discussed this question and have pondered over the meaning, or definition, of truth. It is, as defined here, that which will always be, or that which is eternal. John Jaques, accepting the Lord's definition, has written a very beautiful hymn—'O Say What Is Truth,' and declares it is the 'sum of existence.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:401.)

93:26

"Spirit of Truth"

See Truth in Appendix A.

93:29

"Intelligence "

See Intelligence in Appendix A.

"In a revelation through Joseph Smith the prophet given in 1833, the character of Divine authority and power is thus summarized: 'The Glory of God is Intelligence.' [D&C 93:36.] The context of the passage shows that the intelligence therein referred to as an attribute of Deity is spiritual light and truth; and that man may attain to a measure of this exalting light and truth is thus made certain: [D&C 93:28-30, quoted.] The intelligence that saves comprises knowing and doing what is required by the Gospel of Christ; and such intelligence with you will endure beyond death. [D&C 130:18-19.]" (James E. Talmage, VM, pp. 277-78.)

93:31

"agency of man"

See Free agency in Appendix A.

93:33

"man is spirit"

See Pre-earthly existence in Appendix A.

"Spirits are eternal. At the first organization in heaven we were all present, and saw the Savior chosen and appointed and the plan of salvation made, and we sanctioned it. [Moses 4:1-3.]

"We came to this earth that we might have a body and present it pure before God in the celestial kingdom. The great principle of happiness consists in having a body. The devil has no body, and herein is his punishment. He is pleased when he can obtain the tabernacle of man, and when cast out by the Savior he asked to go into the herd of swine, showing that he would prefer a swine's body to having none. [Luke 8:26-33.]" (Joseph Smith, TPJS, p. 181.)

93:33

"elements are eternal"

"The Lord has shown to us that the elements are eternal and that it requires the eternal union of spirit and element to obtain a fulness of joy. For the spirit part of man and the earthly or temporal part just now, shall be united together perpetually, eternally, the body and the spirit being made one again, only rejoined together after the power of an endless life, that without that union a fulness of joy cannot be obtained. That is very easy to understand in a degree, if we will reflect upon our nature and upon the position that we now occupy. The spirit having come from God who is the Father literally, the Father of the spirit, and the body formed from the earthly elements, through earthly parentage, without this body many things that will give joy, pleasure, power, increase, perpetuity, cannot be enjoyed. This is rational. The spirit reaches out to that which is spiritual, the body reaches down to that which is called temporal, that is, physical—the grosser materials of earth and air and all the surroundings that pertain thereunto. These are realities as much as those are spiritual." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, October 1914, pp. 35-36.)

93:33

"spirit and element, inseparably connected"

"The word of the Lord revealed in this dispensation is very emphatic in teaching that after the resurrection the spirit and the body become inseparably connected. (See Alma 11:40-45; 12:17-18; D&C 63:49-52.) The Lord also declared that he is 'the resurrection and the life,' and 'whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die!' (John 11:25-26.) The spirit and the body are welded so that they can never again be divided when the resurrection comes. And this resurrection is the redemption of the soul, no matter to which kingdom it is assigned. (D&C 88:16.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:402.)

93:36

"the glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth"

"The glory of God is intelligence. On this President Joseph F. Smith has said: 'Christ inherited his intelligence from his Father. There is a difference between knowledge and pure intelligence. Satan possesses knowledge, far more than we have, but he has not intelligence, or he would render obedience to the principles of truth and light. . . . Pure intelligence comprises not only knowledge, but also the power to properly apply that knowledge.' (The Way to Perfection, p. 231.)

"The Lord has defined intelligence, which is the glory of God, as light and truth, and says that 'Light and truth forsake that evil one.' Satan, of course, in his rebellion and hatred of all things righteous, desires to destroy the souls of men, therefore he tries to take from them light and truth that they may be left in spiritual darkness." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:402.)

"Among the many great truths revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, none is more beloved by the Church than 'The Glory of God is intelligence.' The word intelligence, as used in common speech, means readiness in learning, quickness of mind. Its higher Gospel meaning is more profound. The intelligent man is he who seeks knowledge and uses it in accordance with the plan of the Lord for human good. This is implied in the revelation from which the quotation is made, for the full sentence reads, 'The Glory of God is intelligence, or in other words, light and truth.' When men follow the light, their knowledge will always be well used.

"Intelligence, then, becomes but another name for wisdom. In the language of mathematics we may say that knowledge, plus the proper use of knowledge, equals intelligence, or wisdom. In this sense intelligence becomes the goal of the successful life." (John A. Widtsoe, CR, April 1938, p. 50.)

93:38

"every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning"

"Every spirit was innocent in the beginning. When Lucifer rebelled because of his agency, he persuaded others to follow him, then their innocence came to an end, for they were in rebellion before God and had to be cast out. [D&C 29:36-37.] It seems very reasonable that others were not valiant in that premortal state, and they may have led to the gradations upon the earth. However, the Lord declares that every spirit coming into this world is innocent. That is to say, so far as this life is concerned the spirit coming here is innocent. Nothing is to be laid to its charge; this is a correction of the false doctrine which prevails in some religious organizations, that children are born with the taint of 'original sin' upon them. Such false doctrine denies the mercies of Jesus Christ and declares ignorance of the atonement of our Lord. [Moroni 8:19-23.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:163.)

"Many rivers have their beginning from springs of pure, crystal-clear water gushing forth from a mountainside. As the water wends its way to the sea, there are side tributaries that join the main stream. Some of these tributaries are polluted and contaminate the main stream, which started pure at its source. By the time the river reaches the sea, pollution has occurred in the body of the stream.

"How much like life this symbolic representation is! The Lord has revealed that 'every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God.' (D&C 93:38.) With this statement in mind, we can understand why the Savior said, 'Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.' (Matt. 18:3.)

"When a child reaches the age of accountability, the Lord warned, 'And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men. . . . ' (D&C 93:39.)

"We learn from this revelation that in the beginning of mortal life all mankind is innocent before God and, therefore, is like the beginning river of water, pure and undefiled. As the polluted tributaries of water enter the main stream, our lives too become polluted when we allow tributaries of evil and wickedness to enter. It is these tributaries of evil we must be concerned about and fortify ourselves against." (Delbert L. Stapley, Ensign, December 1971, p. 97.)

93:41, 44, 47, 50

For biographical information on the persons mentioned, see Appendix B.

93:53

"Hasten to translate my scripture"

"On the second day of February, 1833, the Prophet completed, for the time being, his inspired translation of the New Testament. No endeavor was made at that time to print the work. It was sealed up with the expectation that it would be brought forth at a later day with other of the scriptures. Joseph did not live to give the world an authoritative publication of these translations. [Footnote: We have heard President Brigham Young state that the Prophet before his death had spoken to him about going through the translation of the scriptures again and perfecting it upon points of doctrine which the Lord had restrained him from giving in plainness and fullness at the time of which we write.] But the labor was its own reward, bringing in the performance a special blessing of broadened comprehension to the Prophet and a general blessing of enlightenment to the people through his subsequent teachings.

"The Lord revealed His purpose in this matter when He said to Joseph at a later time: [D&C 93:53, quoted.]" (George Q. Cannon, LJS, p. 129.)
