Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 94

Background information on section 94

"A conference of high priests assembled April 30, 1833, in the school room in Kirtland and took steps to raise means to pay the rent for the house where their meetings had been held during the past season. John P. Green was appointed to take charge of a branch of the Church in Parkman County. It was also decided that Sister Vienna Jaques should not proceed immediately on her way to Zion, but wait until William Hobart and others were ready, as it would be a matter of safety. The next day the conference again convened and took into consideration the necessity of building a schoolhouse, for the accommodation of the elders, who were to come together to receive instruction preparatory to taking missions and continuing in the ministry according to the revelation of March 8, 1833. By unanimous voice of the conference, Hyrum Smith, Jared Carter and Reynolds Cahoon were appointed a committee to obtain subscriptions for the purpose of erecting such a building. Two days later the Lord gave a revelation with directions for the building of this house." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:403-4.)

94:1

"commence [the ] . . . foundation of the city of the stake of Zion in. . . Kirtland"

"At a conference held March 23rd, 1833, a committee was appointed to purchase land in Kirtland, upon which to build up a Stake of Zion. Several large farms were bought, and among these was the French farm, so called after its owner. This had an excellent stone quarry and good material for brick-making. A city plat was surveyed, and the Saints gathered from surrounding States, until the Church in Kirtland numbered about 1,500 souls. The Lord, in this Revelation, instructed them to build the city of Kirtland Stake, beginning at His house. He also gave instructions for the consecration of a lot upon which to build a House of the Lord for the ministry of the First Presidency, 'in all things pertaining to the church and kingdom.' Further particulars about this house are given." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 600.)

94:3-17

Instructions on the building of houses

"A lot was set apart for the building of a house for the use of the First Presidency and where revelation could be given and all matters pertaining to the progress of the Church could receive proper attention. . . . It was to be dedicated unto the Lord from the foundation thereof, according to the order of the Priesthood. There is no question that the First Presidency needed a place where they could attend to the matters of Church government. This was to be a sacred house; no unclean thing was to be permitted to enter it, and if the builders would remember this the presence of the Lord should be in the building.

"The second lot south of this building was to be dedicated for the building of another house where the printing for the Church could be done and the translation of the Scriptures, on which the Prophet had been working off and on for many months, could be published. . . . This house also was to be dedicated to the service of the Lord and set apart for the printing. [D&C 94:12, quoted.] The third lot was to be given to Hyrum Smith for his inheritance. Reynolds Cahoon and Jared Carter were also to receive inheritances. [D&C 94:15, quoted.] These two houses . . . were not to be built until he [the Lord] should give the commandment for the building of them." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:165.)

94:13-14

For information on these brethren, see Appendix B.
