Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 95

Background information on section 95

"Great preparations were making to commence a house of the Lord; and notwithstanding the Church was poor, yet our unity, harmony and charity abounded to strengthen us to do the commandments of God. The building of the house of the Lord in Kirtland was a matter that continued to increase in its interest in the hearts of the brethren. . . . The same day [June 1, 1833] I received the following: [D&C 95.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:349-50.)

"On the 1st of June, 1833, Hyrum Smith, Reynolds Cahoon, and Jared Carter, the building committee (Sec. 94:14, 15), issued a circular to the Saints in which they urged them to exert themselves 'to bring about the fulfilment of the command of the Lord concerning the establishing, or preparing of a house, wherein the Elders who have been commanded of the Lord so to do, may gather themselves together, and prepare all things, and call a solemn assembly, and treasure up words of wisdom, that they may go forth to the Gentiles for the last time' (HC 1:349). This, then, was the object for which this Temple was to be built.

"Great interest in this undertaking was now aroused among the Saints, and this Revelation was received, in which the Lord (1) reproves His people for their neglect to begin building the temple (1-12); (2) commands them again to go to work (13-17)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 603.)

95:1

"whom I love I also chasten"

Our Heavenly Father loves us and wants us to keep his commandments so that we can receive the joy and happiness that would result from such obedience. When we do not keep his commandments, he chastens us so that hopefully we will repent. In much the same way, an earthly father may chasten his wayward child when the child is doing something that is not for the child's best welfare.

95:2

"ye must needs be chastened"

"At times I may to many of the brethren appear to be severe. I sometimes chasten them; but it is because I wish them to so live that the power of God, like a flame of fire, will dwell within them and be round about them. These are my feelings and desires." (Brigham Young, JD 8:62.)

95:3

"ye have sinned . . . concerning the building of my house"

"The same day, [June 1, 1833] the Lord gave another revelation (Sec. 95) in which he rebuked the elders of the Church for their delay in building another house which they had been commanded to build. This was the Kirtland Temple. . . .

"It was Dec. 27, 1832, that the Lord gave the command to the Church that his house should be built. . . . The elders of the Church, it would appear, had not taken this command seriously, presumably it had been overlooked in the consideration of so many wonderful things in that particular revelation. The month of May, in the following year, had arrived; the officers of the Church had met in solemn council to consider other matters, the building of other houses for which there was sore need, and the building of the more weighty and important building had been neglected. While the Lord approved the plan for the building of these other houses, and commended the brethren for their enthusiasm and energy in taking steps to erect them, yet he called attention to the grievous sins of the brethren in their neglect to build the more important structure. The Kirtland Temple was necessary before the apostles (who had not yet been called), and other elders of the Church could receive the endowment which the Lord had in store for them. The elders had been out preaching the Gospel and crying repentance ever since the Church was organized and many great men had heard and embraced the truth, nevertheless the elders could not go forth in the power and authority which the Lord intended them to possess until this Temple was built where he could restore keys and powers essential to the more complete preaching of the Gospel and the administering in its ordinances. . . .

"Four days after the Lord had rebuked the brethren for their neglect, without waiting for subscriptions, the brethren went to work on the Temple. Elder George A. Smith, a recent convert, hauled the first load of stone for the Temple. Hyrum Smith and Reynolds Cahoon commenced digging the trench for the walls, and they finished the same with their own hands." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:405-7.)

95:4

"prune my vineyard"

See Vineyard in Appendix A.

95:4

"my strange act"

See material for 101:95.

"The purpose of the Lord was to prepare His Apostles (that is to say, His messengers) for the labor in the vineyard, for the last time, and bring to pass His 'strange act' and pour out His Spirit on all flesh.

"The expression quoted is from the Prophet Isaiah (28:21), where it refers to the fact that God would fight against His own people, because of their apostate condition. 'Shall I not, as I have done to Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols (Isa. 10:11)? That was in the estimation of the Jews, who did not realize their apostate condition, 'strange.' But in this dispensation our Lord was to perform an equally strange act, in revealing His marvelous plan of salvation and making war upon an apostate church which is boasting of its intimate relations with Deity. He was now waiting for the Saints to build that house, in which His messengers were to be prepared for that strange war and endowed with power from on High (v. 8). No wonder that He rebuked them for their tardiness!" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 604.)

95:6

"they are walking in darkness at noon-day"

See Darkness and Light in Appendix A. Now that the light of the gospel had been restored, it was a "very grievous sin" for people to still be walking in the darkness of the apostasy, especially for those who had been ordained.

95:7

"solemn assembly"

See Solemn assembly in Appendix A.

95:8

"endow "

See Endowment in Appendix A.

95:10

"school of the prophets"

See material for 88:127, 136.

95:11

"you should build a house"

"This house was not to be built after the manner of the world, but after the manner which the Lord would show them. The saints also were not to live after the manner of the world, but after the manner which the Lord would show them. This building also was to be fifty-five by sixty-five feet in the inner court as the Lord had instructed in the buildings previously mentioned. [Sec. 94:4, 11.] The lower part of the inner court of this Temple was to be dedicated unto the Lord for the sacrament offerings and for the preaching, and for fasting and prayer, and the offering 'of your most holy desires unto me, saith your Lord.' (Sec. 95:16.) The upper floor, or court, was to be dedicated unto the Lord as 'the school of mine apostles' (Sec. 95:17), the Lord declared in closing his revelation. However, this building was to be erected for other and greater purposes than those made known at this time to the officers and members of the Church. The time had not come for the real purposes and the nature of the endowment to be revealed. The elders, much less the members, were not prepared in 1833 for the fulness of the revelation which the Lord declared would be bestowed upon them. The severe rebuke administered to the Church had its effect and the brethren forgot the need of other buildings and commenced to concentrate their efforts upon this house of the Lord." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:167.)

95:17

"Son Ahman . . . Alphus . . . Omegus"

See Son Ahman and Alpha and Omega in Appendix A.
