Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 97

Background information on section 97

"On the second day of August 1833, the Prophet received a revelation concerning Zion. While he was aware of the fact that trouble was brewing in Jackson County and the spirit of opposition was very great he did not know that the mob had risen and had destroyed property and violently handled some of the brethren. In this revelation the Lord said that he desired to make known his will concerning the brethren in Zion. Many of them had truly humbled themselves and were seeking wisdom. Because of their repentance they would be blessed, for the Lord was merciful to the meek, and all who will not humble themselves will be brought to judgment." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:430.)

"The revelation [Sec. 97] was not complied with by the leaders and Church in Missouri, as a whole; notwithstanding many were humble and faithful. Therefore, the threatened judgment was poured out to the uttermost, as the history of the five following years will show." (Parley P. Pratt, APPP, p. 96.)

97:1

"the voice of my Spirit"

See Voice of the Lord in Appendix A.

97:3-5

"Parley P. Pratt. . . to preside over the school"

For biographical information on Parley P. Pratt, see the material following his name in Appendix B.

"In the latter part of summer and in the autumn [1833], I devoted almost my entire time in ministering among the churches; holding meetings; visiting the sick; comforting the afflicted, and giving counsel. A school of Elders was also organized, over which I was called to preside. This class, to the number of about sixty, met for instruction once a week. The place of meeting was in the open air, under some tall trees, in a retired place in the wilderness, where we prayed, preached and prophesied and exercised ourselves in the gifts of the Holy Spirit. Here great blessings were poured out, and many great and marvelous things were manifested and taught. The Lord gave me great wisdom, and enabled me to teach and edify the Elders, and comfort and encourage them in their preparations for the great work which lay before us. I was also much edified and strengthened. To attend this school I had to travel on foot, and sometimes with bare feet at that, about six miles. This I did once a week, besides visiting and preaching in five or six branches a week." (Parley P. Pratt, APPP, pp. 93-94.)

97:10

A temple to be built "in the land of Zion"

For information on the temple to be built in the New Jerusalem, read the materials listed after 84:5.

97:10-14

"a place of instruction . . . in all things"

"Temple work, for example, gives a wonderful opportunity for keeping alive our spiritual knowledge and strength. The mighty perspective of eternity is unraveled before us in the holy temples; we see time from its infinite beginning to its endless end; and the dream of eternal life is unfolded before us. Then I see more clearly my place amidst the things of the universe, my place among the purposes of God; I am better able to place myself where I belong, and I am better able to value and to weigh, to separate and to organize the common, ordinary duties of my life, so that the little things shall not oppress me or take away my vision of the greater things that God has given us." (John A. Widtsoe, CR, April 1922, pp. 97-98.)

97:11

"by the tithing of my people"

See Tithing in Appendix A.

97:18-21

"this is Zion—THE PURE IN HEART"

See Zion in Appendix A.

"And what is Zion? In one sense Zion is the pure in heart. But is there a land that ever will be called Zion? Yes, brethren. What land is it? It is the land that the Lord gave to Jacob, who bequeathed it to his son Joseph, and his posterity, and they inhabit it, and that land is North and South America." (Brigham Young, JD 2:253.)

"It is the honest and pure in heart that will hearken to the everlasting covenant." (Hyrum Smith, HC 6:320.)

97:25-28

"Zion shall escape if. . ."

"What a pity it is that we have not heeded this commandment: [D&C 97:25, quoted.] Heeding it is our safety, and while we may be preserved from many of the calamities, yet the promise is made that if we observe not to do the things the Lord has commanded us, Zion—who should be the pure in heart—shall be visited with sore afflictions, pestilence, plague, sword, vengeance and devouring fire. . . . While in a measure this revelation applied to the inhabitants of Zion in the early days, yet it applies to us today, to Zion the land and also her inhabitants." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:191.)
