Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 98

Background information on section 98

"Seventeen days after the mobbing of the saints in Missouri [on Aug. 6, 1833], the Prophet received a revelation in which the Lord said that the prayers of saints were heard in heaven, and counsel was given them to be patient in their afflictions and not seek vengeance against their enemies. Oliver Cowdery did not leave Independence on his special mission until after the 23rd of July, and if he arrived in Kirtland before the 6th of August when this revelation was received, it certainly was a miraculous journey considering the distance and the means he had of transportation. Just when he arrived we do not know, but the Prophet had learned that difficulties of a serious nature had commenced in Jackson County. Naturally the members of the Church there were extremely aroused and it was only natural that in their hearts there should be some spirit of retaliation and revenge upon their enemies. Because of this the Lord gave this revelation." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:432-34.)

98:2

"Lord of Sabaoth"

See Sabaoth in Appendix A.

98:4-8

Members of the Church commanded to uphold the constitutional law of the land

See Constitution in Appendix A.

"I am the greatest advocate of the Constitution of the United States there is on the earth. In my feelings I am always ready to die for the protection of the weak and oppressed in their just rights." (Joseph Smith, HC 6:56-57.)

98:9

"when the wicked rule the people mourn"

"Laws which are enacted for the protection of society have no value except when they are administered in righteousness and justice, and they cannot be so administered in righteousness and justice, if dishonest men occupy administrative offices.

"The Lord says; 'When the wicked rule, the people mourn.' Wise men, good men, patriotic men are to be found in all communities, in all political parties, among all creeds. None but such men should be chosen. . . .

"Without beneficent laws, righteously administered, the foundations of civilization crumble, anarchy reigns, decay and dissolution follow." (First Presidency, CR, October 1928, p. 16.)

"I tell you one thing that I will do: I will support good men in every position. I care not what proposition may be submitted to me, I will sustain good men. For it is written, 'When the wicked rule, the people mourn.' When the righteous rule, the people rejoice.

". . . What do I care about party feeling! A lot of men meet together and get up names, among them some shyster that has foisted himself into the notice through some means or other of his own making, and they rush that upon me, and because I would not vote for such men two or three years ago, they said, 'You are a mugwump.' Well, I would rather be a know-nothing than to subscribe to conditions which will make me responsible for the actions of the wicked. I will not do it, I do not care who it cuts, nor what the consequences may be. I say it to the nation, I say it to the world: As God lives, I will never support a man that I know is a wicked man, for any office. The word of the Prophet of God has been given to me, as it has to you, and we have to take cognizance of these things." (Brigham Young, Jr., CR, October 1900, pp. 43-44.)

98:10

"honest . . . and wise men should be sought for diligently"

"The Church is telling its members to look upon the franchise as a sacred gift, to exercise it according to their very best judgment before the Lord, and the Church's ticket is the ticket of the best men, according to the best judgment of the people, to whichever party they belong." (James E. Talmage, CR, October 1920, p. 66.)

"Can man's knowledge and intellect supplant the revealed word of God? Do we really believe we can prosper by letting this land, established by the hand of God, be run by those who know not God and acknowledge not his hand in all things? There have always been ungodly men who fancied their wisdom superior to any other. Why should we, who have testimonies of the reality of God burning within us, submit ourselves to the wisdom of men, which has always been foolishness to God?

"The Lord has made plain that we have a solemn obligation to choose good and honest men to represent us in secular governmental service. It is obvious that a man's spiritual and moral qualifications should be considered before his academic record or his oratorical ability. It is a sobering thought that whatever laws the elected enact, we are obligated then to obey. The Lord said, 'And now, verily I say unto you concerning the laws of the land, it is my will that my people should observe to do all things whatsoever I command them.'" (Hartman Rector, Jr., Ensign, May 1975, p. 11.)

98:12

"line upon line, precept upon precept"

A loving, kind, merciful Heavenly Father will not give his children more or higher laws than they are willing to try and live. Otherwise, he brings them under greater condemnation, for "where much is given, much is required." (D&C 82:3.) He gives unto children "line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little." (2 Ne. 28:30.) Then as they learn the lesser laws and obey them, he "will give more." (2 Ne. 28:30.) However, if the people do not keep even the lesser laws, the greater things will "be withheld from them, unto their condemnation." (3 Ne. 26:10.)

98:16

"renounce war and proclaim peace"

"We stand in the world for peace among men and not war. We detest war; we love peace. Does the world love peace? No. Do they want peace? It is not apparent that they do. The devil reigns in the world, and he has stirred up the hearts of men to anger and to hatred and to bloodshed. . . . After this war [World War I] is over will there be peace? No, there will be no peace. [Sec. 1:35.] It will take generations to outlive the impressions of hatred and animosity that are now being made upon the hearts of the children against their fellow men. . . . Peace to be permanent must come from within as well as to be seen externally. Man must have peace in his heart and love in his heart both for God and man, else there will be no peace." (Hyrum M. Smith, CR, October 1916, pp. 44-45.)

"The Lord has revealed again in these latter days the charge to His followers to—'Renounce war, and proclaim peace.' To endeavor in every proper way, through example and influence, to promote peace everywhere, that the way may be prepared so that 'nations shall not lift up the sword against nations' but be prepared for the coming of the reign of the Lord, that peace and good will toward men shall prevail everywhere. This, we are confident, will eventually occur." (Hugh B. Brown, CR, April 1940, p. 27.)

98:16-17

"seek diligently to turn. . . the hearts of the Jews unto the prophets, and the prophets unto the Jews"

See Elijah in Appendix A.

"As I understand this command we the prophets must turn our hearts unto the Jews, and then we may hope that they will turn their hearts unto us because of the message that we shall bring unto them through the restoration of the gospel in this dispensation. The importance of this the Lord declared in these words: '. . . lest I come and smite the whole earth with a curse, and all flesh be consumed before me.'" (LeGrand Richards, CR, October 1956, p. 24.)

"It is the duty of the elders to endeavor to get the Jews to understand the prophets which they profess to believe, but do not understand; and to believe in Christ, of whom the prophets of old have spoken. Moreover, to prepare themselves for that which was yet to come when Elijah should come to restore his keys of sealing." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:193.)

98:18

"in my Father's house are many mansions"

See Degrees of glory in Appendix A.

98:22

"the gates of hell shall not prevail against you"

See Hell in Appendix A.

98:23-32

"if men . . . smite you . . . bear it patiently"

"The Lord here states what may, perhaps, be called the lex talionis of the gospel. 'An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth,' was the highest ideal of justice to which the majority of the Children of Israel could rise under the Mosaic law. Our Lord enunciated a higher ideal, 'But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also' (Matt. 5:39-40). This principle is set forth in further detail in the paragraphs before us. If men will smite you, or your families, and ye will bear it patiently, and not seek revenge, ye shall be rewarded (v. 23). If the offense is repeated, and ye bear it patiently, your reward shall be a hundred fold (v. 25). If it is repeated again, and ye bear it patiently the reward shall be multiplied four times (v. 26), and the Lord will judge the offender (v. 27). If he still persists, he must be solemnly warned, and if he does not heed the warning, the victim is justified in 'rewarding him according to his works' (v. 31); but if the wronged party will spare the offender, the reward for his righteousness will surely come (v. 30).

"As the world is constituted at present, it is impossible to live in it without being wronged some time. What to do, when wronged, is one of the great problems of a Christian life. The world says, 'Get even!' The Master says, 'Forgive!' 'Absurd!' the world exclaims; 'what are laws and courts and jails for?' Christ bids us remember that our worst enemy is, after all, one of God's children whom Christ came to save, and that we ought to treat him as we would an erring brother. Very often Christian love in return for a wrong proves the salvation of the wrong-doer. It always has a wonderful effect upon those who practice it. It makes them strong, beautiful and God-like, whereas hatred and revenge stamp, upon the heart in which they dwell, the image of the devil." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 623.)

98:23-48

The law of the Lord concerning war and vengeance

"Here is a law given that is of the utmost importance to the inhabitants of the earth as well as to us as a people. It is the law by which the inhabitants of the earth should be governed and we, as Latter-day Saints, especially should understand this law and be governed by it. . . . We should be a peaceful people, seeking peace, and endeavoring to escape all the horrors of war, and to avert them from the nations of the earth, particularly our own nation. The Lord says: [Sec. 98:34-38, quoted.]. . .

"I do not look for our nation to do this. It is scarcely to be expected, in the nature of things, that they would do it. But it is the true principle, and we as a people should use our influence for his purpose. Our prayers should ascend to God, our petitions should ascend to the government of our nation to do everything that honorable people can do to avert war. We have no fear of the effect of the combinations against us. . . . But the promise of God is that if we will do right as a nation, if we will serve Him, they shall not have power over us, or be able to bring us into bondage; and in the end we shall prevail. This is a glorious promise which is made to the inhabitants of the land. (2 Nephi 10:10-14.)" (George Q. Cannon, CR, April 1898, pp. 85-87.)

"In the 98th section the Lord gives the law that he gave in ancient times to his people when they were to go forth to battle. It is in substance: 'If thine enemy come against thee, thou shalt forgive him; if he come again the second time, thou shalt forgive him; and if he even come the third time and you forgive him, it will be reckoned unto you for glory, but if he come again, I, the Lord, justify you in going forth to battle and I will strengthen you and I will fight your battles.' Now the great distinction should be, and we should understand it, that circumstances may arise which will require a different precept from that given at one time when another time comes. In the 22nd chapter of Luke, you will read that Jesus, just before he was taken by the men that came out to bring him before the judgment seat, cried out to his apostles: 'When I sent you without purse and scrip and shoes, lacked ye anything?' And they said, 'Nothing.' Then said he, 'But now, he that hath a purse let him take it, and likewise his scrip: and he that hath no sword, let him sell his garment, and buy one.' (Verses 35, 36.) Well, some people will say perhaps, then, the Lord is a changeable being. Not at all. The Lord always is like that. From the eternities that are past down to the present, when circumstances change, he adapts his laws to the conditions and gives his people counsel and instructions suited to the times and circumstances." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, April 1917, pp. 20-22.)

"Perhaps Peter had met people who continued to trespass against him, and he asked: 'Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him?' (Matt. 18:21.) And the Lord said: 'I say not unto thee, Until seven times: but, Until seventy times seven.' (Ibid., 18:22.) '. . . and as oft as thine enemy repenteth of the trespass wherewith he has trespassed against thee, thou shalt forgive him, until seventy times seven.' (D&C 98:40.) Until seventy times seven! That seems very difficult indeed for us mortals, and yet there are still harder things to do. When they have repented and come on their knees to ask forgiveness, most of us can forgive, but the Lord has required that we shall even forgive them if they do not repent nor ask forgiveness of us.

"In D&C Sec. 98:41-45, he said: [quoted.]

"'And if he do this, thou shalt forgive him with all thine heart'; we must still forgive. The Lord will avenge us. 'Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord' (Rom. 12:19) and man must not seek vengeance nor retaliate against those who have damaged him. Bitterness injures the one who carries it more than the one against whom it is directed." (Spencer W. Kimball, CR, September 1949, pp. 129-30)

"There are, however, two conditions which may justify a truly Christian man to enter—mind you, I say enter, not begin—a war: (1) An attempt to dominate and to deprive another of his free agency, and, (2) Loyalty to his country. Possibly there is a third, viz., Defense of a weak nation that is being unjustly crushed by a strong, ruthless one.

"Paramount among these reasons, of course, is the defense of man's freedom. An attempt to rob man of his free agency caused dissension even in heaven. . . .

"To deprive an intelligent human being of his free agency is to commit the crime of the ages. . . .

"So fundamental in man's eternal progress is his inherent right to choose, that the Lord would defend it even at the price of war. Without freedom of thought, freedom of choice, freedom of action within lawful bounds, man cannot progress. . . .

"The greatest responsibility of the state is to guard the lives, and to protect the property and rights of its citizens; and if the state is obligated to protect its citizens from lawlessness within its boundaries, it is equally obligated to protect them from lawless encroachments from without—whether the attacking criminals be individuals or nations." (David O. McKay, CR, April 1942, pp. 72-73.)

"Does the Lord permit the shedding of blood and justify it? Yes, sometimes he does. Was not the war of independence of this country justifiable? Were not the rights and privileges of the people of this land trampled under foot, and did they not rise in their might and the God of Battles strengthen their arms and they went forth to victory and brought liberty, not only to themselves and their immediate families, but to hosts of people from down-trodden Europe who are rejoicing today under the Stars and Stripes with liberty of conscience and liberty of speech and liberty of action within proper guidance and direction of righteous law. . . .

". . . Now if a nation essays to go forth against another nation for the purpose of conquest, to gain territory, to grasp something that does not belong to that nation, then the nation thus assailed has the right to resist even to the shedding of blood, as it was in this land in the war for independence. But we have to be careful as to what spirit we are guided by. If we want to go out to battle, to encroach upon other people's liberties and rights, to gain their lands, to destroy their property without any right or reason, that is one thing; but if somebody comes against us to destroy us and our property and our homes and our rights and our privileges, either on land or sea, then we have the right under the divine law to rise for our own protection and take such steps as are necessary." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, April 1917, pp. 20-21.)

98:45

"forgive him with all thine heart"

"Remember that we must forgive even if our offender did not repent and ask forgiveness. . . .

"It frequently happens that offenses are committed when the offender is not aware of it. Something he has said or done is misconstrued or misunderstood. The offended one treasures in his heart the offense, adding to it such other things as might give fuel to the fire and justify his conclusions. Perhaps this is one of the reasons why the Lord requires that the offended one should make the overtures toward peace. . . .

"Do we follow that commandment or do we sulk, in our bitterness, waiting for our offender to learn of it and to kneel to us in remorse? And this reconciliation suggests also forgetting. Unless you forget, have you forgiven?

"The Lord forgets when he has forgiven, and certainly must we. He inspired Isaiah to say: 'I, even I, am he that blotted out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.' (Isaiah 43:25.)

"And again in our dispensation, he said: 'Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven; and I, the Lord, remember them no more.' (D&C 58:42.)

"And we are instructed by him that: '. . . thou shalt forgive him with all thine heart. . . . ' (D&C 98:45.)

"No bitterness of past frictions can be held in memory if we forgive with all our hearts." (Spencer W. Kimball, CR, September 1949, pp. 132-33.)

98:47

"might, mind, and strength"

See Might, mind, and strength in Appendix A.
