Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 99

Background information on section 99

"This is a Revelation calling Elder John Murdock to go on a mission to the Eastern States. He was one of the men who received the gospel in Kirtland when Oliver Cowdery and companions passed through that city on the first western journey to the Lamanites, and together with Sidney Rigdon, Edward Partridge, Isaac Morley, Lyman Wight, and others, he was called to the ministry at that time. He held many important positions in the Church and discharged his duties faithfully. One of his children, Joseph S., died at the age of eleven months, as a result of exposure during the night of mob assault upon the Prophet at Hiram. Emma Smith, the Prophet's wife, had given birth to twins on the 30th of April, 1831. On the same date the home of the Murdocks had been blessed with twin children, Joseph S. and Julia. Sister Emma Smith's babies lived but three hours, and, when Sister Murdock passed away, Sister Emma took the motherless infants to rear. During the mob outrage, the infant boy contracted a cold that ended fatally, a few days later. . . .

". . . John Murdock was a member of Zion's camp, and made the journey to Zion in that choice company of men. In 1834, he was appointed a member of the High Council in Clay County, and in 1837, of the High Council in Far West. In 1838, he and George M. Hinckle, as trustees for the Church, purchased a townsite at De Witt, on the Missouri River, and in 1842, he was appointed Bishop of the Nauvoo Fifth Ward." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 629.)

99:1

"my servant John Murdock"

See background information for this section.

99:4

"whoso rejecteth you shall be rejected of my Father"

"Who have rejected this gospel? The indifferent, those who would not take the trouble to investigate it, those who would not take the trouble to bow in submission before the Lord and ask His testimony concerning it, those who thought it beneath them, those who have been too proud, or too rich or too well situated or who for some other reason, have failed to take any interest in this work; these are they who are not members of this Church and who have failed to obey this gospel when they heard it preached in its simplicity and its purity amongst the nations of the earth. . . . There will be a heavy condemnation fall upon this generation because of their inattention to these things. Judgments and calamities will be visited upon the inhabitants of the earth in consequence of neglecting the word of God written in the Scriptures, and also the word of God to His servants in these days." (George Q. Cannon, JD 20:248.)

99:4

"cleanse your feet "

See Feet in Appendix A.

99:8

"continue proclaiming my gospel"

See Missionary service in Appendix A.
