Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 100

Background information on section 100

"The Prophet felt that the field of souls was white for the harvest and that it was incumbent upon him to thrust in his sickle and gather the honest-in-heart. On the 5th day of October, 1833, he departed from Kirtland upon a missionary journey to Canada, in company with Sidney Rigdon and Freeman A. Nickerson. At various places on the road, they stopped and proclaimed the word of the Lord unto the inhabitants. In some villages they found God-fearing men and women who were praying for light and were willing to obey when the simple gospel was presented before the eyes of their understanding. On the 12th day of October they had arrived at Perrysburg, New York, where they halted for a little time. Here the Prophet received a revelation [Sec. 100] in which the Lord instructed him that Zion must be chastened yet for a season, although she would finally be redeemed." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, p. 142.)

"It is a very striking fact that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ever since its organization, has proceeded on its onward course, no matter what the outward circumstances have been. There has been no turning back, no hesitation, no vacillation. As a mighty ship with its precious cargo, it has steered straight for the goal. The wind may have been adverse at times; the waves may have been breaking over it from stem to stern; it may have been assailed by hostile craft from above and from below, and from all sides. There may have been disaffection and even mutiny among the crew, but the command has always sounded clear and high above the storm and the din of conflict. 'Forward, full speed!'

"These reflections are suggested by the fact that while the enemies in Missouri were gathering their lawless forces for an assault upon the Church there, the Lord inspired the Prophet Joseph to go on a mission and proclaim the gospel message. He was not to mind the enemies. His calling was to testify to the world. And he went on this mission as far as Canada, as full of faith and hope as if there had been no storm-clouds in the sky. What a testimony to his divine commission!" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 630.)

100:1-2

"your families are well; they are in mine hands"

"As regards the circumstances of their [missionaries'] families, it is proper and correct that men should have some feelings for those they have left at home. It is true there ought to be sympathy and some care for those with whom they have been immediately associated; yet their families as well as our families, and all of us and our affairs are in the hands of God, and, inasmuch as they go forth putting their trust in the living God all will be peace, and they will find peace and contentment from this time forth until they return, inasmuch as they will magnify their callings and lean upon their God." (John Taylor, JD 10:37.)

100:7

"in solemnity of heart"

One definition of solemn is "marked by grave sedateness and earnest serious sobriety." The eternal truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ should be spoken in reverence, dignity, earnestness, seriousness, with deep and sincere feeling—in solemnity of heart.

100:9

"my servant Sidney, should be a spokesman unto this people"

"He [Sidney Rigdon] was baptized in the town of Kirtland, and the foundation of a great work was laid there. God afterwards revealed that this man was to be a spokesman, and he became the spokesman to this people and to the world for the Prophet Joseph. Those who knew Sidney Rigdon, know how wonderfully God inspired him, and with what wonderful eloquence he declared the word of God to the people. He was a mighty man in the hands of God, as a spokesman, as long as the prophet lived, or up to a short time before his death. Thus you see that even this which many might look upon as a small matter, was predicted about 1,700 years before the birth of the Saviour, and was quoted by Lehi 600 years before the same event, and about 2,400 years before its fulfillment [2 Nephi 3:18], and was translated by the power of God, through his servant Joseph, as was predicted should be the case." (George Q. Cannon, JD 25:126-27.)

100:10

Joseph Smith to be "mighty in testimony"

"The Prophet Joseph was indeed 'mighty in testimony.' As one who had seen the heavens opened and heard the voice of God, the Father, and His Son, and had conversed with angels, he could 'testify,' and his words had the force of those of an eye witness. Parley P. Pratt says that 'even his most bitter enemies were overcome generally if he could once get their ears.' " (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 633.)

"In one of those tedious nights, [in a Richmond, Mo. jail] we had lain as if in sleep till the hour of midnight had passed, and our ears and hearts had been pained, while we had listened for hours to the obscene jests, the horrid oaths, the dreadful blasphemies and filthy language of our guards, Colonel Price at their head, as they recounted to each other their deeds of rapine, murder, robbery, etc., which they had committed among the 'Mormons' while at Far West and vicinity. They even boasted of defiling by force wives, daughters and virgins, and of shooting or dashing out the brains of men, women and children.

"I had listened till I became so disgusted, shocked, horrified, and so filled at the spirit of indignant justice that I could scarcely refrain from rising upon my feet and rebuking the guards: but had said nothing to Joseph [Smith], or any one else, although I lay next to him and knew he was awake. On a sudden he arose to his feet, and spoke in a voice of thunder, or as the roaring lion, uttering, as near as I can recollect, the following words:

"'SILENCE, ye fiends of the infernal pit! In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you and command you to be still; I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die THIS INSTANT!

"He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty. Chained, and without a weapon; calm, unruffled and dignified as an angel, he looked upon the quailing guards, whose weapons were lowered or dropped to the ground; whose knees smote together and who, shrinking into a corner, or crouching at his feet, begged his pardon, and remained quiet till a change of guards.

"I have seen the ministers of justice, clothed in magisterial robes, and criminals arraigned before them, while life was suspended on a breath, in the Courts of England; I have witnessed a Congress in solemn session to give laws to nations; I have tried to conceive of kings, of royal courts, of thrones and crowns; and of emperors assembled to decide the fate of kingdoms; but dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure village of Missouri." (Parley P. Pratt, APPP, pp. 210-11.)

100:14

"my servants, Orson Hyde and John Gould, are in my hands"

For biographical information on Orson Hyde, see Appendix B.

"About this time, Elders [Orson] Hyde and [John] Gould arrived in Zion, and the Church having made the necessary preparations, Elders W. W. Phelps and Orson Hyde were dispatched to the Governor of Missouri [Daniel Dunklin], residing at Jefferson City, the capital of the state, with the following: [Petition setting forth the outrages committed by mobs against the Saints]." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:410-15.)

100:15

"to them that walk uprightly"

"When you are in the line of your duty it is like standing in front of a line of posts, and every post is in line. But step one step aside, and every post looks as though it were not quite in line. The farther you get away from that straight line, the more crooked the posts will appear. It is the straight and narrow path of duty that will lead you and me back to the presence of God." (Heber J. Grant, CR, October 1935, p. 5.)
