Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 2

Background information on section 2

The Prophet Joseph Smith has provided the following account of the first appearance to him of the Angel Moroni on the evening of September 21, 1823:

While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the room was lighter than at noonday, when immediately a personage appeared at my bedside, standing in the air, for his feet did not touch the floor. He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked, and his arms also, a little above the wrist; so, also, were his feet naked, as were his legs, a little above the ankles. His head and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other clothing on but his robe, as it was open, so that I could see into his bosom.

Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so very bright as immediately round his person. When I first looked upon him, I was afraid; but the fear soon left me.

He called me by name, and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the presence of God to me, and that his name was Moroni; that God had a work for me to do. . . .

After telling me these things, he commenced quoting the prophecies of the Old Testament. He first quoted part of the third chapter of Malachi, and he quoted also the fourth or last chapter of the same prophecy, though with a little variation from the way it reads in our Bible. Instead of quoting the first verse as it reads in our books, he quoted it thus:

For behold the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble: for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

And again, he quoted the fifth verse thus:

Behold I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

He also quoted the next verse differently:

And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers; if it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming. (HC 1:9, 11-12. Also in JS-H 1:30-39.)

2:1-3

The prophesied appearance of Elijah the prophet

"The whole world ought to take notice of this prediction [Mal. 4:5, , but the world does not understand it. Surely the signs of the times point to the fact that the great and dreadful day is near, even at our doors. The fig tree, figuratively, is putting forth her leaves. The turmoil, trouble, the war and bloodshed that we have seen, and which we still see, all point to the fact that this day for the coming of the Son of God is near. Therefore, Elijah the prophet is due to appear. I am sure you agree with me that he has already appeared, for we have it so recorded by the testimony of witnesses. [See Section 110.] It was on the third day of April, 1836, when he came to the Kirtland Temple, to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, and conferred upon them the keys of his priesthood and told them that he came in fulfillment of the prophecy of Malachi, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and the children to their fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, April 1948, p. 132.)

2:1

"Elijah the prophet "

"Why should he send Elijah? Because he held the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the priesthood, and without the authority that is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness.

"Salvation could not come to this world without the mediation of Jesus Christ. How shall God come to the rescue of the generations? He will send Elijah the prophet. The law revealed to Moses in Horeb never was revealed to the children of Israel as a nation. Elijah shall reveal the covenants to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children and the children to the fathers. The anointing and sealing is to be called, elected, and the election made sure." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1978, p. 48.)

See also Elijah in Appendix A.

2:1

"the great and dreadful day of the Lord"

See Great and dreadful day of the Lord in Appendix A.

2:2

"the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers"

"The greatest responsibility in this world that God has laid upon us is to seek after our dead. The Apostle says, '. . . they without us cannot be made perfect' (Heb. 11:40); for it is necessary that the sealing power should be in our hands to seal our children and our dead for the fulness of the dispensation of times—a dispensation to meet the promises made by Jesus Christ before the foundation of the world for the salvation of man. [Titus 1:2.] . . . It is necessary that those who are going before and those who come after us should have salvation in common with us; and thus hath God made it obligatory upon man. Hence, God said, 'I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord; and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.' (Mal. 4:5.)" (Joseph Smith, TPJS, p. 356.)

2:3

"the whole earth would be utterly wasted"

One purpose of earth life is to provide an opportunity for each family on the earth to be sealed to the preceding family, and thus back to Adam and then to our Heavenly Father. This bond will enable us to share blessings more fully.

If the priesthood keys required to perform these sealings were not restored to the earth in this dispensation, then this work for both us and our dead ancestors could not be completed. Thus, in a sense, the earth would have been utterly wasted as this great purpose in the plan of God would not have been realized.

Also, it should be remembered that when Jesus Christ comes in his glory to reign on the earth as King of kings and Lord of lords, all the wicked will be destroyed. A righteous people must be prepared to meet him, or literally the whole population of the earth at that time will be utterly wasted.

"In the days of Noah, God destroyed the world by a flood, and he has promised to destroy it by fire in the last days: but before it should take place Elijah should come first and turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, etc.

"Now comes the point. What is this office and work of Elijah? It is one of the greatest and most important subjects that God has revealed. He should send Elijah to seal the children to the fathers, and the fathers to the children.

"Now was this merely confined to the living, to settle difficulties with families on earth? By no means. It was a far greater work. Elijah! what would you do if you were here? Would you confine your work to the living alone? No, I would refer you to the Scriptures, where the subject is manifest: that is, without us, they could not be made perfect, nor we without them; the fathers without the children, nor the children without the fathers. [Heb. 11:40; D&C 128:18.]

"I wish you to understand this subject, for it is important; and if you will receive it, this is the spirit of Elijah, that we redeem our dead, and connect ourselves with our fathers which are in heaven, and seal up our dead to come forth in the first resurrection; and here we want the power of Elijah to seal those who dwell on earth to those who dwell in heaven. This is the power of Elijah and the keys of the kingdom of Jehovah." (Joseph Smith, HC 6:251-52.)

Supplementary readings for section 2

The prophecy concerning the coming of Elijah before "the great and dreadful day of the Lord" is one of the most carefully documented prophecies of all time. It appears in all the standard works of the Church:

Many Christians who believe in the prophetic principle of the Old Testament have assumed that this prophecy of Malachi was fulfilled at the time Elijah appeared on the Mount of Transfiguration to Peter, James, and John. (Matt. 17:1-13.) However, Latter-day Saints know that the prophecy was fulfilled April 3, 1836, when Elijah appeared in the Kirtland Temple. In fact, Elijah specifically mentioned during the visitation that he had come in fulfillment of the prophecy "which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi." (D&C 110:14.) The wording of the prophecy in the Bible and the Book of Mormon is identical but differs somewhat from the accounts in the Pearl of Great Price and the Doctrine and Covenants, which are also identical. Moroni's alterations from the Bible and Book of Mormon texts were probably for emphasis and clarification rather than for correction.
