Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 101

Background information on section 101

"In Section 97 the Lord declares that if Zion will do his will she shall prosper, but if not then she shall be visited by sore affliction, pestilence, plague, sword, vengeance and devouring fire. When this was uttered the trouble between the Saints and the Missourians was on and some of the Saints had been driven from their homes." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:459.)

"In this letter to the scattered Saints in Missouri, dated December 10th, 1833, the Prophet stated that the spirit withheld from him definite knowledge of the reason why the calamity had fallen upon Zion. Here is another striking evidence of his sincerity. If he had been in the habit of writing revelations without divine inspiration, he could have done so at this time. But it is perfectly evident that he did not speak in the name of the Lord except when prompted to do so by the Spirit. On the 16th of December, however, this Revelation was received concerning the Saints in Zion." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 637.)

"Thursday night, the 31st of October [1833], gave the Saints in Zion abundant proof that no pledge on the part of their enemies, written or verbal, was longer to be regarded; for on that night, between forty and fifty persons in number, many of whom were armed with guns, proceeded against a branch of the Church, west of the Big Blue, and unroofed and partly demolished ten dwelling houses; and amid the shrieks and screams of the women and children, whipped and beat in a savage and brutal manner, several of the men: while their horrid threats frightened women and children into the wilderness. . . . On Friday, the first of November, women and children sallied forth from their gloomy retreats, to contemplate with heartrending anguish the ravages of a ruthless mob, in the lacerated and bruised bodies of their husbands, and in the destruction of their houses, and their furniture. Houseless and unprotected by the arm of the civil law in Jackson county, the dreary month of November staring them in the face and loudly proclaiming an inclement season at hand; the continual threats of the mob that they would drive every 'Mormon' from the county; and the inability of many to move, because of their poverty, caused an anguish of heart indescribable.

"On Friday night, the 1st of November, a party of the mob proceeded to attack a branch of the Church settled on the prairie, about twelve or fourteen miles from the town of Independence. . . .

"The same night, (Friday), another party in Independence commenced stoning houses, breaking down doors and windows and destroying furniture. . . .

"Thursday, November 7th, the shores of the Missouri river began to be lined on both sides of the ferry, with men, women and children; goods, wagons, boxes, chests, and provisions; while the ferrymen were busily employed in crossing them over. When night again closed upon the Saints, the wilderness had much the appearance of a camp meeting. Hundreds of people were seen in every direction; some in tents, and some in the open air, around their fires, while the rain descended in torrents. Husbands were inquiring for their wives, and women for their husbands; parents for children, and children for parents. Some had the good fortune to escape with their families, household goods, and some provisions; while others knew not the fate of their friends, and had lost all their effects. The scene was indescribable, and would have melted the hearts of any people upon earth, except the blind oppressor, and the prejudiced and ignorant bigot. . . .

"The Saints who fled from Jackson county, took refuge in the neighboring counties, chiefly in Clay county, the inhabitants of which received them with some degree of kindness. Those who fled to the county of Van Buren were again driven, and compelled to flee, and these who fled to Lafayette county, were soon expelled, or the most of them, and had to move wherever they could find protection." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:426-27, 437-38.)

101:3

"I shall come to make up my jewels"

See material for D&C 60:4.

"This does not refer to the day of final judgment but to the day of the restoration of the Earth to its lawful Ruler and King, our Lord Jesus Christ. (See Malachi 3:16-18). On that day, the Lord will own them and value them as jewels." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 637.)

101:4

"must . . . be chastened and tried, even as Abraham"

The story of Abraham and Isaac is recorded in Genesis 22:1-19.

"The sacrifice required of Abraham in the offering up of Isaac, shows that if a man would attain to the keys of the kingdom of an endless life, he must sacrifice all things. When God offers a blessing or knowledge to a man, and he refuses to receive it, he will be damned." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:555 )

"Here comes the command of God to this man [Abraham] who has been taught so scrupulously about the sinfulness of murder and human sacrifice, to do these very things. Now, why did the Lord ask such things of Abraham? Because, knowing what his future would be and that he would be the father of an innumerable posterity, he was determined to test him. God did not do this for His own sake; for He knew by His foreknowledge what Abraham would do [Abr. 1:22-23]; but the purpose was to impress upon Abraham a lesson, and to enable him to attain unto knowledge that he could not obtain in any other way. That is why God tries all of us. It is not for His own knowledge for He knows all things beforehand. He knows all your lives and everything you will do. But He tries us for our own good, that we may know ourselves, for it is most important that a man should know himself. He required Abraham to submit to this trial because he intended to give him glory, exaltation and honor; He intended to make him a king and a priest, to share with Himself the glory, power and dominion which He exercised." (George Q. Cannon, CR, April 1899, pp. 66-67.)

101:5

"those who will not endure chastening, but deny me, cannot be sanctified."

See Adversity and Sanctify in Appendix A.

101:6

"they polluted their inheritances"

"An attempt to rear the New Jerusalem was made in the summer of 1831, a colony approximating fifteen hundred men, women and children, settling for that purpose in Jackson County, Missouri (Sec. 45:64-71), upon lands purchased from the Federal Government. Ground was consecrated, and a City laid out, including the site for a Temple. But a lack of the perfect unity necessary on the part of these selected for this sacred task, prevented its accomplishment at that time: [Sec. 101:6, quoted.] Forewarned by the Prophet of what would result if these evils were not corrected [Sec. 84:54-59], the colonists did not as a whole pay sufficient heed to the admonition, and the Lord permitted their enemies to come upon them and drive them from 'the goodly land.'" (Orson F. Whitney, SNT, pp. 181-82.)

101:10-12

"the sword of mine indignation"

See Sword in Appendix A.

"While there was punishment in the suffering the Saints had to endure and that because they were slow to hear the Lord, nevertheless the actions of their enemies were not justifiable; and therefore the Lord promised that he would let fall the sword of his indignation in behalf of his people. [Sec. 101:11-12, quoted.] The sword of indignation commenced to fall upon the enemies of the saints shortly after the saints were driven from Missouri, and from time to time it has fallen, both in this land, [and] in foreign lands." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:216.)

101:11

"cup of their iniquity"

When people disobey the commandments of God so long and so extensively that the law of justice requires payment, those people are "ripened in iniquity" (1 Ne. 17:35; Ether 2:9; 9:10), or the "cup of their iniquity" is full. Such people might also be referred to as "drunken with iniquity" (2 Ne. 27:1), "fully ripe in iniquity" (2 Ne. 28:16), and having "waxed strong in iniquity" (Alma 13:17); they are also in the "bonds of iniquity" (Alma 41:11).

101:18

"They that . . . are pure in heart shall return"

"We are going back to Jackson county, Missouri, one of these days. . . . The day will come when Latter-day Saints will be selected—all may not be called at once, but those who are worthy will be called." (George Q. Cannon, CR, April 1898, p. 14.)

"We talk about going back to build up the center (stake) of Zion; it is the burden of our daily prayers. The aspirations of thousands of the people ascend in the ears of the Lord of Saboath in behalf of the redemption of Zion, and that the purposes of God may be forwarded, and that the time may soon come when the center stake of Zion shall be built up and the people be prepared to go back and inhabit that land. Why do we wish this? Because we anticipate when that day shall come that we will be that much nearer the day of triumph, the day when Jesus will come and reign among his Saints. . . .

"The spot has been designated, and we look forward with peculiar feelings to repossessing that land. We expect when that day shall come that we will be a very different people to what we are today. . . . We expect that a society will be organized there that will be a pattern of heavenly society, that when Jesus and his heavenly beings who come with him are revealed in the clouds of heaven, their feelings will not be shocked by the change, for a society will be organized on the earth whose members will be prepared through the revelations of God to meet and associate with them, if not on terms of perfect equality, at least with some degree of equality." (George Q. Cannon, JD 11:336-37.)

101:21

"Until . . . there is found no more room for them"

"Zion will extend, eventually, all over this earth. There will be no nook or corner upon the earth but what will be a Zion. It will all be Zion." (Brigham Young, JD 9:138.)

101:22

"stand in holy places"

See Stand ye in holy places in Appendix A.

101:23-31

Conditions during the Millennium

See Millennium in Appendix A.

101:23

"all flesh shall see me together"

"Jesus will come in a cloud, or as is expressed in the 40th chapter of Isaiah—'The glory of the Lord will be revealed and all flesh shall see it together.' It is also expressed in the revelations of St. John, that when he comes in a cloud every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him. [Rev. 1:7.] It seems then that the second advent of the Son of God is to be something . . . accompanied with great power and glory, something that will not be done in a small portion of the earth like Palestine, and seen only by a few; but it will be an event that will be seen by all—all flesh shall see the glory of the Lord; when he reveals himself the second time, every eye, not only those living at that time in the flesh, in mortality on the earth, but also the very dead themselves." (Orson Pratt, JD 18:170.)

101:25

"all things shall become new"

See New heaven and a new earth in Appendix A.

101:26

"enmity of all flesh shall cease"

"The enmity of the beasts of the field as well as that of all flesh will cease; no more one beast of prey devouring and feasting upon another that is more harmless in its nature; no more will this enmity be found in the fish of the sea or in the birds of the air. This change will be wrought upon all flesh when Jesus comes; not a change to immortality, but a change sufficient to alter the ferocious nature of beasts, birds and fishes. In those days the lion will eat straw like the ox; he will no more be the terror of the forest, but will be perfectly harmless, and gentleness will characterize all the wild and ferocious animals, as well as the venomous serpents, so much so that the little child might lead them and play with them, and nothing shall hurt or destroy in all the holy mountain of the Lord, all things becoming, in some measure, as when they were first created." (Orson Pratt, JD 20:18.)

101:28

"Satan shall not have power"

See Satan and Millennium in Appendix A.

101:28-31

"an infant shall not die until he is old"

"The children that shall grow up unto the Lord shall not taste of death; that is, they shall not sleep in the earth, but they shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, and they shall be caught up, and their rest shall be glorious. I thus distinguish between them and us, because at that time they shall grow up with a more complete and perfect understanding of the laws of life and health, and they will observe them. And temptations and evils that surround us on every hand shall be removed from them. . . . Hence their tabernacles shall not be subject to pain and sickness like unto ours." (Erastus Snow, JD 7:355-56.)

101:32-34

"the Lord. . . shall reveal all things"

Evidently the present theories of man as to how the earth was created are not true, for when the Savior comes in power and glory he will reveal "hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof." (D&C 101:33.)

"There is an eternity before us, and it is full of matter; and if we but understand enough of the Lord and his ways, we would say that he took of this matter and organized this earth from it. How long it has been organized it is not for me to say, and I do not care anything about it . . . whether he made it in six days or in as many millions of years, is and will remain a matter of speculation in the minds of men unless he gives revelation on the subject." (Brigham Young, JD 14:116.)

101:37

"care not for the body . . . but care for the soul "

See material for D&C 88:15.

"Have I not told you often that the separation of body and spirit makes no difference in the moral and intellectual condition of the spirit? When a person who has always been good and faithful to his God, lays down his body in the dust, his spirit will remain the same in the spirit world. It is not the body that has control over the spirit, as to its disposition, but it is the spirit that controls the body. When the spirit leaves the body the body becomes lifeless, the spirit has not changed one single particle of itself by leaving the body." (Heber C. Kimball, JD 3:108.)

101:38

"eternal life"

See Eternal life in Appendix A.

101:39

"salt of the earth and the savor of man "

See Salt and savor in Appendix A.

101:43-62

Parable of the nobleman, his servants, and his vineyard

See Parables in Appendix A. This parable of the Lord concerned the situation then in Missouri, and the Lord said it was his "will concerning the redemption of Zion." (D&C 101:43.)

"In a revelation given December 16, 1833, the Lord in a parable spoke of the conditions in Missouri. A certain nobleman had a spot of land and he sent his servants in this choice land, and set watchmen round about and to build a tower for the protection of the land. While the workmen were yet building they questioned the need of the tower and said that the money required to build it could be put to better purpose. While they were at variance the enemy came by night and broke down the hedge and the servants were scattered. The Lord then commanded one of his servants to go and gather together the residue of his servants and go straightway to the land of his vineyard, for it was his; he had purchased it. They were to break down the walls of his enemies and possess the land." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 3:18.)

"The vineyard—in this Revelation, the vineyard is regarded as separate from the olive grove, for the nobleman planted olive trees in his vineyard, doubling its value.

"Build a tower—The safety of the settlement of the Saints depends on the Temple, or rather on the power of God manifest in His holy House.

"While they were at variance . . . slothful—This never fails. Strife always engenders slothfulness and neglect of duty.

"Watchmen upon the walls—Watchmen upon the tower or walls, has reference to those who are appointed to positions of responsibility. The watchman on the tower is the presiding officer in the stake, ward or community.

"Unto one of his servants—The Prophet Joseph (see Sec. 103:21).

"Redeem my vineyard—The Prophet Joseph is commanded to gather up a company of men, faithful and true, and proceed to Zion and scatter the enemies; but he was not to make war upon them, but redeem the land by purchase (see Sec. 103:23).

"After many days—The Prophet did as directed by Revelation, and in due time 'all things were fulfilled.'" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 648.)

101:63-67

The gathering of Israel is according to the parable of the wheat and the tares

See Parables and Tares in Appendix A.

101:64

"time of harvest is come"

See Harvest symbols in Appendix A.

101:66

"unquenchable fire"

See Everlasting fire in Appendix A.

101:76, 81-95

"continue to importune for redress . . . of those . . . in authority over you"

"The Saints were also to carry their grievances to the proper tribunals and seek for redress of their wrongs. This was a very necessary step, and when the Saints did this and were denied their civil and religious rights, those officials were left without excuse and the judgments of the Almighty which later came upon them during the Civil War, were justified. . . .

"Since there is a just law of retribution, as fixed and eternal as are other laws of the Almighty [Sec. 6:33; 2 Cor. 9:6], the day must come when there shall be adjustments made before a Just Magistrate who will not be cowed by the threats of mobs." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:218, 224.)

101:80

"I raised up [wise men] unto this very purpose"

"We know the signers of the sacred Declaration of Independence and the Founding Fathers, with George Washington at their head, have made appearance in holy places. Apostle Wilford Woodruff was president of the St. George Temple at the time of their appearance and testified that the founders of our republic declared this to him: 'We laid the foundation of the government you now enjoy, and we never apostatized from it, but we remained true to it and were faithful to God.' (Journal of Discourses, 19:229.) . . .

"Yes, I thank God for the sacrifices and efforts made by these Founding Fathers, whose efforts have brought us the blessings of political liberty and economic prosperity we have today." (Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, November 1976, p. 34.)

"I am going to bear my testimony to this assembly, if I never do it again in my life, that those men who laid the foundation of this American government and signed the Declaration of Independence were the best spirits the God of heaven could find on the face of the earth. They were choice spirits, not wicked men. General Washington and all the men that labored for the purpose were inspired of the Lord.

"Another thing I am going to say here, because I have a right to say it. Every one of those men that signed the Declaration of Independence, with General [George] Washington, called upon me, as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Temple at St. George, two consecutive nights and demanded at my hands that I should go forth and attend to the ordinances of the House of God for them. Men are here, I believe, that know of this, Brother J. D. T. McAllister, David H. Cannon and James G. Bleak. Brother McAllister baptized me for all those men and I told those brethren that it was their duty to go into the Temple and labor until they had got endowments for all of them. They did it. Would those spirits have called upon me, as an Elder in Israel, to perform that work if they had not been noble spirits before God? They would not.

"I bear this testimony, because it is true. The Spirit of God bore record to myself and the brethren while we were laboring in that way." (Wilford Woodruff, CR, April 1898, pp. 89-90.)

101:77-80

"I established the Constitution of this land"

See Constitution in Appendix A.

"To me . . . that statement of the Lord, 'I have established the Constitution of this land,' puts the Constitution of the United States in the position in which it would be if it were written in the book of Doctrine and Covenants itself. This makes the Constitution the word of the Lord to us. That it was given, not by oral utterance, but by the operation of his mind and spirit upon the minds of men, inspiring them to the working out of this great document of human government, does not alter its authority." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., CR, April 1935, pp. 93-94.)

"I regard as essential to the welfare of this country the things contained in the Constitution of our land. Of course it may be amended, but amending the Constitution and ripping it up the back and tearing out its vitals are two different things. We want to stand by the Constitution in its spirit and meaning and intent, and in the fundamental parts thereof." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, October 1912, pp. 67-68.)

101:77

"for the rights and protection of all flesh"

"In section 101 the Lord speaks about the constitution of this land. He says it was framed by wise men whom he raised up for that very purpose. What for? To maintain the rights and privileges 'of all flesh.' Not alone the people of this land. The principles of that great instrument are to go forth to the nations, and the time will come when they will prevail, just as sure as the sun shines even when it appears to be in darkness and the clouds are over it." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, April 1917, p. 20.)

101:81-85

Parable of the woman and the unjust judge

See Parables in Appendix A.

The Lord indicated that he would liken "the children of Zion" unto this parable. The widow in the parable is evidently representative of the children of Zion (members of the Church), while the unjust judge is representative of the various state and national leaders who had it in their power to redress the wrongs of the Saints (children of Zion), but refused to do so.

101:95

"my act, my strange act, and . . . my work, my strange work"

See material for D&C 95:4.

"The Lord has said by the mouth of the Prophet Isaiah, that he would proceed to do a marvelous work and a wonder [Isa. 29:14]; and when I look at the rise and progress of this Church, when I behold the great work the Lord has performed, it was a marvelous work and a wonder indeed. . . . This is certainly a strange work and a wonder. There has been every exertion made to stay it. Armies have been sent forth to destroy this people; but we have been upheld and sustained by the hand of the Lord until today." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 21:124-25.)

101:96

"Sidney Gilbert"

For biographical information on Sidney Gilbert, see Appendix B.
