Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 102

Background information on section 102

"At a council of the High Priests and Elders, (Orson Hyde, clerk,) at my house in Kirtland, on the evening of the 12th of February, I remarked that I should endeavor to set before the council the dignity of the office which had been conferred on me by the ministering of the angel of God, by His own voice, and by the voice of this Church; that I had never set before any council in all the order in which it ought to be conducted, which, perhaps, has deprived the councils of some or many blessings.

"And I continued and said, no man is capable of judging a matter, in council, unless his own heart is pure; and that we are frequently so filled with prejudice, or have a beam in our own eye, that we are not capable of passing right decisions.

"Our acts are recorded, and at a future day they will be laid before us, and if we should fail to judge right and injure our fellow-beings, they may there, perhaps, condemn us; there they are of great consequence, and to me the consequence appears to be of force, beyond anything which I am able to express. Ask yourselves, brethren, how much you have exercised yourselves in prayer since you heard of this council; and if you are now prepared to sit in council upon the soul of your brother.

"On the 18th of January I reviewed and corrected the minutes of the organization of the High Council, and on the 19th of February, the Council assembled according to adjournment, from the 17th, (Oliver Cowdery and Orson Hyde, clerks,) when the revised minutes were presented and read to the Council. I urged the necessity of prayer, that the Spirit might be given, that the things of the Spirit might be judged thereby, because the carnal mind cannot discern the things of God. The minutes were read three times, and unanimously adopted and received for a form and constitution of the High Council of the Church of Christ hereafter; with this provision, that if the President should hereafter discover anything lacking in the same, he should be privileged to supply it." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:25-26, 31.)

"A few days before the organization of this High Council, the Prophet addressed a council of High Priests and Elders on the subject of the proper order in such gatherings. 'In ancient days,' he said, 'councils were conducted with such strict propriety, that no one was allowed to whisper, be weary, leave the room, or get uneasy in the least, until the voice of the Lord, by revelation, or the voice of the Council, by the Spirit, was obtained, which has not been observed in this Church to the present time' (HC 2:25)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 658 )

102:1-34

Procedures governing "the high council of the church of Christ"

"After giving . . . instruction the Prophet organized the first high council in the Church. There were twenty-four of the brethren present all of whom were high priests. The high council was appointed by revelation and the Lord pointed out the duties of such a council, which are to settle difficulties in the Church which could not be settled in a bishop's court. The First Presidency of the Church acted as the presidency of this high council which was given jurisdiction over the affairs in dispute, in all the Church. . . .

"It was voted that this council could not act without a majority of the members being present. Then if there were only seven they could appoint temporarily other priests (high priests) who were considered worthy to sit in the place of absent members. It was also voted that whenever any vacancy should occur by death or removal, the vacancy should be filled by the nomination of the president or presidents, and then sanctioned by the general council of high priests. The President of the Church was appointed by revelation to preside in this council, his counselors were chosen in like manner. In the absence of the president then the counselors had power to preside, both or either of them.

"The twelve councilors, when cases were brought before them, were to cast lots by numbers to ascertain which of the twelve should speak first, commencing with number one and so on in succession to number twelve. In simple cases only two would speak; if the cases were difficult then four would be appointed and in extreme cases six could speak, but never more than six. The accused was entitled to one-half of the council to watch his case to see that justice was given him, but every man was to speak according to equity and justice. The councilors who drew the even numbers were to stand in behalf of the accused. After the evidence was given the president would give his decision. A majority of the council was necessary to sustain a decision.

"When abroad a council of high priests could be called in difficult cases to sit in judgment. Written decisions by such councils were to be forwarded to the First Presidency of the Church. In case of a person being dissatisfied with a decision he had the right to appeal. When the twelve apostles sit as a high council no appeal can be taken from their decision, except it be in cases of transgression and then the matter is to be considered, if evidence warrants, by the general authorities of the Church.

"Immediately after the organization of this council there were several cases brought before it and decisions rendered. It might be considered in this day when we have a few high council trials, that many of the cases brought before this first high council were trivial in their nature. Today only major cases of transgression, seemingly, are considered by such bodies in the stakes of Zion." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 3:15-16.)

"Many high councils exist in the Church at the present time, there being one in every Stake of Zion. . . . The plan of settling disputes and preventing litigation among brethren, which the Prophet was then inspired to introduce [The high council, Nov. 17, 1834] has grown with the growth of the Church, and the high council has performed an important mission in the years which have followed. It has worked without fees; it has known no coercion; the honesty of its decisions have been beyond question; and often it has been appealed to by men not of the faith that their disputes might be settled with fairness and economy. It has never usurped the function of the criminal courts; it has never sought to enforce its judgment by any civil process. It has only decreed according to clear and unmistakable justice and has left the parties to accept the judgment, and if not complied with or appealed from, to have Church fellowship withdrawn from them. The rules which the Prophet established to control its proceedings under divine guidance were delivered to it at the time of organization, and they, speaking of all the high councils which have since been organized, are still governed by them." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, pp. 154-55.)

President Harold B. Lee has indicated some of the many duties of the present stake high councils throughout the Church:

"It is the most serious responsibility when they must sit as a court in judgment upon those who are living in defiance of the commandments. . . . But if this were the only thing that the high council had to do, they would not be too busy. I am sure they are not as busy as they ought to be in that field sometimes. . . . But most of their duties lie in . . . what we call 'semi-administrative' functions. . . . One of the most fundamental is to have, under the direction of the Presidency, the supervision of the Priesthood . . . to do for the Priesthood quorums supervising, training, doing all things necessary to strengthen the Priesthood. They are to look after the auxiliaries, to be advisors there, and then they have a responsibility between the presidency in the ward, and it is a very delicate relationship, and I have tried to word it carefully, they are to be 'contacts or intermediaries' to such extent as the presidency may direct. . . .

"They're to be home missionaries sent out once a month by the stake presidency to speak on subjects or to discuss matters that might be thought pertinent to the need at that time. This may be extended to any assignment that the Presidency wants to give. If we have a weak bishopric or weak branch presidency, the high council member may be assigned to actually live with that weak leader in the ward or branch to teach him his duties. He might go there as a watchman if it is understood that there are some doctrines being taught which are false. He might present himself at the Sacrament meeting, he might go to the gospel doctrine class or the Seventies class, wherever that may be reported, and he goes there to get the climate of the ward in order to be what the presidency has assigned him to be, a 'watchman on the tower' as it were.

"Now when you see the stake organization functioning that way, you see how important the work of the high council in today's organization becomes." (CN, Aug. 26, 1961, p. 11.)
