Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 103

Background information on section 103

"In a previous Revelation (Section 101:55-60), it was made known to the Prophet that he would be required, at some future time, to lead 'the strength of mine house' to the land of Zion, in order to 'redeem' it. The Revelation in this Section was received four months and twelve days afterwards, directing him to begin to gather up the strength of the Church for a relief expedition. Elders Lyman Wight and Parley P. Pratt had just arrived in Kirtland, from Missouri, with a message from the Saints. A meeting of the High Council was called. The messengers from Zion told the Council that the scattered Saints had obtained food and clothing in exchange for labor, and that they were quite comfortable for the time being; but they were grief-stricken because they had been driven from their homes in Zion, and they earnestly desired to know, if possible, how and by what means Zion was to be redeemed. This Revelation, given before the meeting of the Council was held, is an answer to that very question. When the messengers had stated the case, the Prophet had the answer ready. He had prepared to announce that he was going to Zion and that he would call for volunteers to accompany him. The Council endorsed this, and between thirty and forty men volunteered to go, whereupon the Prophet Joseph was elected Commander-in-Chief of the expedition." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 659-60.)

"The high council of the Church met February 24, 1834, at the house of the Prophet for the purpose of receiving the message of Lyman Wight and Parley P. Pratt, delegates from the brethren in Missouri who came to Kirtland to report on conditions among the exiles driven from Jackson County. Hyrum Smith and Joseph Coe were appointed to act in the stead of John Smith and John P. Greene who were absent. When the council was called to order and prayer had been offered by the Prophet, these two brethren delivered their message in relation to the condition of the brethren in Clay County, Missouri. They stated that the brethren there were anxious to know how and by what means Zion was to be redeemed. In Clay County they had been able to obtain food and raiment from the citizens in exchange for their labor, but the idea of being driven from their homes pained them, and they desired to know what the Lord would direct in the matter of reinstating them in their lands. None of them had broken their covenant by selling their lands, except William E. M'Lellin, who had sold into the hands of the enemy thirty acres, and he would have sold seven more acres if a brother had not come to the rescue and purchased them." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:481-82.)

"After making our escape into the county of Clay—being reduced to the lowest poverty—I made a living by day labor, jobbing, building, or wood cutting, till some time in the winter of 1834, when a general Conference was held at my house, in which it was decided that two of the Elders should be sent to Ohio, in order to counsel with President Smith and the Church at Kirtland, and take some measures for the relief or restoration of the people thus plundered and driven from their homes. The question was put to the Conference: 'Who would volunteer to perform so great a journey?'

"The poverty of all, and the inclement season of the year made all hesitate. At length Lyman Wight and myself offered our services, which were readily accepted. I was at this time entirely destitute of proper clothing for the journey; and I had neither horse, saddle, bridle, money nor provisions to take with me; or to leave with my wife, who lay sick and helpless most of the time.

"Under these circumstances I knew not what to do. Nearly all had been robbed and plundered, and all were poor. As we had to start without delay, I almost trembled at the undertaking; it seemed to be all but an impossibility; but 'to him that believeth all things are possible.' . . . We were soon ready, and on the first of February we mounted our horses, and started in good cheer to ride one thousand or fifteen hundred miles through a wilderness country. We had not one cent of money in our pockets on starting.

"We traveled every day, whether through storm or sunshine, mud, rain or snow; except when our public duties called us to tarry. We arrived in Kirtland early in the spring, all safe and sound; we had lacked for nothing on the road, and now had plenty of funds in hand. President Joseph Smith and the Church in Kirtland received us with a hospitality and joy unknown except among the Saints; and much interest was felt there, as well as elsewhere, on the subject of our persecution.

"The President inquired of the Lord concerning the matter, and a further mission was appointed us [Section 103]." (Parley P. Pratt, APPP, pp. 107-9.)

103:3

"measure of their iniquities, that their cup might be full"

See material for 101:11.

103:4

"chastened for a little season"

See Season in Appendix A.

"All this time the cry of the exiled Saints in Missouri was ascending to heaven for the redemption of their homes and for their own release from oppression. In a revelation given to the Prophet February 24, 1834, the Lord made known that the wicked had been permitted to fill up the measure of their iniquities that those who are called after His name might be chastened for a season; because in many things they had not hearkened unto His commandments." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, pp. 155-56.)

"The Lord here explains and describes to the Church very plainly the reasons why they were so grievously and severely chastened: [Sec. 103:5-10, quoted.]

"There cannot be a doubt in any faithful man's mind concerning the truth of this promise—the promise of victory and deliverance on the one hand, the promise of punishment, disaster and trouble on the other. The Latter-day Saints have in their experience proved fully the truth of these words. They have seen them fulfilled to the very letter. When they have been faithful in keeping the commandments of God they have prospered and they have had deliverance. When they have been unfaithful they have met with trouble and serious difficulty. It is necessary that the wicked should have the opportunity to exercise their agency in fighting the work of God. They have the privilege to do everything in their power to destroy it, and they will be permitted to do this until the cup of their iniquity is full." (George Q. Cannon, CR, October 1899, pp. 47-49.)

103:9

"a light unto the world . . . saviors of men"

See Saviors in Appendix A.

103:10

"as salt that has lost its savor"

See Salt and savor in Appendix A.

"The Latter-day Saints are called upon to obey the commandments of God. He has revealed Himself with power to them. He bears testimony to them all the time concerning His great work that He is seeking to establish in the earth. He wants to make us the saviors of men. He calls us the salt of the earth. We are the salt of the earth. We are not conceited in saying this, because the acts of the faithful Latter-day Saints are such as to bring salvation to those who are connected with them. I wish to illustrate this so that you can see it for yourselves. Look around you and see the men and the women who have proved themselves unworthy of the principles of the Gospel, and have departed from them. Are they not like salt that has lost its savor? We have had hundreds of them; they have got indifferent; they have lost their savor, and are good for nothing. The Saints are compared to salt that has its saving properties. [Sec. 101:39-40.] Wherever we go we should be saviors of men. We should seek for the salvation of the human family to the fullest extent in our power." (George Q. Cannon, CR, October 1899, pp. 47-49 )

103:15-20

"the redemption of Zion must needs come by power"

"It appears from this declaration that the redemption of Zion was not to come immediately, but was to be postponed to some future day. Moreover, that day would not come until the members of the Church were willing to keep their covenants and walk unitedly, for until the members of the Church learn to walk in full accord and in obedience with all of the commandments, this day cannot come. It may be necessary in order to bring this to pass for the Lord to use drastic measures and cleanse the Church from everything that offends. This he has promised to do when he is ready to redeem Zion. (See Matt. 13:41.) Orson Pratt discoursing on the redemption of Zion said:

" 'When we go back to Jackson County, we are to go back with power. Do you suppose that God will reveal his power among an unsanctified people, who have no regard nor respect for his laws and institutions but who are filled with covetousness? No. When God shows forth his power among the Latter-day Saints, it will be because there is a union of feeling in regard to doctrine, and in regard to everything that God has placed in their hands; and not only a union, but a sanctification on their part, that there shall not be a spot or wrinkle as it were, but everything shall be as fair as the sun that shines in the heavens.' (JD 15:361.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:484.)

"I expect that when the Lord leads forth His people to build up the city of Zion, His presence will be visible. When we speak of the presence of the Lord we speak of an exhibition of power. . . . We shall go back to Jackson County. Not that all this people will leave these mountains, or all be gathered together in a camp, but when we go back there will be a very large organization consisting of thousands, and tens of thousands, and they will march forward, the glory of God overshadowing their camp by day in the form of a cloud, and a pillar of flaming fire by night, the Lord's voice being uttered forth before his army. Such a period will come in the history of this people . . . and his people will go forth and build up Zion according to celestial law." (Orson Pratt, JD 15:364.)

103:16

"a man . . . like as Moses"

"In modern revelation the President of the Church is frequently compared to Moses. Soon after the organization of the Church, the Lord said, 'No one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this Church excepting my servant, Joseph Smith, Jun., for he receiveth them even as Moses.' [D&C 28:2.] In one of the great revelations upon Priesthood, this is more specifically expressed: 'The duty of the President of the office of the High Priesthood is to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses.' [D&C 107:91.] The discussion of this question among the Saints, led to the following statement in the Times and Seasons (6:922) by John Taylor, then the editor: 'The President (of the Church) stands in the Church as Moses did the children of Israel, according to the revelations.' The man like unto Moses in the Church is the President of the Church." (John A. Widtsoe, ER, p. 197.)

103:21

"Joseph Smith is the man . . . in the parable"

"In a revelation given December 16, 1833, the Lord in a parable spoke of the conditions in Missouri. . . . [Sec. 101:43-62.]

"In a revelation given February 24, 1834 [Sec. 103], the Lord referred to this former revelation and said that Joseph Smith (Baurak Ale) was the man to whom he likened the servant 'to whom the Lord of the vineyard spake in the parable which I have given unto you.' [Sec. 103:21.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 3:18.)

103:27

"Let no man be afraid to lay down his life for my sake"

"On the Sabbath day, February 8th, 1835, Joseph invited Brigham and Joseph Young to his home and listened to some of their sweetest hymns. . . . Joseph had seen in vision the brethren who had died of cholera in Missouri; and he related the vision to his visitors, saying: 'If I get a mansion as bright as theirs, I shall ask no more.'" (George Q. Cannon, LJS, p. 176.)

103:29-30, 37-40

For biographical information on persons mentioned in these verses, see Appendix B.

103:30-40

Instructions pertaining to the organization of Zion's Camp

"Parley P. Pratt and Lyman Wight, the messengers from the land of Zion, were commanded not to return until they had obtained companies to go up unto the land of their brethren. The companies were to be by tens, or by twenties, or by fifties, or by hundreds, until they had obtained the number of five hundred men. If they could not obtain five hundred they were to seek diligently to get three hundred, and if they could not obtain three hundred, then they were to obtain one hundred. They were not, however, to go up to the land of Zion until they had obtained at least one hundred. The Prophet Joseph was to go up with them and preside in their midst, for, [Sec. 103:36, quoted]. Parley P. Pratt was to go with Joseph Smith, the Prophet; Lyman Wight with Sidney Rigdon; Hyrum Smith with Frederick G. Williams; Orson Hyde with Orson Pratt, on this mission to raise funds and volunteers to undertake this journey to assist their exiled brethren in the land of Zion." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 3:20-21.)
