Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 104

Background information on section 104

"April 23.—Assembled in Council with Elders Sidney Rigdon, Frederick G. Williams, Newel K. Whitney, John Johnson, and Oliver Cowdery; and united in asking the Lord to give Elder Zebedee Coltrin influence over Brother Jacob Myres, to obtain the money which he has gone to borrow for us, or cause him to come to this place and bring it himself. I also received the following: [D&C 104.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 2:54.)

"The Church being in dire distress financially, brethren had been sent out to see if they could not collect funds for its relief, both in Kirtland and for Zion. A strong appeal to Orson Hyde was issued April 7, 1834. (See HC 2:48.) In the minutes of the conference held at Norton, Medina County, Ohio, the deliverance of Zion was earnestly discussed. The Prophet Joseph Smith who was present said in the course of his remarks that 'if Zion is not delivered, the time is near when all of this Church, wherever they may be found, will be persecuted and destroyed in like manner'; that is in the manner in which the saints in Jackson County were destroyed. Destruction in this sense means to be persecuted, mobbed and scattered, their property being lost to them.

"On the 10th of April, a council of the United Order was held. It was there agreed that the Order, as it was then organized, be dissolved, and each member have his stewardship set off to him. Previously to this time, the United Order of Zion and of Kirtland stood as one unit. On April 23, 1834, the Prophet received an important revelation concerning the 'Order of the Church for the benefit of the poor.' (D&C 104.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:487.)

"Before the brethren of Zion's Camp were ready to begin the journey to Missouri, the Prophet received this Revelation concerning the property belonging to the United Order. This Order had been established by Revelation (See Sec. 82), and its temporal affairs were to be placed on a solid foundation, before the journey to Zion. The brethren were going to face the lion in his den. They did not know whether they would return. Heber C. Kimball says of the departure, on the 5th of May, 'Truly, this was a solemn morning to me. I took leave of my wife and children and friends, not knowing whether I would see them again in the flesh, as myself and brethren were threatened, both in that country and Missouri, by enemies, that they would destroy us and exterminate us from the land.' " (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 668.)

104:1

"a united order, and an everlasting order for the benefit of my church"

See United Order in Appendix A.

104:7

"at my right hand"

See Right hand in Appendix A.

104:9-10

"buffetings of Satan"

See Satan in Appendix A.

104:11-12

"stewardship "

See Steward in Appendix A.

104:16

"the poor shall be exalted"

See Poor in Appendix A.

104:17

"the earth is full, and there is enough and to spare"

The Lord created the heavens and the earth and all things that are in them. (3 Ne. 9:15.) Also, God knows all things from the beginning of the earth to the end thereof. Thus, the Lord knows how many people are destined to live upon this earth, and he has provided resources whereby all their physical needs can be met if these resources are used properly.

104:20

For information on the persons mentioned in this section, see Appendix B.

For an explanation of the use of the unusual names and titles, see background information for section 78.

104:20-42

"stewards. . . stewardship"

See Steward in Appendix A.

"Then, in the revelation the Lord assigns stewardships to many of the brethren. He commanded that there should be a separation of the United Order in Zion from the Order in Kirtland. Each was to act henceforth independently of the other. Distance was too great between these places for unity of purpose in all things. Each order was to be organized in the names of the brethren residing in each place, and to do business in their own names. This separation and dissolving of the former order came about also because of transgression and covetousness on the part of some. They were to understand that all the properties were the Lord's, otherwise their faith was vain, and therefore they were stewards before the Lord. All of this was to be done for the purpose of building up the Church and Kingdom of God on the earth, and to prepare the people for the time when the Lord should come to dwell upon the earth." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:489-90.)

104:31, 33-46

"I will bless, and multiply blessings upon them"

"Now some persons may begin to harrow up their feelings, and to cherish in their hearts murmurings because God in his providence and in his mercy and kindness, may begin to pour upon this man and upon that man blessings by which he accumulates wealth, and by which he is made comfortable and happy; they are envious and jealous. . . . If we envy those that are really beginning to participate a little in the inheritance of all things, is not this a strong presumptive evidence within ourselves that we are not heirs to all things, neither are we willing that our brethren should be.

"When a man of God is blessed from on high and shall begin to gather around him means sufficient to place him beyond the reach of immediate want, God hath done it—God hath blessed that person—and every Saint will feel thankful to see his brethren so prospered and blessed of the Lord, feeling encouraged that his time will come sometime if he continues faithful. . . .

"The Lord sees us all and knows what our feelings are—the very thoughts and intents of our hearts are laid bare before Him [Sec. 38:2], and when He sees that we are prepared to endure great earthly blessings, do you think that any trifling circumstance will cause him to delay and wait and put us off and make us wait for his blessings." (Orson Hyde, JD 10:263.)

104:43

"Gazelam "

For an explanation of this and other unusual names and titles, see background information on section 76. "He was also called Gazelam, being a person to whom the Lord had given the Urim and Thummim." (Orson Pratt, JD 16:156.)

104:66

"the sacred treasury of the Lord"

"As the plan developed the Lord provided for the establishment of a 'sacred treasury' [see Sec. 104:60-77] and 'another treasury' into which the general funds of the Church—the avails of the 'residues'—were to be paid and which were to be drawn upon for the immediate needs of the poor primarily and after that for the general needs of the Church. [D&C 104:67-69; 42:33-35.] It would seem that funds from the treasury for the improvement of the property of a stewardship might properly be granted under justifying circumstances. [D&C 104:62, 73; 58.]" (Albert E. Bowen, Church Welfare Program, pp. 9-10.)

"They were to prepare a treasury and a treasurer for the sacred things of the Church. One who was wise was to be appointed to this labor. Then again they were to have another treasury and treasurer to keep the moneys and properties of the Church. These men so appointed were to be trustworthy and fitted for their callings. A seal was to be placed upon each treasury. In the first, all the sacred documents, writings and all sacred things that should be preserved, should have a seal, which was to be placed upon them. In the second treasury should be placed the funds received from the people, which funds were to be used for holy and sacred purposes. [Sec. 104:60-69.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 3:25-26.)

104:71-72

"common consent of the order"

See Common consent in Appendix A.

"All these things were to be done by common consent. There were to be no dictators in the management of the Lord's business. No part of the funds or property could be taken out of the treasury without the voice of the order. If any man among them should declare, I have need of this to help me in my stewardship, if it be five talents, or ten talents (dollars) or whatever the amount his claim might be it was to be investigated and if found to be worthy the request would be granted. This had to be, however, by the common consent." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 3:25-26.)

104:78

"it is my will that you shall pay all your debts"

"Joseph was doing business in Kirtland, and it seemed as though all creation was upon him, to hamper him in every way, and they drove him from his business, and it left him so that some of his debts had to be settled afterwards; and I am thankful to say that they are settled up; still further, we have sent East to New York, to Ohio, and to every place where I had any idea that Joseph had ever done business, and inquired if there was a man left to whom Joseph Smith, Jun., the Prophet, owed a dollar, or a sixpence. If there was we would pay it. But I have not been able to find one. I have advertised this through every neighborhood and place where he formerly lived, consequently I have a right to conclude that all his debts were settled." (Brigham Young, JD 18:242.)

"It is a rule of our financial and economic life in all the world that interest is to be paid on borrowed money. May I say something about interest?

"Interest never sleeps nor sickens nor dies; it never goes to the hospital; it works on Sundays and holidays; it never takes a vacation; it never visits nor travels; it takes no pleasure; it is never laid off work nor discharged from employment; it never pays taxes; it buys no food; it wears no clothes; it is unhoused and without home and so has no washing, it has neither wife, children, father, mother, nor kinfolk to watch over and care for; it has no expense of living; it has neither weddings nor births nor deaths; it has no love, no sympathy; it is as hard and soulless as a granite cliff. Once in debt, interest is your companion every minute of the day and night; you cannot shun it or slip away from it; you cannot dismiss it; it yields neither to entreaties, demands, or orders; and whenever you get in its way or cross its course or fail to meet its demands, it crushes you.

"So much for the interest we pay. Whoever borrows should understand what interest is; it is with them every minute of the day and night." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., CR, April 1938, pp. 102-3.)
