Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 105

Background information on section 105

"Zion's Camp arrived at Fishing River on the 19th of June, 1834. On the 22nd, Sheriff Gillium, of Clay County, visited the Camp in order to find out the intention of the brethren. The Prophet addressed him and his companions and then issued a signed statement in which the following occurs, 'We are willing for twelve disinterested men, six to be chosen by each party, and these men shall say what the possessions of those men are worth who cannot live with us in the County: and they shall have their money in one year; and none of the "Mormons" shall enter that County to reside, until the money is paid. The damages that we have sustained in consequence of being driven away, shall also be left to the twelve men; or, they may all live in the County if they choose, and we will never molest them if they let us alone and permit us to enjoy our rights. We want to live in peace with all men; and equal rights is all we ask.' The opponents refused to listen to this fair proposition.

"The very day on which Sheriff Gillium visited the Camp, the Prophet received this Revelation." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 679-680.)

"Cornelius Gillium, the sheriff of Clay county, came to our camp to hold consultation with us. I marched my company into a grove near by, and formed in a circle, with Gillium in the centre. Gillium commenced by saying that he had heard that Joseph Smith was in the camp, and if so he would like to see him. I arose and replied, 'I am the man.' This was the first time that I had been discovered or made known to my enemies since I left Kirtland. Gillium then gave us instruction concerning the manners, customs, and dispositions of the people, and what course we ought to pursue to secure their favor and protection, making certain inquiries, to which we replied, which were afterwards published, and will appear under date of publication.

"I received the following:—[D&C 105.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 2:108.)

105:8

"there are many who will say: Where is their God?"

"In that day when branches of the Church were called upon to assist their brethren they said, [Sec. 105:8, quoted]. There were many who refused to go with the Prophet in Zion's Camp or send money to help their afflicted brethren. Because of this lack of faith and obedience, instead of redeeming Zion at that time, the Lord declared that Zion should have to 'wait for a little season.' This waiting was for the purpose of preparing the members of the Church, through faith, obedience, experience in suffering if they would not repent, so that they would eventually be willing to be obedient." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 3:37-38.)

105:9-10

"that my people may be taught more perfectly"

"The Saints in Jackson County and other localities, refused to comply with the order of consecration, consequently they were allowed to be driven from their inheritances; and should not return until they were better prepared to keep the law of God, by being more perfectly taught in reference to their duties, and learn of obedience. And I think we are not justified in anticipating the privilege of returning to build the center stake of Zion, until we shall have shown obedience to the law of consecration. One thing, however, is certain, we shall not be permitted to enter the land from whence we were expelled, till our hearts are prepared to honor this law, and we become sanctified through the practice of the truth." (Lorenzo Snow, JD 16:276.)

105:11-12, 18, 33

"endowed with power from on high"

See Endowment in Appendix A.

"While thus encamped on Fishing River the Lord also in this revelation emphasized the fact that the Kirtland Temple was not to be delayed but built unto his name. He had promised the brethren an endowment, those who were faithful. This temple had to be built so that this endowment could be given. At the end of the journey of this Zion's Camp, the Lord named some of the faithful brethren whom he had appointed to receive this endowment." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:6.)

105:14

"I will fight your battles"

"As Zion's Camp approached Richmond and they were nearing Jackson County, the Prophet's anxiety for the camp increased, for they were in constant danger of attack from their enemies. On the 18th of June about fifty of the mob crossed the Lexington Ferry for the purpose of joining the Ray County mob preparatory to making an attack on the camp. Others had returned to Jackson County under the direction of Samuel C. Owen and James Campbell. This man Campbell swore that 'the eagles and turkey buzzards shall eat my flesh if I do not fix Joe Smith and his army so that their signs will not hold shucks, before two days have passed.' As these mobbers attempted to cross the Missouri River, 'the angel of God saw fit to sink the boat about the middle of the river, and seven out of twelve that attempted to cross, were drowned. Thus suddenly and justly, went they to their own place. Campbell was among the missing. His body floated down the river some four or five miles and lodged upon a pile of driftwood, where the eagles, buzzards, ravens, crows, and wild animals ate his flesh from his bones, to fulfill his own words and left him a horrible example of God's vengeance.' (HC 2:99-100.)

"On the morning of the 19th of June, the Prophet feeling that they were in an unsafe place commanded that the camp move forward without delay. They passed through Richmond, where a black woman called to Luke Johnson. He went to hear what she had to say and she said, 'There is a company of men lying in wait here, who are calculating to kill you this morning as you pass through.' The company halted for breakfast and were kindly treated and given milk by a farmer. After their breakfast they attempted to continue their journey, but had not gone far before a wagon broke down, the wheels ran off another, and many incidents occurred to hinder their progress. That night they had traveled only to an elevated piece of ground between Little and Big Fishing rivers. While they were making their camp five men with guns rode into the camp and told them they would 'see hell before morning.' This was said with accompanying oaths and blasphemy. They stated that armed men were gathering from Ray and Clay counties to join those from Jackson, and they had sworn the destruction of the camp. During that day about two hundred men from Jackson County made arrangements to cross the Missouri River near the mouth of Fishing River, and be ready to meet the Richmond mob near the Fishing River ford. After the first scow load of about forty had passed over the river the scow had great difficulty in returning and did not reach the Jackson side until dark. While this was going on and the five ruffians were in the camp swearing vengeance, wind and thunder and a rising cloud indicated an approaching storm. Shortly after, it began to rain and hail and the storm increased in intensity. An hour before sundown the mobbers commenced firing a cannon, but when the storm broke they sought shelter under their wagons, in hollow trees and wherever they could hide. Their ammunition became soaked, and when morning came they 'took the back track for Independence.' Very little hail fell in the camp. The brethren found shelter in an old meetinghouse while in the camp of the mobbers hailstones and lumps of ice cut down trees, and crops and trees were twisted out of shape. The water in Little Fishing River rose thirty feet in that many minutes. It was reported that one mobber was killed by lightning and another had his hand torn off when his horse drew his hand between logs of a corn crib. Some out of this wicked mob said if that was the way God fought for the Mormons, they might as well go about their business." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:1-3.)

105:25-27

"I will soften the hearts of the people, as I did the heart of Pharoah"

The dealings of the Lord with the Pharoah of Egypt are recorded in Exodus, chapters 5 through 15.

105:29

"laws of consecration"

See Consecration in Appendix A.

105:31

"fair as the sun"

See Banners in Appendix A.
