Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 106

Background information on section 106

"It now being the last of the month, and the Elders beginning to come in, it was necessary to make preparations for the school for the Elders, wherein they might be more perfectly instructed in the great things of God, during the coming winter. A building for a printing office was nearly finished, and the lower story of this building was set apart for that purpose, (the school) when it was completed. So the Lord opened the way according to our faith and works, and blessed be His name.

"No month ever found me more busily engaged than November; but as my life consisted of activity and unyielding exertions, I made this my rule: When the Lord commands, do it. . . .

"I continued my labors daily, preparing for the school, and received the following: [D&C 106.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 2:169-70.)

"On his journey among the churches to gather up the strength of the Lord's House, the Prophet came to the City of Freedom, N. Y., where he was entertained by Warren A. Cowdery. He held several meetings there. One of the converts was Heman Hyde, and shortly after his baptism, March 11, 1834, his parents and thirty or forty others were baptized and organized into a Branch, from which nucleus the light spread and souls were gathered into the fold in all the regions round. In this Revelation, Warren A. Cowdery is called to the office of presiding High Priest over the Branch in Freedom and vicinity." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 689-90 )

106:1-8

"Warren A. Cowdery . . . warn the people"

See Missionary service in Appendix A. Warren Cowdery was an older brother of Oliver Cowdery; they were two of eight children born to William, Jr., and Rebecca Fuller Cowdery.

"Warren A. received a revelation November 25, 1834 calling him to the office of presiding High Priest in Freedom, New York. While residing here, he preferred charges against the Twelve Apostles for their alleged failure to teach the Saints while in Freedom, but he later made an apology. He no doubt left the Church at the same time as Oliver, but he remained in the East and did not join his brother when he (Oliver) was reunited with the Church." (Oliver Cowdery-Second Elder and Scribe, p. 17.)

106:4-5

The second coming will overtake "the world as a thief in the night"

See Second coming in Appendix A, and material for 45:19.

106:5

"gird up your loins"

See Armor of God in Appendix A.

106:6

"scepter"

See Scepter in Appendix A.
