Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 107

Background information on section 107

"This evening [March 12, 1835] the Twelve assembled, and the Council was opened by President Joseph Smith, Jun., and he proposed we take our first mission through the Eastern States, to the Atlantic Ocean, and hold conferences in the vicinity of the several branches of the Church for the purpose of regulating all things necessary for their welfare.

"It was proposed that the Twelve leave Kirtland on the 4th day of May, which was unanimously agreed to. . . .

"This afternoon [March 28, 1835] the twelve met in council, and had a time of general confession. On reviewing our past course we are satisfied, and feel to confess also, that we have not realized the importance of our calling to that degree we ought; we have been light-minded and vain, and in many things have done wrong. For all these things we have asked the forgiveness of our heavenly Father; and wherein we have grieved or wounded the feelings of the Presidency, we ask their forgiveness. The time when we are about to separate is near; and when we shall meet again, God only knows; we therefore feel to ask of him whom we have acknowledged to be our Prophet and Seer, that he inquire of God for us, and obtain a revelation, (if consistent) that we may look upon it when we are separated, that our hearts may be comforted. Our worthiness has not inspired us to make this request, but our unworthiness. We have unitedly asked God our heavenly Father to grant unto us through His Seer, a revelation of His mind and will concerning our duty the coming season, even a great revelation, that will enlarge our hearts, comfort us in adversity, and brighten our hopes amidst the powers of darkness." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:209-10. Recorded by Orson Hyde and William E. M'Lellin, clerks of the high council.)

"One hundred years ago this spring great things happened in this Church; the greatest, as an evidence of God's guiding hand over his Church, occurred on March 28th, 1835, just a few days more than one hundred years ago. On that day The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints received a revelation which is one of the most remarkable documents in the possession of man. It stands absolutely unique; there is none like it . . . it sets forth, in plainness and simplicity, the organization of the quorums of the priesthood; the mutual relations of the quorums to one another; the judicial system of the Church is foreshadowed and outlined; and there is a wonderful picture of the early history of the priesthood. I doubt whether any other such documents, of the same small extent, the same few number of words, lie at the foundation of any other great human institution. . . .

"It is so comprehensive in its brevity, so magnificent in its simplicity, that we have found no occasion, up to the present, to wish that it might have been more complete." (John A. Widtsoe, CR, April 1935, pp. 80-82.)

107:1

The names of the priesthoods in the Church

See Aaronic Priesthood and Melchizedek Priesthood in Appendix A.

107:2-12, 18-19, 22-40, 64-67, 89-98

Explanation of, and offices in, the Melchizedek Priesthood

See (1) Melchizedek Priesthood, (2) Priesthood, (3) Priesthood offices, and (4) Church offices and presiding quorums in Appendix A.

"Melchizedek Priesthood—So called after Melchizedek, king of Salem and Priest of the Most High God. In Psalm 110:4 it is foretold that the Messiah would be a 'Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.' Paul applies this prophecy to our Lord (Heb. 6:20), and the Jews generally regarded Melchizedek as a type of the royal Priesthood which the Messiah would hold." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 696.)

107:5

Offices are appendages to the priesthood

"The Lord here definitely declares that all authorities or offices, are appendages to the Melchizedek Priesthood. Every man ordained receives the Priesthood, and the office which he receives grows out of the Priesthood. Commenting on this principle, President Joseph F. Smith has said:

"'There is no office growing out of this Priesthood that is or can be greater than the Priesthood itself. It is from the Priesthood that the office derives its authority and power. No office gives authority to the Priesthood. But all offices in the Church derive their power, their virtue, their authority from the Priesthood. If our brethren would get this principle thoroughly established in their minds, there would be less misunderstanding in relation to the functions of government in the Church than there is.' (Gospel Doctrine, p. 184.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:19.)

107:13-17, 20, 68-75, 85-88

Explanation of and offices in, the Aaronic Priesthood.

See (1) Aaronic Priesthood, (2) Priesthood, (3) Priesthood offices, and (4) Church offices and presiding quorums in Appendix A.

"Aaronic Priesthood—So called after Aaron, the brother of Moses, who was made the High Priest, or presiding officer, of the Old Testament Priesthood and the Tabernacle service, an office which he filled for nearly forty years. It is also called the Levitical Priesthood, because Aaron was a descendant of Levi, the third son of Jacob and Leah, whose descendants were all set apart and consecrated for the sacred service. They had charge of the Sanctuary and the furniture belonging thereto." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 696.)

107:15

"bishopric"

See Bishop and Church offices and presiding quorums in Appendix A.

107:19

"mysteries of the kingdom of heaven"

See Mysteries in Appendix A.

107:22, 65-67, 78-84, 91-92

Duties of the First Presidency

See First Presidency and Church offices and presiding quorums in Appendix A.

107:23-24, 33, 35, 38-39

Duties of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles

See Council of the Twelve and Church offices and presiding

quorums in Appendix A.

107:25-26, 34, 93-97

Duties of the First Quorum of the Seventy

See First Quorum of the Seventy and Church offices and presiding quorums in Appendix A.

107:33-35, 97

"first unto the Gentiles and secondly unto the Jews"

See material for 29:30.

107:39-57

"Evangelical ministers," or patriarchs to be ordained by the Apostles

See Patriarch and Church offices and presiding quorums in Appendix A.

107:48-50

"Enoch . . . was translated"

See Enoch in Appendix A.

107:53

"Adam-ondi-Ahman "

See Adam-ondi-Ahman in Appendix A.

107:54-56

"Adam . . . Michael, the prince, the archangel"

See Adam in Appendix A.

107:57

"book of Enoch"

See Enoch in Appendix A.

"The Book of Enoch—The account is from the Book so named, but not from any book of Enoch now known to scholars. There is an alleged Book of Enoch extant, but it is no older than the second century B.C. Some time the genuine Book of Enoch will be revealed, from which some chapters in the Pearl of Great Price are copied, through the Spirit of Revelation." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 706.)

107:65-66

Titles of the President of the Church

See First Presidency in Appendix A.

107:76

"a literal descendant of Aaron has a legal right to the presidency of this priesthood"

See Aaronic Priesthood and Bishop in Appendix A.

107:82-83

The President of the Church can be tried before a Church court

"August 11, 1834, a number of high priests and elders assembled to investigate certain charges made by Elder Sylvester Smith against the Prophet Joseph Smith of 'criminal conduct' during the journey to and from Missouri. The Prophet called the meeting to order and spoke at length on the journey of Zion's Camp, and of the rebellious spirit of Sylvester Smith and others while on that journey. He said that he was called on at times to rebuke Sylvester Smith and others, and called on several of the brethren to testify in relation to these matters. After the Prophet had spoken Sylvester Smith arose and stated his case and made some confessions and asked forgiveness for some of his conduct. It appears from the minutes that this was a regular trial at which the Bishop of the Church, Newel K. Whitney, was called on to preside. After both the Prophet and Sylvester Smith had spoken, the members of the council which had been called spoke, on the invitation of Bishop Whitney, expressing their views as to the proper disposal of the case. After the brethren had spoken, Bishop Whitney, after a few remarks gave his decision, according to a motion previously made. The decision was to the effect 'that an article be published in the Evening and Morning Star, by the direction of the council, that the Church in Kirtland has investigated the conduct of President Joseph Smith, Jun., while journeying to the west, and returning; and that we find that he has acted in every respect in an honorable and proper manner with all monies and other properties entrusted to his charge, after which a vote was taken and carried to the above effect.' A committee was appointed to prepare an article for publication and Elder Sylvester Smith said he was willing to publish a confession in the Star.

"This is the first time in the history of the Church that a President of the Church had been brought to trial before the bishop and high priests on an accusation, according to the provision stated in the revelation. . . . From this account published in the history we see that the Prophet was perfectly willing to have a case, where accusations were brought against him, tried before the proper tribunal of the Church." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:9-10.)

107:85

"duty of a president over the office of a deacon"

See Deacon and Priesthood offices in Appendix A.

107:86

"duty of the president over the office of the teachers"

See Teacher and Priesthood offices in Appendix A.

107:87-88

"duty of the president over the Priesthood of Aaron [ which is] . . . to be a bishop "

See Priest, Bishop, and Priesthood offices in Appendix A.

107:89

"duty of the president over the office of elders"

See Elders and Priesthood offices in Appendix A.

107:92

"a seer, a revelator, a translator, and a prophet"

See Seer and Prophet in Appendix A.

107:99

"let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence"

"While the revelation is definite in outlining the responsibility, duty and authority of this [first] presidency, the Lord in his mercy, has made the duties and responsibilities and authority of every other man that holds the priesthood, just as clearly defined as for the presidency of the Church. Every man in this Church knows his calling, knows his place, knows his authority. There is no schism, no division, no misunderstanding, because the Lord, after he has outlined all of their duties, sends them forth to labor with this admonition: [Sec. 107:99, quoted.]" (Alonzo A. Hinckley, CR, April 1935, p. 73.)
