Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 108

Background information on section 108

"Lyman Sherman was one of the little band that made the journey to Missouri in company with the Prophet, in 1834, and when the Seventy were organized, he was chosen one of the first Seven Presidents. The day after Christmas, 1835, he went to the home of the Prophet and expressed a desire to have the Word of the Lord through him. 'For,' said he, 'I have been wrought upon to make known to you my feelings and desires, and was promised that I should have a Revelation which should make known my duty.' (HC 2:345.) This Revelation was given the same day in answer to prayer." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 713.)

108:4

"solemn assembly"

See Solemn assembly in Appendix A.

"Eventually the time arrived for the gathering of the solemn assembly. Tuesday, January 12, 1836, the Presidency of the Church met and arranged for a meeting on the morrow, to consider the subject of the solemn assembly. At the time appointed on the following day a council meeting was held at which the leading brethren were present. Some brethren were ordained. Vinson Knight was named as a counselor in the bishopric in Kirtland, he was then ordained to the office of high priest by Bishop Whitney and set apart as his counselor in the stead of Hyrum Smith who had been set apart in the presidency of the high council in Kirtland. Several brethren were set apart in the high council in Kirtland, filling vacancies created by some of the brethren being called to the apostleship and to other offices. The day was spent in testimony and blessing." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:34.)

"At early candle-light I met with the Presidency at the west school room, in the Temple [Kirtland], to attend to the ordinance of anointing our heads with holy oil; also the Councils of Kirtland and Zion met in the two adjoining rooms, and waited in prayer while we attended to the ordinance. . . .

"Many of my brethren who received the ordinance with me saw glorious visions also. Angels ministered unto them as well as to myself, and the power of the Highest rested upon us, the house was filled with the glory of God, and we shouted Hosanna to God and the Lamb. . . .

"Friday 22.—Attended at the school room at the usual hour, but instead of pursuing our studies, we spent the time in rehearsing to each other the glorious scenes that occurred on the preceding evening, while attending to the ordinance of holy anointing.

"In the evening we met at the same place, with the Council of the Twelve, and the Presidency of the Seventy, who were to receive this ordinance (of anointing and blessing). The High Councils of Kirtland and Zion were present also.

"After calling to order and organizing, the Presidency proceeded to consecrate the oil. . . .

"The Twelve then proceeded to anoint and bless the Presidency of the Seventy, and seal upon their heads power and authority to anoint their brethren." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:379, 381-83.)
