Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 109

Background information on section 109

"Long before the doors of the [Kirtland] temple were opened on the morning of the dedication, March 27, 1836, the people had assembled. When the doors were opened the people were admitted as far as the capacity of the building would permit. The First Presidency acted as ushers in the seating, and each quorum of the Priesthood was seated in their order. When the building was filled to capacity the doors were closed and those who could not enter were forced to wait until another session. . . .

"The Prophet then arose and presented the prayer of dedication. This prayer was given previously by revelation and is found in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 109. Naturally this is a comprehensive prayer that can be studied with great profit. It gives reference to the commandment that the temple should be built and speaks of the purpose for which it was built." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:43-44.)

"During the ceremonies of the dedication [Kirtland Temple] an angel appeared and sat near President Joseph Smith, Sen., and Frederick G. Williams, so that they had a fair view of his person. He was a very tall personage, black eyes, white hair, and stoop shouldered; his garment was whole, extending to near his ankles; on his feet he had sandals. He was sent as a messenger to accept of the dedication." (Heber C. Kimball, LHCK, p. 91.)

109:5

"Son of Man"

See Son of man in Appendix A.

109:7

"seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom"

See material for 88:118.

"Let me plead with you to give more attention to the standard works of the Church. There is so much literature that comes into our homes, I am sure, that we can hardly reach the standard works of the Church, yet the standard works should come first, and other literature afterwards. Of course, we must keep track of daily events, things that are going on in the world, but when it comes to reading books of interest and value, let us give preference to the Church works because they are more precious than any other books in the world." (Rudger Clawson, CR, October 1937, p. 113.)

109:7

"seek learning even by study and also by faith"

See material for 88:118.

109:10

"solemn assembly"

See Solemn assembly in Appendix A.

109:22

"thine angels have charge over them"

"Undoubtedly angels often guard us from accidents and harm, from temptation and sin. They may properly be spoken of as guardian angels. Many people have borne and may bear testimony to the guidance and protection that they have received from sources beyond their natural vision. Without the help that we receive from the constant presence of the Holy Spirit, and from possibly holy angels, the difficulties of life would be greatly multiplied. The common belief, however, that to every person born into the world is assigned a guardian angel to be with that person constantly, is not supported by available evidence. It is a very comforting thought, but at present without proof of its correctness. An angel may be a guardian angel though he come only as assigned to give us special help. In fact, the constant presence of the Holy Spirit would seem to make such a constant, angelic companionship unnecessary." (John A. Widtsoe, GI, pp. 28-29.)

109:34

"Jehovah "

See Jehovah and Jesus Christ in Appendix A.

"Who was it that gave the law to Moses? We are told it was Jehovah. Well, was Jesus Jehovah? Yes, according to the scriptures, both ancient and modern. . . . (D&C 110:3-4.)" (Charles W. Penrose, CR, April 1916, p. 18.)

109:36

"as . . . on the day of Pentecost"

"We read that Jesus, after his resurrection, breathed upon his disciples and said, 'Receive ye the Holy Ghost.' But we also read that he said, 'Behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high.' (Luke 24:49.) We read further, 'For the Holy Ghost was not yet given; because that Jesus was not yet glorified.' (John 7:39.) Thus the promise was made, but the fulfillment came after, so that the Holy Ghost sent by Jesus from the Father did not come in person until the day of Pentecost, and the cloven tongues of fire were the sign of his coming. This manifestation was repeated in this dispensation at the endowment on the Kirtland Temple, in the month of April, 1836." (First Presidency, IE, 19:460-61, March 1916.)

"I left the meeting in the charge of the Twelve, and retired about nine o'clock in the evening. The brethren continued exhorting, prophesying, and speaking in tongues until five o'clock in the morning. The Savior made His appearance to some, while angels ministered to others, and it was a Pentecost and an endowment indeed, long to be remembered, for the sound shall go forth from this place into all the world, and the occurrences of this day shall be handed down upon the pages of sacred history, to all generations; as the day of Pentecost, so shall this day be numbered and celebrated as a year of jubilee, and time of rejoicing to the Saints of the Most High God." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:432-33.)

109:37

"let thy house be filled as with a rushing mighty wind with thy glory"

"Elder George A. Smith rose to prophesy, when a noise was heard like the sound of a rushing wind. All the congregation arose, and many began to speak in tongues and prophesy. And then people of the neighborhood came running together (hearing an unusual sound within and seeing a bright light like a pillar of fire resting upon the Temple), and were astonished at what was taking place. This continued until the meeting closed, at 11 P.M. (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 721.)

109:44

"Help thy servants to say . . . Thy will be done, O Lord, and not ours"

"When things come up that require an exertion on our part, we should bring our wills into subjection to the will of the Father, and feel to say, what is the will of our Father, whom we are here in the world to serve? Then every act that we perform will be a success. We may not see its success today or tomorrow, nevertheless it will result in success." (Lorenzo Snow, CR, October 1899, p. 2.)

109:50

"Have mercy, O Lord, upon the wicked mob, who have driven thy people"

This touching plea by the Prophet not only reflects his great mercy and spirit of forgiveness, but also reinforces the commandment of the Savior that we should love our enemies. This prayer was given by revelation from the Savior to Joseph Smith.

109:51

"make bare thine arm"

See Arm of the Lord in Appendix A.

109:52

"root and branch"

See Root in Appendix A.

109:54

"the constitution of our land"

See Constitution in Appendix A.

109:62

"that Jerusalem, from this hour, may begin to be redeemed "

"The Lord has made great promises both to Israel, and the Jews, and concerning Jerusalem and its temple. Jerusalem, when Christ comes, is to be a holy city again. Another temple will be built, and Israel will be cleansed from all his sins.

"Ezekiel prophesied of the gathering of Israel and the building of the temple in Jerusalem after Israel has been gathered and cleansed. In that day the Lord will make an everlasting covenant with them, 'And I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore. My tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And the heathen shall know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore.' After giving the account of the great battle of Gog and Magog and the destruction of the wicked, he gives a detailed description of the glorious temple which shall be built as this sanctuary. For this description see Ezekiel, Chapters 40-45.

"In that day, when the Lord creates the 'new heavens and a new earth' he will 'create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.' He further says: 'And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people; and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old; but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed.' (Isa. 65:17-25.) In that day Jerusalem is redeemed and our Lord comes to reign, the Lord promised through Zechariah that Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited. (14:11.) Moreover, when Jerusalem becomes one of the two capitals for the King of kings, 'it shall come to pass that every one that is left of all the nations which came against Jerusalem shall even go up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles.' (Zech. 14:16.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:411.)

109:64

"the children of Judah may begin to return"

". . . the tribe of Judah will return to old Jerusalem. [Sec. 133:8, 13, 35.] . . . Judah shall obtain deliverance at Jerusalem. (See Joel 11:32; Isaiah 16:20 and 21; Jeremiah 34:12; Psalm 1:5; Ezekiel 34:11, 12 and 13.) These are testimonies that the Good Shepherd will put forth His own sheep, and lead them out from all nations where they have been scattered in a cloudy and dark day, to Zion, and to Jerusalem." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:315.)

"This great event . . . is one of the signs of the times, and is very important, it seems to me, particularly to all Christian people. It is transpiring in a small strip of country about one hundred and ten miles long and fifty to sixty miles wide, in an area about the size of the state of Vermont. . . .

"The number of Jews has multiplied in recent years in this area in a rather remarkable manner. Plans are underway for the incorporation of about a million and a half more during the immediate months ahead, and projected plans call for an eventual population of some four million in this area. . . .

"This miracle of the return of the Jews was to be one of the events to precede Christ's second coming, and the scriptures are very clear with reference to this fact. [Isa. 11:11-12; Jer. 30:3; 33:7.] . . .

"The prophets of the Book of Mormon even more clearly predict the conditions under which they will gather. These prophets also foresaw the time when they would begin to believe Jesus Christ [2 Nephi 30:7], that the kings of the Gentiles would be as nursing fathers and their queens nursing mothers in helping to bring about their return. [2 Nephi 10:3-9.] These prophets make it clear that eventually the fulness of the gospel will be carried to Jerusalem and to the descendants of Judah. [3 Nephi 20:29-31.]" (Ezra Taft Benson, CR, April 1950, pp. 72, 74.)

109:68

"[Joseph Smith] hath sincerely striven to do thy will"

"Joseph Smith was an obedient man. Humility always breeds obedience. Moreover, the revelations he received from God made obedience to truth the main issue of a happy gospel life. . . . His life was an example of obedience. He was shown the Book of Mormon plates; he knew where they were; yet despite his natural eagerness to possess them, he obediently saw them for four years only once a year, as commanded. Obediently, as the Lord directed, he went from place to place, built temples in the midst of his people's poverty, subjected himself to trials and toils, accepted plural marriage in the face of his training for monogamy—and in every manner throughout his life showed obedience to the Lord's will. As did Abraham of old, his all could be laid on the altar of the Lord. By these tests, as by many others, Joseph Smith was a great man." (John A. Widtsoe, JS, p. 333.)

109:73

"fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners"

See Banners in Appendix A.

109:74

"mountains to flow down . . . valleys to be exalted"

"In the resurrection which now approaches, and in connection with the glorious coming of Jesus Christ, the earth will undergo a change in its physical features, climate, soil, productions, and in its political, moral and spiritual government.

"Its mountains will be levelled, its valleys exalted, its swamps and sickly places will be drained and become healthy, while its burning deserts and its frigid polar regions will be redeemed and become temperate and fruitful. [Sec. 133:19-25.]" (Parley P. Pratt, KT, p. 132.)

109:75

"we shall be caught up in the cloud to meet thee"

"With Christ shall come those who have already been resurrected; and His approach shall be the means of inaugurating a general resurrection of the righteous dead, while the pure and just who are still in the flesh shall be instantaneously changed from the mortal to the immortal state and shall be caught up with the newly resurrected to meet the Lord and His Celestial company, and shall descend with Him. [Sec. 88:96-98.]" (James E. Talmage, JC, p. 787.)

109:77

"everlasting to everlasting"

See Eternity to eternity in Appendix A.

109:79

"shining seraphs around thy throne"

See material for 38:1.
