Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 110

Background information on section 110

"After the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, council and spiritual meetings were held in the building almost daily. Sunday, April 3, 1836, was one of the most eventful days in the history of the Church. A general meeting was held in the Lord's House. In the forenoon Elders Thomas B. Marsh and David W. Patten spoke to an audience of about one thousand persons. In the afternoon the sacrament was administered by the Presidency and the apostles. After this ordinance the prophet and Oliver Cowdery retired to the pulpit, the veils were dropped, and these two men bowed before the pulpit in silent prayer, and the following vision was manifested before them." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:46.)

"There were two stands, one on the west end and one on the east end, each consisting of four pulpits, one rising above the other, like terraces. The pulpits on the west end were reserved for presiding officers of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and those on the east end for the Aaronic Priesthood. Each of these pulpits could be separated from the others by means of veils of painted canvas, which could be let down or rolled up at pleasure.

"On Sunday, April 3rd, 1836, in the afternoon, after the Sacrament, the Prophet Joseph and Oliver Cowdery retired to the pulpit in order to engage in silent prayer. The veils were dropped. When they rose from their devotion, the visions recorded in this Section were given to both." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 724.)

110:1-10

"We saw the Lord"

"Oliver Cowdery, as well as Joseph Smith, saw this vision [Sec. 110:1-4]; they beheld this glorious personage, even the Son of God, when He accepted the Kirtland Temple after its dedication. These witnesses are also supplemented by hundreds of others who have beheld in vision and otherwise, glorious personages in these last days. There are men alive who have beheld the Son of God, who have heard His voice, and who have been ministered unto by Him in this our day and generation. In the face of these testimonies, which cannot be impeached successfully, is it any wonder that faith grows in the hearts of the people of God, the Latter-day Saints?" (George Q. Cannon, JD 25:158.)

110:9-10

"tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice"

"That which took place [in the Kirtland Temple] on the third day of April in the year 1836 has spread forth to all lands. Thousands and tens of thousands, even hundreds of thousands have been blessed because of what took place upon that occasion. Not only the thousands in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but thousands upon thousands who are not members of the Church have partaken of the blessings which came at that time and which have spread forth throughout the earth. And while they may not know it, they have been influenced, and have many of them performed a wonderful work because of the things that took place, and because of the fulfillment of this prediction [Sec. 110:7-10] made by the Son of God." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, April 1936, p. 73.)

110:11

"Moses appeared"

See Gathering in Appendix A.

"Once more the heavens were opened and Moses, the great lawgiver of Israel, stood before Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and committed to them the keys of his dispensation, saying that 'these keys were committed to them for the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north.' This is also the dispensation of the gathering. In it is Israel to be re-established in the land given to Abraham. Moses predicted both the scattering and the gathering of Israel. . . . [Deut. 4 quoted.]

"All of the prophets in ancient days predicted the scattering; they also predicted the gathering again which was to take place in the latter days, and when the Jews had been sufficiently punished for their transgressions they were to return to Palestine. Moses held the keys of the gathering of Israel. He led Israel out of Egypt into the land of Canaan. It was his appointment in this dispensation to come and restore those keys for the modern gathering." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:48.)

"We call attention to the fact that because Moses brought the keys of the gathering of Israel back to earth, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as previously indicated, has builded over six hundred cities in the western part of the United States, in the process of gathering the seed of Israel from among the gentile nations of the earth. These converts to the new faith have not been asked or persuaded to emigrate to America, but this unseen power rests upon them who have authority to bestow it. Of their own accord they desire to gather with the Saints of the Lord in His latter-day Zion." (LeGrand Richards, MWW, p. 189.)

110:12

"Elias appeared"

See Elias in Appendix A.

"After the departure of Moses, Elias who held the keys of the gospel in the days of Abraham appeared and conferred the keys of his dispensation, saying 'that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed.' By this expression, reference is not made to the 'seed' of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery but to the 'seed' of all faithful members of the Church. We know that the Lord called Abraham and made some very important promises to him and his posterity. His descendants through Isaac and Jacob, constitute the house of Israel, the people to whom the Lord intrusted the covenants and delivered his word through prophets for the guidance of the whole world. What prophet this Elias is that was sent to restore these keys is not definitely known. The title 'Elias' has been given to several prophets who have been appointed to important work in different dispensations. The work of an 'Elias' is the work of a forerunner or one who goes before a greater to prepare the way. John the Baptist was an Elias, Noah was an Elias. (D&C 27:7.) The Lord has declared that Elias shall restore all things spoken of by all the holy prophets. (D&C 27:6.) This may have reference to all the prophets who were sent with keys of authority to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:49.)

"Elias came, after Moses had conferred his keys, and brought the gospel of the dispensation in which Abraham lived. Everything that pertains to that dispensation, the blessings that were conferred upon Abraham, the promises that were given to his posterity, all had to be restored [Abr. 2:8-11], and Elias, who held the keys of that dispensation, came." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine 27:100.)

110:13-16

"Elijah . . . stood before us"

See Elijah in Appendix A, and material for section 2.

"Then came another glorious manifestation in fulfillment of the prediction made by the prophet Malachi some four hundred years before the birth of Christ. We read again: [Sec. 110:13-16, quoted.] Since the bestowal of these keys the work of salvation for the dead has been proclaimed, has taken hold of the hearts of the children of men, I say, both in the Church and out of it. [Sec. 2.] There are thousands who are working in the gathering of the records of the dead, and why they do it they do not know." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, April 1936, p. 74.)

"We have an abundance of evidence that this story is true. If Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery had lied, it would have been impossible for them to have turned the hearts of the children to their fathers. Surely, they would not have any power to do that. It is true that following the declaration by them that Elijah did come, the hearts of the children commenced to turn to their dead fathers. There is strong presumptive evidence that this was because these keys were restored. This is a demonstrative fact, that the hearts of children have turned to their fathers. . . . Before the days of the coming of Elijah in 1836, there was no endeavor of any import to search the records of the dead. What was done, here and there, was usually where some estate was involved. The people were not turning their hearts to their dead fathers. They were not searching the records. They were not compiling them. There were no organizations or societies on the face of the earth, as far as I can learn, gathering records of the dead, before the year 1836. In 1837, however, one year later, Great Britain passed laws providing for and compelling the preservation of records of the dead. In the year 1844, the New England Historical and Genealogical Society was organized in Boston, and I think this was the first organization of the kind in the world. In 1869, the New York Genealogical and Biographical Society in the city of New York was organized. Then following rapidly other societies up and down the Atlantic coast of the United States, from Maine to Georgia. . . . In Great Britain, genealogical societies have been organized in practically every country in that land and in Scotland. These records have been kept and filed also in other countries in Europe, the countries from which the Latter-day Saints have come. The Spirit has taken hold of the people, not only in the Church but also of many who are not of the Church, and they, too, are searching the records, and compiling them, of the dead. . . .

"In 1935, Mr. T. B. Thompson published A Catalogue of British Family Histories. It included the titles and years of publication of some two thousand seventy-one families and was supposed to be a complete list of all such published records up to that date. Here are his figures from the date of the invention of printing:

From 1450 to 1600, were published 2 family histories.

From 1600 to 1700, were published 18 family histories.

From 1700 to 1800, were published 72 family histories.

From 1800 to 1836, when Elijah came, were published 100 family histories.

From 1837 to 1935, were published 1,879 family histories.

"These were records in Europe, and since the year 1836, there have been published in Great Britain and the United States thousands of records of the dead." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, April 1948, p. 135.)

"I want to call your attention to an incident which I think is of some importance. I am going to read to you a statement from Alfred Edersheim in his work 'The Temple.' . . .

And so also in the last days it would be the Paschal night when the final judgment should come upon "Edom," and the glorious deliverance of Israel take place. Hence to this day, in every Jewish home, at a certain part of the Paschal service—the door is opened to admit Elijah the prophet as forerunner of the Messiah, while appropriate passages are at the same time read which foretell the destruction of all heathen nations. It is a remarkable coincidence that, in instituting his own Supper, the Lord Jesus connected the symbol, not of judgment, but of his dying love, with his "third cup."

"It was, I am informed, on the third day of April, 1836, that the Jews, in their homes at the Paschal feast, opened their doors for Elijah to enter. On that very day Elijah did enter—not in the home of the Jews to partake of the Passover with them, but he appeared in the House of the Lord, erected to his name and received by the Lord in Kirtland, and there bestowed his keys to bring to pass the very things for which these Jews, assembled in their homes, were seeking." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, April 1936, p. 75.)

110:13

"Elijah the prophet . . . was taken to heaven without tasting death"

For the Biblical account of the translation of Elijah, see 2 Kings 2:1-11.

110:16

"the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands"

"Elijah restored to this Church and, if they would receive it, to the world, the keys of the sealing power; and that sealing power puts the stamp of approval upon every ordinance that is done in this Church and more particularly those that are performed in the temples of the Lord. Through that restoration each of you . . . has the privilege, of going into this house or one of the other temples to have your wife sealed to you for time and all eternity, and your children sealed to you also, or better, have them born under that covenant. What a glorious privilege it is to know that the family organization will remain intact. It is not destroyed. . . . We may go into the house of the Lord and do these things and be baptized for our dead, those who have died, the scriptures say . . . who died without the knowledge of the gospel." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, April 1948, p. 135.)

110:16

"the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near"

See (1) Great and dreadful day of the Lord; (2) Second coming; and (3) Quickly in Appendix A.
