Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 3

Background information on section 3

Section 3 of the Doctrine and Covenants was given following the loss of the 116 pages of manuscript of the Book of Mormon, which had been translated by Joseph Smith when Martin Harris was his scribe. In the History of the Church, the Prophet wrote the following:

Mr. Harris . . . returned again to my house about the 12th of April, 1828, and commenced writing for me while I translated from the plates, which we continued until the 14th of June following, by which time he had written one hundred and sixteen pages of manuscript on foolscap paper. Some time after Mr. Harris had begun to write for me, he began to importune me to give him liberty to carry the writings home and show them; and desired of me that I would inquire of the Lord, through the Urim and Thummim, if he might not do so. I did inquire, and the answer was that he must not. However, he was not satisfied with this answer, and desired that I should inquire again. I did so, and the answer was as before. Still he could not be contented, but insisted that I should inquire once more. After much solicitation I again inquired of the Lord, and permission was granted him to have the writings on certain conditions; which were, that he show them only to his brother, Preserved Harris, his own wife, his father and his mother, and a Mrs. Cobb, a sister to his wife. In accordance with this last answer, I required of him that he should bind himself in a covenant to me in a most solemn manner that he would not do otherwise than had been directed. He did so. He bound himself as I required of him, took the writings, and went his way. Notwithstanding, however, the great restrictions which he had been laid under, and the solemnity of the covenant which he had made with me, he did show them to others, and by stratagem they got them away from him, and they never have been recovered unto this day.

In the meantime, while Martin Harris was gone with the writings, I went to visit my father's family at Manchester. I continued there for a short season, and then returned to my place in Pennsylvania. Immediately after my return home, I was walking out a little distance, when, behold, the former heavenly messenger appeared and handed to me the Urim and Thummim again—for it had been taken from me in consequence of my having wearied the Lord in asking for the privilege of letting Martin Harris take the writings, which he lost by transgression—and I inquired of the Lord through it, and obtained the following: [Sec. 3 follows.] (HC 1:20-22.)

3:1

"the purposes of God cannot be frustrated"

The prophets declare and the scriptures clearly teach that God knoweth all things (2 Ne. 9:20); he knows the end from the beginning (1 Ne. 9:6); he is the same yesterday, today, and forever (1 Ne. 10:18); and the past, present, and future are continually before his eyes (D&C 130:7). (See Knowledge of God in Appendix A.)

Inasmuch as God knows the future, he can plan and prepare for every eventuality; thus, it is absolute folly for man to suppose that he can frustrate the work of God.

Hundreds of years before the birth of Christ, God knew that in the last days evil men would try to thwart his work by attempting to destroy some of the scriptures. He provided for this by commanding His prophets anciently to keep parallel records.

Both Nephi and Mormon, the ancient prophets and historians involved, were faithful to their commands. Nephi prepared the small plates of Nephi, and Mormon wrote an abridgment of the record of Lehi on his plates. Both of those parallel records were preserved, and now that the manuscript copy of one of the records (Mormon's abridgment of the book of Lehi) had fallen into the hands of wicked men, the Lord was able to replace it with the other record (Nephi's small plates).

Truly, "it is not the work of God that is frustrated, but the work of men." (D&C 3:3.)

3.3

"it is not the work of God that is frustrated, but the work of men"

"Naturally, both Martin Harris and Joseph Smith passed through very severe mental torture following the loss of the manuscript. This was especially true of the Prophet. The Lord, knowing the end from the beginning, had provided for just this emergency and in a revelation given to the Prophet before the Lord took from him his gift, he was informed that the work and designs of the Almighty cannot be frustrated by puny man or by the devil. The Prophet was taught that even though a man may receive many revelations, if he sets himself up in his own strength or follows his carnal desires he will incur the displeasures, even the vengeance, of a just God. In his infinite wisdom our Father has provided for every problem or difficulty that may arise to stop or hinder the progress of His work. No power on earth or in hell can overthrow or defeat that which God has decreed. Every plan of the adversary will fail, for the Lord knows the secret thoughts of men, and sees the future with a vision clear and perfect, even as though it were in the past. [Sec. 38:21.] Jacob, son of Lehi, in his rejoicing declared: 'O how great the holiness of our God! For he knoweth all things, and there is not anything save he knows it.' (2 Nephi 9:20.) He knew that Satan would try to frustrate the coming forth of the Book of Mormon by the stealing and changing of the manuscript, and provided for it hundreds of years before the birth of Jesus Christ. Martin Harris without a doubt fell prey to the enticings of Satan, in his constant pleading for the manuscript. Satan played upon his pride and he foolishly thought that by the showing of the manuscript his kindred could be convinced.

"There is always danger when men boast in their own strength, or when they seek to satisfy their own desires. When those desires are contrary to the will of the Lord, and are still persisted in, they will without fail return in punishment upon their heads." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:24-25.)

3:6-8

"you should not have feared man more than God"

In his admonition to Joseph Smith, the Lord counsels him not to go on "in the persuasions of men," but to follow "the counsels of God." (D&C 3:6-7.)

The Lord's rebuke that Joseph had "oft . . . transgressed the commandments and the laws of God" (verse 6) should not be interpreted to mean that the Prophet was guilty of a grave moral sin. The Prophet later wrote: "No one need suppose me guilty of any great or malignant sins. A disposition to commit such was never in my nature." (JS-H 2:28.)

The Prophet had, however, submitted to the importunings of Martin Harris, even after the Lord had informed him that the 116 pages of manuscript should not be given to Mr. Harris. It is for this indiscretion (following after "the persuasions of men") that the Prophet is being reprimanded here.

3:9

"Joseph . . . thou wast chosen"

"The Prophet Joseph was chosen to do the work of the Lord. So was Isaiah (Isa. 49:5); Jeremiah (Jer. 1:5); Paul (Acts 9:15); and many others. But although God had selected him to be His instrument, unless he kept the commandments and instructions imparted to him, he would fall and lose his gift. God does not preordain man's fate, except conditionally. If He has decreed that men shall live by food, He has also made it necessary to prepare and to eat the food in order to enjoy the gift and blessings of life. That is the condition. He chose Israel to be His people, but only on the condition that they would keep His commandments. When they rejected Him, He rejected them. There is no other predestination." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 20.)

3:12-13

Martin Harris is "a wicked man"

Martin Harris is reprimanded by the Lord (verses 12 and 13) and is referred to as a "wicked man." The following reasons are listed for his wickedness:

"At heart, Martin was not wicked and desired to do what was right. He had faith in the mission of Joseph Smith, and that very faith led to his undoing, for he could not stand the gibes of relatives and friends. It was because of this that he desired to obtain the manuscript that these relatives and friends might be convinced. . . . His wickedness consisted in his selfish desire to gratify his own wish contrary to the will of the Lord, after he had been denied this request before it was granted. Moreover, he was wicked in that he violated a most sacred and solemn covenant and trust which he made with the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smith. From his wicked act, or acts, he humbly repented and again found favor with the Lord to the extent that he was privileged to stand as one of the special three witnesses of the Book of Mormon, and to behold the plates in the presence of the holy angel. He was deprived, however, from ever again acting as scribe in the translation of this sacred record of the Nephites." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:28.)

3:16-20

Meaning of the titles "Nephites" and "Lamanites"

The Book of Mormon teaches that the people of Lehi, early in their history, divided into groups according to the names of their forefathers; hence, they became known as Lamanites, Lemuelites, Nephites, Jacobites, Josephites, Zoramites, and Ishmaelites. (Jacob 1:13.) In his writings, however, the prophet Jacob divided the people in two groups: Lamanites and Nephites. "I shall call them Lamanites that seek to destroy the people of Nephi, and those who are friendly I shall call Nephites, or the people of Nephi." (Jacob 1:14.)

Through the centuries of Book of Mormon history, some of the blood descendants of Nephi and his followers became known as Lamanites if they joined with those who sought "to destroy the people of Nephi." In a somewhat similar manner, the blood descendants of Laman and his followers might have been called Nephites if they became friendly toward or joined with the people of Nephi.

At the resurrection of Jesus Christ all of the wicked were destroyed from among this people, and for nearly two hundred years there were no "manner of ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God."(4 Ne. 1:17.)

In A.D. 194 a group of people broke off from the true church and took "upon them the name of Lamanites; therefore there began to be Lamanites again in the land." (4 Ne. 1:20.) Later, in A.D. 231,

there was a great division among the people.

And . . . there arose a people who were called Nephites, and they were true believers in Christ; and among them there were those who were called by the Lamanites—Jacobites, and Josephites, and Zoramites;

Therefore the true believers in Christ . . . were called Nephites, and Jacobites, and Josephites, and Zoramites.

And . . . they who rejected the gospel were called Lamanites, and Lemuelites, and Ishmaelites. (4 Ne. 1:35-38.)

There is no indication that these divisions were along lineal bloodlines; rather, the two major divisions (Nephites and Lamanites) simply indicated whether or not the people believed in Christ.

The major designations continued until the close of the Book of Mormon period when the Lamanites destroyed the Nephites in battle (Mormon 4-6). However, it should not be assumed that all the lineal blood descendants of the Nephites (including Jacobites, Josephites, and Zoramites) were destroyed, as some of them had undoubtedly earlier joined with the unbelieving Lamanites. The prophet Moroni suggests that even in the period following the wars of A.D. 385, some of the so-called Nephites were spared if they would "deny the Christ." (Moro. 1:2.)

In this revelation the Lord clearly indicates there are still descendants of all the sons of Lehi upon the earth as well as descendants of Zoram and Ishmael. (D&C 3:16-20.) In another revelation the Lord also refers to "the Lamanites, and also all that had become Lamanites because of their dissensions." (D&C 10:48.)

3:16-20

"these plates" are preserved for the descendants of Lehi

"These Lamanites are heirs to the promises, and God has said, without qualification, that he will give this land to them for an everlasting inheritance [3 Ne. 20:13-14]; that they shall be, with us, the builders of the new Jerusalem [3 Ne. 21:20-25]; the powers of heaven shall be among them, and they shall know the record of their fathers which has been brought to us through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith." (Anthony W. Ivins, CR, April 1915, p. 112.)

3:19-20

Purposes of the Lord in publishing the Book of Mormon

The Lord has listed in this one revelation several purposes for the preservation of the plates of the Book of Mormon and for the publication of that sacred record:

4.That the Lamanites might "believe the gospel . . . and that through their repentance they might be saved" (verse 20; see also Morm. 7:2-9; 8:4-16, 25-26; the preface of the Book of Mormon)

The prophet Mormon, who was given the responsibility of abridging the ancient records of the forefathers of the Lamanites, was also told by the Lord some of the purposes for the preservation of the record. Thus, the wording of Mormon's testimony is similar to the words used by the Lord in this revelation: "Know ye that ye are of the house of Israel. Know ye that ye must come unto repentance, or ye cannot be saved. . . . Know ye that ye must come to the knowledge of your fathers, and repent of all your sins and iniquities, and believe in Jesus Christ, that he is the Son of God. . . . " (Morm. 7:2-3, 5.)
