Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 111

Background information on section 111

"On the 25th of July, 1836, the Prophet Joseph, in company with Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, and Oliver Cowdery, left Kirtland for a mission to the East. They passed through Albany, New York, Providence, Boston, and arrived, early in August, in Salem, Mass., where they hired a hall in which they held meetings for about a month, and visited sections of the surrounding country. While there, this Revelation was received." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 728.)

"On Monday afternoon, July 25th, in company with Sidney Rigdon, Brother Hyrum Smith, and Oliver Cowdery, I left Kirtland . . . and the next evening, about ten o'clock we arrived at Buffalo, New York. . . . We took passages on a line boat for Utica, where we arrived about eight o'clock A.M. of the 29th, just in time to take the railroad car for Schenectady, the first passenger car on the new road. . . .

"On the 30th, at seven o'clock A.M., we went on board the steamer John Mason, which took us to the Erie, lying over the bar. . . .

"From New York we continued our journey to Providence, on board a steamer; from thence to Boston, by steam cars, and arrived in Salem, Massachusetts, early in August, where we hired a house, and occupied the same during the month, teaching the people from house to house, and preaching publicly, as opportunity presented; visiting occasionally, sections of the surrounding country, which are rich in the history of the Pilgrim Fathers of New England, in Indian warfare, religious superstition, bigotry, persecution, and learned ignorance. . . .

"I received the following: [Section 111, follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 2:463-65.)

"While the Prophet gives a somewhat circumstantial account of this journey to Salem and his return to Kirtland in September, he nowhere assigns an adequate cause for himself and company making it—the object of it is not stated. Ebenezer Robinson, for many years a faithful and prominent elder in the church, and at Nauvoo associated with Don Carlos Smith—brother of the Prophet—in editing and publishing the Times and Seasons, states that the journey to Salem arose from these circumstances. There came to Kirtland a brother by the name of Burgess who stated that he had knowledge of a large amount of money secreted in the cellar of a certain house in Salem, Massachusetts, which had belonged to a widow (then deceased), and thought he was the only person who had knowledge of it, or of the location of the house. The brethren accepting the representations of Burgess as true made the journey to Salem to secure, if possible, the treasure. Burgess, according to Robinson, met the brethren in Salem, but claimed that time had wrought such changes in the town that he could not for a certainty point out the house 'and soon left.' They hired a house and occupied it and spent their time as per the narrative of the Prophet already quoted. While in Salem the Prophet received a revelation in which the folly of this journey is sharply reproved." (B. H. Roberts, CHC 1:411.)

111:3

"form acquaintance with men in this city"

"I wish the Elders of Israel to understand mankind as they are—to go to the people and take them as they are." (Brigham Young, JD 9:121.)

111:11

"be. . . as wise as serpents"

This is essentially the same statement by the Savior as found in Matthew 10:16 ("Be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves"). In his Inspired Version of the Bible, Joseph Smith changed the account in Matthew to "Be ye therefore wise servants, and as harmless as doves." (Matt. 10:14; italics added.)
