Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 112

Background information on section 112

"The same day that the Gospel was first preached in England I received the following: [Section 112, quoted.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 2:499.)

"At this time the spirit of speculation in lands and property of all kinds, which was so prevalent throughout the whole nation, was taking deep root in the Church. As the fruits of this spirit, evil surmisings, fault-finding, disunion, dissension, and apostasy followed in quick succession, and it seemed as though all the powers of earth and hell were combining their influence in an especial manner to overthrow the Church at once, and make a final end. Other banking institutions refused the 'Kirtland Safety Society's' notes. The enemy abroad, and apostates in our midst, united in their schemes, flour and provisions were turned towards other markets, and many became disaffected toward me as though I were the sole cause of those very evils I was most strenuously striving against, and which were actually brought upon us by the brethren not giving heed to my counsel.

"No quorum in the Church was entirely exempt from the influence of those false spirits who are striving against me for the mastery; even some of the Twelve were so far lost to their high and responsible calling, as to begin to take sides, secretly, with the enemy.

"In this state of things, and but a few weeks before the Twelve were expecting to meet in full quorum, (some of them having been absent for some time), God revealed to me that something new must be done for the salvation of His Church. And on or about the first of June, 1837, Heber C. Kimball, one of the Twelve, was set apart by the spirit of prophecy and revelation, prayer and laying on of hands, of the First Presidency, to preside over a mission to England, to be the first foreign mission of the Church of Christ in the last days." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:487-89.)

112:1

"Thomas"

For biographical information on Thomas B. Marsh, see Appendix B.

112:4

Gentiles and Jews

See Gentiles and Jews in Appendix A.

112:7

"gird up your loins. . . Let thy feet be shod"

See Armor of God in Appendix A.

112:10

"the Lord thy God shall lead thee"

"Some of the older brethren who remember the days of President Joseph F. Smith have told me that frequently when President Smith was introduced as the 'head of the Church,' he was always quick to reply, 'Oh, no. I'm but the President of the Church. Jesus Christ is its head.'" (Harold B. Lee, CR, October 1960, pp. 16-17.)

112:12-13

"Admonish them . . . and if they harden not their hearts . . . I will heal them"

"Immediately after this time, on September 3rd [1837], at a conference held in Kirtland, . . . Objection being . . . made to three of the apostles, Luke Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson and John F. Boynton, they were by the voice of the Saints shorn of their apostolic rank and were disfellowshiped; however, as they subsequently made protestation of their repentance, they were received back into the Church and into their station. But their humility was either a mere pretense or was very volatile in its character; because not many weeks elapsed until they were once more engaged in an effort to ruin the Church and the Prophet." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, pp. 215-16.)

112:14

"take up your cross"

See Cross in Appendix A.

"Let me say to the Latter-day Saints, if they will take up their cross and follow the Lord Jesus Christ in the regeneration, any of them will receive more, know more, and have more of the spirit of revelation than they are aware of." (Brigham Young, JD 3:209.)

"This seems to have been a common expression in religious circles at this time. Newel Knight said that he 'would try and take up his cross and pray vocally during meeting' (HC 1:82). It is a Scriptural expression. Our Lord says, 'If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me' (Luke 9:23). The performance of duty is a task that requires continual effort. If anybody should join the Church because the services are 'grand,' or the sermons 'beautiful,' he would be disappointed, but he who comes determined to do his duty, will find life eternal. Paul says, 'For thy sake we are killed all the day long' (Rom. 8:36); again, 'I die daily' (1 Cor. 15:31). The followers of Christ 'carry the cross.'" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 734-35.)

112:15

"I am with him [Joseph] . . . and the keys. . . shall not be taken from him"

"It was decreed in the counsels of eternity, long before the foundations of the earth were laid, that he [Joseph Smith] should be the man, in the last dispensation of this world, to bring forth the word of God to the people, and receive the fulness of the keys and power of the Priesthood of the Son of God. The Lord had his eye upon him, and upon his father, and upon his father's father, and upon their progenitors clear back to Abraham, and from Abraham to the flood, from the flood to Enoch, and from Enoch to Adam. He has watched that family and that blood as it has circulated from its fountain to the birth of that man. He was foreordained in eternity to preside over this last dispensation." (Brigham Young, JD 7:289-90.)

"At the time this revelation was given some of the members of the council of the apostles were in open rebellion and had displayed a very bitter spirit towards the Prophet. The Lord endeavored to impress upon them the fact that the Prophet was the one who held the keys of this dispensation and that he would hold them constantly until the Lord should come. In a former revelation (Sec. 43:4-7) the Lord had said that the keys were in the hands of Joseph Smith and that if he should transgress and lose them they would be given to another. At that day the Prophet had not been tested and proved by tribulation and suffering, but now in July 1837, the Prophet having shown his integrity in all kinds of difficulties and tribulation the Lord declared that the keys shall never be taken from him. The Lord wished to impress upon the apostles and others in the councils of the Church that he had not forsaken his prophet and would be with him to the end." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:72-73.)

112:16

"Thomas, thou art the man whom I have chosen"

See Thomas B. Marsh in Appendix A.

112:17

"my servant Hyrum"

"It will be noted here that the Lord names Hyrum Smith with Sidney Rigdon as a counselor in the First Presidency. The reason for this is that Frederick G. Williams had partaken of the evil spirit which prevailed among so many of the brethren, and had to be relieved of his place and presidency in that exalted quorum. Fortunately, however, at a later date he humbly returned repentant and was received back into full fellowship in the Church." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:73.)

112:20

"The First Presidency. . . I have made counselors"

"The First Presidency, the Lord said, were to be counselors to the twelve. By this is meant that the twelve should not go forth without the counsel and direction of the First Presidency." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:73.)

112:21

"the Twelve . . . shall have power . . . whithersoever ye shall send them"

"And then the Prophet Joseph concludes his remarkable call of missionaries: '. . . and don't let a single corner of the earth go without a mission.' And when we think of that, we cover a lot of territory. The earth is a big earth.

"We crossed the Iron Curtain. . . . But now we have come to know there is no Iron Curtain, no Bamboo Curtain, no Wood or Steel Curtain, or Desert, or Mountain, or Sea that can keep us out. For we will bridge the oceans with ships, the mountains and deserts with planes, and the curtains with the word of God in their own tongues. [D&C 32:3 quoted.]

"There are these four points: Jesus will accompany the missionaries; he will be in their midst; he will be the advocate with the Father; and nothing shall prevail, nothing.

"This is a divine promise we have waited for a long time." (Spencer W. Kimball, Talk at Regional Representatives Seminar, June 27, 1974.)

112:23

"darkness covereth the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the people"

See Darkness in Appendix A.

"It seems sometimes as if the darkness that surrounds us is all but impenetrable. I can see on all sides the signs of one great evil master mind working for the overturning of our civilization, the destruction of religion, the reduction of men to the status of animals. This mind is working here and there and everywhere. May we hope and pray that this is the darkness before the dawn, and that soon the light will come in the east, that the darkness will fade out, that a sun of righteousness will rise and touch the peaks and flow down and fill the valleys, fill our hearts and fill our lives, until we shall be the people which God wishes us to be." (J. Reuben Clark, CR, October 1935, p. 92.)

112:24

"a day of burning, a day of desolation"

See Burning and Calamities in Appendix A.

112:25

"upon my house shall it begin"

"Sometimes we hear someone refer to a division in the Church. In reality, the Church is not divided. It simply means that there are some who, for the time being at least, are members of the Church but not in harmony with it. These people have a temporary membership and influence in the Church; but unless they repent, they will be missing when the final membership records are recorded.

"It is well that our people understand this principle, so they will not be misled by those apostates within the Church who have not yet repented or been cut off. But there is a cleansing coming. The Lord says that his vengeance shall be poured out 'upon the inhabitants of the earth. . . . And upon my house shall it go forth, saith the Lord; First among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my name and have not known me. . . . ' (D&C 112:24-26.) I look forward to that cleansing; its need within the Church is becoming increasingly apparent.

"The Lord strengthened the faith of the early apostles by pointing out Judas as a traitor, even before this apostle had completed his iniquitous work. So also in our day the Lord has told us of the tares within the wheat that will eventually be hewn down when they are fully ripe. But until they are hewn down, they will be with us, amongst us." (Ezra Taft Benson, IE, June 1969, p. 42.)

112:28

"purify your hearts"

" 'Hearts,' is a figure used frequently in the Scriptures and stands for 'affections,' 'understanding,' 'courage,' 'joy,' etc. 'Broken heart' means one that is humble and willing to be obedient to the will of the Lord. 'Stony heart,' means that the individual is unrepentant, unbelieving. These messengers who were to go forth were to purify their hearts so that the Spirit of the Lord might be their guide as they went forth into all the world." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 736.)

112:30

"the dispensation of the fulness of times"

See Dispensation in Appendix A.

112:33

"lest the blood of this generation be required at your hands"

"I . . . wish to state to the Twelve and to the Seventies, and to the Elders, that they are not responsible for the reception or the rejection by the world of that word which God has given to them to communicate. . . . When they have performed their labors, and fulfilled their duties, their garments are free from the blood of this generation, and the people are then left in the hands of God their Heavenly Father. For the people . . . will be held responsible to God for their rejection of the Gospel, and not to us." (John Taylor, JD 24:289.)

112:34

"I come quickly . . . I am Alpha and Omega"

See Quickly and Alpha and Omega in Appendix A.
