Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 114

Background information on section 114

"On April 17, 1838, the Prophet received a revelation for David W. Patten who had for some time been located in Missouri and with Elder Thomas B. Marsh was maintaining a steady influence amidst the opposition of disaffected brethren, including the three who had been appointed to preside, David Whitmer, William W. Phelps and John Whitmer. The Lord called upon Elder Patten to settle up his business as soon as possible, make a disposition of his merchandise, and prepare to take a mission the following spring, in company with others to preach the Gospel to all the world. . . . Elder Patten obedient to this revelation took steps to meet this call which had come to him. Events were to develop, however, which would change the nature of his mission before the following spring could arrive." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:85.)

114:1

"David . . . testify of my name and bear glad tidings unto all the world"

For additional information on David Patten, see Appendix B.

"David W. Patten is instructed to settle up his affairs and be prepared to take a mission. He was born in the State of New York, about the year 1800, and was baptized June 15th, 1832, by his brother, John Patten. He performed several missions and gradually rose to prominence. On February 15th, 1835, he was ordained an Apostle. He was absolutely fearless. His testimony was powerful and through him God performed many mighty works. In 1838, the mobbings in Missouri commenced anew, and Patten was foremost in the defense of the Saints. He died as a result of a wound received on the 25th of October, 1838, in a conflict with a lawless rabble at a place called Crooked River. His mission was on the other side of the veil." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 739.)

114:2

"inasmuch as there are those among you who deny my name, others shall be planted in their stead"

During the very month this revelation was received (April 1838), several of the leading brethren in the Church were excommunicated. Elder George Q. Cannon reviews the events of the first months of that year:

"While the Prophet had been journeying toward Missouri after escaping the Kirtland mob in January, 1838, a general assembly of the Saints in Far West was held on the 5th day of February, at which David Whitmer, John Whitmer and William W. Phelps were rejected as the local presidency; and a few days later Thomas B. Marsh and David W. Patten, of the Twelve, were selected to act as a presidency until the Prophet should arrive. Oliver Cowdery too had been suspended from his position. Persisting in unchristianlike conduct, W. W. Phelps and John Whitmer had been excommunicated by the high council in Far West, four days previous to the arrival of Joseph.

"This was the sad situation as the Prophet approached the dwelling place of the Saints in Missouri. Many of the people went out to meet him, and at a distance of one hundred and twenty miles from Far West they found him and tendered him teams and money to help him forward. The joy they had in his presence arose from an absolute knowledge of his power and authority as a Prophet of God. They were certain that many of their difficulties would end with his presence, because he would give the light of truth by which to guide their footsteps. . . .

"At the same conference [April 6, 1838] Brigham Young, David W. Patten and Thomas B. Marsh were chosen to preside over the Church in Missouri.

"On the 12th of April, 1838, Oliver Cowdery was found guilty of serious wrong-doing for which he had not made repentance, and he was excommunicated by the high council at Far West. Before the same tribunal on the day following David Whitmer was charged with persistent disobedience of the word of wisdom and with unchristianlike conduct, and he was also cut off. Luke Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson and John F. Boynton were excommunicated about the same time, and less than a month later a similar fate befell William E. McLellin.

"It was a sorrowful day for Joseph when he lost the companionship of these men who had been with him during many trials and who had participated with him in the glorious undertaking of heavenly things. But they were no longer anything but dead branches, harmful to the growing tree, and it was necessary for the pruner to lop them off." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, pp. 221-24.)
