Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 115

Background information on section 115

"On the 26th of April the Prophet received a very important revelation of instruction for the First Presidency, the apostles, the bishop, and the members of the Church. It will be noted that the counselors named to serve with the Prophet were Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum Smith. In the fall of the year 1837, Frederick G. Williams lost his standing because he had become disaffected and Hyrum Smith was called and sustained in his stead. . . .

"The word of the Lord was also to Bishop Partridge and those of the high council who had remained true, that from this time forth they should call the Church by its right name—The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 'for thus shall my church be called in the last days.' . . . Since the Lord felt it important to remind the councils of the Church of its correct name and inform them that by that name it should be known in the last days, we should endeavor to carry out this commandment more nearly than it is the custom for many of us to do." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:85-86.)

115:4

"thus shall my church be called . . . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"

"It will be observed that in verses three and four of this revelation the Lord gives to the Church its official name, 'The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.' Previous to this the Church had been called 'The Church of Christ,' 'The Church of Jesus Christ,' 'The Church of God,' and by a conference of Elders held at Kirtland in May, 1834 [HC 2:62-63], it was given the name 'The Church of the Latterday Saints.' All these names, however, were by this revelation brushed aside, and since then the official name given in this revelation has been recognized as the true title of the Church, though often spoken of as 'The Mormon Church,' the 'Church of Christ,' etc. The appropriateness of this title is self evident, and in it there is a beautiful recognition of the relationship both of the Lord Jesus Christ and of the Saints to the organization. It is 'The Church of Jesus Christ.' It is the Lord's; He owns it, He organized it. It is the Sacred Depository of His truth. It is His instrumentality for promulgating all those spiritual truths with which He would have mankind acquainted. It is also His instrumentality for the perfecting of the Saints, as well as for the work of the ministry. It is His in all these respects; but it is an institution which also belongs to the Saints. It is their refuge from the confusion and religious doubt of the world. It is their instructor in principle, doctrine, and righteousness. It is their guide in matters of faith and morals. They have a conjoint ownership in it with Jesus Christ, which ownership is beautifully recognized in the latter part of the title. 'The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,' is equivalent to 'The Church of Jesus Christ,' and 'The Church of the Latter-day Saints.' " (HC 3:23-24, footnote.)

"Now, the Lord not only directed Joseph to organize his church: he told him what to name it. It is a fact worth noting that of all the churches then claiming to represent Christ, not one of them bore his name. Joseph learned from the teachings of Jesus to the Nephites that no church could be Christ's church unless it did bear his name. When the Nephites raised the question about what to name his church, Jesus, as he ministered among them, said:

"'. . . how be it my church save it be called in my name? For if a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel." (3 Ne. 27:8.)

"This statement gives us the twofold test: Christ's church (1) must bear his name, and (2) must be built upon his gospel. That there should be no uncertainty about the name in this last dispensation, the Lord said to Joseph Smith: '. . . thus shall my church be called in the last days, even The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.' (D&C 115:4. Italics added.) The phrase 'Mormon Church' is a nickname. The restored church thus meets the Savior's twofold test: it bears his name and it is built upon his gospel." (Marion G. Romney, Ensign, January 1973, p. 31.)

"Consider what the real name means—'The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.' We can understand, easily, what 'latter-day' means—modern day, this day; but what does the word 'Saint' mean? By derivation, by acceptation, and by the best authority in the language, it means directly, used as an adjective, 'holy,' and when used as a noun, 'a holy one,' and we, therefore, profess to be a body of holy men, holy women. We proclaim ourselves in the name of Jesus Christ to be the holy ones of the last days, a significant proclamation, blasphemous in the extreme if it be not justified. . . .

"What should it mean to you and me, to be thus called a holy man, a holy woman? As thus applied, the term does not mean that the one who bears it is necessarily without weakness or devoid of blemish. An authorized usage of the term 'holy' is that it shall apply for exclusive service in the cause of God, and such we profess to be, set apart amongst men and nations as the people of God." (James E. Talmage, CR, April 1922, p. 72.)

115:5

"be a standard for the nations"

"It is designed in the heavens that this people shall be at the head, and that the great men of the nation will come by and by to Zion for counsel and wisdom. Where are we going to get it? What are our opportunities above other people? Why, we commune with the heavens. There is where we are in advance of the world. We not only have the advantages of their learning, but we have divine inspiration, by which our minds are enlightened. The Presidency of the Church have the heavens opened to them by the Spirit, and power of God, and they will be able to counsel the wisest of the nations. This time will come; nor is it far off." (Marriner W. Merrill, CR, April 1901, p. 26.)

"Probably the thought that has come to me most often has been as to the place and purpose of the Church in this war-torn world, this world of strife and unhappiness. What is our mission to the world? I have turned to the scriptures to get the answer, and have found the answer, both in ancient and modern scriptures. It is that the Church of Christ at all times must be as a standard to the nations, a standard to which all nations, all people, all men may turn as they seek safety, peace, and happiness. . . .

"Let me say that the Church itself cannot be this standard. Since the Church is made up of individuals, it becomes an individual responsibility to make the church a standard for the nations. I must be a standard in my life. I must so conduct myself that I may be a standard worthy of being followed by those who seek the greater joy in life." (John A. Widtsoe, CR, April 1940, p. 35.)

115:6

"the gathering . . . may be for a defense"

See Gathering in Appendix A.

115:8

"build a house unto me" at Far West

"It was also declared in this revelation that the city of Far West should be made holy by consecration: [Sec. 115:7, quoted.] They were commanded to build a house unto the Lord, and the saints were to commence the preparatory work the coming summer, the time being set as July 4, 1838, when this should begin, and from that time forth they were to labor diligently to build the house unto the name of the Lord. When this revelation was given there was no house, or temple, recognized by the Lord as his. He had promised to make holy the temple in Kirtland, but had declared also that if it should be defiled it should no longer be his house and his name would not be upon it. [Sec. 97:15-17.] April 3, 1836, he accepted that house, but in the summer of 1837, it had been polluted, and apostates, wicked in spirit, had taken possession of that temple, hence the Lord rejected it as a sacred spot, an holy temple to his name. [Sec. 124:28.] Now came the command to build another house on ground that was consecrated. This house was to be built according to the Lord's plan, for it was to be a temple to his name." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 3:115-16.)

115:18

"other places should be appointed for stakes"

See Stakes in Appendix A.

115:19

"I will sanctify him"

See Sanctify in Appendix A.
