Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 116

Background information on section 116

"Friday, May 18, 1838, the Prophet Joseph Smith, accompanied by Sidney Rigdon, Thomas B. Marsh, David W. Patten, Bishop Edward Partridge, Elias Higbee, Simeon Carter, Alanson Ripley and many others, left Far West for the purpose of exploring the country north of Far West with the intention of preparing boundaries for stakes of Zion. On this trip they proposed to select locations and lay off claims to unoccupied lands preparatory to the gathering of the members of the Church from other parts, and for the benefit of the poor. They traveled to the mouth of Honey Creek, a tributary of Grand River, and camped for the night. They passed through a beautiful country, mostly a prairie which was thickly covered with grass and weeds. This territory they said was inhabited by wild turkeys, deer, prairie chickens and other game. They saw a wolf to which the Prophet's dog gave chase. The Prophet said they had nothing to fear except rattlesnakes that were occasionally found. Their horses were turned loose to feed on the prairie, and the next morning, after striking their tents, they crossed Grand River at the mouth of Honey Creek and at Nelson's Ferry. This stream they described as a large, beautiful, deep and rapid stream during high water in the spring, which would admit of navigation. They continued their course up the river through considerable timber, for about eighteen miles, and came to Lyman Wight's home. He lived at the foot of Tower Hill, as the Prophet called it, 'a name I gave the place in consequence of the remains of an old Nephite altar or tower that stood there, where we camped for the Sabbath.' In the afternoon after making camp, the Prophet, Sidney Rigdon, and George W. Robinson, his clerk, did a little exploring up Grand River about one half mile to Wight's Ferry, their object being to lay claim to a city plat near said ferry in Daviess County, township 60, ranges 27 and 28, and sections 25, 36, 31 and 30. The brethren called this place 'Spring Hill,' but the Prophet by the word of the Lord named it 'Adam-ondi-Ahman, because said the Lord, it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the Prophet.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:88-89.)

"Adam-ondi-Ahman is located immediately on the north side of Grand River, in Daviess county, Missouri, about twenty-five miles north of Far West. It is situated on an elevated spot of ground, which renders the place as healthful as any part of the United States, and overlooking the river and the country round about, it is certainly a beautiful location." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:39.)

116:1

"Adam-ondi-Ahman "

See same title in Appendix A.

"One of the hymns sung at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple was by Elder William W. Phelps, known as 'Adam-ondi-Ahman.' The name, therefore, was well known before this visit to Tower Hill, and before the Prophet had pointed out this place as the one where Adam visited his posterity, and where he will come at the grand council. (See 'The Gathering at Adam-ondi-Ahman,' Chapter 40, The Way to Perfection.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:90.)

116:1

"where Adam . . . the Ancient of Days"

See Adam in Appendix A.

"Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our Father Adam, Michael, he will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:386-87.)

"In the 107th Section, the Lord speaks of Adam as 'Michael, the Prince, the Archangel,' and says that he shall be a prince over the nations forever. We may with perfect propriety call him prince, the ancient of days, or even God in the meaning of the words of Christ, which I have just quoted [Sec. 78:16]; but we do not worship him, we worship the same God that he worshipped." (Anthon H. Lund, CR, October 1902, p. 81.)
