Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 117

Background information on section 117

"July 8, 1838, the Lord gave the Prophet Joseph Smith a number of short, but very important revelations, including those on tithing, one to William Marks, and Oliver Granger, one to Bishop Whitney and one in relation to the apostles. These are sections 117, 118, 119 and 120 in the Doctrine and Covenants, but they are not arranged in the Doctrine and Covenants in the order in which they appear in the Documentary History of the Church. Then there was another revelation to William W. Phelps and Frederick G. Williams, which is not in the Doctrine and Covenants." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:95.)

"The departure of the Church leaders from Kirtland [Jan. 1838] had been the signal for a general migration of the Mormons from Ohio to Missouri. Far West was now their gathering place—not their Zion, but only a stake of Zion, as Kirtland had been before. All during the spring and summer of 1838 the exodus continued, until the Saints remaining at Kirtland were very few. Apostles [Heber C.] Kimball and [Orson] Hyde, arriving there from Europe in May, tarried only long enough to arrange their affairs and make suitable preparations for their journey to Missouri. About the 1st of July the two Apostles, accompanied by Erastus Snow, Winslow Farr and others, with their families, set out for Far West. Among those remaining at Kirtland were Bishop N. K. Whitney and Oliver Granger, who had charge of the Church property in Ohio." (Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, 1:140-44.)

"The Lord had commanded the Saints to gather and build up Far West speedily (See Sec. 115:17). A company of 515 souls, known as the Kirtland Camp, left Kirtland on the 6th of July, 1838, for Zion. On the 14th of September, it appears only 260 members were left, the others having been scattered 'to the four winds.' The camp arrived in Adam-ondi-Ahman on the 4th of October. Neither Marks, Whitney, nor Granger were members of this company. Joseph Smith at Far West had no means of knowing, at that time, who had, or who had not, left for Zion; but the Lord knew. Hence this Revelation in which He (1) calls William Marks and Newel K. Whitney to come to Zion and instructs the Saints concerning the property in Kirtland. (Commentary, p. 744.)

"It is quite evident that these two brethren had fallen under the spell of speculation and temptation so rife in Kirtland in 1837, and which was the downfall of so many of the leading brethren of the Church. However, they had not lost their faith and when the Lord gave them this call, they proceeded to obey the command;" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:96.)

117:1, 12

William Marks, Newel K Whitney, Oliver Granger

For additional information on these brethren, see Appendix B.

"William Marks was born November 15, 1792, in Rutland, Rutland County, Vermont. This is the first mention of his name in the Prophet's narrative, and nothing can be learned of his career previous to this time." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:486.)

"Oliver Granger was a man of faith and business ability—two qualities which form a rare combination. He characterized the Kirtland Camp as the greatest undertaking since the organization of the Church, and he firmly believed that God would bless that endeavor. (HC 3:96.) When the Prophet fled from Kirtland, he appointed Granger his business agent, and so well did he perform this duty that he was commended by business men. At a conference held at Quincy, May 4th to 6th, 1839, he was appointed to return to Kirtland and take charge of the Temple and Church there. This makes the concluding verses of the Revelation perfectly clear. His name is to be held in remembrance for his faithful services as a man of business, having sanctified his talent to the service of the Lord." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 746.)

117:4

"what is property unto me? saith the Lord"

The Lord has created the heavens and the earth "and all things that in them are." (3 Ne. 9:15.) He can create (organize) many other earths if necessary. Thus, one soul is much more important to the Lord than the whole earth: "For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" (Matt. 16:26.)

117:6

"Do I not hold the destinies of all the armies of the nations?"

"Surely the Lord made the earth and he owns it. His government the nations of the earth rejected and in its stead set up governments of their own making, and this has been the condition from the beginning until now. Kings and potentates all down the ages, thought they, by their own acts, controlled the destinies of nations, and held dominion. Without the permission of the Almighty they never could have ruled and held dominion. All who have a correct insight into the history of nations must surely know that the Lord has always held a controlling hand over the nations of the world. When they have become corrupt he has relieved them of power. When they have entered on expeditions of conquest he has permitted them to go just so far, then as he said to Ezekiel concerning Gog and Magog, he puts hooks in their jaws, and defeats their purpose. Truly he holds the destinies of the armies of the nations of the earth; and not only the armies, but the destinies of nations, and when the time is ripe he will make an end of all nations that now rule in their arrogance and mistaken idea of might and power, and set up his own kingdom to endure forever." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:96-97.)

117:7

"will I not make solitary places to bud and to blossom?"

"He has promised to make the solitary places to bud and to blossom, and to bring forth in abundance. . . . From this we gather that these brethren still regretted leaving their possessions in Kirtland, and the Lord assures them that there is more in store for them in the land to which he has called them." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:97.)

117:8

"the plains of Olaha Shinehah"

"The plains of Olaha Shinehah, or the place where Adam dwelt, must be a part of, or in the vicinity of Adam-Ondi-Ahman. This name Olaha Shinehah, may he, and in all probability is, from the language of Adam. We may without great controversy believe that this is the name which Adam gave to this place, at least we may venture this as a probable guess. Shinehah, according to the Book of Abraham, is the name given to the sun. (Abraham 3:13.) It is the name applied to Kirtland when the Lord desired in a revelation to hide its identity. (Sec. 82.) Elder Janne M. Sjodahl commenting on the name, Olaha Shinehah, has said: 'Shinehah means sun, and Olaha is possibly a variant of the word Olea, which is "the moon." (Abraham 3:13.) If so the plains of Olaha Shinehah would be the Plains of the Moon and the Sun, so called, perhaps because of astronomical observations there made.' We learn from the writings of Moses that the Lord revealed to the ancients great knowledge concerning the stars, and Abraham by revelations and through the Urim and Thummim received wonderful information concerning the heavens and the governing planets, or stars. It was also revealed by the Prophet Joseph Smith that Methuselah was acquainted with the stars as were others of the antediluvian prophets including Adam. So it may be reasonable that here in this valley important information was made known anciently in relation to the stars of our universe." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:97-98.)

117:11

"Newel K. Whitney be ashamed of the Nicolaitane band"

"Bishop Whitney was called on to forsake the abominations of those in Kirtland, whom the Lord designates as the 'Nicolaitane band.' He was to be ashamed of his littleness of soul,' and go to the land of Adam-ondi-Ahman and there serve as bishop." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 3:125.)

117:12-16

Revelation pertaining to Oliver Granger

"Oliver Granger, who had remained faithful, was commended by the Lord and also commanded to move to Far West. The Lord promised that his name should be had in 'sacred remembrance from generation to generation, forever and ever, saith the Lord.' Oliver Granger came as he was commanded and fulfilled his mission as a merchant in that place. In May, 1839, he was appointed to return to Kirtland and take charge of the temple and church property. He died while in this service, September 23, 1841." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 3:125-26.)
