Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 118

Background information on section 118

See background information for section 117.

118:1

"Let a conference be held immediately; let the Twelve be organized"

"In answer to the supplication: 'Show us thy will, O Lord, concerning the twelve,' the Lord commanded that a conference be held immediately to fill the places vacated by those who had fallen. . . . The command was given that the apostles were to take their leave next spring and cross the 'great waters' and there take up the work commenced by Elders Kimball, Hyde and others in 1837. The Lord said: 'Let them take leave of my saints in the city of Far West, on the twenty-sixth day of April next, on the building-spot of my house, saith the Lord.' Men were selected to fill the vacancies caused by the excommunication of William E. M'Lellin, Luke S. Johnson, John F. Boynton, and Lyman E. Johnson. The men appointed by revelation were: John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff and Willard Richards, the latter serving as a counselor in the British Mission at the time. These four brethren were to be officially notified of their appointment.

"According to this commandment a council meeting was called and convened July 9, 1838." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:98.)

118:5

"Let them take leave . . . of Far West, on the twenty-sixth day of April next"

"The Lord knew, of course, that events would happen before April 26, 1839, by which the Latter-day Saints who remained true to the faith would be driven from Missouri by the exterminating order of Governor Boggs, but apostates would be permitted to remain and be nurtured by the mob. It appears that this call was made to try the faith of the brethren, to see if they would fulfill the commandment at the risk of their lives. Before the end of the year 1838 most of the saints had been driven from their homes. The few who remained were given orders to be gone by Friday, April 11, 1839, or forfeit their lives. The last to leave were the members of the committee on removal, who were told April 18th, to be gone within one hour or take the consequences. By the 26th of that month Far West was practically deserted, so far as members of the Church were concerned. That this prophecy might be fulfilled appeared to be impossible, for the members of the mob had declared that should one of the apostles return to Far West they would kill him on the spot." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:195.)

"Enemies of the Church threatened to make compliance with this command impossible, but when the day came, the Twelve and others met on the Temple ground at Far West, and Alpheus Cutler laid the foundation stone again, by rolling up a stone and placing it near the southeast corner, according to the Revelation (Section 115:11), whereupon the Twelve engaged in prayer. Then they sang, 'Adam-ondi-Ahman,' and, finally, took leave of the Saints. Then they were ready for their respective missions. When the enemies heard of the proceedings, they were very much chagrined because they had forgotten the date." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 747-48.)

118:6

For biographical information on the brethren mentioned, see Appendix B.
