Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 119

Background information on section 119

See background information for section 117.

"July 8, 1838, the Prophet prayed to the Lord saying: 'O Lord! Show unto thy servant how much thou requires" of the properties of thy people for a tithing,' and he received a revelation known as Section 119. The Lord had given to the Church the law of consecration and had called upon the members, principally the official members, to enter into a covenant that could not be broken and to be everlasting in which they were to consecrate their properties and receive stewardships, for this is the law of the celestial kingdom. Many of those who entered into this solemn covenant broke it and by so doing brought upon their heads, and the heads of their brethren and sisters, dire punishment and persecution. This celestial law of necessity was thereupon withdrawn for the time, or until the time of the redemption of Zion. While suffering intensely because of their debts and lack of means to meet their obligations, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, November 29, 1834, in solemn prayer promised the Lord that they would give one tenth of all that the Lord should give unto them, as an offering to be bestowed upon the poor; they also prayed that their children, and children's children after them should obey this law. (HC 2:174-5.) Now, however, it became necessary for the law to be given to the whole Church so the Prophet prayed for instruction. The answer [Section 119] they received [came] in the revelation." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:90-91.)

"The law of tithing, as now understood, had not been given to the Church previous to this Revelation. The term 'tithing' in the prayer quoted in the headlines, and in previous Revelations (64:23; 85:3; 97:11), is, therefore, synonymous with 'free-will offering,' or 'contribution' to the Church funds. The question presented in the petition to the Almighty was not how much a tenth part of the property of the people amounted to, but how much of that property He required for sacred purposes. The answer was this Revelation on the Law of Tithing." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 749.)

119:1

"I require all their surplus property to be put into the hands of the bishop"

"Let us consider for a moment this word 'surplus.' What does it mean when applied to a man and his property? Surplus cannot mean that which is indispensably necessary for any given purpose, but what remains after supplying what is needed for that purpose. Is not the first and most necessary use of a man's property that he feed, clothe and provide a home for himself and family! . . . Was not 'surplus property,' that which was over and above a comfortable and necessary substance? In the light of what had transpired and of subsequent events, what else could it mean? Can we take any other view of it when we consider the circumstances under which it was given in Far West, in July, 1838?

"I have been unable in studying this subject to find any other definition of the term 'surplus,' as used in this revelation, than the one I have just given." (Franklin D. Richards, JD 23:313.)

"In more recent years the Church has not called upon the members to give all their surplus property to the Church, but it has been the requirement according to the covenant, that they pay the tenth." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 3:120.)

119:3

"tithing"

See Tithing in Appendix A.

"Tithe-paying is not a principle new to our dispensation. Whenever the Lord has had a people on the earth who were willing to observe his laws, and they were not practicing the law of consecration, they have been called upon to pay tithes and offerings. Abraham gave tithes of all to Melchizedek, keeper of the Lord's storehouse, and king of Salem. (Gen. 14:20.) Jacob made a covenant very similar to that of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. (Gen. 28:22.) This law was given through Moses to Israel. Malachi said the people in his day had robbed the Lord in withholding their tithes and offerings. The Savior commended those who paid an honest tithing, such as the widow and her mite. This law is one binding upon members of the Church. We call it a free-will offering, and so it is, for everything in the Gospel is by free will, but nevertheless it is a law of God which to us is everlasting." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:92.)

119:4

"one-tenth of all their interest annually"

"When you are in doubt as to just how you should calculate your tithes, reverse the terms as we sometimes do in solving complex mathematical problems, and suppose for the time being that the Lord had said this; let us postulate this is an assumed law given to the Church: 'In order to show my love for my people, the faithful members of my Church, it is my will, saith the Lord, that each one shall receive from my storehouse, the storehouse of my Church, at regular intervals during the year, an amount equal to one-tenth of his income.' Now my dear brother, sit down and calculate how much the Lord owes you under that kind of law, and then go pay it to your bishop." (James E. Talmage, CR, October 1928, p. 119.)

"I want to say to you . . . that the law of tithing is not a question of dollars and cents alone. I believe that the man who pays his honest tithing to God will not only be blessed by God himself, but that the nine-tenths will reach farther than the other ten-tenths would if he did not obey that law." (Reed Smoot, CR, October 1900, pp. 7-8.)

119:4

"this shall be a standing law unto them forever, for my holy priesthood"

"Do we not hope and expect to have an inheritance in the celestial kingdom, even upon this earth in its redeemed and sanctified state? [Sec. 88:25-26; 130:9.] What are the terms under which we may obtain that inheritance? The law of tithing is the law of inheritance. It leads to it. No man may hope or expect to have an inheritance on this celestial globe who has failed to pay his tithing. By the payment of his honest tithing he is establishing a right and a title to this inheritance, and he cannot secure it upon any other terms but by complying with this and other just requirements; and this is one of the very essential things." (Melvin J. Ballard, CR, October 1929, pp. 50-51.)

"There is a great deal of importance connected with this principle, for by it shall be known whether we are faithful or unfaithful. In this respect it is as essential as faith in God, as repentance of sin, as baptism for the remission of sin, or as the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. For if a man keep all the law save in one point, and he offend in that, he is a transgressor of the law, and he is not entitled to the fulness of the blessings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. [Sec. 93:10; James 2:10.] But when a man keeps all the law that is revealed, according to his strength, his substance and his ability, though what he does may be little, it is just as acceptable in the sight of God as if he were able to do a thousand times more." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, April 1900, p. 47.)

119:6

"by this law sanctify the land of Zion"

"Do you know that the soil can be sanctified by the tithing of its products? The land can be sanctified. [Mal. 3:8-10.] There is a relationship between the elements and forces of nature and the actions of men." (James E. Talmage, CR, October 1929, p. 68.)
