Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 4

Background information on section 4

"This section [4] was given through the Prophet Joseph Smith to his father, Joseph Smith, Sen., at Harmony, Pennsylvania, February, 1829. Joseph Smith, Sr., was the first person to believe the story of the Prophet and encouraged him to continue faithful to the teachings of the angel. . . . In February, 1829, he came to his son, the youthful prophet, and asked to know by revelation the will of the Lord. This section of the Doctrine and Covenants is the result of that humble inquiry.

"This revelation is very short, only seven verses, but it contains sufficient counsel and instruction for a life-time study. No one has yet mastered it. It was not intended as a personal revelation to Joseph Smith, but to be of benefit to all who desire to embark in the service of God. It is a revelation to each member of the Church, especially to all who hold the Priesthood. Perhaps there is no other revelation in all our scriptures that embodies greater instruction pertaining to the manner of qualification of members of the Church for the service of God, and in such condensed form than this revelation. It is as broad, as high and as deep as eternity. No elder of the Church is qualified to teach in the Church, or carry the message of Salvation to the world, until he has absorbed, in part at least, this heaven-sent instruction." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:34-35.)

4:1

"a marvelous work is about to come forth"

"The Book of Mormon is a marvelous work, no matter from what angle it is viewed. It was marvelous because it was brought to light by immortal hands. It was marvelous that a young man, with only a limited school education, and poor as far as this world's riches go, should be called upon to translate and publish it. It is marvelous in the story it tells, the teachings it gives and the prophecies it contains. It is marvelous in the effects it has produced. . . . However, the marvelous work is not confined to the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, but has reference to all that pertains to the restoration in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 23-24.)

"More than seven hundred years before the birth of Jesus Christ the Lord spoke through Isaiah of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and the restoration of the Gospel. Isaiah, by prophecy, spoke of the restoration of the new and everlasting covenant, and the Lord performing a 'marvelous work and a wonder.' . . . This marvelous work is the restoration of the Church and the Gospel with all the power and authority, keys and blessings which pertain to this great work for the salvation of the children of men. All who have given diligent attention to the Church and the great things it has accomplished, and is accomplishing, must feel and know that the word of the Lord is fulfilled, even though many of the marvels are yet future." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:35.)

See Great and marvelous work in Appendix A.

4:2

Serve God "with all your heart, might, mind, and strength "

"Because the Lord was about to begin a marvelous work among the children of men, he needed servants who were willing to give themselves entirely to that work—'heart, might, mind, and strength'; that is affections, will-power, reasoning faculty, and physical strength, all must be dedicated to the service of the Lord in this latter-day work." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 24.)

See also Might, mind, and strength in Appendix A.

4:2

"that ye may stand blameless"

"The preaching of the Gospel should be done in the spirit of the utmost humility and perseverance. Missionaries are commanded not to idle away their time, but to give to the Lord their heart, and serve him with all their 'might, mind and strength.' Every missionary who goes forth is under the solemn obligation and pledge to bear testimony of the restoration of the Gospel, and witness of its truth. In doing this he leaves all who hear him without excuse and their sins are on their own heads. If he fails to do this then he will not 'stand blameless before God at the last day.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:343.)

4:3

"if ye have desires to serve God, ye are called"

"My understanding is that the most important mission that I have in this life is: first, to keep the commandments of God, as they have been taught to me; and next, to teach them to my Father's children who do not understand them. . . . It is not necessary for you to be called to go into the mission field in order to proclaim the truth. Begin on the man who lives next door by inspiring confidence in him, by inspiring love in him for you because of your righteousness, and your missionary work has already begun. [Sec. 4:4-7, quoted.]" (George Albert Smith, CR, October 1916, pp. 50-51.)

4:4

"the field is white already to harvest"

"After the long night of apostasy, the world was filled with tradition, false doctrine and practice which were accepted as divine truth, since they had come down for hundreds of years. Error was venerable; people worshipped, as their fathers before them, the doctrines of men, as Isaiah declared. It was no small labor to go forth to reap the field, for the wheat had to be nurtured and carefully watered that it might grow to the harvest. Yet there were many who were waiting to hear the message of the restoration—choice spirits held in reserve to come forth in this great dispensation of the Fulness of Times. The need of laborers was great, but those available were few, yet they went forth in the power the Lord gave them, and none could stay them. Woe be to the man who sets his hand to the sickle and is not diligent, or who leaves the unharvested field. The Lord says of him that he stands in danger and may perish and lose salvation to his own soul (v. 4)." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:36.)

See also Harvest symbols in Appendix A.

4:5-6

Qualities for missionary service

The Lord provides two lists of characteristics that qualify a person for missionary work. The first list (faith, hope, charity, love) appears to be general and inclusive, while the second list (faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, godliness, charity, humility, diligence) seems to be more specific, although two terms, faith and charity, are common to both groups.

"It is true, we are engaged in a warfare, and all of us should be valiant warriors in the cause in which we are engaged. Our first enemy we will find within ourselves. It is a good thing to overcome that enemy first, and bring ourselves into strict obedience to the principles of life and salvation which he has given to the world for the salvation of men. When we shall have conquered ourselves, it will be well for us to wage our war without, against false teachings, false doctrines, false customs, habits and ways, against error, unbelief. . . ." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, October 1914, p. 128.)
