Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 121

Background information on section 121

"LIBERTY JAIL, CLAY COUNTY, MISSOURI,"

March 25, 1839.

"To the Church of Latter-day Saints at Quincy, Illinois, and Scattered Abroad, and to Bishop Partridge in Particular: Your humble servant, Joseph Smith, Jun., prisoner for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the Saints, taken and held by the power of mobocracy, under the exterminating reign of his excellency, the governor, Lilburn W. Boggs, in company with his fellow prisoners and beloved brethren, Caleb Baldwin, Lyman Wight, Hyrum Smith, and Alexander McRae, send unto you all greeting. May the grace of God the Father, and of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, rest upon you all, and abide with you forever. May knowledge be multiplied unto you by the mercy of God. And may faith and virtue, and knowledge and temperance, and patience and godliness, and brotherly kindness and charity be in you and abound, that you may not be barren in anything, nor unfruitful." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:289.)

"While the Prophet Joseph Smith and his companions, Hyrum Smith, Lyman Wight, Caleb Baldwin, Alexander McRae and part of the time, Sidney Rigdon, were confined in Liberty [Missouri] Jail awaiting trial on false charges, and suffering unspeakable abuse from the wicked and filthy guards who attended them, they were, notwithstanding all the abuse, permitted to see some of their friends occasionally. These friends who were permitted to come to the jail were also permitted at times to bring letters from the prisoners' families. They were also able to forward communications in this way to their friends. One of these communications from the Prophet to the Church at Quincy—for the Saints had been driven from Missouri—was written March 25, 1839, and was signed by all of his companions. This is one of the greatest letters that was ever penned by the hand of man. In fact it was the result of humble inspiration. It [Section 121] is a prayer and a prophecy and an answer by revelation from the Lord. None other but a noble soul filled with the spirit of love of Christ could have written such a letter. Considering the fact that these prisoners had been confined several months; were fed on food at times not fit for a pig, and at times impregnated with poison and once being offered human flesh, evidently from the body of one of their brethren, it is no wonder that the Prophet cried out in the anguish of his soul for relief. Yet, in his earnest pleading, there breathed a spirit of tolerance and love for his fellow man." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:175-76.)

121:1

"O God, where art thou?"

"In his anguish the Savior cried unto his Father while on the cross. In his anguish yet pleading not so much for himself as for his afflicted brethren, the Prophet also cried in earnest pleading: 'O God,where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?' Did he feel that he had been forsaken? This he alone can answer. Yet his trust was in the Lord, for all other help had failed him." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:176.)

121:4

"O Lord God Almighty, maker of heaven, earth, and seas, and of all things that in them are"

See Creator, Jesus Christ, and God in Appendix A.

121:4

"thy pavilion . . . thy hiding place"

"These are expressions used by the authors of the Bible. When David says, 'He made darkness his hiding-place, his pavilion round about him; darkness of waters, thick clouds of the skies' (Ps. 18:11), he considers the darkness of the thundercloud as a tent, or pavilion, in which Jehovah dwells in His majesty. The thunder-bolts, the hail, the wind, are His messengers. The Prophet Joseph, by using this grand, poetic conception, entreats the Lord to manifest Himself in His power for the salvation of the Saints from their enemies." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 753.)

121:7

"My son, . . . thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment"

See Adversity in Appendix A.

"The Lord said to Adam that for his sake the earth was cursed and that he should eat his food in sorrow all the days of his life. [Moses 4:23.] The scriptures say that man is born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward [Job 5:7], which means that it is in the design of God that we should have these adversities and experiences in the world. . . . The Prophet Joseph Smith one time said, when someone had remarked that somebody had affliction because of his sins, that it is an unhallowed statement to make, that afflictions come to all. . . .

"The Lord has expressed himself about these adversities that come, and I speak for example, of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who had adversity from the moment he delivered his glorious message of the vision in the grove. You will remember in Liberty Jail he cried out: [Sec. 121:1, 3, quoted.]

"What was the Lord's answer to this prayer? [Sec. 121:7-8, quoted.] Then the Lord held up before him other trials and difficulties that were to come, some even worse than he had had, but then said to him: '. . . know thou, my son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?' [D&C 122:7-8.]

"So, in adversity we may have that which will exalt us, or we may have that which will degrade us. We may have that which, 'if we endure it well,' will ennoble us, and we may have that which, if we indulge in self-pity and bitterness, may destroy us. In all our adversities there are these two elements, and the determining factor is how shall we endure them? Shall we endure them well? If not, they may destroy us." (George Q. Morris, CR, October 1958, pp. 70-72.)

121:10

"Thou art not yet as Job"

The story of Job is found in the Old Testament book that carries his name, but the New Testament also refers to the "patience of Job." (See James 5:11.)

"I wonder if there are a few here within the sound of my voice, that have feelings of this kind [everything is going wrong], like old Job had, for instance. A poor man who wondered why his children were taken from him; why his herds were destroyed and why his houses, his dwellings, went up in flames, and why he was left without anything. . . . The Lord had a certain position in which He sought to place Job in the future at some future time when years and years had rolled away perhaps, and He wanted to try him. He wanted to educate him so that he would not complain, no matter how illy he thought himself treated by the Lord. That was a glorious trial of Job's. It has come down in history; his experience and his trials, and it has been a wonderful consolation to the people of the Lord to read the history of his experiences and his trials and how well he passed through them." (Lorenzo Snow, CR, October 1900, p. 4.)

121:11

"their hope shall be blasted"

"From the earliest days of the Church, malcontents, apostates, 'soreheads,' have railed out with slander, falsehood, derision, against those whom God called to lead the people. They so treated the Prophet, and Brother Brigham [Young], and to a lesser degree, every President who has followed. But the Lord has always prospered the Church as it followed their leadership. The detractors have gone down to the oblivion they deserved. So it will always be. The Prophet of the Lord has stood above and beyond the carpings of those unrighteous critics. He has always lived, as our leader lives today, in the kindly light of the Lord's approval, the recipient of the Lord's choicest blessings, manifested openly to those who will but look." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., CR, April 1940, p. 22.)

121:12

"God hath set his hand and seal to change the times and seasons"

When read in context, it is quite evident that this statement is reinforcing the power and "marvelous workings" of God. Only the Lord has the power to change the times and seasons of this earth.

121:16

"Cursed are all those . . . against mine anointed"

"There are some who look upon the leaders of this Church and God's anointed as men who are possessed of selfish motives. By them the words of our leaders are always twisted to try to bring a snare to the work of the Lord. Mark well those who speak evil of the Lord's anointed for they speak from impure hearts. . . .

"I remember the prophetic pronouncement that was made from this stand by President George Albert Smith eighteen months ago when he said: 'Many have belittled Joseph Smith, and those who have will be forgotten in the remains of mother earth and the odor of their infamy will be ever with them, but honor, majesty, and fidelity to God attached to Joseph Smith's name and exemplified by him will never die.' I wish that statement could be heard to all the ends of the earth." (Harold B. Lee, CR, October 1947, pp. 66-67.)

121:16-17

"they have sinned"

Several references in these two verses seem rather vague, but it is quite evident the correct meaning is indicated in the following words enclosed in brackets:

Cursed are all those that shall lift up the heel against mine anointed, saith the Lord, and cry they [mine anointed] have sinned when they have not sinned before me, saith the Lord, but have done that which was meet in mine eyes, and which I commanded them.

But those who cry transgression [on the part of mine anointed] do it because they [those who lift up the heel against mine anointed] are the servants of sin, and are the children of disobedience themselves.

121:23

"Wo unto all those that discomfort my people"

"Our enemies have never done anything that has injured this work of God, and they never will. I look around, I read, I reflect, and I ask questions, where are the men of influence, of power and prestige, who have worked against the Latter-day Saints? Where is the reputation for honor and courage, of the governors of Missouri and Illinois, the judges, and all others who have come here to Utah on special missions against the Latter-day Saints? Where are there people to do them honor? They cannot be found. . . . Where are the men who have assailed this work? Where is their influence? They have faded away like dew before the sun." (Heber J. Grant, CR, April 1909, p. 11.)

121:26

"God shall give unto you knowledge"

"The promise was made that knowledge by the Holy Spirit would be given to the Prophet, even the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost, and things would be made known that had not been revealed since the world was until now. . . . Much of this information was revealed to the Prophet in the following years in Nauvoo and pertained to the eternal salvation of mankind both living and dead. Much of it still awaits fulfillment, so far as the saints are concerned. How much the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith we do not know, but it was far more than he was permitted to reveal to his fellows." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:177.)

121:26

"the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost"

See Holy Ghost in Appendix A.

121:28

"whether there be one God or many Gods"

"I want to say this to all Israel: Cease troubling yourselves about who God is; who Adam is, who Christ is, who Jehovah is. Let these things alone. Why trouble yourselves about these things? God has revealed Himself, and when the 121st section of the Doctrine and Covenants is fulfilled, whether there be one God or many Gods they will be revealed to the children of men as well as thrones and dominions, principalities, and powers. Then why trouble yourselves about these things? God is God. Christ is Christ. The Holy Ghost is the Holy Ghost. That should be enough for you and me to know. If we want to know any more wait till we get where God is in person." (Wilford Woodruff, MS 57:355-56.)

121:31

"all . . . shall be revealed in the days of the dispensation of the fulness of times"

See Dispensation in Appendix A.

121:32

"Council of the Eternal God . . . before this world was"

See Pre-earthly existence in Appendix A.

121:34

"there are many called"

"Now who are those who are called? I take it that every man who is ordained to an office in the priesthood has been called." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, October 1945, p. 97.)

121:34

"few are chosen"

"There are many who are called to serve in the kingdom of God. The Priesthood has been conferred upon a multitude of brethren, but out of this multitude only those will be chosen who endure in faith to the end. The Lord has never promised to those who are unfaithful, who have received the call and appointment but have not endured, that they shall receive the blessing. While there are many who seemingly feel this to be the case, only those who serve and are faithful shall be chosen. The reason why so many fall away is explained to be, 'because their hearts are set . . . upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:177-78.)

121:35

"their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world "

"Some years ago, I read an editorial in the Deseret News entitled 'The Mechanical Rabbit.' I quote: 'Most of our readers must have smiled the other day when they read of the greyhounds in Britain who don't know a rabbit when they see one. So long had they chased a mechanical rabbit around the racetrack, that when a real rabbit bounded across the track, the dogs didn't give it a second look.

"'Stupid, eh? But sad too, this perverting of the natural instincts. . . .

" 'We chase mechanical rabbits, too.

" 'We chase paychecks, and don't give a second look to the glint of the rising sun on a snow-topped peak.

"'We chase our way through the appointments of a crowded desk calendar, and fail to take time to chat with the next-door neighbor or to drop in on a sick friend.

"'We chase social pleasures on a glittering noisy treadmill—and ignore the privilege of a quiet hour telling bedtime stories to an innocent-eyed child.

"'We chase prestige and wealth, and don't recognize the real opportunities for joy that cross our paths. . . .

"'Race on, you poor, blind over-civilized hounds. You'll never catch your rabbit until you learn to recognize a genuine one.

" 'But, you'll have company in your race; the company of unnumbered men who'll never catch the joy they chase until they, too, learn to recognize a genuine one.' . . .

"In modern revelation the Lord said: 'Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen? Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men. . . . ' (D&C 121:34-35.)

"Here is instruction to straighten out our values. . . . Have we sought 'so much' for material things while missing, even ignoring, the things of God?" (A. Theodore Tuttle, Ensign, December 1971, p. 90.)

121:38

"he is left . . . to kick against the pricks"

"Men begin to fall away. They first begin to 'kick against the pricks.' . . . These no doubt are the pricks of the gospel. I wonder, perhaps, if they are not those things President J. Reuben Clark . . . called 'restraints,' the restraints of the word of wisdom, the restraints imposed in keeping the Sabbath day holy, injunctions against card playing, the restraints imposed by following out the welfare program. And so we might go on. These are the restraints against which some people seem to rebel and are kicking constantly against—the 'pricks' of the gospel. . . . These [persons] are the ones who next begin to 'persecute the Saints' and, finally, to fight against God." (Harold B. Lee, CR, October 1947, pp. 65-66.)

121:39

"it is the nature and disposition of almost all men . . . to exercise unrighteous dominion"

"Most men are inclined to abuse authority, especially those who wield it who are the least prepared to hold positions of trust. It has been the characteristic of men in power to use that power to gratify their own pride and vain ambitions. More misery has come to the inhabitants of this world through the exercise of authority by those who least deserved it, than from almost any other cause. Rulers of kingdoms in the past have oppressed their subjects, and where they had the power they have sought to increase their dominions. We have had some horrible examples of misplaced ambition which, in recent years, placed the very existence of humanity in peril. These conditions still prevail in high places bringing fear and consternation to the troubled world.

"There should not, however, be any of this unrighteous ambition within the Church, but everything should be done in the spirit of love and humility."(Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:178.)

"All men who hold position do not abuse its privileges, and the man who serves God humbly and faithfully never will, for the moment he yielded to the temptation so to do, that moment would he cease to serve the Lord; but there are many, alas, who sadly misuse the functions of their office, and prostitute every power and privilege to the gratification of self and the injury and embarrassment of their fellow men. It is dangerous to put some men into power. They swell up and become so distended with the ideas of their greatness and importance, that we are forcibly reminded of so many inflated toy balloons, which the slightest prick of a pin would burst and ruin forever. A very small office and a very little authority is sufficient to intoxicate some men and render them entirely unfit for duty." (Orson F. Whitney, Scrapbook of Mormon Literature, 2:510-13.)

121:43

"Reproving betimes with sharpness"

"I frequently rebuke and admonish my brethren, and that because I love them, not because I wish to incur their displeasure, or mar their happiness." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:478.)

"It is a kindness to reprove in the spirit of love. It is an unkindness to mitigate the gravity of offenses in those for whose guidance and direction we have responsibility. . . . Teach duty, require duty, if need be, in children to bless their lives with proper understanding and practices essential to their happiness." (Stephen L Richards, CR, April 1957, pp 97-98.)

121:45

"let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly"

"I know of no greater promise made by God to man than this promise made to those who let virtue garnish their thoughts unceasingly.

"Channing Pollock once remarked: 'A world in which everyone believed in the purity of women and the nobility of men, and acted accordingly, would be a very different world, but a grand place to live in.' (Reader's Digest, June 1960, p. 76.)

"I assure you, . . . that it would be a world of freedom in which the spirit of man might grow to undreamed-of glory, a world of peace, the peace of clear conscience, of unsullied love, of fidelity, of unfailing trust and loyalty. This may appear an unattainable dream for the world. But for each of you it can be a reality, and the world will become so much the richer and the stronger for the virtue of your individual lives." (Gordon B. Hinckley, IE, December 1970, p. 73.)

"How I wish that virtue garnished our thoughts unceasingly. How I wish that no man holding the Priesthood of the living God was ever guilty of allowing any words to fall from his lips that he could not repeat in the presence of his mother. Then he would be, to a very great extent, in that straight and narrow path that leads to life eternal." (Heber J. Grant, CR, April 1937, pp. 11-12.)
