Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 122

Background information on section 122

See background information for section 121.

"The enemies of the work of God . . . imprisoned the Prophet in Liberty Jail [Missouri], where he received two very remarkable revelations. [March 25, 1839, HC 3:289-305.] They are known as Sections 121 and 122 of the Doctrine and Covenants, also a remarkable document which was published regarding the persecutions of the Saints. (Section 123.) The mob could not prevent the Prophet from receiving communications from God." (Heber J. Grant, CR, April 1937, p. 6.)

122:1

"The ends of the earth shall inquire after thy name"

"With comforting words to the Prophet during this time when all the world looked so dark and he lay in prison, the Lord informed him that the time would come when the ends of the earth should inquire after his name. Naturally this seemed impossible at that time, and only the Spirit of the Lord could have made it known. . . . We have lived to see all of this fulfilled, and yet it has only been fulfilled in part. However, through the preaching of the Gospel in most all parts of the earth, there have come out of the world, the righteous, the pure in heart and the noble to pay tribute to his name. They have sought after him and after his counsel. In the early days of the Church when the message of salvation was proclaimed in Great Britain, thousands accepted it and praised his name. They sought his counsel and the authority of the Priesthood. Many came out of this land, and later out of other European countries, seeking his fellowship, and his blessings under his hands. According to the promises of the Lord, this will continue, for it is the decree that the knowledge of the Gospel shall eventually cover the earth as the waters do the sea. When that day comes, Joseph Smith will receive from those on the earth who remain, their fellowship and they will praise his name, while those who reviled against him and held him in derision, shall be removed from the face of the earth." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:1 80-8 1.)

122:2

"the pure in heart . . . shall seek counsel . . . under thy hand"

"Here are the words of Deity, spoken to Joseph Smith, by which all men can judge the state of their own spiritual development: [Sec. 122:1-2, quoted.]

"All men may well ask themselves where they stand with reference to Joseph Smith and his divine mission. Do they inquire after his name and seek that salvation found only in the gospel of Christ as revealed to his latter-day prophet, or do they deride and despise the Lord's living oracles and say that God no longer speaks to men in the way he did anciently? The great question which all men in our day must answer—and that at the peril of their own salvation—is: Was Joseph Smith called of God?

"As for me and my house, we shall seek counsel and authority and blessing constantly from him and from those who now wear his prophetic mantle." (Bruce R. McConkie, CR, April 1976, p. 144.)

122:3

Joseph, "thy people shall never be turned against thee by the testimony of traitors"

"This is a significant truth that the enemies who turned away from the Church should have remembered. The Latter-day Saints who were acquainted with the Prophet personally, with very few exceptions, remained loyally true to him. There were some traitors in Nauvoo. One of the Prophet's counselors became his bitter enemy and sought his life. One other failed to give him loyal support. Others who had been his friends joined hands with the enemies of the Church and sought to bring him to his death, but the great majority of the people remained loyal and true.

"The influence of traitors caused him great trouble and cast him 'into bars and walls' and to his death, yet his voice speaks through his works and is more terrible and disconcerting to his enemies than the roaring of the fierce lion, and even in his death he was not forsaken by the Lord. His people remained true and the Lord has blessed them." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:181.)

"Speaking of the experience of the Prophet Joseph in the early days, I want to say that though there were many who turned from him, yet he had true and devoted friends, who stood by his side and sustained him to the very last; and he rolled upon their shoulders the cause of the kingdom, and they have been true to that trust. This Church has been taken care of from that time to this, and these men have walked in the footsteps of their file leaders, in the footsteps of the Prophet Joseph, and they have built upon the foundations which he laid." (Francis M. Lyman, CR, October 1905, p. 11.)

122:4

"thy voice shall be . . . terrible in the midst of thine enemies

"In one of those tedious nights [Winter, 1838-39, Richmond, Mo. jail] we had lain as if in sleep, till the hour of midnight had passed, and our ears and hearts had been pained, while we had listened for hours to the obscene jests, the horrid oaths, the dreadful blasphemies and filthy language of our guards, Colonel Price at their head, as they recounted to each other their deeds of rapine, murder, robbery, etc., which they had committed among the 'Mormons' while at Far West and vicinity. They even boasted of defiling by force wives, daughters, and virgins, and of shooting or dashing out the brains of men, women and children.

"I had listened till I became so disgusted, shocked, horrified, and so filled with the Spirit of indignant justice, that I could scarcely refrain from rising upon my feet and rebuking the guards, but I had said nothing to Joseph or anyone else, although I lay next to him, and knew he was awake. On a sudden he arose to his feet and spoke in a voice of thunder, or as the roaring lion, uttering, as near as I can recollect, the following words: 'Silence! Ye fiends of the infernal pit! In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still; I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die this instant!'

"He ceased to speak. He stood erect in terrible majesty. Chained, and without a weapon, calm, unruffled, and dignified as an angel, he looked down upon his quailing guards, whose knees smote together, and who, shrinking into a corner, or crouching at his feet, begged his pardon, and remained quiet until an exchange of guards.

"I have seen ministers of justice, clothed in ministerial robes, and criminals arraigned before them, while life was suspended upon a breath in the courts of England; I have witnessed a congress in solemn session to give laws to nations; I have tried to conceive of kings, of royal courts, of thrones and crowns; and of emperors assembled to decide the fate of kingdoms; but dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure village of Missouri." (Parley P. Pratt, APPP, pp. 210-11.)

122:6

"if thine enemies fall upon thee "

"Myself and fellow prisoners were taken to the town, [Far West, Mo.] into the public square, and before departure we, after much entreaty, were suffered to see our families, being attended all the while by a strong guard. I found my wife and children in tears, who feared we had been shot by those who had sworn to take our lives, and that they would see me no more. When I entered my house, they clung to my garments, their eyes streaming with tears while mingled emotions of joy and sorrow were manifested in their countenances. I requested to have a private interview with them a few minutes, but this privilege was denied me by the guard. I was then obliged to take my departure. . . .

"My partner wept, my children clung to me, until they were thrust from me by the swords of the guards. I felt overwhelmed while I witnessed the scene, and could only recommend them to care of that God whose kindness had followed me to the present time, and who alone could protect them, and deliver me from the hands of my enemies, and restore me to my family." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:193.)

122:7

"all these things . . . shall be for thy good"

"Few men have been called on to suffer more than did Joseph Smith. His entire life was spent in the midst of persecution by the hands of his enemies. No doubt he wondered many times why this had to be. In this revelation the Lord tells him. . . . There is great experience in tribulation that brings to pass much good. The person who goes through life without pain or sorrow, and who is not called upon to sacrifice comforts and partake of hardships, never receives the full value of life. We came here for experience, the benefits of which are not to be limited to this mortal life, but to be of value to those who receive the exaltation in the Kingdom of God." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:181.)

"It remained for the Prophet Joseph Smith to . . . set forth the why and wherefore of human suffering; and in revealing it he gave us a strength and power to endure that we did not before possess. For when men know why they suffer, and realize that it is for a good and wise purpose, they can bear it much better than they can in ignorance. . . .

"The fall of Adam and Eve was a great calamity, but it brought forth a wonderful blessing; it gave us our bodies, with endless opportunities to advance and achieve. It brought death into the world, but it also brought forth the human family. There was the compensation. 'Adam fell that men might be: and men are, that they might have joy.' [2 Nephi 2:25.] The crucifixion of Christ was a terrible calamity, but the atonement connected with it was the foreordained means of man's salvation. Israel's calamitous fate proved a blessing to the world in general. God's promises to Abraham had to be made good. 'In thee and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.' [Abr. 2:11.] This promise was fulfilled in Christ, but an important part of the fulfillment began when the children of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were flung broadcast over the world, and the barren wastes of unbelief might be sprinkled with the blood that believes, and made fruitful of faith and righteousness.

"So it is with all our troubles and sorrows; there is a compensation for them. . . .

"When the sky darkens and the tempest threatens, where do we go for shelter? To the sagebrush or the willow? No, rather to some spreading oak that has withstood the storms of ages and become stronger because of the fierce winds that have swayed its branches and caused its roots to strike deeper and deeper into the soil. When we want counsel and comfort, we do not go to children, nor to those who know nothing but pleasure and self-gratification. We go to men and women who have suffered themselves and can give us the comfort that we need. Is not this God's purpose in causing his children to suffer? He wants them to become more like himself. God has suffered far more than man ever did or ever will, and is therefore the great source of sympathy and consolation. Who are these arrayed in white, nearest to the throne of God? asked John the Apostle, wrapt in his mighty vision. The answer was: 'These are they who have come up through great tribulation, and washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.' [Rev. 7:13-14.]

"There is always a blessing in sorrow and humiliation. They who escape these things are not the fortunate ones. 'Whom God loveth he chasteneth.' [Heb. 12:6.] When he desires to make a great man he takes a little street waif, or a boy in the back-woods, such as Lincoln or Joseph Smith, and brings him up through hardship and privation to be the grand and successful leader of a people. Flowers shed most of their perfume when they are crushed. Men and women have to suffer just so much in order to bring out the best that is in them." (Orson F. Whitney, IE, November 1918, pp. 5-7)

122:8

"The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?"

"It is not necessary, in the providence of God, that we should all be martyrs; it is not necessary that all should suffer death upon the cross, because it was the will of the Father that Jesus should so suffer, neither is it necessary that all the Saints of this last dispensation should perish because our prophet perished, but yet it may be necessary . . . that a sufficient number of faithful witnesses of God and of his Christ should suffer, and even perish by the hands of their enemies, to prove and show unto the world—the unbelieving and unthinking—that their testimony is true."(Erastus Snow, JD 21:26.)

"Do not let us be discouraged at difficulties and trials, for we are sent to this state of existence for the express purpose of descending below all things, that we may pass the ordeals and trials of this life and thereby prove our integrity and be prepared to rise above all things. And after all, we have not been called upon to endure to that extent that the Savior of the world was. But he was not subjected to the afflictions he had to endure without hope, neither are we. . . . If we can pass these tests and trials we shall prove to God and angels that we are worthy to receive the welcome plaudit, 'well done, thou good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of the Lord.' [Matt. 25:21-23.]" (Daniel H. Wells, JD 12:235.)

122:9

"thy years shall not be numbered less"

"I know what I say; I understand my mission and business. God Almighty is my shield; and what can man do if God is my friend? I shall not be sacrificed until my time comes; then I shall be offered freely." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:259.)

"Was there frustration in the martyrdom of Joseph Smith? Joseph was protected and his life saved in every instance of persecution until his work was finished and he had done his part in the restoration of the gospel and the priesthood and all other keys of the dispensation, and until the organization of the kingdom was effected. He could not be killed before that time, though all hell raged against him. He wanted to live. Life was sweet to him. It held promise of sweet associations with his family, his brethren and the satisfaction of seeing the work blossom into a full-blown flower. But his work was done; other strong leaders could now carry on; he was needed in other fields. Only in his thirties, a very young man, he died, and commenced his work in other realms." (Spencer W. Kimball, CR, April 1945, p. 59.)
