Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 123

Background information on section 123

See background information on section 121.

"In prison [Liberty, Missouri, March 1839], Joseph was in constant communion with the heavens and he received revelation [Sections 121, 122 and 123; March 25, 1839, HC 3:289-305], without which he and his brethren must have been cast down and without hope. He also sent epistles full of instruction and hope to leading men among the Saints." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, p. 283.)

123:1

Gather up "all the facts, and sufferings and abuses"

"That records might be kept on earth as well as in heaven, the Lord commanded (Sec. 123) that there be gathered all the knowledge of all the acts, and sufferings and the abuses put upon the members of the Church by the State of Missouri. Also a record should be kept of all the property destroyed, the damages sustained, both to the character and the personal injuries and to the real property of the Saints. The names of those who were engaged in this wickedness and these murders and drivings were also to be gathered and preserved. A committee was appointed to gather this evidence that it might be on file. This information would be of value when presented before the Government of the United States when the Church should seek justice at the seat of government. If redress could not be obtained there, then the evidence would stand against those who were guilty, before the Eternal Tribunal which will try all men and all things." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 3:203-4.)

123:4

"perhaps a committee can be appointed"

"At a conference held near Quincy, III., May 4th-6th, 1839, Almon W. Babbitt, Erastus Snow, and Robert B. Thompson were appointed a committee to gather up the historical material required by this Revelation." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 763.)

123:4

"gather up the libelous publications"

"This gathering of information was not to be confined to the deeds committed in Missouri, but should reach out to embrace the wickedness, falsehoods, and deeds of those who fought the truth throughout all time. Magazine articles, writings in encyclopedias, all libelous histories, and other writings . . . were to be gathered that they might be published to the world, sent to the heads of government. [Sec. 123:5, quoted.] . . .

"The work of gathering the libelous articles from magazines, books, newspapers, and all sources, still goes on. In the library of the Historian's Office, there are on file today upwards of 2,000 books, encyclopedias, magazines, histories, pamphlets, communications, etc., sent forth by Satan and his emissaries, and still this flood of wicked and malicious falsehood goes on and evidently will go on until the Lord comes to cleanse the earth of all its filthiness." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 3:203-4.)

"Now, what means are they using and what means have they been using, for years, against the Church? Ridicule, contumely, falsehood, slander, misrepresentation! Men that fight against The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints build up 'men of straw' and slaughter them. They advance ideas that do not belong to us, that we have never held, that we do not advocate, that are no part of our doctrine or religion at all. They conjure up these propositions in their own minds, and then proceed, with all the eloquence and fervor of their souls, to tear in pieces and destroy the images of their own minds. They do not fight Mormonism—they can't, without they fight God and the truth! The moment that men attempt to fight this Church they fight God, they fight the principles of His gospel and His truth; they fight faith in God, faith in Jesus Christ, faith in righteousness, faith in the resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, faith in every principle that exalts and uplifts and ameliorates the condition of man in the world. If they undertake to fight us they fight these principles, because we have espoused these principles." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, October 1910, pp. 128-29.)

"It is impossible to take up all the misrepresentations given to the world by anti 'Mormon' preachers and writers. They have one merit. They stir up interest in what is called the 'Mormon' question. People are led thus to investigate and many of them find out the truth, and unite with the people who are so greatly maligned." (First Presidency, CR, April 1911, p. 130.)

123:5

"concatenation . . . nefarious "

Concatenate means "to link together in a series or chain."

Nefarious means "flagrantly wicked or impious." Evil and vicious are synonyms.
