Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 124

Background information on section 124

"Almost as soon as the Prophet and his brethren arrived in Nauvoo from their imprisonment and persecutions in Missouri, the Lord gave instructions that a temple should be built in Nauvoo. By this time the fulness of the doctrine of salvation for the dead had been revealed and the importance of performing ordinances for the dead was impressed upon the mind of the Prophet and by him, in discourses and letter, upon the saints. No doubt Joseph Smith had been praying to the Lord on this subject, and this revelation (Sec. 124) is an answer to his pleadings." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:265-66.)

124:1

"unto this end have I raised you up"

"Joseph Smith was born of humble parentage in an obscure village. He never went to college nor attended high school, but he accomplished in the short period of his life of thirty-eight and one-half years more than any other mortal man of his time, if not of all time. . . .

"During the short life of the Prophet Joseph Smith he was instrumental in the hands of the Lord in the establishment of the Church and kingdom of God on earth as seen in vision by the Prophet Daniel. [Dan. 2.] Through him the everlasting gospel in its fulness was restored, with all its gifts, blessings, principles, and ordinances, and the power and authority of the priesthood to administer the ordinances of the gospel to the children of men, who, by repentance and obedience, are prepared to receive them.

"The works of Joseph Smith and the spirit that prompted them live on in the hearts and lives of his followers." (George F. Richards, CR, September 1949, p. 153.)

124:1

"the weak things of the earth"

See Weak things of the world in Appendix A.

124:2-7

"make a solemn proclamation of my gospel . . . to all the kings of the world, . . . to the . . . president-elect, . . . the. . . governors. . . and to all the nations of the earth"

"Toward the end of his mortal ministry, the Lord commanded the Prophet Joseph Smith as follows:

" 'Make a solemn proclamation of my gospel . . . to all the kings of the world, to the four corners thereof . . . and to all nations of the earth.' (D&C 124:2-3.) He was to invite them to come to the light of truth, and use their means to build up the kingdom of God on earth.

"In the spirit of this divine direction, on the sixth day of April 1845, and shortly after the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum had mingled their blood with that of the other martyrs of true religion, the Council of the Twelve made such a proclamation. They address it:

" 'To all the Kings of the World;

To the President of the United States of America; To the Governors of the several States;

And to the Rulers and People of all nations.'. . .

"It seems fitting and proper to me that we should reaffirm the great truths pronounced in this declaration and that we should proclaim them anew to the world." (Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, November 1975, pp. 32-34.)

124:4

"by the power of the Holy Ghost"

See Holy Ghost in Appendix A.

124:10

"the day of my visitation cometh speedily"

See Second coming and Quickly in Appendix A.

124:12

"Robert B. Thompson"

"Elder Robert Blashel Thompson died at his residence in Nauvoo, in the 30th year of his age, in the full hope of a glorious resurrection. He was associate editor of the Times and Seasons, colonel in the Nauvoo Legion, and had done much writing for myself and the Church." (Joseph Smith, HC 4:411 )

124:15

and following verses

For additional information on persons mentioned in this section, see Appendix B.

124:15

"Hyrum Smith. . . I, the Lord, love him"

"No mortal man who ever lived in this Church desired more to do good than did Hyrum Smith, the patriarch. I have it from the lips of my own sainted mother, that of all the men she was acquainted with in her girlhood days in Nauvoo, she admired Hyrum Smith most for his absolute integrity and devotion to God, and his loyalty to the prophet of God." (Heber J. Grant, CR, October 1920, p. 84.)

124:19

"David Patten"

"I have thought it more than mere coincidence that one of the first martyrs in this dispensation, David W. Patten, a member of the Twelve Apostles, lost his life near the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, that same valley in which Adam had gathered his posterity, which the Lord had revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith was near Wight's Ferry, at a place called Spring Hill, Daviess county, Missouri. [Section 116.]" (Harold B. Lee, CR, April 1948, p. 53.)

"And in speaking about David Patten, one of the twelve, it is written: [Sec. 124:130, quoted.] But his being dead made no difference in regard to his priesthood. He held it just the same in the heavens as on the earth. There is another man mentioned. Referring to the high council, it is stated: [Sec. 124:132, quoted.]" (John Taylor, GK, p. 184.)

124:19

"Joseph Smith, Sr., who sitteth with Abraham"

"Then there is something said concerning Joseph Smith, Sen., the father of the Prophet Joseph Smith, of whom it is said that he sitteth with Abraham, at his right hand. (See D&C 124:19.) Who was Abraham? A patriarch. Who was Father Joseph Smith? A patriarch. It is quite fitting, therefore, that he should associate with Abraham who was and is also a patriarch." (John Taylor, GK, p. 184.)

124:20-22, 62, 70

"George Miller"

"George Miller, as long as the Prophet Joseph lived, seemed to be a faithful Latter-day Saint. He was chosen to fill the important place of Bishop, left vacant by the death of Edward Partridge. He accompanied the Prophet on his journeys, on several occasions. He and Newel K. Whitney were appointed Trustees-in-trust of the Church, after the death of the Prophet. And when the Saints left Nauvoo, he was among the first to cross the river. But from now on he changed. In the Camp of Israel, slowly wending its way westward, he became disaffected. He always wanted to be ahead of the main body, and be a law unto himself. At Winter Quarters he expressed the view that Texas was the place to go to, and not the Rocky Mountains, and when Brigham Young refused to listen to him, knowing that the Prophet had pointed to the Great Basin as the gathering place of the Saints, he left the Camp with a few followers, and joined Lyman Wight in Texas. Shortly afterwards he disagreed with this schismatic and joined Strang, unable to find peace and rest anywhere. Here is another career, beginning in integrity and love of the gospel and ending in failure, because of lack of humility." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 772.)

124:21

"I seal upon his head [George Miller] the office of a bishopric"

"I would here remark that Edward Partridge was the first Bishop of the Church, and that he was appointed at an early day to go to the land of Zion, and to preside over the Bishopric in that district of country. . . . In the same revelation that George Miller was called to occupy the place of Edward Partridge, and to hold the same kind of Bishopric that he held, we find that there was a Presiding Bishopric appointed." (John Taylor, JD 22:199.)

124:22-23

"build a house . . . for boarding"

"The Spirit of Revelation directs the Saints to build a fine hotel for the entertainment of strangers. There is no greater inducement for travelers to visit a place than good hotel accommodations. This Revelation proves that the Lord wanted the tourists of the world to visit and become acquainted with the Saints. These were not to be surrounded by a wall of isolation. They had nothing to hide from the world.

"The erection of the hotel here referred to, generally known as the Nauvoo House, was commenced in the spring of 1841, and in 1846, when the Saints left Nauvoo, the walls were up above the windows of the second story. It fronted two streets, 120 feet on each. The estimated cost was $100,000. It was planned to be the most magnificent hotel in the West, at the time. When the Saints left the City, the unfinished building became the property of the Prophet's widow, and was subsequently claimed by her second husband, Mr. L. C. Bidamon. In 1872 he put part of it under roof and fitted it up as an hotel, known as the Bidamon House." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 772-73.)

". . . the Nauvoo House, [was] a place for the boarding of strangers. Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, and many others were called upon to 'pay stock' for themselves and their seed after them 'from generation to generation,' in this house. . . . Those who took stock were not to pay less than fifty dollars, and not more than fifteen thousand dollars for any one man." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ECH, p. 306.)

"October 21, 1841, the cornerstone of the 'Nauvoo House' was laid. However, this was never completed during the lifetime of the Prophet. August 31, 1843, he moved into the 'mansion house' in Nauvoo, a private dwelling, in which traveling guests could be entertained." (John A. Widtsoe, JS, p. 212.)

124:27

"build a house to my name"

"The importance of temples and the work in them has been a doctrine of the Church from the beginning. We have seen how the Lord rebuked the saints for not building the Kirtland Temple as soon as they should have done, after the call was given; also how the command was given to build a temple in Jackson County, which was prohibited by the enemies of the Church. Almost as soon as the Prophet and his brethren arrived in Nauvoo from their imprisonment and persecutions in Missouri, the Lord gave instructions that a temple should be built in Nauvoo." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:265.)

124:28

"there is not a place . . . that he may come"

"The Saints had to flee before mobocracy. And, by toil and daily labor, they found places in Missouri, where they laid the corner stones of Temples, in Zion and her Stakes, and then had to retreat to Illinois, to save the lives of those who could get away alive from Missouri. . . . But before all this had transpired, the Temple at Kirtland had fallen into the hands of wicked men, and by them been polluted, like the Temple at Jerusalem, and consequently it was disowned by the Father and the Son." (Brigham Young, JD 2:32.)

124:36

"it is ordained that in Zion, and in her stakes, and in Jerusalem "

A careful reading of this verse would seem to indicate that Jerusalem will not be part of an organized stake of Zion at the time the temple is built there in the last days. Otherwise, the words "including Jerusalem" might have been used rather than "and in Jerusalem."

124:37-39

The tabernacle of Moses

"The importance of the ordinances in the house of the Lord is shown in verses 37-39 [Section 124], where we are informed that Moses was commanded to build a portable temple, generally called tabernacle, which could be carried with them in the wilderness. This tabernacle, is the same temple where the boy Samuel heard the voice of the Lord. (1 Samuel 1-3.) This sacred building was later replaced by Solomon's Temple. The question is often asked, 'What was the nature of the ordinances performed in these edifices in ancient times?' The Lord explains this in the verses above cited. It is true that in ancient Israel they did not have the fulness of ordinances as we do today, and most, if not all, of which they were privileged to receive very likely pertained to the Aaronic Priesthood. (See D&C 84:21-26.) Neither did the ancients labor in their temples for the salvation of the dead. That work was reserved until after the Savior's visit to the spirit world where he unlocked the door to the prisons and had the gospel carried to the spirits who had been confined." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 4:82.)

127:38

"that . . . ordinances might be revealed"

"You have come from the nations abroad, to be instructed in the ways of the Lord, to be taught in the ordinances that pertain to the great and last dispensation of the fullness of times—ordinances that did not pertain to any former dispensation,—ordinances that were not made known to any former people, but ordinances and principles that pertain to the exaltation and glory of the world which we inhabit." (Orson Pratt, JD 21:205.)

124:41

"I deign [condescend to give] to reveal . . . things . . . hid from before the foundation of the world"

"Wednesday, May 4, 1842, the Prophet met with a number of brethren in the upper room of his store where he had his private office, where he kept his sacred writings, did his translating and received revelations and held council meetings. The special reason for the gathering was of the greatest moment to the Church and to this generation. It was the fulfillment of the promise the Lord made that he was about to reveal unto the Church 'things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to the dispensation of the fulness of times.' These things were to be made known, and the blessings come from them to be given to the members of the Church, within the walls of temples built to the name of the Lord. The Lord said he would reveal unto his servant, Joseph Smith 'all things pertaining to his house, and the priesthood thereof, and the place whereon it shall be built.' (D&C 124:41-42.) Knowing that the Prophet would be taken in death before this house was finished, the Lord commanded him to make known to the trusted brethren the ordinances which later would be performed in the temple when it was finished. It was on this occasion, May 4, 1842, that the Prophet called some of these brethren to his upper room, and gave unto them instruction 'in the principles and order of the Priesthood, attending to washings, anointings, endowments and the communication of keys pertaining to the Aaronic Priesthood, and so on to the highest order of the Melchizedek Priesthood, setting forth the order pertaining to the Ancient of Days, and all those plans and principles by which any one is enabled to secure the fullness of those blessings which have been prepared for the Church of the Firstborn, and come up and abide in the presence of the Eloheim in the eternal worlds.' [HC 5:2.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 4:111-12.)

124:49-53

"I [have] accepted the offerings"

"If you will read carefully the revelations I speak of now [Sections 84 and 124], you will find that the Lord refers particularly to this very requirement in regard to Jackson county, Missouri, and he declares that the people there were commanded to build a house to him at that time, and on that spot. But their enemies came upon them and prevented them from doing that which the Lord commanded them, and therefore the Lord accepted their offering. The Lord lays down there a principle which it is well for us to understand. The Lord says that whenever he gives a commandment, no matter what it is about, to the children of man, and they go to with their might and endeavor to fulfil his commandment, and do that which is required of them, and they are prevented by their enemies, or by any other means, from accomplishing it, he does not require it any more at their hands. He accepts of their offering." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, April 1924, pp. 13-14.)

124:50

"I will visit [iniquity] . . . unto the third and fourth generation"

"You have an idea that the commandment [Exodus 20:5] means that when a man sins his children will be held responsible for his folly and be punished for it, for three or four generations. The commandment does not mean anything of this kind. The Lord never punishes a child for its parents' transgressions. He is just and merciful. The real meaning of this visiting of the iniquity is that when a man transgresses he teaches his children to transgress, and they follow his teachings. It is natural for children to follow in the practices of their fathers and by doing so suffer for the parents' iniquity which they have voluntarily brought upon themselves.

"There are numerous other passages of scripture showing the mercy and justice of the Lord and that they are not to be punished for the fathers' transgression. Here are a few: [Deut. 24:16; Kings 14:6; 2 Chron. 25:4; Jer. 31:29-30; Ezek. 18:20, quoted.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, IE, June 1955, p. 383.)

124:78-79

"Isaac Galland"

"Most of the Saints expelled from the State of Missouri during the winter 1838-9, found their way into Illinois and Iowa. . . . Among the prominent citizens who, at this time, extended a helping hand to the Saints were Daniel H. Wells, a native of Trenton, New York, and Dr. Isaac Galland. Daniel H. Wells was the owner of a tract of land, which he divided into lots and which the exiles were offered, practically on their own terms. Dr. Galland, also, sold his land at a reasonable price and on the most favorable terms.

"The Prophet arrived at Quincy on the 22nd of April, 1839, and two days after, a Council was convened and resolutions were passed directing some of the Saints to go to Zion, and some to settle on Dr. Galland's land, near Commerce, Ill. This location soon became the central gathering place, and its name was changed to Nauvoo." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 768.)

124:84

"With Almon Babbitt . . . I am not pleased"

"The Lord severely rebukes Almon Babbitt. From these verses it may be gathered that his chief ambition was to make money, and that he advised the Saints to leave Nauvoo, contrary to the counsel of the Church leaders. Perhaps he was interested in the sale of land elsewhere. At all events, when the Saints left Nauvoo, he was appointed one of the real estate agents in whose hands the abandoned property was left, to be disposed of on the best terms obtainable. How he discharged this duty, we may infer from the following statement of Heber C. Kimball: 'My house was sold at $1,700, intended to be used to help to gather the Saints; but Almon W. Babbitt put it in his pocket, I suppose' (JD 8:350)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 784.)

124:89

"the new translation"

See Inspired Version of the Bible in Appendix A.

124:91

"let my servant William be appointed . . . counselor"

"William Law was called by revelation to act as second counselor in the First Presidency, in 1841, but when the doctrine of celestial marriage was revealed he turned away from the Church, and was one of the chief plotters against the Prophet and Patriarch and helped to bring them to martyrdom." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 4:83.)

124:91

"my servant Hyrum may take the office of . . . Patriarch . . . by right"

See Patriarch in Appendix A.

"From this [revelation] we learn, that Joseph Smith, Sen., inherited the Patriarchal Priesthood, by right from the fathers over the house of Israel in this dispensation. For this right to have descended to him, by lineage, he must of necessity be an Ephraimite, for Ephraim, by the right of appointment and ordination by his father Jacob, is the head of Israel. This fact is plainly stated in the scriptures. . . . By virtue of this adoption of Ephraim, as the head of the house of Israel, and Joseph Smith, Sen., being the oldest son of Ephraim, holding the Priesthood in this dispensation, he is Patriarch of the whole church by right. This right should be perpetuated in his family, as the oldest branch of the tribe of Ephraim." (Franklin D. Richards and James A. Little, Compendium, pp. 74-75.)

"Hyrum Smith served in the First Presidency as second counselor to his younger brother from the time of the release of Frederick G. Williams to January 19, 1841. At this time the Lord called Hyrum Smith to the office of patriarch by virtue of the law of primogeniture. It was his right, and so the Lord declared in this revelation. This office, as we have previously seen, descends from father to son through the chosen lineage. It was conferred upon Joseph Smith as the lawful heir to the blessings of Joseph and Ephraim, and descended to Hyrum Smith as a legal right. (See D&C 68:16-18, and 124:91.) This office belongs to the descendants of Hyrum Smith." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:269.)

"Hyrum Smith is pointed out as the legal successor of his father in the Patriarchal office; it is his 'by right' of lineage, no less than by Patriarchal blessing. The following is the blessing pronounced upon Hyrum Smith by his father: 'My son Hyrum, I seal upon your head your patriarchal blessing, which I placed upon your head before, for that shall be verified. In addition to this, I now give you my dying blessing. You shall have a season of peace, so that you shall have a sufficient rest to accomplish the work which God has given you to do. You shall be as firm as the pillars of heaven unto the end of your days. I now seal upon your head the patriarchal power, and you shall bless the people. This is my dying blessing upon your head in the name of Jesus. Amen.'" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 786.)

124:91-95

"a prophet . . . seer. . . revelator"

See Seer in Appendix A.

"'Can a number of men be Prophets, Seers, and Revelators and yet not interfere with the rights of him who stands at the head?" There is no reason why this should not be the case. By reference to Section 124, paragraphs 91-95; it will be seen that the Lord, by His own voice, appointed Hyrum Smith to 'be a prophet, seer and a revelator unto my church, as well as my servant Joseph.' " (George Q. Cannon, JI, Jan. 1, 1891, pp. 27-28.)

124:95

"gifts . . . that once were upon . . . Oliver Cowdery"

"This [D&C 124:94] was a special blessing given to Hyrum Smith and in accepting it he took the place of Oliver Cowdery, upon whom these keys had previously been bestowed. It should be remembered that whenever the Lord revealed Priesthood and the keys of Priesthood from the heavens, Oliver Cowdery stood with Joseph Smith in the presence of the heavenly messengers, and was a recipient, as well as Joseph Smith as the 'first' and Oliver Cowdery as the 'second' Elder of the Church. Thus the law pertaining to witnesses was fully established, for there were two witnesses standing with authority, keys and presidency, at the head of this the greatest of all dispensations. When through transgression Oliver Cowdery lost this wonderful and exalted blessing, Hyrum Smith was chosen by revelation of the Lord to take his place." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, April 1932, 5:51-52.)

124:103

"Sidney"

See Sidney Rigdon in Appendix B.

124:109

"city of Nauvoo"

"Shortly after the saints began to assemble at Commerce the name of the settlement was changed to Nauvoo. The Prophet declared that the word is of Hebrew origin, and 'signifies a beautiful situation, or place, carrying with it, also, the idea of rest.' It is about one hundred and ninety miles up the river from St. Louis and nearly the same distance west of Chicago." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:246-47.)

124:111-14

"Amos Davies"

"From this Revelation it is evident that Amos Davies, not withstanding his prominence, had some weaknesses. He was slow to obey counsel, and he shunned work. He is, therefore, commanded to 'labor with his own hands' and prove himself faithful in all things. It is to be feared that he heeded this commandment only in part, for on the 9th of March, 1842, he indulged in abusive language concerning the Prophet, whereupon the court bound him over, to keep the peace." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 789.)

"In the evening attended trial at Brother Hyrum's office, the City of Nauvoo versus Amos Davis, for indecent and abusive language about me while at Mr. Davis' the day previous. The charges were clearly substantiated by the testimony of Dr. Foster, Mr. and Mrs. Hibbard, and others. Mr. Davis was found guilty by the jury, and by the municipal court, bound over to keep the peace six months, under $100 bond." (Joseph Smith, HC 4:549.)

124:115

"Robert D. Foster"

"Robert D. Foster was one of the men who fell from a high position of honor to the lowest depths of wickedness. The Prophet befriended him again and again, hoping that he would mend his ways. According to a statement made to Cyrus H. Wheelock, shortly before the tragedy at Carthage, he was one of a number of conspirators who were determined to take the life of the Prophet." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 790.)

"So on the very day that the paper [Nauvoo Expositor] was to come forth burdened with lies, Robert D. Foster went to the mansion and demanded a private interview with Joseph. He asked the Prophet to go away with him alone, pretending that he wished to return to the Church and wanted to confer upon that subject. Joseph refused to talk except in the presence of witnesses, for this man Foster had often before misrepresented the Prophet's words. Joseph said to him that there was but one condition upon which he might return and that was to repent and to make restitution as far as possible.

"While they stood talking Joseph put his hand upon Foster's vest and said: 'What have you concealed there?'

"Foster stammered in reply: 'It's my pistol.'

"He would have lied, but under that piercing glance his bravado deserted him, and he was compelled to acknowledge the fact.

"The reason of this visit was soon made plain, and it was made plainer at a later time by the testimony of unimpeachable witnesses, Saints and strangers alike. He had not come to seek forgiveness and restoration of fellowship; he had not come to make amends. He had come to lure Joseph away to his death." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, 484-85.)

124:126

"First Presidency"

See First Presidency in Appendix A.

124:127

"Twelve traveling council"

See Council of the Twelve in Appendix A.

124:141

"the bishopric"

See Bishop in Appendix A.

124:143

"above offices"

See Church offices and presiding quorums in Appendix A.

124:144

"at my general conference"

"Reference to the Doctrine and Covenants will disclose the fact that there are four principal purposes of holding conferences of the Church: First, to transact current Church business. [Sec. 20:62.] Second, to hear reports and general Church statistics. [Sec. 73:2.] Third, to 'approve those names which I (the Lord) have appointed, or to disapprove of them.' [Sec. 124:144.] Fourth, to worship the Lord in sincerity and reverence, and to give and to receive encouragement, exhortation, and instruction. [Sec. 58:56; 72:7.]" (David O. McKay, CR, October 1938, pp. 130-31.)
