Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 125

Background information on section 125

"When the Saints left Missouri, a large number of fugitives found their way into the Territory of Iowa. Large tracts of land were purchased, and several settlements were built up in the southeastern portion of that Territory. Before the arrival of the Saints, there were only 2,839 inhabitants in Lee County. In 1846 the population was estimated at 12,860. So rapidly did the County develop, when touched by the magic wand of 'Mormon' industry. Nauvoo was the central point of gathering at this time, and the question, stated in the first verse of this Revelation, arose. The answer follows." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 795.)

"Mr. [Isaac] Galland in a communication to David W. Rogers [May 1839], suggested that the Saints locate in Iowa, which was a territory; for he thought they would be more likely to receive protection from mobs under the jurisdiction of the United States, than they would in a state of the Union, 'where murder, rapine and robbery are admirable (!) traits in the character of a demagogue; and where the greatest villains often reach the highest offices.' He also wrote to Governor Robert Lucas of Iowa, who had known the 'Mormon' people in Ohio, and who spoke very highly of them as good citizens." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ECH, p. 266.)

125:2-4

"Zarahemla"

The name Zarahemla was obviously taken from one of the major cities mentioned in the Book of Mormon. It has been suggested that the basic meaning of the word in Hebrew is "place of abundance"; thus, its meaning would be very similar to that of Bountiful, another Book of Mormon city. (Ancient America and the Book of Mormon, p. 152.)

"This settlement was founded by the Saints in 1839, on the uplands about a mile west of the Mississippi River, near Montrose and opposite Nauvoo, Ill. The Church had bought an extensive tract of land here. At a conference held at Zarahemla, August 7th, 1841, seven hundred and fifty Church members were represented, of whom three hundred and twenty-six lived in Zarahemla. But when the Saints left for the Rocky Mountains, that city was lost sight of." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 796.)

"Across the river [Mississippi at Nauvoo, Illinois] on the Iowa side, extensive holdings also were obtained. [1839.] The village of Nashville, in Lee County, with twenty thousand acres adjoining, were purchased; also other lands opposite Nauvoo. Here the Prophet instructed the Saints that a city should be built, to be called Zarahemla. A number of members of the Church had located here when the Saints were driven from Missouri, and it appeared to be a suitable location for a permanent settlement of the people. . . . The idea seemed to be that the Latter-day Saints should spread out over considerable territory, and form organizations in various parts of the country, but this plan was abandoned, and the Saints scattered abroad were commanded by revelation in January, 1841, to gather to Hancock County, Illinois, and to Lee County, Iowa, and to build up the settlements in these parts occupied by the members of the Church. This was, the presidency wrote, 'agreeable to the order of heaven.' Consequently the Saints began to immigrate to Nauvoo, and the city grew rapidly by such additions. About one year after the location of the site, Nauvoo had a population of over three thousand souls, and six years later, at the time of the great western exodus, about twenty thousand. The stake at Zarahemla was later discontinued, but John Smith remained there to preside over the Saints in Iowa. [1846.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, ECH, pp. 268-69.)
