Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 126

Background information on section 126

"In order to grasp fully the significance of this Revelation, an incident from the first meeting, in 1832, between the Prophet Joseph and his successor [to be] should be recalled. They had spent the evening in conversation on the gospel, and when the time for parting had come, Brigham Young was invited to lead in prayer. While he was praying, the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he spoke in tongues—the first instance of the bestowal of that gift upon anyone in this dispensation. Afterwards, it is asserted, the Prophet said, 'A time will come when Brother Brigham will preside over this Church.' (Whitney's History of Utah 1:112.)

"It should, further, be remembered that, at a Conference held at Nauvoo, August 16th, 1841, the Prophet Joseph, with this Revelation in mind, stated that, 'The time has come when the Twelve should be called upon to stand in their place next to the First Presidency, and attend to the settling of emigrants and the business of the Church at the Stakes, and to assist to bear off the kingdom victoriously to the nations.' (HC 4:403.) By this Revelation, therefore, Brigham Young, the President of the Twelve (D&C 124:127), was called to stand next to the First Presidency. Why? To take his place, whenever the Prophet should be called to another sphere of action. By this Revelation, the Spirit indicated that Brigham Young was to be the successor of Joseph Smith, as the Prophet had predicted in 1832." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 797.)

"In the month of July, 1841, the Apostles began to return to Nauvoo from their missions to Europe, and their coming was a great comfort to the Prophet in his hour of affliction. At a special conference which was held at Nauvoo on the 16th of August, 1841, shortly after the return of the Twelve, Joseph stated to the people there assembled that the time had come when the Apostles must stand in their places next to the First Presidency. They had been faithful and had borne the burden and heat of the day, giving the gospel triumph in the nations of the earth, and it was right that they should now remain at home and perform the duty in Zion." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, p 374.)

126:1

"Dear and well-beloved brother, Brigham Young"

See Brigham Young in Appendix B.

"Brigham Young was a man of undoubted genius,—a master mind, well balanced and powerful, thoroughly practical in thought and method, and of Napoleonic energy and intuition. . . . Brigham Young first saw the Book of Mormon in the spring of 1830, at the home of his brother Phineas in Mendon. It had been left there by Samuel H. Smith, brother to the Prophet. Two years later a party of Mormon Elders from Pennsylvania came preaching in that neighborhood. Being converted to the faith, Brigham was baptized by Eleazer Miller on the 14th of April, 1832. . . . Not long afterward Brigham . . . accompanied by Joseph Young, visited Kirtland and became acquainted with the Prophet. It was the summer or fall of 1832. This was the first meeting of Joseph Smith with the man who was destined to be his successor. It is said that Joseph predicted about this time that Brigham Young would yet preside over the Church." (Orson F. Whitney, History of Utah, p. 112.)

126:2

"I have seen your labor and toil"

"I came into this Church in the spring of 1832. Previous to my being baptized, I took a mission to Canada at my own expense; and from the time that I was baptized until the day of our sorrow and affliction, at the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum, no summer passed over my head but what I was traveling and preaching, and the only thing I ever received from the Church, during over twelve years, and the only means that were ever given me by the Prophet, that I now recollect, was in 1842, when brother Joseph sent me the half of a small pig that the brethren had brought to him. I did not ask him for it. . . .

"I have traveled and preached, and at the same time sustained my family by my labor and economy. . . . For me to travel and preach without purse or scrip was never hard. . . . In company with several of the Twelve I was sent to England in 1839. We started from home without purse or scrip, and most of the Twelve were sick. . . . I was not able to walk to the river, not so far as across this block, no, not more than half as far; I had to be helped to the river, in not even an overcoat; I took a small quilt from the trundle bed, and that served for my overcoat, while I was traveling to the State of New York, when I had a coarse sattinet overcoat given to me. Thus we went to England, to a strange land to sojourn among strangers. . . .

"I was there one year and sixteen days, with my brethren the Twelve and during that time I bought all my clothing, except one pair of pantaloons, which the sisters gave me in Liverpool soon after I arrived there and which I really needed. I told the brethren, in one of my discourses, that there was no need of their begging, for if they needed anything the sisters could understand that. The sisters took the hint, and the pantaloons were forthcoming. I paid three hundred and eighty dollars to get the work started in London, and when I arrived home, in Nauvoo, I owed no person one farthing." (Brigham Young, JD 4:34-35.)

"The career of Brigham Young was that of a missionary. Shortly after his baptism, he went to Canada, in company with his brother, Joseph, and as a result of their labors, several families joined the Church and went to Kirtland. Brigham Young labored at his trade and preached the gospel whenever an opportunity was found. He joined Zion's Camp when that organization was formed. He and his brother were the 'sweet singers' of the Camp, always cheerful and true. Brigham Young was chosen to be one of the Twelve Apostles, and early in May, 1835, he went to the Eastern States, as did the other Apostles, for the purpose of preaching the gospel, gathering the Saints, and collecting means to purchase land in Missouri. In 1836, after having attended the solemn assembly at Kirtland and received a promised endowment, he went on another mission to the Eastern States, traveling through New York, Vermont, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island, returning to Kirtland in the fall, where he became one of the chief supports of the Prophet, during the time of financial crash and apostasy. In 1840, Brigham Young, accompanied by Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, George A. Smith, and Reuben Hedlock, left New York for a mission to Great Britain, where he labored with indomitable zeal and great success. On the 20th of April, 1841, he set sail for New York on his return journey. While in the British mission field, he had been instrumental in performing a great work. He says 'Through the mercy of God we have gained many friends, established churches in almost every noted town and city of Great Britain, baptized between seven and eight thousand souls, printed 5,000 Books of Mormon, 3,000 hymn books, 2,500 volumes of the Millennial Star, and fifty thousand tracts.' It was shortly after the arrival of Brigham Young in Nauvoo, after his British mission, that this Revelation was received, in which the Lord expresses approval of his labors and commands him to leave his family no more, but to send His word abroad and provide for his family." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 796-97.)
