Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 127

Background information on section 127

"During the summer and fall of 1842, the Prophet Joseph Smith was forced to go into hiding because of the attempt on the part of the Missouri mobocrats to get him in their clutches. He had been accused by ex-governor Boggs as being an accessory and Orrin Porter Rockwell as the principal in the shooting of Boggs, May 6, 1842. This was a conspiracy to get the Prophet back into the hands of the Missourian mobbers. Governor Carlin of Illinois, had joined in this conspiracy contrary to every principle of correct law, as it was later shown in the trial which was held in Springfield [Illinois]. . . . From his place of concealment the Prophet wrote these two letters (Sections 127 and 128 in the Doctrine and Covenants) by revelation to the Church." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:328.)

127:1

"my enemies . . . pursue me without a cause"

"I told them [members of the Church] it was likely I would have again to hide up in the woods, but they must not be discouraged, but build up the city, the Temple, etc. When my enemies take away my rights, I will bear it and keep out of the way; but if they take away your rights, I will fight for you. I blessed them and departed." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:181.)

127:2

"unless I was ordained from before the foundation of the world"

See Foreordination and Pre-earthly existence in Appendix A.

127:5

"baptism for your dead"

See Dead in Appendix A.

127:6

"let there be a recorder. . . [an] eye witness"

"I have one remark to make respecting the baptism for the dead to suffice for the time being, until I have opportunity to discuss the subject at greater length—all persons baptized for the dead must have a recorder present, that he may be an eyewitness to record and testify of the truth and validity of his record. It will be necessary, in the Grand Council, that these things be testified to by competent witnesses. Therefore let the recording and witnessing of baptisms for the dead be carefully attended to from this time forth. [D&C 128:2-5.] If there is any lack, it may be at the expense of our friends; they may not come forth." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:141.)

127:7

"whatsoever you bind on earth, may be bound in heaven"

See Sealing power in Appendix A.

"What is bound or sealed in the temples of the Lord, is also sealed in heaven. This is the great authority which Elijah restored. It also covers ordinances performed for the living as well as for the dead. The Prophet said that all of the ordinances for the living are required in behalf of all the dead who are entitled to the fulness of the exaltation. (See HC 6:183-184.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:329.)

127:11

"the prince of this world cometh"

See Satan in Appendix A.
