Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 128

Background information on section 128

See background information on section 127.

"The important instructions contained in the foregoing letter made a deep and solemn impression on the minds of the Saints; and they manifested their intentions to obey the instructions to the letter." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:153.)

128:1

"baptism for the dead"

See Dead in Appendix A.

128:3

"there can be a recorder appointed"

See Records in Appendix A.

"In the early days of the Church some baptisms for the dead that were not properly witnessed and recorded, were rejected of the Lord, and the work had to be done over again. We know that great care and attention is given to this matter today in our Temples and that efficient help must be secured to do this. . . . Truly it is a great and marvelous work, and not the least important thing about it is that these ordinances are all carefully recorded in the books and are filed away in the archives of the Temple, to be brought forth in due time. From these records the people who have gone to that house will be judged. Nothing that is done in that Temple will be accepted of the Lord, except it is properly witnessed and recorded." (Rudger Clawson, CR, April 1900, pp. 43-44.)

128:5

"prepared before the foundation of the world"

See Pre-earthly existence in Appendix A.

128:5

"for the. . . dead who . . . die without a knowledge of the gospel"

"The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son. I saw the beautiful streets of the kingdom, which had the appearance of being paved with gold. I saw Fathers Adam and Abraham, and my father and mother, my brother, Alvin, that has long since slept, and marvelled how it was that he had obtained an inheritance in that kingdom, seeing that he had departed this life before the Lord had set His hand to gather Israel the second time, and had not been baptized for the remission of sins.

"Thus came the voice of the Lord unto me, saying—

All who have died without a knowledge of this Gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitted to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God, also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts.

"And I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:380-81.)

Note: This revelation is now in the Pearl of Great Price and is known as Joseph Smith—Vision of the Celestial Kingdom.

128:7

"the book of life"

See Book of life in Appendix A.

128:8

"whatsoever you record on earth shall be recorded in heaven "

See Sealing power in Appendix A.

128:8

"God has prepared for their salvation from before the foundation of the world"

See Pre-earthly existence in Appendix A.

"Malachi says promises of salvation, through aid rendered by the children, were made to the fathers. [Mal. 4:5-6; D&C 2.] When and how were such promises given? This promise was made even before the foundation of the earth was laid. It was part of the great plan and was understood before man was placed on the earth. Joseph Smith, by revelation, instructed the Saints and said that the Lord 'ordained and prepared' the means, 'before the foundation of the world, for the salvation of the dead who should die without a knowledge of the gospel.' [Sec. 128:5.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, WP, p. 176.)

128:12

"baptism . . . is in the likeness of the resurrection"

See Baptism in Appendix A.

128:13

"the baptismal font was instituted as a similitude of the grave"

"The Lord has placed the baptismal font in our temples below the foundation, or the surface of the earth. This is symbolical, since the dead are in their graves, and we are working for the dead when we are baptized for them. Moreover, baptism is also symbolical of death and the resurrection, in fact, is virtually a resurrection from the life of sin, or from spiritual death, to the life of spiritual life. (See D&C 29:41-45.) Therefore when the dead have had this ordinance performed in their behalf they are considered to have been brought back into the presence of God, just as this doctrine is applied to the living. Other ordinances of the endowment and sealings therefore do not have to be performed below the surface of the earth as in the case of baptism." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 4:137-38.)

128:15

"Paul "

"He [the apostle Paul] is about five feet high; very dark hair; dark complexion; dark skin; large Roman nose; short face; small black eyes, penetrating as eternity; round shoulders; a whining voice, except when elevated, and then it almost resembled the roaring of a lion. He was a good orator, active and diligent, always employing himself in doing good to his fellow man." (Joseph Smith, TPJS, p. 180.)

128:17

"for Malachi says . . . I will send you Elijah the prophet"

See Elijah in Appendix A, and all the materials for section 2 and section 110, verses 13-16.

128:18

"the earth will be smitten with a curse unless there is a welding link"

"The dominant thought in the mind of the Prophet Joseph Smith during his last days on earth was expressed by him in the following forceful language: [Sec. 128:18, quoted.] . . . Why must the house of Israel be assembled? Why must the gospel dispensations—links of a mighty chain extending from the creation down to the end of time—be bound together in one? It is because God is coming down upon the earth, and the way must be prepared before him. Jesus Christ is coming to reign as King of Kings, to inaugurate the millennial era of universal freedom, righteousness and peace; and in order that his coming, which is designed as a blessing, may not prove a curse, a calamity, through the unpreparedness of His people and the world at large, he has set his hand in these days to perform the marvelous work and wonder that the Prophet Isaiah foretold. [Isa. 29:14.]" (Orson F. Whitney, CR, April 1918, p. 74.)

128:19

"As the dews of Carmel"

This has reference to the heavy dews that fall on Mount Carmel, which is located in the Holy Land alongside the Mediterranean Sea near the modern city of Haifa.

128:21

"the voice of God in the chamber of old Father Whitmer"

This was the house in which the Church was organized on April 6, 1830.

128:21

"Michael. . . Gabriel. . . Raphael"

"From the Revelations we know that Adam is Michael, and Noah, Gabriel; John the Baptist is called an angel (see Sec. 13). So is Moroni. Who Raphael was in the flesh is not revealed. In the Apocryphal book called Tobit (12-15) he is represented as saying, 'I am Raphael, one of the seven holy angels, which present the prayers of the Saints, and which go in and out before the glory of the Holy One.' " (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 810.)

128:22

"Go forward and not backward"

"We must go forward, not backward. I bear testimony to you . . . the whole spirit world is watching your labor and your works, and . . . if the veil was taken from off our eyes, we would see the responsibility of our acts and what would be the result of these things? We would labor diligently and do all we could for the rearing of these temples for the redemption of our dead." (Wilford Woodruff, CR, April 1880, p. 11.)

128:22

"King Immanuel"

See Jesus Christ in Appendix A.

128:24

"the great day of the Lord is at hand"

See Great and dreadful day of the Lord and Second coming in Appendix A.

128:24

"he is like a refiner's fire"

The art of refining precious metals such as gold and silver was known in ancient times. The ores were passed repeatedly through the furnace until their dross was taken away. It is believed that the refiner knew when the process was completed because he could see his image reflected in the purified metal.

The descriptive phrase "for he is like a refiner's fire" is found in the Old Testament (Malachi 3:2), the Book of Mormon (3 Ne. 24:2, which is a quotation from Malachi), and the Doctrine and Covenants (128:24). In each instance the occasion referred to is the second coming of the Savior, and the pronoun he refers to the Savior. Thus, when the Savior comes in power and great glory, he will be as a refiner's fire because all the wicked (dross) will be burned, and only those who have been refined (sanctified) will be able to endure his presence. Hopefully, his saints will then reflect in their lives the teachings of the Master Refiner.

128:24

"he is like. . . fuller's soap"

A fuller is "one who fulls or thickens cloth and who cleanses undressed cloth from oil or grease or who thoroughly cleanses soiled garments." (Bible dictionaries.) In order to whiten and cleanse the garments, they are washed in tubs with strong soap "where feet trod out the grime which has been loosened by the lye or soap."

The apt phrase "like fuller's soap" is used in the scriptures in connection with "refiner's fire" and with the second coming of the Savior. When he comes in great glory, he will be like the soap of the fuller, for he will cleanse people from their sins if they will but repent and follow him. (See Malachi 3:2; 3 Ne. 24:2; D&C 128:24.)

128:24

"the sons of Levi . . . may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness"

See material for 13:1.

"The 'offering in righteousness' is here identified with temple work for the salvation of the dead, which encompasses all the principles of the plan of salvation. When, therefore, the sons of Levi accept Christ and His gospel, subject themselves to the ordinances of the Church, and become active in gospel requirements, they will offer the offering in righteousness of which has been spoken." (John A. Widtsoe, ER 1:196.)
