Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 129

Background information on section 129

"Spent most of the day in conversation with Parley P. Pratt and others. [Sec. 129, follows.]

"A man came to me in Kirtland, and told me he had seen an angel, and described his dress. I told him he had seen no angel, and that there was no such dress in heaven. He grew mad, and went into the street and commanded fire to come down out of heaven to consume me. I laughed at him, and said, You are one of Baal's prophets; your God does not hear you; jump up and cut yourself: and he commanded fire from heaven to consume my house." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:267-68.)

129:1

"There are two kinds of beings in heaven"

"He explained the difference between an angel and a ministering spirit; the one a resurrected or translated body, with its spirit ministering to embodied spirits—the other a disembodied spirit, visiting and ministering to disembodied spirits. Jesus Christ became a ministering spirit (while His body was lying in the sepulchre) to the spirits in prison, to fulfill an important part of His mission [1 Peter 3:18-20], without which He could not have perfected His work, or entered into His rest. After His resurrection He appeared as an angel to His disciples.

"Translated bodies cannot enter into rest until they have undergone a change equivalent to death. Translated bodies are designed for future missions." (Joseph Smith, HC 4:425.)

129:1

"Angels"

"The theme discoursed upon is the presence in heaven of two kinds or classes of beings, namely, first, resurrected beings and, second, spirits who are not resurrected. It is not asserted that there are no other kinds of persons in heaven than they, but the subject treated is of the two classes mentioned.

"Comparison with other texts of scripture, ancient and modern, makes clear the fact that there are other grades or classes of heavenly beings than the two spoken of in section 129. It is understood by ordinary students of modern religion that there are perfected beings called gods, who are higher than the angels (see D&C 132:16-39), and to whom the angels are servants. And even among the gods there are Presiding Personages, the Holy Trinity standing at the head. [D&C 121:32; 130:22-23.]

"There are angels of various appointments and stations. Michael is called an 'archangel.' (D&C 29:26; Dan. 10:13.) Some are resurrected beings like the angel that was sent to John the Revelator (Rev. 22:8, 9), and those already referred to in D&C, Section 132, while others are 'ministering spirits sent forth to minister unto them who shall be heirs of salvation.' (Heb. 1:14.) Some of these angels are described as 'the spirits of just men made perfect' and are 'not resurrected,' and others were made ministering spirits before entering into mortality, serving among their fellows in their pre-existent state. Christ was a ministering spirit before his birth into this world. [Ether 3:14-16.] He was 'anointed above his fellows.' The angel Gabriel was a ministering spirit after he had been a mortal man (Noah) and before his resurrection, for Jesus of Nazareth was . . . 'the firstfruits of them that slept.' (See Luke 1:11-30; Dan. 8:16; 9:21.)

"Angels are God's messengers, whether used in that capacity as unembodied spirits, selected according to their capacities for the work required, or as disembodied spirits, or as translated men, or as resurrected beings. . . .

"Angels high in authority have been clothed on special occasions with the right to represent Deity personally. They have appeared and have been recognized as God himself, just as royal ambassadors of earthly potentates have acted, as recorded in history. The angel spoken of in Exodus 23:20-22, was one of these. So also was the Angel already spoken of who ministered to John. . . .

"The popular notion that angels are winged beings, because it is stated by some scripture writers that they saw them 'flying through the heavens,' is a fallacy. Cherubim and Seraphim spoken of by Ezekiel [10:3] and Isaiah [6:2, 6] are not to be classed with the angels, for the angels are of the same race and descent as man, whether in body or in spirit, and do not need wings for locomotion, nor do they appear in birdlike form. They are of the family of Deity in different degrees of progression and are 'in the image and likeness' of the Most High.

"There are fallen angels, too, who were cast down for transgression, as mentioned by Jude (verse 6), chief among whom on this earth is Lucifer or Satan, who has sought on many occasions to appear as an 'angel of light' to deceive and lead astray, and who tempted the Son of God, but failed in his efforts as he did with Moses and with the Prophet Joseph Smith. (See Luke 4:1-13; Visions of Moses 1:12-22; D&C 128:20.) That great spiritual personage was an angel of God in his 'first estate,' and yet never had a body of flesh, but 'was in authority in the presence of God' as a spirit, before he rebelled and was 'thrust down.' (D&C 76:25-28.)

"Thus it will be seen that all angels are not resurrected beings, nor is it so declared." (Charles W. Penrose, IE, August 1912, pp. 949-52.)

129:4

"When a messenger comes"

"Most generally, when angels have come, or God has revealed himself, it has been to individuals in private, in their chamber, in the wilderness or fields, and that generally without noise or tumult. The angel delivered Peter out of prison in the dead of night [Acts 5:9]; came to Paul unobserved by the rest of the crew [Acts 27:23-24]; appeared to Mary and Elizabeth without the knowledge of others [Luke 1:28-30]; spoke to John the Baptist whilst the people around were ignorant of it [John 5:36-38]." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:31.)

129:8

"If it be the devil as an angel"

"There are bad spirits as well as good, and the vital question is: How can we know the difference between them? Let us at this stage consult an expert—for there are such—one who came in contact with spiritual forces to a marvelous extent, not only receiving messages from other worlds, but also interviewing the messengers. Joseph Smith knew the difference between good and evil communicants, and here is his testimony concerning them: [D&C 129:4-8, quoted.]

"In another place, the Prophet says: 'Wicked spirits have their bounds, limits and laws, by which they are governed; and it is very evident that they possess a power that none but those who have the Priesthood can control.' (HC 4:576.) To his declaration that 'a man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge' [cf. 131:6], he adds that if men do not get knowledge including the knowledge of how to control evil spirits, the latter will have more power than the former, and thus be able to dominate them. This is precisely the condition of 'the spirits in prison.' They are dominated by a power which they cannot control. They are in Hell, and Satan sways the scepter over his own dominion. [D&C 76:81-85.]" (Orson F. Whitney, SNT, pp. 310-12.)

129:9

"you may know"

"It should be noted that this Revelation came about a year before so-called spirit-rapping had been discovered, or invented, by the Fox family at Hydeville, N. Y., in March, 1844, giving birth to Spiritism with all its delusions. By this Revelation the Saints were forewarned and therefore saved from being deceived by false pretensions or by evil spirits." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 811.)
