Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 130

Background information on section 130

"At ten a.m. went to meeting. Heard Orson Hyde preach. . . . Alluding to the coming of the Savior, he said, 'When He shall appear, we shall be like Him, etc. He will appear on a white horse as a warrior, and maybe we shall have some of the same spirit. Our God is a warrior. (John 14:23.) It is our privilege to have the Father and Son dwelling in our hearts, etc.'

"We dined with my sister Sophronia McCleary, when I told Elder Hyde that I was going to offer some corrections to his sermon this morning. He replied, 'They shall be thankfully received.' [Section 130:1-16, follows.]

"At one p.m. attended meetings. . . .

"Then corrected Elder Hyde's remarks, the same as I had done to him privately. . . .

"At seven o'clock meeting. . . . [Sec. 130:17-23, follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 5:323-35.)

130:1

"the Savior shall appear. . . he is a man"

See Second coming in Appendix A.

130:2

"sociality. . . will exist among us there"

"A Saint who is one in deed and in truth, does not look for an immaterial heaven, but he expects a heaven with lands, houses, cities, vegetation, rivers, and animals; with thrones, temples, palaces, kings, princes, priests, and angels; with food, raiment, musical instruments, etc." (Orson Pratt, JD 14:40-41)

130:3

"the Father and the Son"

See Godhead in Appendix A.

130:4

"God's time. . . man's time"

"Until our earth assumed its position among the planets, and began to perform its revolutions, and the earth was so far completed as to assume its position among the heavenly orbs, and perform its revolutions as now, present modes of reckoning time could not be appointed to man—either our days or months or our years, all of which are determined by the revolutions of the earth upon its axis, and the moon around the earth, and the earth in its orbit around the sun. But what is the rule or measure of time by which God reckons his labor and work? . . . There is, one saying of Apostle Peter which reads—'Be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.' [2 Pet. 3:8.] But whether that has any reference to the days that Moses speaks of, in which the Lord was engaged in the formation of this earth, we are not told. [Gen. 1; Moses 2.]" (Erastus Snow, JD 19:324.)

130:5

"angels who minister to this earth . . . belong to it"

"We have no doubt of the correctness of the statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith that 'there are no angels that minister to this earth but those who do belong or have belonged to it'; but that does not necessarily imply that they took a mortal body. In our opinion they belonged to this earth from the time of its creation, when they covenanted to come and take the bodies thereon, at the time that the morning stars sang together and all the sons of God shouted for joy. [Job 38:4-7.] In just this same way was Jesus 'the Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world.' [Rev. 13:8.]

"We are taught to believe that Adam was the first man who took a body on this earth. [D&C 84:16; Moses 2:27; Abr. 4:27; 1 Ne. 5:11; 2 Ne. 2:22.] There was no death before he fell. Who, then, was the angel who taught him the law of sacrifice, or of faith and baptism? [Moses 4:31; 5:5-9; 6:51-53.] We cannot admit that the scriptures are false, and that these beings were not angels; neither can we admit that Adam was not the first man, and that the Savior was not the first fruits of the resurrection. Therefore, we are forced to the conclusion that the word 'angel' is used in the scriptures for any heavenly being bearing God's message or fulfilling His commands; and, further, that all beings who were created with the design that they should inhabit this earth, belong to it, and to no other planet." (George Q. Cannon, JI, Jan. 15, 1891, pp. 53-54.)

"When messengers are sent to minister to the inhabitants of this earth, they are not strangers, but from the ranks of our kindred, friends, and fellow-beings and fellow-servants. The ancient Prophets who died were those who came to visit their fellow creatures upon the earth. [D&C 129:3.] They came to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; it was such beings,—holy beings if you please,—that waited upon the Savior and administered to Him on the Mount. The angel that visited John when an exile, and unfolded to his vision future events in the history of man upon the earth, was one who had been here, and who had toiled and suffered in common with the people of God. . . . In like manner our fathers and mothers, brothers, sisters and friends who have passed away from this earth, having been faithful, and worthy to enjoy these rights and privileges, may have a mission given them to visit their relatives and friends upon the earth again, bringing from the divine presence messages of love, of warning, of reproof and instruction to those whom they have learned to love in the flesh." (Joseph F. Smith, JD 22:351.)

130:7

"they reside in the presence of God"

"Gods have an ascendancy over the angels [D&C 76:88; 132:16], who are ministering servants. In the resurrection, some are raised to be angels; others are raised to become Gods. [D&C 76:54-62; 132:17.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 5:426-27.)

130:8, 10

"Urim and Thummim"

See Urim and Thummim in Appendix A.

130:9

"This earth . . . will be a Urim and Thummim"

See Earth and Urim and Thummim in Appendix A.

"Then will the earth receive its resurrection, for it, as well as man and all other living creatures, was redeemed by the atonement of Jesus Christ from the fallen state. When that day comes, the earth will become the sea of glass spoken of in John's Revelation. [Rev. 4:6; D&C 77:1.] This is a figure of speech typifying the earth in its celestial form. . . .

"Also speaking of this condition, President Brigham Young has said: 'When it (the Earth) becomes celestialized, it will be like the sun, and be prepared for the habitation of the saints, and be brought back into the presence of the Father and the Son. It will not then be an opaque body as it now is, but it will be like the stars of the firmament, full of light and glory; it will be a body of light. John compares it, in its celestial state to a sea of glass.' (JD 7:163.) He also said: 'When the earth is sanctified, cleansed, and purified by fire, and returns to its paradisiacal state, and becomes like a sea of glass, urim and thummim; . . . then and not till then, will the saints receive their everlasting inheritance.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, JD 17:117.)

"This earth, when it becomes purified and sanctified, or celestialized, will become like a sea of glass; and a person, by looking into it, can know things past, present, and to come; though none but celestialized beings can enjoy this privilege. They will look into the earth, and the things they desire to know will be exhibited to them, the same as the face is seen by looking into a mirror." (Brigham Young, JD 9:87.)

130:13

"It [the Civil War] may probably arise through the slave question "

"It is a part of a prophet's work not only to foretell and warn of impending conflicts and calamities, but also to show the means of escape. Joseph Smith was a prophet—statesman. He predicted the war which would terminate in the death and misery of many souls [D&C 87:1]; but this great prophet had a peace offering to give to the people. He told them of ways and means to avoid war. . . .

"In 1844 the Prophet Joseph Smith gave the following counsel with respect to a coming event which was soon to cast its black shadow over the land, and which was of great and general concern. 'Pray Congress to pay every man a reasonable price for his slaves out of the surplus revenue arising from the sale of public lands, and from deduction of pay from the members of Congress, break off the shackles from the poor black man, and hire him to labor with other human beings, for an hour of virtuous liberty on earth is worth a whole eternity of bondage. . . . '

"Abraham Lincoln, the Great Emancipator, probably knew Joseph Smith very well. During a political campaign he wrote a letter in which 'he gives a long list of names to which he wants documents to be sent,' and in the same letter he tells a candidate 'that Joseph Smith is an admirer of his, and that a few documents had better be mailed to the Mormon people.' Abraham Lincoln was familiar with the prophetic message that Joseph Smith delivered and the means to escape that the Prophet opened up to the nation to save the people from the dreadful calamity which bathed the land in the blood of human bodies. . . .

"Lincoln wrote, in his own hand, the joint resolution to be presented to Congress, providing an appropriation of $400,000,000 to be paid to the owners of the slaves if war should cease immediately. He laid this proposition before his cabinet, but it was unanimously disapproved. The great and lonely Lincoln, the best friend the South had, turned away sadly. 'I see,' he said, 'you are all against me. The war is costing us $3,000,000 a day, and think of the lives being lost.' (Abraham Lincoln, A History, by John G. Nicolay and John Hay, 10:132-39.)

"Oh, if the words of Joseph Smith, the prophet-statesman, had been heeded, what an effusion of blood would have been prevented! Those young men buried in soldiers' graves would have walked the earth in the full vigor of youth and splendid manhood if the nation had accepted the means of escape which Joseph Smith pointed out to them." (Charles A. Callis, CR, October 1938, pp. 24-25.)

130:19

"diligence and obedience"

See Obedience in Appendix A.

"This scripture . . . is no doubt one of the most quoted in the Church. . . . [D&C 130:18-19, quoted.] Those words are most meaningful—and I have no fear of learning, of the pursuit of knowledge, for any of our young people, if they will keep in mind diligence and obedience—obedience to the commandments of God, diligence in keeping close to the Church, in keeping active, keeping prayerful, keeping clean, keeping circumspect in their conduct." (Richard L. Evans, CR, April 1956, pp. 43-44.)

130:19-21

"all blessings are predicated" upon obedience to law

"This being true [D&C 130:19-21], then it would seem that we all should place the pursuit of light and truth, or intelligence, uppermost in our selection of goals, since we may have them eternally. We must seek after enlightenment. Since 'the glory of God is intelligence' (D&C 93:36), if we would be like our Heavenly Father, our course is fixed." (Hartman Rector, Jr., Ensign, June 1971, p. 79.)

130:22-23

"the Father. . . Son . . . Holy Ghost"

See Godhead in Appendix A.
