Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 5

Background information on section 5

"Having humbly repented of his folly which brought upon him the charge from the Lord of wickedness [Sec. 3:12; 10:1], Martin Harris again sought the Prophet Joseph Smith and pleaded for the privilege to become one of the three witnesses which were spoken of in the Book of Mormon (2 Nephi 27:12-14). It was in the summer of 1828 when the manuscript was lost, and in March, 1829, when Martin again pleaded with the Prophet for this great privilege of being a witness. The Lord hearkened to his request and the Lord gave the revelation known as Section 5 in the Doctrine and Covenants." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:35-36.)

5:7-10

"this generation shall have my word through you"

"The Lord has always sent his accredited witnesses to testify of his truth, and has declared that all who reject these witnesses shall be under condemnation. This revelation declared that this generation shall have the word of the Lord through Joseph Smith. There may be some who think that this is unreasonable, and the Lord should use some miraculous means to convert the world. Frequently when strangers . . . hear the story of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, they ask if the plates are in some museum where they may be seen. Some of them with some scientific training, express themselves to the effect that if the scholars could see and examine the plates and learn to read them, they would bear witness to the truth of the Book of Mormon and the veracity of Joseph Smith and the whole world would then be converted. When they are informed that the angel took the plates again, they turn away in their skepticism, shaking their heads, but the Lord has said: 'For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways,' saith the Lord. 'For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.' (Isa. 55:8-9.) We have learned that people are not converted by miracles or by examining records. If the Lord had the plates where scholars could examine them, they would have scoffed at them just as much as they do today. People are converted by their hearts being penetrated by the Spirit of the Lord when they humbly hearken to the testimonies of the Lord's servants. The Jews witnessed the miracles of our Lord, but this did not prevent them from crying out against him and having him crucified. (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:36-37.)

5:11

"in addition . . . the testimony of three"

Before the second coming of Christ when all the wicked will be destroyed, the Lord will prove to the world that this is his work. The wicked will then be left without excuse, much as the wicked were left without excuse on the American continents when the resurrected Jesus Christ appeared shortly after his resurrection.

Our Heavenly Father is primarily interested in our being converted to his principles rather than our being simply convinced of them. Thus, the generation of Joseph Smith was to receive these things (the Book of Mormon, etc.) by faith through the word of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

In this revelation, the Lord indicates that three other persons will also be shown the plates of Mormon and will testify of them. (See also D&C 17; HC 1:52-57, and "The Testimony of Three Witnesses," published in the front of each copy of the Book of Mormon.)

"In giving the world the testimony of three witnesses in addition to Joseph Smith, the Lord fulfilled the law. We are called upon in this life to walk by faith, not by sight, not by the proclamation of heavenly messengers with the voice of thunder, but by the proclamation of accredited witnesses whom the Lord sends and by whom every work shall be established. [John 8:17.] The Lord made the promise that the testimony of the three should go forth with his words that were given through Joseph Smith, and this should be declared to all the world. These witnesses should know that these things are true and 'from heaven will I declare it unto them,' said the Lord. The testimony which they have given and which is recorded in each copy of the Book of Mormon in the most solemn language has gone forth to the four corners of the earth, in fulfillment of the promise made in the Book of Mormon. (See 2 Ne. 27:12-14.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:40.)

5:14

"to none else will I grant this power"

The three special witnesses of the plates of the Book of Mormon were shown these things by an angel sent from God, and the voice of God declared from the heavens "that these things are true" (D&C 5:12; 17; HC 1:52-57). Although eight other persons were shown the plates by Joseph Smith the Prophet (HC 1:57-58), this experience was not accompanied by visual or aural heavenly manifestations. Thus, the three witnesses were the only ones who received this "same testimony" as indicated in D&C 5:14.

5:14

The Church is likened to an army with banners

The expressive term "clear as the moon, and fair as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners" is full of beauty and poetry, and it has the appearance of being of ancient form. It is found only once in the Bible—the Song of Solomon (or Canticles) 6:10. For further information on this term, see Banners in Appendix A.

5:16-17

"wait yet a little while" to be baptized

All things must be done in correct order and sequence. The Lord indicates here that all true believers in the Book of Mormon should be baptized of the water and of the Spirit, but he also indicates that this ordinance should not yet be performed inasmuch as Joseph Smith had not yet had the priesthood conferred upon him. When the Aaronic Priesthood was restored by John the Baptist, the "keys . . . of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins" were also restored and could then be used. (D&C 13.)

5:18-19

"if they repent not"

"The Lord always warns the people of a new dispensation through prophets raised up unto them in their own day. This he has done for this generation through the great prophet of the restoration, Joseph Smith, Jr. Through him the Lord repeatedly declared that the world was ripening in iniquity and that unless men repented destruction would overtake them. For example, in March, 1829, he said: [Sec. 5:19-20, quoted.] You will note that this prediction, as were like predictions in the past, is conditional. 'If they repent not,' is the condition. For this generation, as for all others, the Lord has provided the means of escape. This means is now, and has always been, the Gospel of Jesus Christ." (Marion G. Romney, CR, April 1958, p. 128.)

5:19

"brightness of my coming"

The term "brightness of my coming" refers to the second coming of Jesus Christ when he will come in glory and great power to judge the nations and establish his kingdom. In a revelation given in October 1831, the Lord refers to the time when "the Son of Man shall come down in heaven, clothed in the brightness of his glory, to meet the kingdom of God which is set up on the earth." (D&C 65:5.) The term is also used by Paul in 2 Thessalonians 2:8, wherein he states that "the Lord shall consume [the wicked] . . . with the brightness of his coming."

See Second Coming in Appendix A.

5:21

"yield to the persuasions of men no more"

The counsel of the Lord to Joseph Smith to "walk more uprightly before me, and to yield to the persuasions of men no more" is similar to his earlier admonition that the Prophet should not "have gone on in the persuasions of men." (D&C 3:6.) In the earlier revelation, the Lord explained why this counsel is necessary: "For, behold, you should not have feared man more than God. . . men set at naught the counsels of God, and despise his words." (D&C 3:7.)

The youthful Prophet had naturally been inclined to place confidence and trust in his older associates who had shown interest in and concern for him. Martin Harris already had betrayed this confidence once (see background information for section 3), and the Lord is here warning Joseph Smith again to place his first trust in him rather than in Martin Harris or the arm of flesh.

5:22

"even if you should be slain"

The expression "even if you should be slain" appears to be a foreshadowing of the type of death that was eventually experienced by Joseph Smith.

5:23

"concerning the man [Martin Harris] that desires the witness"

"Martin Harris had already received a remarkable proof of the truth of the claims made by the Prophet Joseph regarding the Book of Mormon, when he carried a facsimile of the engravings to New York scientists. Professor Anthon had told him, as he himself states, that the 'hieroglyphics were true characters.' He had also, through the Prophet, received revelations (Sec. 3:12). But he was not yet satisfied." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 25.)
