Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 131

Background information on section 131

"Ramus, where this Revelation was received, was a settlement situated about 22 miles southeast of Nauvoo. The Prophet often visited this place and preached some powerful discourses there.

"On the 16th of May, 1843, a little company, consisting of Joseph Smith, George Miller, William Clayton, Eliza and Lydia Partridge, and J. M. Smith, went to Ramus. The Prophet and William Clayton stayed at Benjamin F. Johnson's over night. Before retiring, the little party of friends engaged in conversation on spiritual topics. The Prophet told them that 'except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection.' Then he spoke of the unpardonable sin, explaining that it consists in shedding innocent blood, or being accessory thereto. 'All other sins,' he said, 'will be visited with judgment in the flesh, the spirit being delivered to the buffetings of Satan until the day of the Lord Jesus.' Then he spoke of the three heavens in the celestial glory, as recorded in the first four verses of this Revelation.

"On the 17th of May the Prophet preached a discourse on II. Pet. 1, and showed that knowledge is power. Among the truths announced at this time was that recorded in the 5th and 6th verses of this Revelation.

"In the evening the Prophet went to hear a Methodist preach. After the sermon he offered some corrections. On Gen. 2:7 he observed that it ought to read, 'God breathed into Adam his [that is, Adam's] spirit or breath of life'; but when the word ruach applies to Eve, it should be translated 'lives.'

"He added the truths recorded in the 7th and 8th verses of this Revelation." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 818-19.)

131:1

"In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees"

See Celestial and Degrees of glory in Appendix A.

131:2

"the new and everlasting covenant of marriage"

See Marriage and Covenant in Appendix A.

"The new and everlasting covenant is the fulness of the Gospel, in other words, the sum total of all the covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, etc. that belong to the Gospel. Marriage for time and eternity is not the new and everlasting covenant, but one of the covenants which belong to the new and everlasting covenant." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 818.)

"We believe in the eternal nature of the marriage relation, that man and woman are destined, as husband and wife, to dwell together eternally. We believe that we are organized as we are, with all these affections, with all this love for each other, for a definite purpose, something far more lasting than to be extinguished when death shall overtake us. We believe that when a man and woman are united as husband and wife, and they love each other, their hearts and feelings are one, that that love is as enduring as eternity itself, and that when death overtakes them it will neither extinguish nor cool that love, but that it will brighten and kindle it to a purer flame, and that it will endure through eternity; and that if we have offspring they will be with us and our mutual associations will be one of the chief joys of the heaven to which we are hastening. . . . God has restored the everlasting priesthood, by which ties can be formed, consecrated and consummated, which shall be as enduring as we ourselves are enduring, that is, as our spiritual nature; and husbands and wives will be united together, and they and their children will dwell and associate together eternally, and this, as I have said, will constitute one of the chief joys of heaven; and we look forward to it with delightful anticipations." (George Q. Cannon, JD 14:320-21.)

131:4

"an increase"

"Except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:391.)

"What do we mean by endless or eternal increase? We mean that through the righteousness and faithfulness of men and women who keep the commandments of God they will come forth with celestial bodies, fitted and prepared to enter into their great, high and eternal glory in the celestial kingdom of God; and unto them, through their preparation, there will come children, who will be spirit children. I don't think that is very difficult to comprehend and understand. The nature of the offspring is determined by the nature of the substance that flows in the veins of the being. When blood flows in the veins of the being, the offspring will be what blood produces, which is tangible flesh and bone, but when that which flows in the veins is spirit matter, a substance which is more refined and pure and glorious than blood, the offspring of such beings will be spirit children. By that I mean they will be in the image of the parents. They will have a spirit body and have a spark of the eternal or divine that always did exist in them." (Melvin J. Ballard, SMJB, pp. 239-40.)

131:5

"sealed up unto eternal life"

"After a person has faith in Christ, repents of his sins, and is baptized for the remission of his sins and receives the Holy Ghost (by the laying on of hands), which is the first Comforter, then let him continue to humble himself before God, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every word of God, and the Lord will soon say unto him, Son, thou shalt be exalted. When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve Him at all hazards, then the man will find his calling and his election made sure, then it will be his privilege to receive the other Comforter, which the Lord hath promised the Saints, as is recorded in the testimony of St. John, in the 14th chapter, from the 12th to the 27th verses. [D&C 88:3.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 3:380.)

131:6

"It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance"

See Knowledge in Appendix A.

"A man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge, for if he does not get knowledge, he will be brought into captivity by some evil power in the other world, as evil spirits will have more knowledge, and consequently more power than many men who are on the earth. Hence it needs revelation to assist us, and give us knowledge of the things of God." (Joseph Smith, HC 4:588.)

"Man can no more be saved in his ignorance than he can be saved in his sins. The gospel helps us to overcome both and here again it becomes the power unto our salvation, if we do our part." (Hugh B. Brown, Eternal Quest, p. 89.)

"Knowledge tested and tried is the beginning of faith. For that reason, 'it is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance.' The extent of a person's faith depends in part on the amount of his knowledge. The more knowledge he gathers, the more extensive becomes his field of faith. The degree of faith possessed by any man depends not upon the extent of his knowledge, but upon the certainty of his knowledge, which leads to the proper use of his knowledge. Thus a man of great knowledge may have weak faith, while one of limited information may have strong faith. (Alma 32:34-41.)" (John A. Widtsoe, JS, p. 163.)

131:7

"All spirit is matter"

"The spirit of man is not a created being; it existed from eternity, and will exist to eternity. [D&C 93:29; Abr. 3:18.] Anything created cannot be eternal; and earth, water, etc., had their existence in an elementary state, from eternity." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:387.)

"The materials out of which this earth was formed, are just as eternal as the materials of the glorious personage of the Lord himself. . . . This Being, when he formed the earth, did not form it out of something that had no existence, but he formed it out of materials that had an existence from all eternity: they never had a beginning, neither will one particle of substance now in existence ever have an end. There are just as many particles now as there were at any previous period of duration, and will be while eternity lasts. Substance had no beginning; to say that laws had no beginning would be another thing; some laws might have been eternal, while others might have had a lawgiver. But the earth was formed out of eternal materials, and it was made to be inhabited and God peopled it with creatures of his own formation." (Orson Pratt, JD 19:286.)

131:8

"We cannot see it"

"The unseen world is much larger and greater and much more important than the world that is seen, the world in which we live. The world in which we live is greatly magnified by the fact that we can behold it with our mortal eyes. The unseen world suffers in this respect, because we do not see it with the mortal eye. Somebody may ask: 'Can it be seen?' Yes, oh, yes, indeed, it can be seen. 'But how shall we see it?' We must look at it through our spiritual eye, or in other words, the eye of faith. There is no doubt that what it exists, that greater world, and that it is very substantial. The Prophet Joseph Smith has said this concerning it: [D&C 131:7-8, quoted.]" (Rudger Clawson, CR, April 1933, pp. 74-75.)
