Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 132

Background information on section 132

"This Revelation is dated the 12th of July, 1843. William Clayton, who was Temple Recorder and private clerk of the Prophet at that time, relates the following: On the morning of the 12th of July, 1843, Joseph and Hyrum Smith came into the office in the upper story of the "brick store," on the bank of the Mississippi River. They were talking on the subject of plural marriage. Hyrum said to Joseph, "If you will write the revelation on celestial marriage, I will take and read it to Emma, and I believe I can convince her of its truth, and you will hereafter have peace." Joseph smiled and remarked, "You do not know Emma as well as I do." Hyrum repeated his opinion and further remarked, "The doctrine is so plain, I can convince any reasonable man or woman of its truth, purity or heavenly origin," or words to their effect. Joseph then said, "Well, I will write the revelation and we will see." He then requested me to get paper and prepare to write. Hyrum very urgently requested Joseph to write the revelation by means of the Urim and Thummim, but Joseph, in reply, said he did not need to, for he knew the revelation perfectly from beginning to end.

Joseph and Hyrum then sat down and Joseph commenced to dictate the revelation on celestial marriage, and I wrote it, sentence by sentence, as he dictated. After the whole was written, Joseph asked me to read it through, slowly and carefully, which I did, and he pronounced it correct. He then remarked that there was much more than he could write, on the same subject, but what was written was sufficient for the present. (HR 6:225-26.)

"This was not the first mention of the subject among the Saints. Sarah Ann Kimball and many others knew of it in 1842, and Joseph B. Noble heard of it in the fall of 1840. Orson Pratt says that the Prophet Joseph, in the forepart of 1832, while he was living at the house of Father Johnson at Hiram, Ohio, told Church members that he had enquired of the Lord concerning this doctrine, and received the answer that it was true, but that the time to practice it had not come (Discourse by Orson Pratt, Salt Lake City, October 7, 1869). Consequently, the Law of the Church remained as stated in Doctrine and Covenants 42:22, and as it is to-day, 'Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shall cleave unto her and none else.'

"The Revelation is divided into two parts. The first, comprising vv. 3-33, deals mainly with the principle of celestial marriage, or marriage for time and all eternity; the second, comprising the remaining verses, deals with plural marriage. The doctrine of celestial marriage remains in force; the practice of plural marriage was abandoned by the acceptancy by the Church, in Conference assembled October 6th, 1890, of the Manifesto of President Woodruff." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 820-21.)

132:1

"thus saith the Lord unto you my servant Joseph"

"He [President Lorenzo Snow] lived to bear his testimony to the world that Joseph Smith, the Prophet, taught him the doctrine of celestial marriage . . . that he knew positively that Joseph Smith did receive it by revelation and that that doctrine was true and of God." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, October 1902, p. 87.)

132:4

"a new and everlasting covenant"

See Covenant in Appendix A.

"Each ordinance of the Gospel is a covenant which is new and everlasting. It is new and everlasting because it is divine truth and never grows old. . . . This was said of baptism, and the Lord calls it 'a new and an everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning.' (D&C 22:1.) It is so with all the covenants and obligations in the Gospel which pertain to salvation and exaltation of man. . . .

"There are some members of the Church who seem to think that the new and everlasting covenant is the covenant of celestial marriage, or marriage for eternity, but this is not so. Marriage for eternity is an everlasting covenant, and like the Lord said of baptism, we may say of marriage, it is a new as well as an everlasting covenant because it was from the beginning. It will be, if properly performed according to the law of the Lord, eternal. In the opening verses of Section 132, the Lord draws a distinction between a new and everlasting covenant and the new and everlasting covenant. While the definition is given in the negative form, it is plainly discernible that the new and everlasting covenant is the fulness of the Gospel. [D&C 132:7, quoted.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:157-58.)

132:7

"sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise"

See Holy Ghost in Appendix A.

"I will make an explanation of the expression, 'Sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise.' This does not have reference to marriage for time and all eternity only, but to every ordinance and blessing of the gospel. Baptism into the Church is sealed by this Spirit, likewise confirmation, ordination, and all ordinances as well as marriage for time and all eternity.

"The meaning of this expression is this: Every covenant, contract, bond, obligation, oath, vow, and performance, that man receives through the covenants and blessings of the gospel, is sealed by the Holy Spirit with a promise. The promise is that the blessing will be obtained, if those who seek it are true and faithful to the end. If they are not faithful, then the Holy Spirit will withdraw the blessing, and the promise comes to an end. [D&C 76:50-54; 88:3-5; 124:124; 132:7; Moses 6:60.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 2:94.)

"The Lord . . . said that a man and wife who are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise shall pass by the angels and gods that are set there to their exaltation and glory in all things, as has been sealed upon their heads. [132:19.]

"In an explanation of what it means to be sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, one of our brethren said this: 'While we receive eternal blessings at the hands of the priesthood which has the right to seal on earth and it shall be sealed in the heavens, this revelation clearly states that it must be sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise also. A man and woman may by fraud and deception obtain admittance to the House of the Lord and may receive the pronouncement of the holy priesthood, giving to them so far as lies in their power these blessings. We may deceive men but we cannot deceive the Holy Ghost, and our blessings will not be eternal unless they are also sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise. The Holy Ghost is one who reads the thoughts and hearts of men, and gives his sealing approval to the blessings pronounced upon their heads. Then it is binding, efficacious, and of full force.' " (Harold B. Lee, IE, December 1970, p. 105.)

132:15

"if. . . a man marry. . . her not by me. . . their covenant and marriage are not of force when they are dead"

"The one officiating by authority of the law of the land pronounced you legally and lawfully husband and wife 'Until death do you part.' There they stand clearly before you—Death and Separation. You who are parties to a civil ceremony are to be married only during the period of your mortal lives. At death your marriage contract is to be dissolved and you are to be permanently separated or divorced from each other in the next life. Not only must this thought be a startling consideration, but if there be children and family life that too must end with death. According to the Lord's revelation, all manmade 'covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations . . . are of no efficacy, virtue or force in and after the resurrection from the dead . . . and have an end when men are deed.' (D&C 132:7.)

"Even though the legal officer or minister had declared you to be husband and wife for 'time and all eternity,' unless he had the authority so to speak, then that promise or contract would 'not be valid, neither of force when they are out of the world.' (D&C 132:18.) The Master told Peter and the other apostles of a power beyond that of man which he called the 'keys to the kingdom of heaven,' and by this power he said, 'Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven.' (Matt. 16:19.) That power and authority, by which holy ordinances are administered, is known as the holy priesthood and is always to be found in the Church of Jesus Christ in every dispensation of the gospel upon the earth." (Harold B. Lee, Youth and the Church, pp. 125-26.)

132:15-18

"when they are out of the world they neither marry nor are given in marriage"

"The following statement by Jesus has been very much misunderstood: [Matt. 22:23-30 quoted.]

"The late Dr. James E. Talmage of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, explained the Savior's answer to the question of the Sadducees, who deny there is any resurrection:

The Lord's meaning was clear, that in the resurrected state there can be no question among the seven brothers as to whose wife for eternity the woman shall be, since all except the first had married her for the duration of mortal life only, and primarily for the purpose of perpetuating in mortality the name and family of the brother who first died. Luke records the Lord's words as follows in part: "But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage: Neither can they die any more: for they are equal unto the angels: and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection." In the resurrection there will be no marrying nor giving in marriage; for all questions of marital status must be settled before that time, under the authority of the Holy Priesthood, which holds the power to seal in marriage for both time and eternity. (James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ, p. 548.)

"To this explanation add the Lord's own words in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith at Nauvoo, Illinois, recorded July 12, 1843, relating to the new and everlasting covenant of marriage: [D&C 132:15-18, quoted.] Jesus must have had this very thought in mind when he answered the Sadducees who did not believe in the resurrection and whose marriage vows were for this world only." (LeGrand Richards, MWW, pp. 172-73.)

132:17

"without exaltation, in their saved condition"

See Exaltation and Salvation in Appendix A.

"From this revelation [D&C 132:4-6, 15-17, 19-20 it will be seen that men can become Gods and enjoy a 'fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever,' only by observing the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, and that without marriage they can only become 'ministering servants, to minister for those who are worthy of a far more, and an exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory.'

"When the Lord said, referring to the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, 'and if ye abide not that covenant, then are ye damned,' he does not use the term 'damned' in the sense that it is usually understood by the modern Christian world, for it will be noted he indicated they 'shall be appointed angels in heaven; which angels are ministering servants; to minister for those who are worthy of a far more and exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory.' In verse seventeen of the above quotation, the Lord stated that they shall 'remain separately and singly, without exaltation, in their saved condition.' Thus even they will be saved, but not exalted. The use of the word 'damned,' therefore, means that one's progress is stopped. (D&C 131:4.) 'They cannot be enlarged.' [D&C 132:17.]" (LeGrand Richards, MWW, p. 263.)

132:19

"sealed . . . by the Holy Spirit of Promise"

See material for 132:7.

132:19

"in time, and through all eternity"

See Time and Eternity to eternity in Appendix A.

"We sometimes speak of eternity in contradistinction to time; and often say, 'through time and into eternity;' and again 'from eternity to eternity,' which is simply another form of expressing the same idea, and 'pass through time into eternity.' In other words, time is a short period allotted to man in his probationary state—and we use the word time in contradistinction to the word eternity, merely for the accommodation of man in his finite sphere, that we may comprehend and learn to measure periods." (Erastus Snow, JD 21:23.)

132:20

"Then shall they be gods"

See Godhood and Exaltation in Appendix A.

"After men have got their exaltations and their crowns—have become Gods, even the sons of God—are made King of kings and Lord of Lords, they have the power then of propagating their species in spirit; and that is the first of their operations with regard to organizing a world. Power is then given to them to organize the elements, and then commence the organization of tabernacles." (Brigham Young, JD 6:275.)

132:22

"strait is the gate . . . that leadeth unto . . . continuation of the lives"

See Strait and Eternal life in Appendix A.

"The way to eternal lives is strait. That means that it is difficult of access, not easily attained. The expression 'continuation of the lives,' means the right and power of eternal increase, or posterity. 'Broad is the gate, and wide the way, that leadeth to the deaths, and many there are that go in thereat, because they receive me not, neither do they abide in my law.' The term 'deaths' mentioned here has reference to the cutting off of all those who reject this eternal covenant of marriage and therefore they are denied the power of exaltation and the continuation of posterity. To be denied posterity and the family organization, leads to the 'death,' or end of increase in the life to come." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 4:161-62.)

132:24

"this is eternal lives"

See Eternal life in Appendix A.

"He [Christ] will be King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and every man who has labored with him and for Him in this holy ministry will be crowned with glory and immortality and 'eternal lives.' That means more than life, more than mere existence, it means perpetual increase of posterity, worlds without end." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, October 1921, p. 22.)

132:24

"to know . . . God and Jesus Christ"

"To know God and our Lord Jesus Christ is to be on the road to exaltation, and this includes eternal increase. But to know God is not merely to have heard of Him. It is 'to walk' with Him, as Enoch did; it is to 'believe,' or 'live by' Him, as Abraham did; it is to be familiar with Him, as a child with its father." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 828.)

"No man can know the Father and the Son who does not dwell in their presence. Those who do dwell in their presence and have partaken of the fulness of the covenants and who have proved themselves worthy, shall be like God, for they are the sons and daughters of God, and numbered as the members of his grand family. The fulness of eternity is theirs." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:360-61.)

132:25

"Broad is the gate. . . that leadeth to the deaths"

"The parallel passage, Matt. 7:13, has 'destruction' for 'deaths.' In this paragraph 'deaths' stands for the opposite of 'lives' in vv. 22 and 24. It is the end of eternal increase. Note that there are only two gates and two roads. One gate is broad and one is strait; one road is wide and one is narrow; there is no middle road; few find the strait gate and the narrow way; many enter the broad gate and walk on the wide way." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 828.)

132:26-27

"if . . . he or she shall commit any sin . . . and if they commit no murder . . . yet they shall come forth in the first resurrection "

See Resurrection in Appendix A.

"Verse 26, in Section 132, is the most abused passage in any scripture. The Lord has never promised any soul that he may be taken into exaltation without the spirit of repentance. While repentance is not stated in this passage, yet it is, and must be, implied. It is strange to me that everyone knows about verse 26, but it seems that they have never read or heard of Matthew 12:31-32, where the Lord tells us the same thing in substance as we find in verse 26, Section 132.

"It is wrong to take one passage of scripture and isolate it from all other teachings dealing with the same subject. We should bring together all that has been said by authority on the question. . . . [3 Ne. 27:17-19.]

"So we must conclude that those spoken of in verse 26 are those who, having sinned, have fully repented and are willing to pay the price of their sinning, else the blessings of exaltation will not follow. Repentance is absolutely necessary for the forgiveness, and the person having sinned must be cleansed." (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 2:94.)

132:26

"buffetings of Satan"

See Satan in Appendix A.

132:27

"blasphemy against the Holy Ghost"

See Perdition in Appendix A.

"A blasphemy is an indignity offered to God in words or acts, and in the Scriptures it means also 'heresies.'" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 829.)

"The unpardonable sin is to shed innocent blood, or be accessory thereto. All other sins will be visited with judgment in the flesh, and the spirit being delivered to the buffetings of Satan until the day of the Lord Jesus." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:391-92.)

"This unpardonable sin is explained to mean 'murder, wherein ye shed innocent blood, and assent unto my death, after ye have received my new and everlasting covenant.' Some of those who have been instrumental in shedding the blood of the martyrs, from Stephen, who was stoned in Jerusalem, to Joseph and Hyrum, who were slain at Carthage, may ultimately be found among those who come under this condemnation. God alone is their judge." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 829.)

132:29

"Abraham received all things . . . by revelation and commandment"

"The next that we read of is that he [Abraham] had the Urim and Thummim, and thus he sought unto God for himself, and while searching unto him, God revealed himself unto Abraham. . . . Afterwards, the Lord revealed himself to him from time to time, communicated his will to him, and he was made acquainted with the designs of the Almighty. The Lord showed unto him the order of the creation of this earth on which we stand, and revealed unto him some of the greatest and most sublime truths that ever were made known to man. [Abr. 3.] He got these through revelation from God and through the medium of the Gospel of the Son of God." (John Taylor, JD 21:159-60.)

132:31

"This promise is yours also, because ye are of Abraham"

"If Abraham was to be a prince and a ruler, and his posterity become numerous, may we not, if faithful to our God and to our covenants, be as Abraham? Shall there be any end to our posterity? May they not be as numerous as the stars in the firmament, and as the sands upon the seashore? Abraham may be in advance of us; he lived in an earlier period; but we are following up in the same track." (Orson Hyde, JD 11:151-52.)

132:34

"because this was the law"

"Sarah gave Hagar to Abraham in accordance with law. It is known now that, according to the Code of Hammurabi, which, in many respects, resembles the later Mosaic law, if a man's wife was childless, he was allowed to take a concubine and bring her into his house, though he was not to place her upon an equal footing with his first wife, or the first wife might give her husband a maid-servant. This was the law in the country from which Abraham came. A concubine was a wife of inferior social rank." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 831.)

132:37

"they . . . are gods"

See Eternal life, Exaltation, and Godhood in Appendix A.

132:39

"Nathan . . . and others of the prophets . . . had the keys of this power"

This statement clearly indicates that many of the prophets of ancient Israel held the sealing keys of the priesthood, even though the people as a whole did not hold the higher priesthood.

132:39

"David's wives. . . he shall not inherit them"

"A murderer, . . . one that sheds innocent blood, cannot have forgiveness. David sought repentance at the hand of God carefully with tears, for the murder of Uriah; but he could only get it through hell: He got a promise that his soul should not be left in hell.

"Although David was a king, he never did obtain the spirit and power of Elijah and the fulness of the Priesthood; and the Priesthood that he received, and the throne and kingdom of David is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage." (Joseph Smith, HC 6:253.)

132:41

"adultery"

See Adultery and Sex sins in Appendix A.

132:46

"whatsoever you seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven"

See Sealing power and Elijah in Appendix A.

132:52

"and let mine handmaid, Emma Smith, receive all those . . . "

"Emma Smith, the widow of the Prophet, is said to have maintained to her dying moments that her husband had nothing to do with the patriarchal order of marriage, but that it was Brigham Young that got that up. I bear record before God, angels and men that Joseph Smith received that revelation, and I bear record that Emma Smith gave her husband in marriage to several women while he was living." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 23:131.)

132:55

"crowns of eternal lives"

See Eternal life in Appendix A.

132:57

"Satan seeketh to destroy"

See Satan in Appendix A.

132:65

"law of Sarah"

See material for 132:34.

132:66

"Alpha and Omega"

See Alpha and Omega in Appendix A.
