Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 133

Background information on section 133

"Section 133, of the Doctrine and Covenants was received at the close of the conference of November 1, 1831, and two days after the Preface, or section one, was given. It was called 'The Appendix' because it was received after the revelation approving the selection of revelations to be published, and has occupied the position near the end of the volume in all editions and out of its chronological order. The tenor of this section is very similar to that of section one, in fact, is largely a continuation of the same theme." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:263.)

"It had been decided by the conference that Elder Oliver Cowdery should carry the commandments and revelations to Independence, Missouri, for printing, and that I should arrange and get them in readiness by the time that he left, which was to be by—or, if possible, before the—15th of the month [November]. At this time there were many things which the Elders desired to know relative to preaching the Gospel to the inhabitants of the earth, and concerning the gathering; and in order to walk by the true light, and be instructed from on high, on the 3rd of November, 1831, I inquired of the Lord and received the following important revelation, which has since been added to the book of Doctrine and Covenants, and called the Appendix: [D&C 133.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:229.)

133:1

"O ye people of my church"

See Church in Appendix A.

133:2

"The Lord who shall suddenly come to his temple"

The tense of the verb indicates that this appearance of the Lord in his temple was still in the future as of November 1831.

"We read in the scriptures of divine truth that the Lord our God is to come to his temple in the last days . . . it is recorded in the 3rd chapter of Malachi that "the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his temple." This had no reference to the first coming of the Messiah, to the day when he appeared in the flesh; but it has reference to that glorious period termed the last days, when the Lord will again have a house, or a temple reared up on the earth to his holy name." (Orson Pratt, JD 14:274.)

133:2

"the Lord who shall come down upon the world with a curse to judgment"

"We are preparing for the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ [by building temples], just as truly as the world is ripening in iniquity and preparing to receive His judgments when He does come." (Brigham Young, JD 25:192.)

133:3

"he shall make bare his holy arm"

See Arm of the Lord in Appendix A.

133:3

"all the ends of the earth"

See Earth in Appendix A.

133:4

"sanctify yourselves"

See Sanctify in Appendix A.

133:5

"Go ye out from Babylon"

See Babylon in Appendix A.

"The Lord commanded all the Saints, excepting those who were specially commanded to tarry for the preaching of the gospel and the warning of the nations, to gather on the land of Zion (v. 4). They were to go out of Babylon. This term the Lord, in a number of revelations, and also in John's Revelation, applied to the wicked world and the great and abominable church which rules a large portion of the earth (see sections 1:16; 35:11; 64:24; Rev. 16:19; 17:5; 18:2), and has made the nations drunken with her sins." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 840.)

133:5

"Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord"

See Vessels of the Lord in Appendix A.

133:6

"Call your solemn assemblies "

See Solemn assembly in Appendix A.

133:7

"from one end of heaven to the other"

The word heaven in this verse in regard to the gathering of the last days might refer to the gathering of the city of Enoch, the city of Melchizedek, etc. There are some who wonder if it might not also refer to the gathering of the lost tribes. For example, Wilford Woodruff made an entry in his record that indicates Brigham Young believed the lost tribes of Israel were of the earth and thus would be gathered from the heavens:

The leaders on their return from Provo made a visit to Logan. Here, President Young is quoted as saying that the ten tribes of Israel are on a portion of the earth—a portion separated from the main land. This view is also expressed in one of the . . . hymns written by Eliza R. Snow:

And when the Lord saw fit to hide The ten lost tribes away, Thou, earth, was severed to provide The orb on which they stay. (Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff p. 448.)

133:8

"first upon the Gentiles, and then upon the Jews"

See Gentile and Jews in Appendix A, and the material for 29:30.

133:10, 19

"go forth to meet the Bridegroom "

See Bridegroom in Appendix A.

133:13

"let them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem"

"In this great day of gathering, the Lord has commanded that those of the house of Israel who are scattered among the Gentiles should flee unto Zion, and those who are of the house of Judah should flee unto Jerusalem, 'unto the mountain of the Lord's house,' which is their gathering place. (D&C 133:12, 13.). . .

"Jerusalem of old after the Jews have been cleansed and sanctified from all their sins, shall become a holy city where the Lord shall dwell and from whence he shall send forth his word unto all people. Likewise, on this continent, the city of Zion, New Jerusalem—shall be built, and from it the law of God shall also go forth. [D&C 45:66-67; 84:2.] There will be no conflict, for each city shall be headquarters for the Redeemer of the world, and from each he shall send forth his proclamations as occasion may require. Jerusalem shall be the gathering place of Judah and his fellows of the house of Israel, and Zion shall be the gathering place of Ephraim and his fellows, upon whose heads shall be conferred 'the richer blessings.' [D&C 133:34.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, IE, July 1919, pp. 815-16.)

133:14

"from Babylon, from the midst of wickedness"

See Babylon in Appendix A.

"Now, we are here in obedience to a great command, a command given by the Almighty to his Saints to gather out from Babylon, lest they be partakers of her sins and receive of her plagues. But if we are going to partake of her sins and to nourish and cherish the wicked and ungodly, what better shall we be for gathering? Shall we escape her plagues by so doing? No, there is no promise to that effect, but if we practice the sins and iniquities of Babylon here in Zion, we may expect to receive of her plagues and be destroyed." (Daniel H. Wells, JD 18:98.)

133:18

"the lamb shall stand upon Mount Zion . . . and upon the Mount of Olivet"

See Lamb in Appendix A.

"Zion . . . will still remain upon the Western Hemisphere, and she will be crowned with glory as well as old Jerusalem, and, as the Psalmist David says, she will become the joy of the whole earth. . . .

"Zion will be caught up when Jesus comes, to meet him. Jesus will descend not only upon the Mount of Olives, but he will descend and stand upon Mount Zion. But before he stands upon it, it will be caught up to meet him in the air. Will the buildings of Zion be caught up? Yes. And its land? Yes. And Jesus will stand upon Mount Zion, according to the prediction of John the Revelator, and he will reign over his people during a thousand years; and his associates will be the resurrected righteous of all former dispensations." (Orson Pratt, JD 18:68-69.)

133:18

"with him a hundred and forty-four thousand"

See Godhead and Godhood in Appendix A.

"On that occasion he [John the Revelator] saw one hundred and forty-four thousand standing upon Mount Zion, singing a new and glorious song; the singers seemed to be among the most happy and glorious of those who were shown to John. They, the one hundred and forty-four thousand, had a peculiar inscription in their foreheads. [Rev. 14:1.] What was it? It was the Father's name. What is the Father's name? It is God—the being we worship. If, then, the one hundred and forty-four thousand are to have the name of God inscribed on their foreheads, will it be simply a plaything, a something that has no meaning? Or will it mean that which the inscriptions specify?—that they are indeed Gods—one with the Father and one with the Son; as the Father and Son are one, and both of them called Gods, so will all His children be one with the Father and the Son, and they will be one so far as carrying out the great purposes of Jehovah is concerned." (Orson Pratt, JD 14:242-43.)

133:23-24

"the land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back"

See Second Coming in Appendix A.

"There shall be famine, and pestilence, and earthquake in divers places; and the prophets have declared that the valleys should rise; that the mountains should be laid low [Isa. 40:4-5]; that a great earthquake should be, in which the sun should become black as sack-cloth of hair and the moon turn to blood; yea, the Eternal God hath declared that the great deep shall roll back into the north countries and that the land of Zion and the land of Jerusalem shall be joined together, as they were before they were divided in the days of Peleg. [Gen. 10:25.] No wonder the mind starts at the sound of the last days." (Joseph Smith, Evening and Morning Star, February 1835.)

133:26

"they who are in the north countries"

This has reference to the return of the lost ten tribes of Israel. They will come out of the north countries, but some have questioned whether or not this means they are now living in the north countries.

"[Concerning the] bringing forth of the Lost Tribes from their hiding place, which is known to God, but unknown to man. Nevertheless, I have found elders in Israel who would tell me that the predictions relating to the Lost Tribes are to be explained in this figurative manner—that the gathering of those tribes is already well advanced and that there is no hiding place whereto God has led them, from which they shall come forth, led by their prophets to receive their blessings here at the hands of gathered Ephraim, the gathered portions that have been scattered among the nations. Yea, let God be true, and doubt we not his word, though it makes the opinions of men appear to be lies. The tribes shall come; they are not lost unto the Lord; they shall be brought forth as hath been predicted." (James E. Talmage, CR, October 1916, p. 76.)

"It is understood that the ten tribes of Israel, after their liberation from the captivity of the Assyrians, departed into the land northward and eventually were lost to the knowledge of other nations. Just where they went and where they are we do not know more than what the Lord has revealed. We learn from the Book of Mormon (3 Nephi, 15th and 16th chapters) that the Savior visited them and taught them the gospel. They have their records, and prophets have been among them to teach them in part, at least, the gospel. . . .

At a conference of the Church held in June 1831, the Prophet said that John the Revelator was then among the ten tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 843-44.)

"But hear it all Israel, after your sorrow and pain and distress and after the days of your tribulation, your great Eloheim will stretch out his hand and gather you from every nation wherever you are driven, and he will bring you home to your own land, and you shall rebuild, your temple and city, and you shall be delivered by Shiloh when he comes. That will be fulfilled; and all that God has said with regard to the ten tribes of Israel, strange as it may appear, will come to pass. They will, as has been said concerning them, smite the rock, and the mountains of ice will flow before them, and a great highway will be cast up, and their enemies will become a prey to them; and their records, and their choice treasures they will bring with them to Zion. These things are as true as God lives." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 21:301.)

133:32

"and they shall . . . be crowned . . . by the hands of . . . the children of Ephraim"

"Joseph, son of Jacob, was blessed by the Lord with the birthright in Israel, and stood first among the sons of Jacob. This blessing was also the inheritance of Ephraim, the second son of Joseph. We read in the fifth chapter of Chronicles the following: 'The sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel, (for he was the firstborn; but forasmuch as he defiled his father's bed, his birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph, the son of Israel: and the genealogy is not to be reckoned after the birthright. For Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the chief ruler, but the birthright was Joseph's.)' The Lord confirmed this through Jeremiah when he said: 'I am the father of Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn' (Jer. 31:9). Thus, holding the first place in Israel, it is the right of Ephraim among the tribes to take the place of honor and stand at the head to minister unto the others. The Lord has called him to this mission in this dispensation. As the Tribes departed on their northern journey, many of the people fell by the way and mingled with the inhabitants of the land through which they passed. It is quite evident that those of Ephraim mingled with the nations in this way more than the people of any other tribe, for we have learned through revelation to Joseph Smith, that most of those now being gathered from the nations where the gospel has been preached, are of the lineage of Ephraim. This information has been imparted to thousands by our Patriarchs as they have been inspired to make the prediction on the heads of those who have received blessings at their hands. The Lord scattered the children of Ephraim that he might gather them in the latter days, to prepare the way for the coming of the other tribes to Zion. As the firstborn among the tribes, the Ephraimites receive the richer blessings and will be prepared through the fulness of the Priesthood to crown the people from the north with greater power pertaining to the gospel and their salvation when they come." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 845)

133:34

"the richer blessing upon the head of Ephraim"

"It is my testimony that 'today' is the day of Ephraim. It is the day which the Lord has set to fulfil his promises made in the times of the Ancient Patriarchs, when he said that he would scatter Israel to the four corners of the world, and that Ephraim should be scattered in all the nations, and then in the 'last days' be gathered out again. [Jer. 30:3; 1 Nephi 19:15-16; 3 Nephi 5:24.] Many are being gathered out by our missionaries, as 'one of a family and two of a city' [Jer. 3:14] and they are found here, gathered into a gathering place appointed of the Lord, and they are receiving his blessings. This is why so many of us are declared to be of Ephraim." (Hyrum G. Smith, CR, April 1929, pp. 122-23.)

133:35

"they also of the tribe of Judah . . . shall be sanctified"

"We have a great desire for their [Jews] welfare, and are looking for the time soon to come when they will gather to Jerusalem, build up the city and the land of Palestine, and prepare for the coming of the Messiah. . . .

"When the Savior visits Jerusalem, and the Jews look upon him, and see the wounds in his hands and in his side and in his feet, they will then know that they have persecuted and put to death the true Messiah, and then they will acknowledge him, but not till then. [D&C 45:47-53.] They have confounded his first and second coming, expecting his first coming to be as a mighty prince instead of as a servant. They will go back by and by to Jerusalem and own their Lord and Master. [D&C 109:62-64; 110:11.]" (Brigham Young, JD 11:279.)

133:36-39

"I have sent forth mine angel flying through the midst of heaven"

"Now, this is the remarkable thing to which John the Revelator calls our attention; he said: [Rev. 14:6-7 quoted.]

"Wonder of wonders and mystery of mysteries! Is it possible that in the latter days an angel should be seen flying through the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach to the enlightened Christian nations of the world? It is so recorded in the Bible. We believe and claim as a people, that that angel has come to the earth and appeared to Joseph Smith, in the person of Moroni, who delivered to the youthful Prophet a record familiarly known as the Book of Mormon, a record containing the fulness of the Gospel, with a message that said the Gospel must be preached in every nation under the heavens before the end should come. [D&C 20:6-12; 27:5.] Shortly after the visitation of this angel, following the organization of the Church, the Spirit fell upon the early elders, and they went forth unto the regions round about, proclaiming the word." (Rudger Clawson, CR, April 1909, pp. 91-92.)

"The restoration of gospel knowledge commenced in modern times in the spring of 1820. The promised angel began the process of revealing gospel truths and powers in September of 1823. By November of 1831 the restoration was sufficiently advanced for the Lord to say to the world through Joseph Smith: [D&C 133:36-37 quoted.]

"We are thus commanded to preach the restored gospel in all the world. We are to carry its saving truths to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. We are to raise the warning voice and testify of the mighty things which God hath wrought in our day. We are to gather the lost sheep of Israel into the fold of their true Shepherd. We are to take the message of salvation to the ends of the earth." (Bruce R. McConkie, IE, June 1969, p. 112.)

133:37

"this gospel shall be preached"

See Missionary service in Appendix A.

133:38-74

Events associated with the second coming

See Second coming in Appendix A.

133:46-48

"the Lord shall be red in his apparel"

In ancient times in some parts of the world, people used to squeeze the juice out of the grapes by placing the grapes in a wine vat and then stomping on them. Naturally, the clothes of those persons who "treadeth in the wine-vat" were soon stained with the grape juice and became the same color. When the Savior appears in the last days, his garments will be red "like him that treadeth in the wine-vat" (D&C 133:48), and "his voice shall be heard: I have trodden in the wine-press alone" (D&C 133:50).

"Isaiah has pictured this great day when the Lord shall come with his garments, or apparel, red and glorious, to take vengeance on the ungodly. (Isa. 64:1-6.) This will be a day of mourning to the wicked, but a day of gladness to all who have kept his commandments. Do not let anyone think that this is merely figurative language, it is literal, and as surely as we live that day of wrath will come when the cup of iniquity is full. We have received a great many warnings. The great day of the Millennium will come in; the wicked will be consumed and peace and righteousness will dwell upon all the face of the earth for one thousand years." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:91-92.)

133:55

"Moses . . . Elijah . . . John . . . were with Christ in his resurrection"

"Not only did Christ rise from the dead at that time, but others were seen who had risen from their graves—righteous men and women who died before Christ, and who had the privilege of rising with him. I do not believe that the resurrection then was a general one; I believe it extended to those only who, while upon earth, had proved themselves willing to do all for the kingdom of God, and to whom neither property, honor, nor life itself had been too dear to keep them from carrying out the purposes of God." (Anthon H. Lund, CR, April 1904, p. 6.)

133:56

"the graves of the saints shall be opened"

"It is expressly asserted that many graves shall yield up their dead at the time of Christ's advent in glory, and the just who have slept, together with many who have not died, will be caught up to meet the Lord. [1 Thes. 4:14-16.]" (James E. Talmage, AF, p. 388.)

133:59

"the weak things of the earth"

See Weak things of the world in Appendix A.

133:59

"the Lord shall thrash the nations by the power of his Spirit"

See material for 35:13.

133:62

"unto him that . . . sanctifieth himself . . . shall be given eternal life"

See Sanctify and Eternal life in Appendix A.

133:64

"that which was written by the prophet Malachi"

See material for section 2.

133:64

"it shall leave them neither root nor branch"

See Root in Appendix A.

133:65-74

The words of the Lord concerning his second coming

"When Christ comes in his glory as conqueror and deliverer and to take vengeance upon the ungodly, he shall come as one who has trodden the winepress alone. It shall be the time of vengeance which is in his heart and all nations shall tremble at his presence. [D&C 45:74-75.] In that day he who has sanctified himself shall be saved, but he who has not shall be cut off from among the people. Then the words of Malachi (chaps. 3-4) shall be fulfilled. The wicked shall be as stubble and shall be consumed, but the righteous shall be spared, and their children grow up as 'calves of the stall' without sin unto salvation. The thousand years of peace shall be ushered in and Christ shall reign as King of Kings and Lord of Lords. In that day when the unrighteous question his coming and the authority of his punishment the Lord shall answer them: [D&C 133:65-74 quoted.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:266.)

133:67

"my arm was not shortened"

See Arm of the Lord in Appendix A.

133:72

"they sealed up the testimony and bound up the law"

See material for 109:46.

133:73

"outer darkness"

See Darkness in Appendix A.
