Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 134

Background information on section 134

"At a general assembly held in Kirtland on August 16, 1835, the Saints adopted a series of statements regarding human government. [Section 134.] They are wise and as far-reaching as the Articles of Faith themselves. . . . They were given after the mobbings, plunderings, the assassinations of and part of our experiences in Missouri. They were uttered by a people, who, judged by human standards, had every reason to feel that their government had failed, and that they might not hopefully and successfully look thereto for their protection." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., CR, April 1935, p. 90.)

"The reason for the article on 'Government and Laws in General,' is explained in the fact that the Latter-day Saints had been accused by their bitter enemies, both in Missouri and in other places, as being opposed to law and order. They had been portrayed as setting up laws in conflict with the laws of the country. This bitterness went so far that an accusation was brought against them, on one occasion in a Missouri court, of disloyalty because they believed that at some future time the Lord would set up his own kingdom which would supersede the government of the United States, and so believing that the time would come when such a kingdom would be established, they were disloyal to the United States. Every pretext that could be imagined against the Saints to try to show them disloyal and rebellious against established government, was brought into use." (Joseph Smith, CHMR 2:30-31.)

"This 'Declaration of Belief Regarding Governments and Laws in General,' is not a revelation. It was not written by the Prophet Joseph Smith, but was prepared by Oliver Cowdery and was read at the General Assembly of the Church, August 17, 1835, at the time the revelations, which had been prepared for publication, were submitted for the vote of approval by the elders of the Church. At the time this conference, or General Assembly, was held, the Prophet Joseph Smith and his second counselor, Frederick G. Williams, were in Canada on a missionary journey, and the Prophet did not return to Kirtland until Sunday, August 23rd, one week after the Assembly had been held. Since the Assembly had voted to have this article on government and one on marriage, also prepared by Oliver Cowdery, published in the Doctrine and Covenants, the Prophet accepted the decision and permitted this to be done.

"It should be noted that in the minutes, and also in the introduction to this article on government, the brethren were careful to state that this declaration was accepted as the belief, or 'opinion' of the officers of the Church, and not as a revelation, and therefore does not hold the same place in the doctrines of the Church as do the revelations." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 852.)

"A general assembly of the Church of Latter-day Saints was held at Kirtland on the 17th of August, 1835, to take into consideration the labors of a committee appointed by a general assembly of the Church on the 24th of September, 1834, for the purpose of arranging the items of the doctrine of Jesus Christ for the government of the Church. The names of the committee were: Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon, Oliver Cowdery, and Frederick G. Williams, who, having finished said book according to the instructions given them, deem it necessary to call a general assembly of the Church to see whether the book be approved or not by the authorities of the Church: that it may, if approved, become a law and a rule of faith and practice to the Church. . . .

"President Oliver Cowdery then read the following article on 'Governments and Laws in General,' which was accepted and adopted and ordered to be printed in said book, by a unanimous vote: [Beginning of article.] 'That our belief with regard to earthly governments and laws in general may not be misinterpreted nor misunderstood, we have thought proper to present, at the close of this volume, our opinion concerning the same.' [Section 134, follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 2:243, 247.)

134:1

"governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man

"The Apostle Paul says truly: 'For there is no power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God.' [Rom. 13:1.] At first this is a startling statement. . . . 'The powers are ordained of God,' not that they are always the best forms of government for the people, or that they afford liberty and freedom to mankind." (Erastus Snow, JD 22:151.)

"All governments are more or less under the control of the Almighty, and, in their forms, have sprung from the laws that he has from time to time given to man. Those laws, in passing from generation to generation, have been more or less adulterated, and the result has been the various forms of government now in force among the nations; for, as the Prophet says of Israel, 'They have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinances, and broken the everlasting covenant.' [Isa. 24:5.]" (Brigham Young, JD 6:342.)

"Taking this article [Section 134] in its entirety we are willing to accept it, for it contains sound principles that are acceptable today, and will be approved by the Church until that day comes when the Rightful Ruler of the earth shall come to set up his perfect government. [D&C 38:21-22.] One statement in this article, we could modify and give a better meaning. 'We believe that governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man,' might be more nearly correct if stated: 'A perfect government was instituted of God for the benefit of man.' The statement that governments, if this is interpreted to mean all governments, were instituted of God, may be questioned. Yet it is true that he holds men accountable for their acts in relation to the governments which man has set up, and which are not approved of God." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:63-64.)

134:1

"he holds men accountable for their acts in relation to . . . laws"

"This is the attitude of the Church in regard to law observance. We agree with the author of the following statement: 'In reality the man who defies or flouts the law is like the proverbial fool who saws away the plank on which he sits, and a disrespect or disregard for law is always the first sign of a disintegrating society. Respect for law is the most fundamental of all social virtues, for the alternative to the rule of law is that of violence and anarchy.' (Case and Comment, March/April 1965, p. 20.)

"There is no reason or justification for men to disregard or break the law or try to take it into their own hands. Christ gave us the great example of a law-abiding citizen when the Pharisees, trying to entangle him, as the scriptures say, asked him if it were lawful to give tribute money unto Caesar. After asking whose inscription was on the tribute money, and their acknowledgment that it was Caesar's, he said: 'Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's.'(Matt. 22:21.)

"It is the duty of citizens of any country to remember that they have individual responsibilities, and that they must operate within the law of the country in which they have chosen to live." (N. Eldon Tanner, Ensign, November 1975, p. 83.)

"The Great Jehovah will award judgment or mercy to all nations according to their several deserts, their means of obtaining intelligence, the laws by which they are governed, the facilities afforded them of obtaining correct information, and His inscrutable designs in relation to the human family." (Joseph Smith, HC 4:596.)

134:4

"human law has [no] right to interfere in prescribing rules of worship"

"One of the fundamental articles of faith promulgated by the Prophet Joseph Smith was: 'We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience; and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where, or what they may.' But we claim absolutely no right, no prerogative whatever, to interfere with any other people." (Heber J. Grant, CR, April 1921, p. 203.)

"A good government must secure for every citizen the free exercise of conscience. Matters of belief or religious practice should not be interfered with, unless they oppose laws formulated for the common good. There should be no mingling of religious influence with trespassing upon each others' field." (John A. Widtsoe, JS, p. 215.)

"When a man uses this God-given right to encroach upon the rights of another, he commits a wrong. Liberty becomes license, and the man a transgressor. It is the function of the state to curtail the violator and to protect the violated." (David O. McKay, CR, April 1940, p. 118.)

134:4

"religion is instituted of God"

"If . . . we admit that God is the source of all wisdom and understanding, we must admit that by His direct inspiration He has taught man that law is necessary in order to govern and regulate His own immediate interest and welfare; for this reason, that law is beneficial to promote peace and happiness among men. . . . God is the source from whence proceeds all good; and if man is benefited by law, then certainly, law is good; and if law is good, then law, or the principle of it emanated from God; for God is the source of all good; consequently, then, he was the first Author of law, or the principle of it, to mankind. [Alma 5:40.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 2:12-13.)

134:5

"sustain . . . governments"

"We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law. [Article of Faith 12.]

"The three significant words used in the 12th Article of Faith express the proper attitude of the membership of the Church toward law. These words are—obey, honor, and sustain. The Article does not say we believe in submission to the law. Obedience implies a higher attitude then mere submission, for obedience has its root in good intent; submission may spring from selfishness or meanness of spirit. Though obedience and submission both imply restraint on one's own will, we are obedient only from a sense of right; submissive from a sense of necessity.

"Honor expresses an act or attitude of an inferior towards a superior. When applied to things it is taken in the sense of holding in honor. Thus, in honoring the law, we look upon it as something which is above selfish desires or indulgences.

"To sustain signifies to hold up; to keep from falling. To sustain the law, therefore, is to refrain from saying or doing anything which will weaken it or make it ineffective.

"We obey law from a sense of right. We honor law because of its necessity and strength to society. We sustain law by keeping it in good repute." (David O. McKay, CR, April 1937, p. 28.)

134:5

"men are bound to . . . uphold . . . governments. . . while protected in their. . . rights"

"A question has many times been asked of the Church and of its individual members, to this effect: In the case of a conflict between the requirements made by the revealed word of God, and those imposed by the secular law, which of these authorities would the members of the Church be bound to obey? In answer, the words of Christ may be applied—it is the duty of the people to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's. [D&C 63:26; Matt. 22:21.] . . .

"Pending the overruling by Providence in favor of religious liberty, it is the duty of the saints to submit themselves to the laws of their country. Nevertheless, they should use every proper method, as citizens or subjects of their several governments, to secure for themselves and for all men the boon of freedom in religious service. It is not required of them to suffer without protest imposition by lawless persecutors, or through the operation of unjust laws; but their protests should be offered in legal and proper order. The saints have practically demonstrated their acceptance of the doctrine that it is better to suffer evil than to do wrong by purely human opposition to unjust authority. And if by thus submitting themselves to the laws of the land, in the event of such laws being unjust and subversive of human freedom, the people be prevented from doing the work appointed them of God, they are not to be held accountable for the failure to act under the higher law. [D&C 124:49-50.]" (James E. Talmage, AF, pp. 422-23.)

"Sustain the government of the nation wherever you are, and speak well of it, for this is right, and the government has a right to expect it of you so long as that government sustains you in your civil and religious liberty, in those rights which inherently belong to every person born on the earth." (First Presidency, MS 14:321-26.)

"It is most important that all citizens be informed in matters of government; that they know and understand the laws of the land; and that they take an active part wherever possible in choosing and electing honest and wise men to administer the affairs of government. There are many who question the constitutionality of certain acts passed by their respective governments, even though such laws have been established by the highest courts in the land as being constitutional, and they feel to defy and disobey the law. Abraham Lincoln once observed: 'Bad laws, if they exist, should be repealed as soon as possible; still, while they continue in force, they should be religiously observed.'" (N. Eldon Tanner, Ensign, November 1975, p. 83.)

134:5

"governments have a right to enact . . . Laws"

"Not only should we seek humble, worthy, courageous leadership, but we should measure all proposals having to do with our national or local welfare by four standards: First, is the proposal, the policy or the idea being promoted, right as measured by the Gospel of Jesus Christ? . . . Second, is it right as measured by the Lord's standard of constitutional government, . . . the Lord's standard is a safe guide. Third, . . . Is it right as measured by the counsel of the living oracles of God? . . . Fourth, what will be the effect upon the morale and the character of the people if this or that policy is adopted?" (Ezra T. Benson, Our Prophets and Principles, pp. 69-70.)

134:8

"step forward . . . in bringing offenders . . . to punishment"

"Now, the Lord has provided that those in his Church shall live according to the law, and he makes a distinction between the law pertaining to the Church and what we call the secular law, or the law of the land, but he requires obedience to each. My love for my brother in this Church does not mean that I am to stand between him and righteous judgment. This Church is no organization like that of the secret combinations of old, which the Lord hath said he hates, the members of which were pledged, and bound by oath that they would cover up one another's crimes, that they would justify one another in theft and murder and in all things that were unclean. [Ether 8:13-19.] It is no such organization at all. It would not be of God if it were." (James E. Talmage, CR, October 1920, p. 63.)

134:9

"We do not believe it just to mingle religious influence with civil government"

"The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints holds to the doctrine of the separation of church and state; the noninterference of church authority in political matters; and the absolute freedom and independence of the individual in the performance of his political duties. . . . We declare that from principle and policy, we favor: the absolute separation of church and state; no domination of the state by the church; no church interference with the functions of the state; no state interference with the functions of the church, or with the free exercise of religion; the absolute freedom of the individual from the domination of ecclesiastical authority in political affairs; the equality of all churches before the law." (First Presidency, CR, April 1907, p. 14.)

134:10

"all religious societies have a right to deal with their members"

See Excommunication in Appendix A.

"There are really only three kinds of offenses of which the Church takes cognizance. First and most serious is the breaking of the moral law in any of its divisions. Second, deliberate disobedience to the regulations of the Church, which tenders a person liable to such punishment as the Church can properly mete out to its members. Third, the incorrect interpretation of doctrine, coupled with an unwillingness to accept the correct view after proper explanations of the doctrine have been made. The first two types of violation are of conduct, the third of belief. All imply non-conformity to the practices or non-acceptance of teachings of the Church." (John A. Widtsoe, PC, p. 164.)

134:11

"men should appeal . . . for redress of. . . wrongs"

"We shall abide all constitutional law, as we always have done; but while we are God-fearing and law-abiding, and respect all honorable men and officers . . . we will contend inch by inch, legally and constitutionally, for our rights as American citizens." (John Taylor, in B. H. Roberts, Life of John Taylor, p. 363.)

134:12

"we do not believe it right to interfere with bond servants"

"It should be the duty of an Elder, when he enters into a house, to salute the master of that house, and if he gain his consent, then he may preach to all that are in that house; but if he gain not his consent, let him not go unto his slaves, or servants, but let the responsibility be upon the head of the master of that house, and the consequences thereof." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:263-64.)

"All men are to be taught to repent; but we have no right to interfere with slaves, contrary to the mind and will of their masters. In fact, it would be much better, and more prudent, not to preach at all to slaves, until after their masters are converted, and then teach the masters to use them with kindness; remembering that they are accountable to God." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:440.)
