Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 135

Background information on section 135

"This article on the Martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum, the Patriarch, touches the heart of every sincere believer in the Gospel of Jesus Christ and the restoration of the Church. This article was written by Elder John Taylor who offered his life with his beloved brethren in this tragedy in Carthage, Illinois. President Taylor was severely wounded and carried the balls with which he was wounded to his grave. His devotion and willingness and that of his companion, Willard Richards, bear a strong testimony of their conviction and integrity to the truth of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 855.)

"I have understood that this splendid account [Section 135] of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith was written by President John Taylor, known as the 'Champion of Liberty' who received four shots in his body and who lived carrying some of those bullets to his grave, and who, years after the martyrdom, stood before the people in this stand as the President, Prophet, Seer and Revelator of the Church of Jesus Christ." (Heber J. Grant, CR, October 1933, p. 7.)

135:3

"Joseph Smith . . . has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world"

"We are living in this dispensation, which is pregnant with greater events than any other dispensation that has ever existed on the earth, because in it is embraced all that ever existed any where among any people of the earth. [D&C 128:19-22; Acts 3:19-21.] Hence why we look upon Joseph Smith as so great and important a character in the world's history. I think he was one of the greatest Prophets that ever lived, Jesus himself excepted." (John Taylor, JD 18:326-27.)

"I spoke to the theme of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, indicating that, aside from Jesus Christ, I looked upon him as second in greatness to no other religious teacher that ever lived. And judged by the same standard used in judging greatness in men—by his works—as with Shakespeare, Washington, Lincoln, Einstein, etc.—I still believe my view of him is correct and that he is the greatest man America ever produced. Hence I am convinced that he is deserving of a careful, thorough, and honest study by every person interested in his personal well-being." (Joseph F. Merrill, CR, April 1948, p. 70.)

135:3

"for the salvation of men"

"Why did he [the Lord] call him [Joseph Smith] into the spirit world? Because he held the keys of this dispensation, not only before he came to this world and while he was in the flesh, but he would hold them throughout the endless ages of eternity. [D&C 90:3.] He held the keys of past generations—of the millions of people who dwelt on the earth in the fifty generations that had passed and gone who had not the law of the gospel. . . . He went to unlock the prison doors of these people, as far as they would receive his testimony, and the Saints of God who dwell in the flesh will build temples and perform certain ordinances for the redemption of the dead. This was the work of Joseph the prophet in the spirit world." (Wilford Woodruff, CR, April 1880, pp. 8-9.)

135:3

"he has brought forth the Book of Mormon"

"The Prophet Joseph Smith translated a record which was placed in his hands by an angel from God. It's a book of about 600 pages. He translated it in just under two months. . . . I'd like to ask you if you would undertake to write a history of the ancient inhabitants of America and limit your source material to that which was available in 1829? . . . You must write 329 chapters—54 chapters to deal with wars; 21 historical chapters, 55 chapters on visions and prophecies and 71 chapters on doctrines and exhortations; 17 chapters on missionary work and 21 on the ministry of Christ, and remember that every word you write must be in meticulous agreement with the Holy Bible. Therefore you must become so well acquainted with the Bible that you can, with confidence, write your book with no inaccuracies or contradictions." (Hugh B. Brown, Joseph Smith among the Prophets, p. 11.)

135:3

"he has brought forth . . . many other wise documents"

"The Pearl of Great Price contains the Book of Moses as revealed to the Prophet in 1830 shortly after the organization of the Church. . . .

"The Book of Abraham came out of the translation of some Egyptian papyri from the catacombs of Egypt which fell into the hands of the Prophet. . . . It [Pearl of Great Price] also includes a revision of chapter twenty-four of the Gospel of Matthew. The changes made are revealing to all students of sacred history. The Pearl of Great Price further contains extracts from the early history of the Prophet, recounting especially the events connected with the First Vision and the visitation of Moroni. The compilation closes with the Articles of Faith of the Church. These articles originally formed a part of a letter to Mr. John Wentworth, newspaper editor of Chicago. . . .

"The History of the Church is another of the literary efforts of the Prophet Joseph Smith." (John A. Widtsoe, JS, pp. 254-56.)

135:3

"he . . . gathered many thousands of the Latter-day Saints"

"He [Joseph Smith] undertook to carry the gospel message to all parts of the world, and the success of that project is miraculous. He undertook to weld men from practically all parts of the world into a brotherhood. . . . These people, despite national antagonisms, were bound together in a brotherhood such as is not known anywhere else in the world. That's a superhuman undertaking for a young man without education and with only thirty-nine years of life." (Hugh B. Brown, Joseph Smith among the Prophets, p. 11.)

135:3

"He lived great"

"You may be interested to hear what a nationally-known writer and publicist and once mayor of Boston, Josiah Quincy, wrote about Joseph Smith. In May 1844, Mr. Quincy and his cultured friend, Charles Francis Adams, son and grandson, respectively, of two United States Presidents, happened to make a two-day visit to Nauvoo. Being well-known, prominent men they were entertained at the Mansion House, Joseph Smith's residence. An account of this visit is given by Mr. Quincy, in the last chapter of his book entitled Figures of the Past, published in 1880. I quote the following from this twenty-four page chapter:

It is by no means improbable that some future textbook for the use of generations yet unborn, will contain a question something like this: What historical American of the nineteenth century has exerted the most powerful influence upon the destinies of his countrymen? And it is by no means impossible that the answer to that interrogatory may be thus written: Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet. And the reply, absurd as it doubtless seems to most men now living, may be an obvious commonplace to their descendants. History deals in surprises and paradoxes quite as startling as this. The man who established a religion in this age of free debate, who was and is today accepted by hundreds of thousands as a direct emissary from the Most High,—such a rare human being is not to be disposed of by pelting his memory with unsavory epithets. . . .

Born in the lowest ranks of poverty, without book-learning, and with the homeliest of all human names, he had made himself at the age of thirty-nine a power upon earth. Of the multitudinous family of Smith . . . none had won human hearts and shaped human lives as this Joseph. His influence, whether for good or evil, is potent today, and the end is not yet. . . .

"Mr. Quincy concludes his chapter with these words:

" 'I have endeavored to give the details of my visit to the Mormon prophet with absolute accuracy. If the reader does not know just what to make of Joseph Smith, I cannot help him out of the difficulty. I myself stand helpless before the puzzle.' " (Joseph F. Merrill, CR, April 1947, pp. 134-35.)

135:4

"he was murdered in cold blood"

"I told Stephen Markham that if I and Hyrum were ever taken again we should be massacred, or I was not a prophet of God. I want Hyrum to live to avenge my blood, but he is determined not to leave me. (HC 6:546, June 22, 1844.)

"It is thought by some that our enemies would be satisfied with my destruction; but I tell you that as soon as they have shed my blood they will thirst for the blood of every man in whose heart dwells a single spark of the spirit of the fullness of the Gospel. The opposition of these men is moved by the spirit of the adversary of all righteousness. It is not only to destroy me, but every man and woman who dares believe the doctrines that God hath inspired me to teach to this generation." (Joseph Smith, HC 6:498.)

135:6

"Hyrum . . . and Joseph Smith . . . will be classed among the martyrs"

"It was necessary for Hyrum Smith, as well as Joseph Smith, to lay down his life as a witness, for . . . the Lord had honored him with the responsibility of holding the keys of authority in this dispensation jointly with his younger brother. 'It is also written in your law,' said Jesus to the Jews, 'that the testimony of two men is true.' [John 8:17.] And this law was binding upon Joseph and Hyrum Smith. The shedding of their blood also bound that testimony upon an unbelieving world and this testimony will stand at the judgment seat as a witness against all men who have rejected their words of eternal life." (Joseph Fielding Smith, IE, June 1944, p. 364.)

135:6

"their names shall go down to posterity as gems"

"I would not have you indulge in man worship. God forbid. To Him be the glory always. We cannot glorify Joseph [Smith] without glorifying our Father in heaven. We must glorify our Lord Jesus Christ. We cannot indulge in any worship that will detract from or lessen our worship of our Great and Eternal Father and His Son Jesus Christ. But we can reverence the man of God; we can love him; we can emulate his example; we can cherish his memory; we can perpetuate this in our children; and we can seek to comprehend the truths that he taught, so that by comprehending and by practicing them we may be prepared to dwell with him, and dwell with our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ in eternity. This we can do." (George Q. Cannon, MS 57:326.)

135:7

"They were innocent of any crime"

"Joseph Smith was loved by his people, held in contempt by others, and misunderstood by the majority of men. Often he was hunted as if he were an animal. Arrest, imprisonment, trial followed one another until his death. It is said that about fifty times charges were made against him in the courts, yet, so the records prove, he was never found guilty of a violation of the law." (John A. Widtsoe, JS, p. 33.)

"I knew him [Joseph Smith] when at his mother's breast, I watched and counselled his youth, but when God spoke and taught him, I bowed to his superior knowledge, and although he was a boy and I an old man, and his uncle, yet I was not ashamed to learn true principles from him, and . . . drank in the truths which flowed from the prophet's lips. I was in jail with him and his brother Hyrum a few hours before they were killed, and I can testify before God, that they died innocent of any crime, and that they sealed their testimony with their blood." (John Smith, as quoted in George Albert Smith, CR, April 1927, p. 85.)

135:7

"the martyrs under the altar that John saw"

"But he [John the Revelator], under the inspiration of the Almighty, and filled with the light and intelligence of heaven, could gaze upon the position of things in the eternal worlds, and saw the souls of those who had been slain for the testimony of Jesus, and the word of God, etc. They were told that they should rest yet for a little season, until their fellow servants also and their brethren that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled. [Rev. 6:9-11.] . . . His servants who have been called to lay down their lives, will come forth with crowns upon their heads and reign upon the earth." (John Taylor, JD 25:285.)
