Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 136

Background information on section 136

"The Saints were driven from their homes in Nauvoo under the most trying circumstances and in poverty and destitution in large measure, for they had been robbed by their enemies. Therefore it was extremely needful for a revelation from the Lord for their guidance in their journeyings to the Rocky Mountains. The Lord did not fail them in this hour of distress and gave this revelation to President Brigham Young to guide them in their journeyings and admonishing them to keep His commandments. All the members of the Church were to be organized in companies and were required to keep the commandments faithfully that they might have the guidance of His Spirit with them in all their trying circumstances. These companies were to be on the order followed by Zion's Camp in their remarkable march from Kirtland to Missouri, with captains, over hundreds, fifties and tens and all under the direction of the council of Apostles." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 857.)

"At length, all being ready for a start, on the 4th of February, 1846, the exodus of the Mormons from Illinois began. . . . By the middle of February a thousand souls, with their wagons, teams and effects had been landed on the Iowa shore.

"Sugar Creek, nine miles westward, was made the rendezvous and starting point of the great overland pilgrimage. Here the advance companies pitched their tents, and awaited the coming of their leaders. The weather was bitter cold, the ground snow-covered and desolate as to have dismayed souls less trustful in Providence, less inured to hardship and suffering than they. It was February 5th that the first camp formed on Sugar Creek. That night—a bitter night, nine wives became mothers; nine children were born in tents and wagons in that wintry camp. How these tender babes, these sick and delicate women were cared for under such conditions, is left to the imagination of the sensitive reader. How these Mormon exiles, outcasts of civilization, carrying their aged, infirm and helpless across the desolate plains and prairies, were tracked and trailed thereafter by the nameless graves of their dead, is a tale which though often attempted, has never been and never will be fully told. . . .

"At various points between the Mississippi and the Missouri the Mormons founded temporary settlements, or, as they called them, 'traveling stakes of Zion,' fencing the land, building log cabins, and putting in crops for their own use or for the benefit of their people who came after them. Two of these 'stakes' were named Garden Grove and Mount Pisgah; the former on the east fork of Grand River, one hundred and forty-five miles from Nauvoo, and the latter near the middle fork of the Grand, twenty-seven miles farther west. Mount Pisgah was on the Pottawatomie Indian lands.

"A thousand west-bound wagons of the Saints were now rolling over the prairies of Iowa. . . . Some of the Mormons had early crossed to the west side of the [Missouri] river, constructing a ferry-boat for that purpose, and settled, by permission of the Indians—Omahas—upon the lands set apart for their use by the Federal Government. . . .

"As the season advanced the settlers on the west side were instructed to congregate in one place, and a site being chosen for that purpose they there founded their celebrated Winter Quarters. This place is now Florence, Nebraska, five miles above the city of Omaha. . . . Garden Grove and Mount Pisgah were still inhabited; their numbers now swelled by the refugees from Nauvoo. Here in these humble prairie settlements, surrounded by Indians, hopeful and even happy, though enduring much sickness and privation, which resulted in many deaths, the pilgrim Mormons passed the winter of 1846-7. . . . 'The word and will of the Lord concerning the Camp of Israel in their journeyings to the West,' was issued by President Young at Winter Quarters [Iowa] on the 14th of January 1847. A few paragraphs of this manifesto— the first of its kind, penned by the Prophet's successor—will convey some idea of the nature of the preparations for the continued exodus: [D&C 136:2-11, 20-31, quoted.]

"Agreeable to these instructions the Saints went to work with a will, and as spring opened all was life, bustle and stir at their camps on the Missouri, and at their other settlements on the prairies of Iowa." (Orson F. Whitney, HU 1:233 ff.)

136:1-15

"The Word and Will of the Lord concerning the Camp of Israel "

For additional information on each of the persons mentioned in this section, see Appendix B.

"In 1847 the Latter-day Saints, under the leadership of President Brigham Young began to fulfill the prediction of the Prophet Joseph who had declared, two years before his death, that the Saints would 'become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains.' In the book of Doctrine and Covenants there is a revelation entitled 'The Word and Will of the Lord,' to a people encamped upon the Missouri river, who had left civilization behind, who had been driven from their homes and were making preparation to cross the great plains and mountains and settle in this then empty and desolate land. That 'Word and Will of the Lord' commanded the people of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to organize themselves . . . preparatory to the long and wearisome ox-team journey to Salt Lake Valley." (Orson F. Whitney, CR, October 1916, pp. 54-55.)

136:18

"Zion shall be redeemed in mine own due time"

See Zion in Appendix A.

136:22

"I am he who led the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt"

See Israel, Gathering of Israel, and Jehovah in Appendix A. Jesus Christ of the New Testament and the Doctrine and Covenants is the Jehovah of the Old Testament.

136:28

"If thou art merry, praise the Lord"

"The 'Mormon' Church has always encouraged legitimate amusements. . . . Away back in the days of Nauvoo we find the drama introduced by the Prophet Joseph. . . . Why, even on the plains, after a day's march, the wagons were drawn up in a circle, a man with the violin would take his place by the campfire, and there on the prairie the sturdy pioneers would join hands in a dance, opening it by prayer, and participate in amusement that fostered the spirit of the gospel. Two years had not passed after their entrance into the 'Valley' before they built the 'bowery,' and there presented, undoubtedly, the first drama that was ever given in the West. Later they built the Social Hall. . . . President Brigham Young . . . once said, in substance: 'The atmosphere of the dance should be such that if any elder be called from the party to go to administer to a sick person, he could leave with the same spirit that he would go from his elder's quorum meeting.'" (David O. McKay, CR, April 1920, pp. 1 16-17.)

136:30

"Fear not thine enemies, for they are in mind hands"

"Dear Brethren, we are sensible that the account of the death of the Prophet and Patriarch of the Church will be painful to your hearts; it is to ours. We feel and mourn their loss, but they have sealed their testimony with their blood; they have not counted their lives as dear unto themselves as the lives of the Church; they have died in the Lord and their works will follow them.

"The eyes of the Lord are upon those who have shed the blood of the Lord's anointed, and he will judge them with a righteous judgment. Let the Saints cultivate a meek and quiet spirit, and all things shall in the end work together for your good." (Brigham Young, MS 25:86.)

136:31

"My people must be tried in all things"

See Adversity in Appendix A.

"Suffering and trials are essential to the eternal welfare of man. Those who seek a place in the celestial kingdom in exaltation may be called upon to pass through tribulation. At an earlier day the Lord had declared that it would be after much tribulation that the blessings would come. [58:2-3 quoted.]" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 861.)

136:36-68

"Which foundation he [Joseph Smith] did lay, and was faithful"

"The details of the life of Joseph Smith are familiar to us. He announced at once his glorious vision of the Father and the Son and was immediately oppressed and persecuted. Modern scribes and Pharisees have published libelous books and articles by the hundreds, imprisoned him some forty-odd times, tarred and feathered him, shot at him, and did everything in their power to destroy him. In spite of their every effort to take his life, he survived through more than a score of years of bitter and violent persecution to fill his mission, until his hour should come.

"Twenty-four years of hell he suffered but also twenty-four years of ecstasy he enjoyed in converse with Gods and other immortals! His mission was finished—heaven and earth were linked again. . . . And his hour had come to seal with his blood his testimony, so often borne to multitudes of friends and foes. His Judas came from his own circle— Governor Ford was his Pontius Pilate, Nauvoo was his Gethsemane, and Carthage his Calvary. There were also modern Pharisees to goad the mobs and another martyr testified. . . . The shots rang out! And freely flowed the blood of martyrs, for Hyrum, his older brother, had chosen to remain with him. This precious blood soaked into the earth, sealing an undying and unanswerable testimony which continued to ring in minds and hearts. . . .

"His work was not lost. His testimony goes steadily forward on to infinity. As Alma had carried the torch for Abinadi, the apostles for the Savior, now came Brigham Young and the Twelve to continue the work of restoration.

"Men do not give their lives to perpetuate falsehoods. Martyrdom dissipates all questions as to the sincerity of the martyr. Personalities do not survive the ages. They rise like a shooting star, shine brilliantly for a moment and disappear from view, but a martyr for a living cause, like the sun, shines on forever. . . .

"Today a great people hailed for their education, practicability, and virtue, stand to bear witness that the martyrdom of Joseph Smith, like that of the martyrs before him, is another of the infallible proofs of the divinity of the gospel of Jesus Christ, restored in its fulness through that humble prophet." (Spencer W. Kimball, CR, April 1946, pp. 45, 50.)

"Under the Lord's direction, he [Joseph Smith] organized the Church of Christ, with apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, etc., as the Church should be organized, to continue thus until all should come to a unity of the faith. He ministered unto the people, he healed the sick; he loved the souls of the children of men. But, as had been the case with prophets whom the Lord had raised up before, it seemed necessary in this case that the testimony of His servant should be sealed with his life's blood. . . . He had given the keys for the gifts and blessings of God unto the people, and the Father had continued to bless him; finally he realized that his labor was about done." (George Albert Smith, CR, April 1904, p. 63.)

136:39

"it was needful that he should seal his testimony with his blood"

"Deep down, fundamentally, what was it that brought about the death of the Apostle Paul and the death of the Prophet Joseph? The fundamental reason was this: They were servants of God, and Satan wanted them out of the way. They stood as 'lions in the path,' and were building up God's kingdom in His own appointed way. Both these men had looked upon the face of Deity. Paul had been 'caught up to the third heaven' [2 Cor. 12:2-5], Joseph to the 'seventh heaven' and there 'heard things unlawful to be uttered.' [D&C 76:115.] Each was a divinely commissioned preacher of the gospel at the opening of a new dispensation." (Orson F. Whitney, CR, October 1912, p. 70.)

136:39

"that he might be honored and the wicked might be condemned"

"The Lord has suffered some of our Prophets and Apostles to be martyred; and what for? That the cup of the iniquity of the nations might be full and that his servants might be crowned heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ to a martyr's crown." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 5:269.)

136:40

"Have I not delivered you from your enemies . . . ?"

"The blood of innocence has stained the soil of free America—the blood of a Prophet, of a Patriarch, and of other righteous men and women who have suffered for their religion. . . . They were cruelly murdered, and we as a people were driven out by violence, driven out from the midst of civilization, driven out from our homes and our hard-earned possessions, and our track is marked with the blood and with the graves of our own people from the borders of civilization till we reached these Rocky Mountains, and for no other cause for which we could be punished legally. . . .

"But prejudice was created; men became excited; mobs were formed, and extermination was decided upon, and there was no alternative presented to us but this: either to submit to be killed off, men, women and children, from the face of the earth, or to take our flight as best we could in our poverty to some remote land where we could worship God according to the dictates of our own conscience in peace and in quietness. We chose the latter alternative. We preferred to come out among tribes of Indians of which we knew nothing, and live in their midst and trust to their mercies, savages though they were, than to remain among civilized men, men who called themselves Christians." (George Q. Cannon, JD 26:285.)

136:42

"Be diligent . . . lest . . . your faith fail you "

"Be faithful . . . be humble. Do not neglect any duty that devolves upon you. Whenever you neglect your prayers, you are on dangerous ground. Whenever you neglect to worship the Lord, and break the Sabbath day, you are on dangerous ground. Whenever you neglect to deal righteously and honestly by any person in the world, you are on dangerous ground and in danger of falling into the grasp of Satan. You cannot afford to do it. Satan has great power in the world, and he is more anxious about this little body of people gathered in these mountains than about any nation on this earth. Why? Because these people have the Priesthood of God; they have the ordinances of the Gospel; they have the power of God for salvation to the world. Hence he is agitated, and he agitates others and stirs them up with prejudice and evil thoughts against the Latter-day Saints. . . . The Lord has chosen spirits that have been sent here for the very work that has to be accomplished. Let us . . . develop the fact in our lives that we are among those that the Lord has selected to come here and perform His work." (Francis M. Lyman, MS 56:149.)
