Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 6

Background information on section 6

"Previous to joining the Prophet Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery had met David Whitmer at Palmyra, and conversed with him concerning the rumors rife in that vicinity about the finding of the Book of Mormon plates. This chance meeting resulted in a friendship between the young men, and finally when Cowdery determined to visit the Prophet in Harmony, he went via the Whitmer residence, at Fayette, which was near the town of Waterloo, at the head of Seneca Lake, Seneca county, New York; and promised his friend David Whitmer that after visiting the Prophet he would write him his impressions as to the truth or untruth of Joseph Smith's having an ancient record." (Footnote, HC 1:32.)

"When Oliver Cowdery went to Pennsylvania, he promised to write me what he should learn about these matters, which he did. He wrote me that Joseph had told him (Oliver's) secret thoughts, and all he had meditated about going to see him, which no man on earth knew, as he supposed, but himself, and so he stopped to write for Joseph." (David Whitmer, Historical Record: Church Ency. Book 1, 6:208 [May 1887].)

"On the 5th day of April, 1829, Oliver Cowdery came to my house, until which time I had never seen him. He stated to me that, having been teaching school in the neighborhood where my father resided, and my father being one of those who sent to the school, he went to board for a season at his house, and while there the family related to him the circumstances of my having received the plates, and accordingly he had come to make inquiries of me. Two days after the arrival of Mr. Cowdery (being the 7th of April) I commenced to translate the Book of Mormon, and he began to write for me, which, having continued for some time, I inquired of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim, and obtained the following: [Section 6, follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC1:32-33.)

6:1

"A great and marvelous work"

The Lord uses the adjectives "great and marvelous" several times to refer to different aspects of his work, including two references in this one revelation: 6:1 and 6:11. See Great and marvelous work in Appendix A.

6:2

God's word is "sharper than a two-edged sword"

For information on this descriptive term, see Sword in Appendix A.

"The Word of God is 'quick'; it is 'living,' and not dead. It is 'powerful', it is a force, like compressed steam, or electricity. As a sharp, two-edged sword it pierces and cuts, and penetrates to the inmost parts of man, being a 'discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart' (Heb. 4:12. Compare Isa. 49:2; Eph. 6:17; Rev. 2:16; 19:15)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 33.)

6:3-4

"the field is white already to harvest"

See Harvest symbols in Appendix A.

6:5

"if you will knock it shall be opened"

See Prayer in Appendix A.

"There is no reason in the world why any soul should not know where to find the truth. If he will only humble himself and seek in the spirit of humility and faith, going to the Lord just as the Prophet Joseph Smith went to the Lord to find the truth, he will find it. 'Knock, and it shall be opened unto you.' This is my testimony. I know it is true." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, April 1951, p. 59.)

6:6

"establish the cause of Zion"

"The question as to individual responsibility for the welfare of the Church was asked in the early days of members of the Church. Several of the men who labored with the Prophet Joseph Smith came to him in those early days and said: 'What shall we do?' They might have said: 'What shall we do to be saved?' The Lord in every instance gave an answer. We have a series of short revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, which are answers to that question. I find in every one a significant statement, worded almost identically in all of these revelations, to Hyrum Smith, David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery, and others of less fame in the Church: 'Keep my commandments, and seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion.' [Sec. 6:6; 11:6; 14:6.] That is our business, the business of the Latter-day Saints. . . .

"We are here to build Zion to Almighty God, for the blessing of all the world. In that aim we are unique and different from all other peoples. We must respect that obligation, and not be afraid of it. We cannot walk as other men, or talk as other men, or do as other men, for we have a different destiny, obligation, and responsibility placed upon us, and we must fit ourselves for that great destiny and obligation." (John A. Widtsoe, CR, April 1940, p. 36.)

6:7

"Seek not for riches"

See Riches in Appendix A.

"The great criterion of success in the world is that men can make money, but I want to say to you Latter-day Saints that to do this is not true success. . . . What is the matter? Why, the appetite for money grows upon a man, increases and strengthens unless he is careful, just as much as the appetite for whiskey, and it gets possession of him, and he loves the money instead of loving it only for the good that he can do with it. He does not estimate properly the value of things." (Heber J. Grant, CR, October 1911, p. 23.)

"It is thought by many that the possession of gold and silver will produce for them happiness, and hence, thousands hunt the mountains for the precious metals; in this they are mistaken. The possession of wealth alone does not produce happiness." (Brigham Young, JD 11:15.)

6:7

"mysteries of God"

See Mysteries in Appendix A.

6:7

"eternal life"

See Eternal life in Appendix A.

6:9

"Say nothing but repentance"

See Repentance in Appendix A.

"In the revelation to Oliver Cowdery, and to several others who came to ask what the Lord would have them do, the Lord said: 'Say nothing but repentance unto this generation; keep my commandments, and assist to bring forth my work.' We must not infer from this expression that those who went forth to preach were limited in their teachings so that all they could say was 'repent from your sins,' but in teaching the principles of the Gospel they should do so with the desire to teach repentance to the people and bring them in humility to a realization of the need for remission of sins. Even today, in all of our preaching it should be with the desire to bring people to repentance and faith in God. That was the burden of John's message as he went forth to prepare the way for the Lord:'Repent ye; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand,' he declared to the people, but he also taught them the necessity of baptism and officiated in that ordinance for all who repented of their sins. [Matt. 3:11.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:39-40.)

6:10

"Behold thou hast a gift"

"Oliver Cowdery's gift was the spirit of revelation (Section 8:3, 4), by which he could obtain knowledge of things divine. He also had the gift of Aaron. Aaron was the spokesman of Moses, and Oliver Cowdery became the first spokesman of the Prophet, or of the Church, when, on the 30th of April, 1830, he preached the first public discourse in this dispensation." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 35.)

6:16

"none else save God knowest thy thoughts"

Although Lucifer has a great deal of power, which he uses to tempt, deceive, and entice men, he does not have the power to read thoughts, as "there is none else save God that knowest thy thoughts and the intents of thy heart." The writings of Moses also indicate that Satan does not know the mind of God: "And Satan . . . knew not the mind of God, therefore he sought to destroy the world." (Moses 4:6.)

6:21

"I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God"

See Jesus Christ in Appendix A.

"Jesus Christ, our Lord, is the source of these Revelations. He is the Word, as well as the Redeemer of the world. He is the Light which shineth in darkness; not which shone formerly, but which now shineth. The Darkness is that condition of the world, which is unaffected by the light of divine revelation, because of the ignorance, superstition, and enmity of men. In that condition the world does not comprehend the light of revelation. That kind of darkness remains apart, unyielding, unpenetrated, now as in the day when John wrote his Gospel (John 1:5)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 36.)

6:22-24

"I have told you things which no man knoweth"

Inasmuch as only the Lord knows the "thoughts and the intents" of men (D&C 6:16), the Lord truly gave unto Oliver Cowdery a witness from Him when he reminded Oliver of thoughts and feelings that could only be known by the Lord and by Oliver himself.

"After we had received this revelation [Section 6], Oliver Cowdery stated to me that after he had gone to my father's to board, and after the family had communicated to him concerning my having obtained the plates, that one night after he had retired to bed he called upon the Lord to know if these things were so, and the Lord manifested to him that they were true, but he had kept the circumstances entirely secret, and had mentioned it to no one; so that after this revelation was given he knew that the work was true, because no being living knew of the thing alluded to in the revelation, but God and himself." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:35.)

6:25-28

Counsel for Oliver Cowdery

This revelation was received during the same month that Oliver Cowdery first started to serve as scribe for Joseph Smith in the translation of the Book of Mormon. As Oliver Cowdery witnessed the gift of translation being manifested through Joseph, it would seem only natural that he would wonder about the gift and desire it for himself. Here the Lord counsels Oliver to be patient and faithful to the opportunities that had been given to him, so that additional power could be given to him later to "assist in bringing to light" those scriptures or parts of scriptures that were then not available to the peoples of the earth. This reference evidently refers both to the Book of Mormon and to Joseph Smith's inspired version of the Bible.

6:25-27

"records which contain much of my gospel . . . have been kept back"

"It was in the summer of the year 1830 that the Lord called on Joseph Smith to commence his correction of the Bible. In June, the word of the Lord came to him that other scripture, in addition to the Book of Mormon, was to be given. This was according to the promise made to Oliver Cowdery and Joseph Smith as given in Section 6:25-27, in April, 1829. In June, 1830, the Prophet commenced to translate the words of Moses which were given to Moses when he was caught up into a high mountain where he talked with the Lord face to face. This vision of Moses is one of the most remarkable revelations given in this dispensation. It is published in the Pearl of Great Price." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:119.)

6:28

"in the mouth of two or three witnesses"

"Oliver Cowdery, whose reputation for honesty has never been questioned, was with Joseph Smith when John the Baptist came to restore the authority of the Aaronic Priesthood, and when Peter, James and John appeared to restore the Melchizedek Priesthood, and also when the foundation-laying revelations from spiritual beings, given at the time of the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, were received. [Sec. 13; 27:12-13; 110.] Of all these joint experiences, Oliver Cowdery often bore testimony.

"Sidney Rigdon, who was with Joseph Smith when the revelation called the Vision was received, bore testimony in diverse places to the glimpse at that time, with Joseph Smith, of heavenly personages, including the Lord himself. [Sec. 76:19-24.]" (John A. Widtsoe, JS, pp. 338-39.)

6:34

"if ye are built upon my rock"

For information on the term rock, see Rock in Appendix A.

6:34

"they cannot prevail"

"I remember reading, when a boy, a helpful passage from the Doctrine and Covenants. Let me read it here. As a lad I felt fear, sometimes of men, but more often of the dark outside forces. I often wondered if this persecuted people, after all, would be able to accomplish all that was pictured in its destiny. Then I found in my reading of the Doctrine and Covenants this passage which has been a joy and a help and a strength to me all my life, for the Lord said to his people in Harmony, Pennsylvania, before the Church was organized: [Sec. 6:34-37, quoted.]

"What do we care for the slanderer or the liar; what do we care for the enemy who arises to defeat our holy purposes? We have the truth, the mightiest weapon God has given to his people, and we shall win, in the end, if we do the things that God requires us to do." (John A. Widtsoe, CR, October 1923, p. 27.)

6:36

"doubt not, fear not"

"Keep courage. Do not feel sorry for yourselves. Whatever you do, do not feel sorry for yourselves. You live in a great age of opportunity. I remember the words of one very sharp and shrewd observer who said, 'Whenever I hear someone sigh and say that life is hard, I am tempted to ask "compared to what?"' What are the alternatives? No one ever promised us it would be easy. It is a schooling; it is an opportunity; it is a learning period, and a wonderful one. Despite all the disappointments and difficulties, the great and ultimate rewards are beyond price." (Richard L. Evans, CR, April 1961, p. 76.)

6:37

Behold my wounds

The reminder of the Savior to behold "the wounds which pierced my side, and also the prints of the nails in my hands and feet" is evidently meant here in a figurative sense only. There is no indication that the Savior actually, physically showed himself to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on this occasion. Rather, he is reminding them to be faithful in their callings, as was evident by the marks of the crucifixion.
