Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 7

Background information on section 7

One of the most frequently misunderstood chapters in all the scriptures is John 21, which tells of the appearance of the resurrected Jesus Christ on the shore of the Sea of Galilee. Verses 20-23 are particularly difficult:

Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee?

Peter seeing him saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do?

Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me.

Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? (John 21:20-23 )

Instead of simply wondering about these verses, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery asked the Lord concerning the exact status of John the Beloved, and they were privileged to read the words that were written by John himself concerning this incident. (D&C 7.)

Later on as they continued with the translation of the Book of Mormon, they received additional insights into the mission and condition of John. When the resurrected Jesus Christ appeared to his chosen twelve disciples among the descendants of Lehi and asked them to express their hearts' desire, he indicated to three of them, "Ye have desired the thing which John, my beloved, who was with me in my ministry, before that I was lifted up by the Jews, desired of me." (3 Ne. 28:6.)

The Savior then explained to them the promise he had made to John:

Therefore, more blessed are ye, for ye shall never taste of death; but ye shall live to behold all the doings of the Father unto the children of men, even until all things shall be fulfilled according to the will of the Father, when I shall come in my glory with the powers of heaven.

And ye shall never endure the pains of death; but when I shall come in my glory ye shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye from mortality to immortality; and then shall ye be blessed in the kingdom of my Father.

And again, ye shall not have pain while ye shall dwell in the flesh, neither sorrow save it be for the sins of the world; and all this will I do because of the thing which ye have desired of me, for ye have desired that ye might bring the souls of men unto me, while the world shall stand. (3 Ne. 28:7-9.)

Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery "inquired through the Urim and Thummim" as to what had happened to John, the beloved disciple. As a result of that inquiry, the truths contained in Section 7 were revealed to them. There is no indication that the actual parchment containing the writings of John was at any time physically in the hands of the Prophet. All things are possible unto God (Matt. 19:26), and surely the exact words of John's writings could have been revealed to Joseph Smith, even if the parchment no longer existed. As is indicated in a later revelation, all things "past, present, and future" are continually before the Lord. (D&C 130:7.)

"The question might be asked, whether the Prophet had actually seen the parchment written and hidden by John, or a copy of it; if so, where and when did he obtain it, and what became of it?

"The history of the Prophet does not furnish information on these subjects. But it is not necessary to suppose that the Prophet had St. John's parchment, or a copy of it, before him, when he received this Revelation. It was the contents of the document that were revealed. It was just as easy for the Spirit of the Lord to communicate the contents of that record to the Prophet, without the actual presence of it, as it would have been to enable him to understand the language in which John wrote it, whether Greek or Aramaean, which languages neither Joseph nor Oliver could have read, except by special divine interposition, even if they had had the manuscript before them. The miracle would have been practically the same. . . .

"There is, therefore, no difficulty in accepting the proposition that God could make the contents of John's parchment known to His Servants, whether the document was accessible to them or not. That John committed our Lord's last promise to him and Peter to writing is probable. It must have made a deep and lasting impression on him." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 40.)

"During the month of April I continued to translate, and he (Oliver Cowdery) to write, with little cessation, during which time we received several revelations. A difference of opinion arising between us about the account of John the Apostle, mentioned in the New Testament, as to whether he died or continued to live, we mutually agreed to settle it by the Urim and Thummim and the following is the word which we received: [Section 7 follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:35-36.)

7:1-8

The promise to John the Beloved

"From this revelation the conversation between our Lord and Peter recorded in the twenty-first chapter of John (verses 18-24), is clarified, and we know that John was blessed with the privilege of remaining on the earth until the second coming of Christ. This also explains the words of the Savior regarding some remaining until he should come to his kingdom. [Matt. 16:28.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:44.)

7:2

"power over death"

Latter-day Saints use the term translated being to refer to those special persons who have been given "power over death." This expression does not mean that these people will not die; rather it means that death will have no power over them until the time comes for them to die and then to be resurrected in the twinkling of an eye.

"Translated bodies cannot enter into rest until they have undergone a change equivalent to death. Translated bodies are designed for future missions." (Joseph Smith, HC 4:425.)

"Now the doctrine of translation is a power which belongs to this Priesthood. There are many things which belong to the powers of the Priesthood and the keys thereof, that have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world; they are hid from the wise and prudent to be revealed in the last times.

"Many have supposed that the doctrine of translation was a doctrine whereby men were taken immediately into the presence of God, and into an eternal fulness, but this is a mistaken idea. Their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order, and a place prepared for such characters he held in reserve to be ministering angels unto many planets, and who as yet have not entered into so great a fulness as those who are resurrected from the dead. 'Others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection.' (Heb. 11th chap., part of the 35th verse.)

"Now it was evident that there was a better resurrection, or else God would not have revealed it unto Paul. Wherein then, can it be said a better resurrection. This distinction is made between the doctrine of the actual resurrection and translation: translation obtains deliverance from the tortures and sufferings of the body, but their existence will prolong as to the labors and toils of the ministry, before they can enter into so great a rest and glory." (Joseph Smith, HC 4:425.)

"Mormon, in regarding the history of the labors of the Disciples of Christ, not only gives an excellent account of their ministry and powers, but also describes the fact that while the three who tarry will eventually have to be changed from mortality to immortality, they are not subject to pain, disease, and the ills of the flesh, and they have power over the elements. They also have the authority to minister to all the scattered tribes of Israel until Christ comes. (3 Nephi 28:8-40.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:48-49.)

7:3

"until I come in my glory"

"This expression is almost identical with that used by our Lord on another occasion, when He said, 'For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father. . . . Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom' (Matt. 16:28; Mark 9:1; Luke 9:27). Peter suffered martyrdom. . . James [and] many of the other Apostles were slain. John had 'power over death.' Tradition says that on one occasion he came unharmed from a cauldron of boiling oil; and that on another occasion he was a captive among a band of robbers, whose chieftain became converted through his preaching." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 41.)

7:3

"thou shalt . . . prophesy before nations"

"A great mission was given unto John because of his desire, and he is even now laboring as 'a flaming fire and a ministering angel, for those who are heirs of salvation.' In the tenth chapter of Revelation we read that John was given a little book by the angel and commanded to eat it up, which he did, and he said 'it was in my mouth sweet as honey; and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was bitter.' And the angel said by way of interpretation of this act: 'Thou must prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings.' When this mission was given, John was an old man far beyond the allotted years of three score and ten. In answer to a question as to the meaning of this vision of the book, the Prophet Joseph Smith said: It was a mission and an ordinance for John to gather the tribes of Israel. (D&C 77:14.) At a conference of the Church, held June, 1831, Joseph Smith said 'that John the Revelator was then among the ten tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion.' (History of the Church 1:176; Essentials in Church History, p. 126.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:48.)

"He [John the Beloved] 'prophesied before nations, kindred, tongues and people' through the Book of Revelation, in which the history of the world, as committed to the records of heaven before the foundations of the world were laid, is outlined. He prophesied more particularly about the general apostasy (Rev. 9:20, 21; 13:1-18); and the restoration of the Gospel (10:1-11; 14:1-3)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 41.)

7:5-6

The desire of John the Beloved

The Savior's statement to Peter that John "has desired that he might do more, or a greater work yet among men than what he has before done" compares the worth of John's future work and mission to that which John had already accomplished. It does not necessarily compare the importance of John's future mission with the importance of Peter's future mission.

7:6

"I will make him . . . a ministering angel"

"John received the promise that he would be a 'ministering angel' for the benefit of the heirs of salvation on earth. The bishops of the seven Asiatic churches are addressed as angels, and the inference is that it was a common title at that time of all bishops, in Europe and Africa, as well as Asia. The word angel means messenger. It is almost synonymous with the word apostle, which also means messenger." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 41.)

"When the Prophet Joseph [Smith] had finished the endowments of the First Presidency, the Twelve and the Presiding Bishops, the First Presidency proceeded to lay hands upon each one of them to seal and confirm the anointing; and at the close of each blessing the whole of the quorums responded to it with a loud shout of Hosanna! Hosanna! etc. [in the Kirtland Temple.] While these things were being attended to, the beloved disciple John was seen in our midst by the Prophet Joseph, Oliver Cowdery and others." (Heber C. Kimball, LHCK, pp. 91-92.)

7:6-7

Peter shall minister for heirs of salvation and for James and John

The word minister in verse 7 does not mean that Peter will serve "under the direction of" James and John, nor does the same word in verse 6 mean that John will be directed by those who are heirs of salvation. In both instances minister means "to administer to, or help to meet the needs of." That Peter was the presiding apostle under Christ is made abundantly clear in both ancient and modern scriptures. (See Matt. 16:18-19; John 21:15-19; Acts 1:15-26; 2:14, 37-42; Gal. 1:18; D&C 27:12; 49:11; 128:10, 20.)

7:7

"unto you three I will give this power"

The Savior in New Testament times frequently selected the same three apostles (Peter, James, and John) to accompany him on sacred occasions. They were present with the Savior on the Mount of Transfiguration (Matt. 17:1-8; Mark 9:2-8; Luke 9:28-36) and were invited to be near him during his experiences in the Garden of Gethsemane (Matt. 26:37-46; Mark 14:32-42).

In this revelation (D&C 7:7), the Savior indicates that he has given to Peter, James, and John the "keys" of his ministry until he comes. When John the Baptist later restored the Aaronic Priesthood (D&C 13), he specifically stated that he was acting under the direction of Peter, James, and John. (See HC 1:39 and D&C 27:7-8, 12.)

Soon after the appearance of John the Baptist, the three ancient apostles—Peter, James, and John—appeared and ordained Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery "to be apostles" and bestowed upon them the keys of the ministry of Christ. (See D&C 27:12; 128:20, and HC 1:40-43.)
