Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 8

Background information on section 8

"Whilst continuing the work of translation, during the month of April, Oliver Cowdery became exceedingly anxious to have the power to translate bestowed upon him, and in relation to this desire the following revelations were obtained: [Sections 8 and 9, follow.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:36.)

8:1

"you shall receive a knowledge of the engravings of old records"

"At this time the Lord seemed perfectly willing that Oliver Cowdery as well as Joseph Smith should engage in this labor of translating the plates, and he gave in some detail what qualifications are necessary for the reception of knowledge by revelation and also the procedure necessary in translating ancient records. Oliver was informed that this power could not be received except by the exercise of faith with an honest heart, and by this faith, knowledge of the ancient records and their engravings should be made known." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:46.)

8:2, 3

"the spirit of revelation"

The Lord here defines for Oliver Cowdery (and for the whole world, through the publication of this revelation) the "spirit of revelation": ". . . I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart" (D&C 8:2). Thus revelation, as with prophecy, comes not by the will of men, but holy men speak as they are "moved by the Holy Ghost." (2 Pet. 1:21.)

See Revelation in Appendix A.

"I will read a portion of a revelation given through the Prophet Joseph Smith, previous to the organization of the Church, dated April 1829:[Sec. 8:1-3, quoted.] . . . The same Spirit of revelation that Moses had, concerning which God speaks through the Prophet Joseph Smith, has rested upon men that have held the keys of this kingdom, whether it was during President [Brigham] Young's life or at the present time—that same Spirit of revelation rests upon him who holds the presidency as senior apostle in the midst of the people of God. The apostles of this Church have all the authority, they have all the keys, and it is within the preview of their office and calling to have all the Spirit of revelation necessary to lead this people into the presence of the Lamb in the celestial kingdom of our God. . . .

"But it is the truth, that the same Spirit of revelation that rested upon Moses, and which enabled him to lead the children of Israel through the Red Sea [Ex. 14:26-31; Heb. 11:29], rests upon the servants of God in the midst of this people, and you will find it so to your entire satisfaction if you will listen to their counsels and be guided by them." (George Q. Cannon, JD 21:264, 271.)

8:3-5

"the spirit of revelation . . . is thy gift"

"The Lord placed great emphasis on the necessity of holding sacred the gifts of God. Oliver had a gift (Sec. 8:3-4), even that of revelation, but he was admonished to receive it in humility and with a contrite spirit. All who receive gifts of the Spirit should do so with a humble spirit. The gifts are sacred and we should hold them so, and 'trifle not with sacred things.' [Sec. 6:12.] . . . His gifts are holy, sacred, and all who receive them should remember from whence they come and for what they are to be used. [Sec. 46:9-10.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:40.)

"The gift of revelation promised to Oliver Cowdery was to be a protection to him, if he would need it, and it would deliver him out of the hands of his enemies, and protect him from the destroyer. This the Lord endeavored to impress upon him by saying: 'Oh, remember these words, and keep my commandments. Remember this is your gift.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:52.)

8:4

"if it were not so, they would slay you"

This warning by the Lord would seem to indicate that if Oliver Cowdery had not responded to the spirit of revelation, he would probably have been killed in a state of apostasy. Oliver later resisted the spirit of revelation enough that he apostatized from the faith, though he was later rebaptized and joined again with the Church. For further information on the later life of Oliver Cowdery, see Oliver Cowdery in Appendix B.

8:6-8

"you have another gift . . . the gift of Aaron"

"There was another gift bestowed upon Oliver Cowdery, and that was the gift of Aaron. Like Aaron with his rod in his hand going before Moses as a spokesman, so Oliver Cowdery was to go before Joseph Smith. Whatever he should ask the Lord by power of this gift should be granted if asked in faith and in wisdom. Oliver was blessed with the great honor of holding the keys of this dispensation with Joseph Smith, and like Aaron [Ex. 4:10-17], did become a spokesman on numerous occasions. It was Oliver who delivered the first public discourse in this dispensation." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:48.)

"Oliver Cowdery also had the 'gift of Aaron.' Aaron was the elder brother of Moses. Being prompted by the Spirit of the Lord, he met his younger brother in the wilderness and accompanied him to Egypt. He introduced him to the children of Israel in the land of Goshen. He was his spokesman before Pharaoh, and he assisted him in opening up the dispensation which Moses was commissioned to proclaim (Exodus 4:27-31). This was the gift of Aaron. In some respects Oliver Cowdery was the Aaron of the new and last dispensation." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 44.)

8:12

The Lord speaks again to Oliver Cowdery

The statement by the Lord to Oliver Cowdery that He is "the same that spake unto you from the beginning" evidently refers to the night when Oliver Cowdery had cried unto the Lord in his heart that he might know "concerning the truth of these things." (See D&C 6:22-23 and HC 1:35.)
