Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 9

Background information on section 9

Although this revelation was given for the specific benefit of Oliver Cowdery, everyone who reads it might well learn the principle and apply it to himself: each should perform well the assignment given him by the Lord and should not seek to do the work of another unless he is asked to do so.

Oliver had been called to serve as a scribe for Joseph Smith, who had been given the responsibility for translating the Book of Mormon. (D&C 1:29.) It was the Lord's desire that Oliver continue with his work as scribe until the translation of the Book of Mormon was finished (9:1); then the Lord promised Oliver that He would give him power to assist in the translation of other records (9:2-3).

Oliver became impatient and tried to translate on his own. The remainder of the revelation is the explanation of the Lord to Oliver concerning this failure.

"It seems probable that Oliver Cowdery desired to translate out of curiosity, and the Lord taught him his place by showing him that translating was not the easy thing he had thought it to be. In a subsequent revelation (Sec. 9), the explanation was made that Oliver's failure came because he did not continue as he commenced, and the task being a difficult one, his faith deserted him. The lesson he learned was very necessary, for he was shown that his place was to act as scribe for Joseph Smith and that it was the latter who was called and appointed by command of the Lord to do the translating. There must have been some impatience in having to sit and act as scribe, but when he failed to master the gift of translating, he was then willing to accept the will of the Lord." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:50-51.)

9:2

"other records"

"The Lord told him that he was to continue as scribe until the translation of the Book of Mormon was completed, and that there were other ancient records to come forth, and that he might have the privilege of translating these at some future day if he would remain faithful. We learn from the Book of Mormon that there are many records and that at some time when the people are prepared by faith to receive them that they shall also be translated and published for the knowledge and salvation of the faithful. (2 Ne. 27:7-8; 3 Ne. 26:6-11; Ether 3:22-28 and 4:5-7.)

"Later there came into the hands of the Prophet other records which had to be translated, such as the Book of Abraham, but these records of ancient inhabitants on this American continent were not translated. It is possible that some of them might have been translated had the people received the Book of Mormon with full purpose of heart and had been faithful to its teachings. This was the promise the Lord made through Mormon. He said he would try the faith of the people and if they were willing to accept the lesser things (i.e., the Book of Mormon), then he would make known to them the greater things. That we have failed in this is very apparent, we have not accepted the revelations in the Book of Mormon, neither in the Doctrine and Covenants with that faith and willingness to know the will of the Lord which would entitle us to receive this greater information. Oliver Cowdery was a party to this failure by turning away from the Church for a number of years when it needed his service. He therefore lost his privilege to translate through his own disobedience, and the people have lost the privilege of receiving the 'greater things' spoken of by the Lord to Mormon (3 Nephi 26:8-11) until the day shall come when they are willing to be obedient in all things and will exercise faith such as was had by the brother of Jared. It should be remembered that such faith has rarely been seen on the earth. It appears, therefore, that we must wait until the reign of unrighteousness is at an end before the Lord will give to the people these writings, containing 'a revelation from God, from the beginning of the world to the ending thereof.' [2 Ne. 27:7.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:48-49.)

"When Joseph got the plates, the angel instructed him to carry them back to the hill Cumorah, which he did. Oliver says that when Joseph and Oliver went there, the hill opened, and they walked into a cave, in which there was a large and spacious room. He says he did not think, at the time, whether they had the light of the sun, or artificial light; but it was just as light as day. They laid the plates on a table; it was a large table that stood in the room. Under this table there was a pile of plates as much as two feet high, and there were altogether in this room more plates than, probably, many wagon loads; they were piled up in the corners and along the walls. The first time they went there, the sword of Laban hung upon the wall; but when they went again, it had been taken down and laid upon the table across the gold plates; it was unsheathed, and on it were written these words, 'This sword will never be sheathed again until the kingdoms of this world become the kingdom of our God and His Christ.' I take the liberty of referring to those things so that they will not be forgotten and lost.

"Now, you may think I am unwise in publicly telling these things, thinking, perhaps, I should preserve them in my own breast; but such is not in my mind. I would like the people called Latter-day Saints to understand some little things with regard to the workings and dealings of the Lord with His people here upon the earth. I could relate to you a great many more, all of which are familiar to many of our brethren and sisters." (Brigham Young, JD 19:38.)

9:7-9

"you must study it out in your mind"

Spiritual effort, as well as mental and physical effort, was required in order to translate the sacred records of the Book of Mormon. Oliver Cowdery thought that all he needed to do in order to translate was to ask the Lord, but here he is told that he must also "study it out" in his mind as well as to ask the Lord whether or not it is right. The Lord also gives Oliver a key so that he will know when the translation is right: his bosom shall burn within him.

"With a glad heart Oliver took over the work of translating, and the Prophet Joseph was ready to act as scribe. The attempt was a failure; it seems that Oliver Cowdery thought that it would be an easy matter with the aid of the Urim and Thummim to understand the engravings and give their equivalent meaning in the English language, without taking thought or studying it out in his mind. He therefore failed to comprehend the instructions the Lord had given him, notwithstanding the Lord told him he should have the gift of revelation." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:49.)

9:8

"your bosom shall burn within you"

"A similar privilege is given to any member of the Church who seeks knowledge in the spirit of prayer and faith. The Lord will cause the feeling of security and truth to take hold of the individual and burn within the bosom, and there will be an overwhelming feeling that the thing is right. Missionaries have felt the manifestation of this gift while laboring in the field; when searching the scriptures; when speaking before congregations on the streets and in public gatherings. When you have been listening to some inspired speaker who has presented a new thought to you, have you not felt that burning within and the satisfaction in your heart that this new thought is true? On the other hand, have you experienced the feeling of stupor, gloom, or uneasiness when some thought has been presented which was in conflict with the revealed word of the Lord, and you have felt by this manifestation of the Spirit that what was said is not true? It is a great gift, which all may receive, to have this spirit of discernment, or revelation, for it is the spirit of revelation. . . . The better our understanding of the scriptures and the more diligent we are in the service of the Lord, the better will we comprehend this truth and have this gift bestowed upon us. . . . We have a sure word by which we may be guided in these matters, and that is faithful, prayerful obedience to the commandments of the Lord." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:52.)

"There is a key given in the ninth section of the book of Doctrine and Covenants, which would be very profitable for the Latter-day Saints to follow even now. [D&C 9:8-9 quoted.]

"You do not know what to do today to solve your financial problems, what to plant, whether to buy or sell cattle, sheep or other things. It is your privilege to study it out; counsel together with the best wisdom and judgment the Lord shall give you, reach your conclusions, and then go to the Lord with it, tell him what you have planned to do. If the thing you have planned to do is for your good and your blessing, and you are determined to serve the Lord, pay your tithes and your offerings and keep his commandments, I promise that he will fulfil that promise upon your head, and your bosom shall burn within by the whisperings of the Spirit that it is right. But if it is not right, you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought, and your heart will be turned away from that thing.

"I know of nothing today that the Latter-day Saints need more than the guidance of the Holy Spirit in the solution of the problems of life." (Melvin J. Ballard, CR, April 1931, pp. 37-38.)

"It is impossible to advance in the principles of truth, to increase in heavenly knowledge, except we exercise our reasoning faculties and exert ourselves in a proper manner. We have an instance recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants of a misunderstanding on the part of Oliver Cowdery, touching this principle. . . . [D&C 9:7-8 quoted.]

"So in regard to us, respecting the things which we are undertaking, if we expect to improve, to advance in the work immediately before us, and finally to obtain possession of those gifts and glories, coming up to that condition of exaltation we anticipate, we must take thought and reflect, we must exert ourselves, and that to the utmost of our ability." (Lorenzo Snow, JD 18:371-72.)

9:12

"I have given . . . Joseph sufficient strength"

As the prophet Nephi observed many centuries before, "the Lord giveth no commandment unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them." (1 Ne. 3:7.) The application of this principle is evident in the translation of the plates of the Book of Mormon by Joseph Smith. Although the Prophet was relatively unlearned by worldly standards and had not formally studied ancient languages, yet he succeeded in translating the Book of Mormon by the gift and power of God and through the use of the Urim and Thummim.

As indicated in this revelation, the Lord had given Oliver Cowdery the right to translate part of the record. When Oliver failed in his attempts, the Lord gave unto his "servant Joseph sufficient strength, whereby it is made up." Thus, the total responsibility for translation was left with Joseph.

9:14

"a hair of your head shall not be lost"

This descriptive expression indicates that the Lord is aware of everything we do. It is used one time in the New Testament (Luke 21:18) and four times in the Doctrine and Covenants (9:14; 29:25; 84:8, 116).
