Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 10

Background information on section 10

"This Revelation should be read in connection with Sec. 3.

"As soon as the 116 pages of manuscript had been lost through the carelessness of Martin Harris, the Urim and Thummim was taken from the Prophet. The sacred instrument was restored after a short time, and the Revelation in Section 3, especially rebuking Martin Harris, was received. Then both the plates and the Urim and Thummim were removed for a few days. It was necessary that the young Prophet should learn the lesson that he was entirely dependent on the Lord. When they were restored, he received the Revelation in Section 10, containing instructions to himself with regard to the lost portion of the manuscript. (See Footnote, HC 1:23.)" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 49.)

"After I had obtained the above revelation [Section 3], both the plates and the Urim and Thummim were taken from me again; but in a few days they were returned to me, when I inquired of the Lord, and the Lord said thus unto me: [Section 10, follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:23.)

10:1

"Urim and Thummim"

For information on the Urim and Thummim, see Urim and Thummim in Appendix A.

10:1

Martin Harris "a wicked man"

Martin Harris is herein designated as a "wicked man" because he broke his covenant with the Lord that he would show the 116 pages of manuscript to only five persons. This disobedience also caused the Angel Moroni to reclaim the plates of Mormon and the Urim and Thummim from Joseph Smith, which in turn caused him to lose the gift of translation, and thus his mind became darkened. Therefore, the Lord said to Joseph Smith that Martin Harris was "a wicked man, for he has sought to take away the things wherewith you have been entrusted; and he has also sought to destroy your gift." (10:7.)

For additional information on why Martin Harris was called a "wicked man," read the material for 3:12-13. Also, read the biographical sketch of Martin Harris in Appendix B.

10:4

"Do not run faster or labor more than you have strength"

"The scriptural advice, 'Do not run faster or labor more than you have strength' (D&C 10:4) suggests paced progress, much as God used seven creative periods in preparing man and this earth. There is a difference, therefore, between being 'anxiously engaged' and being over-anxious and thus under-engaged." (Neal A. Maxwell, Ensign, November 1976, pp. 12-13.)

10:5, 10-33, 63

Satan exists

The revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants clearly and consistently teach the reality of Satan (the devil; Lucifer) and warn against his nefarious teachings and practices. (As examples, see also 19:3; 24:1; 28:11; 40:2; 50:3; 53:12, 14; 63:28; 64:17; 132:57.) Even before this revelation was received in the summer of 1828, Joseph Smith had felt the evil influence and power of Satan.

The Prophet's first recorded direct experiences with evil forces were immediately before his first vision in the spring of 1820:

After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desire of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction.

But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction—not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being—just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me.

It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. (JS-H 1:15-17.)

The attacks of Satan and his followers against the Prophet, the gospel, the restored scriptures, and the baptized members of the Church have been almost constant since that time. Within a few days of the first vision, the persecution and hatred toward Joseph Smith started. His recollections of these events are recorded in the Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith—History 1:22-25 (also known as Joseph Smith 2).

For additional information on Satan, see Satan in Appendix A.

10:10-31

"they say and think in their hearts"

The Lord, who knows all things, including thoughts and the intents of the heart (D&C 6:16), here explains the evil designs of those who have stolen the 116 pages of manuscript. They intend to withhold their purloined copy of the translation until Joseph Smith has retranslated the same pages. Then they intend to alter the words of the earlier translation and try to convince others that Joseph Smith is a liar when he pretends to translate, for they would claim he cannot translate the same way twice. Thus, the plan of Satan was to "overpower" the testimony of the Prophet so "that the work may not come forth in this generation." (D&C 10:33.) However, the Lord truly did show unto the world that his "wisdom is greater than the cunning of the devil" (D&C 10:43) by providing for the alternate record of the small plates of Nephi to be translated. (See information for D&C 3:1 and 10:38-42.)

10:29

"to get thee to tempt the Lord thy God"

"To pray for a translation of 116 written pages, word for word the same as the missing portion, would be 'tempting' the Lord. It would be asking for a miracle as great as that by which Satan suggested that our Lord prove his Divine commission, which suggestion Christ declined by quoting Deut. 6:16, 'Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God' (Matt. 4:5-7). If we expect God to perform miracles in our behalf, when we bring trouble upon ourselves by disobedience, we 'tempt' God." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 53.)

10:38-42

"translate the engravings which are on the plates of Nephi"

When Nephi, the son of Lehi, was first commanded by the Lord to write a record on plates, he prepared and started to write on the large plates of Nephi. (1 Ne. 19:1-4.) Later he was commanded by the Lord to make a second set of plates (which later became known as the small plates of Nephi) and to engrave on them "an account . . . of the ministry" of his people. (1 Ne. 9:3.) He was obedient to this command, even though he confessed he did not understand the purpose thereof. (1 Ne. 9:5.) It was sufficient for him to know that the Lord wanted the second record "for a wise purpose in him" and that "the Lord knoweth all things from the beginning; wherefore, he prepareth a way to accomplish all his works among the children of men." (1 Ne. 9:5-6.)

At least one of the purposes the Lord had in mind for this second record is made clear in the events leading up to this revelation.

The plates Joseph Smith received from the angel Moroni were the plates of Mormon, which contained Mormon's abridgment of the large plates of Nephi (see 3 Ne. 5:8-10; Mormon 2:17-18; 5:9), including an abridgment of Nephi's writings that were evidently included in the book of Lehi. The Prophet's translation of Mormon's abridgment of the book of Lehi, comprising 116 pages of manuscript, was subsequently lost by Martin Harris. (See HC 1:20-22.)

In this revelation (section 10), the Lord instructs Joseph Smith not to retranslate the abridgement of the book of Lehi, but to translate the small plates of Nephi in their stead. Thus, the earlier "wise purpose of the Lord" is at least partially made manifest.

10:45

"translate this first part of the engravings of Nephi"

"The Prophet Nephi kept a record of the sacred history of his people on what he was pleased to call the small plates which he had made. The historians who followed him continued that history down to the reign of King Benjamin, when the plates of this record were full. When Mormon was making his abridgment the Lord inspired him to attach these 'small plates' to his abridgment. He did not know why, only that the Spirit whispered to him to do so. [W of M 3-7.] The Lord, who knows the end from the beginning, thus prepared for the loss of the abridged record which was given to Martin Harris. Mormon therefore had a double account of the early history of his people from the time of the call of Lehi from Jerusalem down to the end of the writings of Amaleki, the last to write on the small plates of Nephi. The Lord, thus knowing that the manuscript covering this period of history would be stolen in the manner described, provided the better record to take the place of the abridgment. He denied Joseph Smith the privilege of translating the abridgment the second time, and thus prevented him from falling into the trap set by his enemies, but commanded him to translate the small plates giving the full account as kept by the early prophets and scribes." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:28-29.)

10:45-51

Promises to the holy prophets of the Lehites

The Lord had promised many of the prophets and leaders of the Lehite civilization (the Nephites and Lamanites of the Book of Mormon) that their records would come forth in later generations to their descendants. A partial listing of these promises include the promises to:

Lehi (and Joseph who was sold into Egypt)—2 Ne. 3:6-23.

Nephi —1 Ne. 9:1-6; 13:35-41; 19:1-6, 18; 2 Ne. 11:2-3; 25:7-8; 26:16-17; 28:1-2; 29:11; 33:10-15.

Jacob —Jacob 1:1-8; 4:1-4.

Enos —1:12-18.

Jarom—1:1-2.

Mormon— W of M 1:1-6; Morm. 5:8-13; 7:9.

Moroni — Morm. 8:14-16, 25-35; 9:36-37; Moro. 10:24, 27-29.

Note also the general promise of the Lord in 2 Nephi 29:8-14 that there will be three great scriptural witnesses of the last days which will testify of each other.

"The Lord makes known that the Nephite prophets in prayer earnestly sought that their writings should be preserved to come forth and to speak as from the dead, to bear witness to the remnant of Lehi, and also the Jews and Gentiles, that God had revealed to them the fulness of the Gospel. Their anxiety was that in these last days men might be brought to repentance and faith in God through the testimony given many centuries before to these Nephite prophets. In fact, we learn from the Book of Mormon that this is the main object of the Book of Mormon as stated in many of its passages." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR l:29.)

"Nephi made two records. In one he preserved an account of his father Lehi's life and genealogy, and the history of his people. This history was continued for many generations, by historians, such as Mosiah, Alma, Helaman, etc. The Prophet Mormon made an abridgment from this vast amount of historical material. The Prophet Joseph translated this abridgment, and it was the first part of that translation which was lost.

"But Nephi also made another record. In this he preserved an account of events connected with the departure of his father from Jerusalem and their landing in America. This history was continued for 400 years, down to the reign of King Benjamin. It was chiefly an ecclesiastical history.

"The Prophet Mormon found these 'smaller plates' of Nephi and attached them to his own abridgment of the 'larger plates.' And thus there was a double line of history of the Nephites for 400 years. The Prophet Mormon says he added the smaller plates to his abridgment 'for a wise purpose (Mormon 1:7), 'for thus it whispereth me, according to the working of the Spirit of the Lord which is in me,' and Nephi says he made those smaller plates in obedience to a commandment of God, given for some reason unknown to him (1 Ne. 9:5)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 54-55.)

10:48

"and also all that had become Lamanites"

Some readers of the Book of Mormon have erroneously assumed that all the blood descendants of Nephi and his followers were destroyed in the great battles of A.D. 363 to 385. (Morm. 4-6.) Thus they have wrongly believed that only the blood descendants of Laman survived this great destruction.

In his writings, Moroni suggests that those Nephites who were willing to deny Christ were spared and joined with the Lamanites. (Moro. 1:2-3.) Also, during the golden age of the people of Lehi after the appearance of the resurrected Jesus Christ, there were no people known as "Lamanites nor any manner of-ites." (4 Ne. 17.) The people who later were known as Lamanites were descendants of the group of people "who had revolted from the Church" in A.D. 194 "and taken upon them the name of Lamanites." (4 Ne. 20.) The record later states that in A.D. 231 "the true worshipers of Christ . . . were called Nephites. . . . And . . . they who rejected the gospel were called Lamanites." (4 Ne. 36-38.)

Therefore, the Lamanites of the last great battles were descendants of those who revolted against the true church of Christ between about A.D. 194 and 231. They might be actual blood descendants of Nephi, Jacob, Joseph, or Sam, as well as Laman, Lemuel, or the sons of Ishamel.

In this revelation the Lord thus refers to "the Lamanites, and also all that had become Lamanites because of their dissensions." (10:48.) (For further information on this subject, see the material listed after D&C 3:16-20.)

10:59

"Other sheep I have which are not of this fold"

The reference that Jesus made to his disciples concerning his "other sheep" is recorded in John 10:16. Concerning this scripture, Elder LeGrand Richards has written:

"A writer on the life of Christ has indicated that he would find no excuse for this passage of scripture, since he knew of no other sheep except those to whom Jesus ministered. Some have explained that it must have been the Gentiles, but Jesus indicated: '. . . I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.' (Matt. 15:24.)

"It should be noted that Jesus did not minister unto the Gentiles, although he did send his Apostles unto them after his crucifixion. [Matt. 28:19-20.]

"After Jesus had been crucified and had ascended unto his Father, he visited his 'other sheep' in America, known as the Nephites, and there chose twelve disciples and organized his Church, as he had done among the Jews, an account of which is given in some detail in Third Nephi of the Book of Mormon. [3 Ne. 15:11-24.]" (LeGrand Richards, MWW, pp. 51-52.)

"The words of the Lord to his disciples as written in the tenth chapter of John, verse sixteen, is one of the passages, with a hidden meaning to the teachers in the sectarian world. Some commentators, like the Jewish disciples, think the Lord was speaking of the Gentiles, but they fail to understand that the Lord said he was not sent to the Gentiles, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. It was not until after his resurrection that he commissioned his disciples to go into all the world and preach the Gospel. While he was with them and when he sent them forth into the cities and villages where he intended later to go, he expressly commanded them that they were not to go 'into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans . . . but rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.' He also told the woman of Canaan who came to him seeking a blessing, 'I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.'

"When Jesus appeared to the Nephites he told them that they were the other sheep of whom he had spoken to his disciples in Palestine, but because of their unbelief he was forbidden by his Father to tell them more. To the Nephites he made it very plain that not only were they of the 'other sheep,' but there were still others, including the ten lost tribes, who would also hear his voice, and eventually, when the gathering of Israel is complete, these other members of the house of Israel who were scattered would be gathered and bring their records with them. In that day the records of the Jews and of the Nephites and also the other tribes of the house of Israel, which he had led away, should join their records, and these scattered and punished people would be gathered home unto the lands of their possessions and then he would remember his covenant with Abraham and once again they would be his people and forever. (See 2 Ne. 29; 3 Ne. 15 and 16.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:32.)

10:62-63

The Book of Mormon to restore true doctrines

The Lord indicates here another purpose for the publication of the Book of Mormon: "to bring to light the true points of my doctrine."

The essentials of the gospel of Jesus Christ were taught by the Savior to the Jews and were contained in records that are now known as the New Testament. The prophet Nephi, the first writer in the present Book of Mormon, saw in a vision nearly 600 B.C. that many of the "plain and . . . precious" parts of the gospel were to be taken out of the Jewish scriptures—the Bible. (1 Ne. 13:2-26.) The Lord told Nephi that he would be "merciful unto the Gentiles" in that he would "bring forth unto them, in mine own power, much of my gospel, which shall be plain and precious, saith the Lamb." (1 Ne 13:34.)

In this revelation (D&C 10:46-49, 62-63), the Lord indicates that he is fulfilling his promise to the ancient prophets by including in the Book of Mormon "all those parts of my gospel which my holy prophets, yea, and also my disciples, desired in their prayers should come forth unto this people." (D&C 10:46.)

10:63

"they do wrest the scriptures"

One meaning of the word wrest is "to direct to an unnatural or improper use"; another meaning is "to deflect or change from a true or normal bearing, significance, or interpretation." Thus, persons who "wrest" the scriptures place a meaning upon the words that was not intended by the Lord who gave the scriptures. As Peter has indicated, "No prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation." (2 Pet. 1:20.)

"One of the reasons people apostatize from this Church is that they have failed to heed the warning of the scriptures against listening to false teachers who raise their voices in our midst. [Sec. 45:5-6; 2 Nephi 28:20-31.] In spite of the fact that these warnings of the scriptures are crystal clear, many of our people fail to heed them.

"How do these false teachers lead people astray? They do so by attacking the fundamental doctrines of the Church. [Sec. 52:9, 14-20, 36.) They attack the teachings of the Authorities. They seek to develop doctrinal disputes among the people to undermine their faith, and they lead people to apostasy when they do such things as that. Very often false teachers who have come among us endeavor to justify their position by claiming to have received some revelation or dream directing them, they say, in the paths which they tread. . . .

"Remember, too, the Savior told the Prophet Joseph Smith that it is Satan who 'doth stir up the hearts of the people to contention concerning the points of doctrine,' and that when individuals put themselves in the hands of Satan in doing these things 'they do err, for they do wrest the scriptures and do not understand them.' " (Mark E. Petersen, CR, October 1945, pp. 88, 92.)

10:65

"as a hen gathereth chickens under her wings"

This descriptive expression reflects the great love and concern of the Lord for his people. It is found in three sections of the Doctrine and Covenants: 10:65, 29:2, and 43:24.

"Remember that powerful truth found in Matthew 23:37:

'. . . how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!' With your indulgence, I would like to repeat that quotation once more and add just two words of admonition: '. . . how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not help me!' How many of us are actively helping the Lord gather his flock?" (Marvin J. Ashton, Ensign, December 1971, p. 101.)

10:68

"Whosoever declareth more or less than this . . . is not of me"

"There is no need of this people being called together to change the Articles of their Faith, or their creed, for that which they have received is not of man, but from God. . . . This is a grand difference between the work of man and the work of God. [Sec. 88:66-67; 93:24-25.] That which is of man must be modified and changed to meet the demands of various ages in which mankind live, but that which is of God will endure, as the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith, has endured the scrutiny of critics, the discoveries and the light of science in our day and time." (Abraham O. Woodruff, CR, October 1901, p. 53 )

10:69

"endureth to the end"

See Endure to the end in Appendix A.

10:69

"my rock"

See Rock in Appendix A.

10:69

"the gates of hell"

See Hell in Appendix A.

10:70

"life and light of the world"

See Light in Appendix A.
