Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 11

Background information on section 11

Joseph Smith recorded the following account of the events that followed shortly after he and Oliver Cowdery had received the Aaronic Priesthood and had been baptized on May 15, 1829:

Our minds being now enlightened, we began to have the Scriptures laid open to our understandings, and the true meaning and intention of their more mysterious passages revealed unto us in a manner which we never could attain to previously, nor ever before had thought of. In the meantime we were forced to keep secret the circumstances of having received the Priesthood and our having been baptized, owing to a spirit of persecution which had already manifested itself in the neighborhood. . . .

After a few days, however, feeling it to be our duty, we commenced to reason out of the Scriptures with our acquaintances and friends, as we happened to meet with them. About this time my brother Samuel H. Smith came to visit us. . . .

Not many days afterwards, my brother Hyrum Smith came to us to inquire concerning these things, when at his earnest request, I inquired of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim, and received for him the following: [Section 11 follows.] (Joseph Smith, HC 1:43-45.)

11:1-9

Blessing for Hyrum Smith

These introductory verses of the blessing of Hyrum Smith are virtually word-for-word the same as the blessing given the previous month to Oliver Cowdery, which is recorded in section 6.

For information concerning the terms and expressions of these first nine verses, read the materials listed for the corresponding verses in section 6. The remainder of the blessing to Hyrum varies considerably from the latter part of the blessing to Oliver.

11:10

"thou hast a gift"

"The Lord declared that Hyrum Smith had a gift. The great gift which he possessed was that of a tender, sympathetic heart, a merciful spirit. The Lord on a later occasion said: 'Blessed is my servant Hyrum Smith; for I, the Lord, love him because of the integrity of his heart, and because he loveth that which is right before me, saith the Lord.' (D&C 124:15.) This great gift was manifest in his jealous watch-care over the Prophet lest some harm come to him." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:52.)

11:11

"I am the light which shineth in darkness"

See Light in Appendix A.

11:13

"my Spirit. . . shall enlighten your mind"

"There is a way by which persons can keep their consciences clear before God and man, and that is to preserve within them the Spirit of God, which is the spirit of revelation to every man and woman. It will reveal to them, even in the simplest of matters, what they shall do, by making suggestions to them. We should try to learn the nature of this spirit, that we may understand its suggestions, and then we will always be able to do right. This is the grand privilege of every Latter-day Saint. We know that it is our right to have the manifestations of the spirit every day of our lives. . . .

"From the time we receive the Gospel, go down into the waters of baptism, and have hands laid upon us afterwards for the gift of the Holy Ghost, we have a friend, if we do not drive it from us by doing wrong. That friend is the Holy Spirit, the Holy Ghost, which partakes of the things of God and shows them unto us. This is a grand means that the Lord has provided for us, that we may know the light, and not be groveling continually in the dark. [Sec. 88:66-68.]" (Lorenzo Snow, CR, April 1899, p. 52.)

11:13, 16-26

Preparing for missionary service

The Lord here teaches Hyrum Smith several steps to be followed in preparing for a mission:

The Lord indicates further that these suggestions are for "all who have good desires" to serve. (11:27.)

11:15-17

"you need not suppose that you are called to preach until you are called"

God is a God of order, so even though a person might have the desire to preach the gospel, he still needs to be called of God by one having authority before he can legally and officially represent the Lord. The Lord therefore counsels Hyrum Smith to prepare to give missionary service, but not to "suppose that you are called to preach until you are called." (11:15.) "Hyrum Smith had a desire to engage in public speaking, as a minister. It was, therefore, necessary to correct certain prevalent errors concerning preaching, for the benefit of the little circle of friends who, under divine guidance, now were laying the foundations of the Church. One of these errors was the assumption that a minister can prove that he has divine authority, by quoting the commission of our Lord to His first Apostles. The Lord therefore instructs His servant not to suppose that he is sent to preach until he is actually called, as were the Twelve." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 63.)

"It is quite the common thing in the world for men to assume authority and to act in the name of the Lord when he has not called them. No man is authorized to act in the name of the Lord, or to officiate in any ordinance, unless he has been properly called. For this reason the Priesthood was restored and the Church organized. When this revelation was given the Church had not been organized. Presumably some of those who sought light and the will of the Lord felt that when the Lord spoke to them, they were authorized to go forth to act in his name. Here he informs Hyrum Smith that he was to wait (v. 15), yet he was to put his trust in the Holy Spirit and to walk humbly, to judge righteously, 'and this is my Spirit.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:57.)

11:21

"you shall have my Spirit . . . unto the convincing of men"

"Let one go forth who is careful to logically prove all he says by numerous quotations from the revelations, and let another travel with him who can say, by the power of the Holy Ghost, Thus saith the Lord, and you will invariably find that the man who testifies by the power of the Holy Ghost will convince and gather many more of the honest and upright than will the merely logical reasoner." (Brigham Young, JD 8:53-54.)

11:20

"might, mind and strength"

See Might, mind, and strength in Appendix A.

11:24

"my rock, which is my gospel"

See Rock in Appendix A.

11:25

"Deny not the spirit of revelation"

See Revelation in Appendix A.

"He [Hyrum Smith] was not to deny the Spirit of Revelation. This is good counsel for all of us today. There are some members of the Church who seemingly complain because the Lord is not giving revelations to be placed in the Doctrine and Covenants as in the beginning, and they ask why revelation has ceased in the Church. Usually it is the case that these critics are not faithfully keeping the commandments the Lord has already given and their eyes are blind to the fact that revelation and the guidance of the Lord is being meted out to the Church constantly. No one with the spirit of discernment can fail to see that the hand of the Lord has guided this people from the beginning and this guidance is manifest today as in other times to all who are humble and have a contrite spirit. (See Jacob 4:8.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:53.)

11:30

"as many as receive me . . . I give power to become the sons of God"

"Salvation is attainable only through compliance with the laws and ordinances of the Gospel; and all who are thus saved become sons and daughters unto God in a distinctive sense. In a revelation given through Joseph Smith the Prophet to Emma Smith, the Lord Jesus addressed the woman as 'My daughter,' and said: 'for verily I say unto you, all those who receive my gospel are sons and daughters in my kingdom.' (D&C 25:1.) In many instances the Lord had addressed men as his sons. (E.g. D&C 9:1; 34:3; 121:7.)

"That by obedience to the Gospel men may become sons of God, both as sons of Jesus Christ, and, through him, as sons of his Father, is set forth in many revelations given in the current dispensation. Thus we read in an utterance of the Lord Jesus to Hyrum Smith in 1829; [D&C 11:28-30, quoted.] [Note: see also D&C 34:1-3; 35:1-2; 39:1-4; 45:7-8.]" (First Presidency, AF, pp. 468-69.)
