Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 12

Background information on section 12

"About the same time [as the revelation in section 11 was given to Hyrum Smith] an old gentleman came to visit us of whose name I wish to make honorable mention—Mr. Joseph Knight, Sen., of Colesville, Broome County, New York, who, having heard of the manner in which we were occupying our time, very kindly and considerately brought us a quantity of provisions, in order that we might not be interrupted in the work of translation (of the Book of Mormon plates) by the want of such necessities of life; and I would just mention here, as in duty bound, that he several times brought us supplies, a distance of at least thirty miles, which enabled us to continue the work when otherwise we must have relinquished it for a season. Being very anxious to know his duty as to this work, I inquired of the Lord for him, and obtained the following: [Section 12 follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:47-48.)

12:1-6

Blessing for Joseph Knight, Sr.

For biographical information on Joseph Knight, Sr., see Joseph Knight, Sr. in Appendix B.

The first six verses of this blessing to Joseph Knight, Sr., are virtually word-for-word the same as the earlier blessings given to Oliver Cowdery (section 6) and Hyrum Smith (section 11).

For information concerning these terms and expressions, read the materials listed for the corresponding verses in section 6. Other scriptures also have instances of such repetitions; for example, compare Isaiah 2:2-4 with Micah 5:1-3.

12:7-8

Principles apply to all

The Lord indicates that the counsel in the preceding verses (1 through 6) applies "to all those who have desires to bring forth and establish this work." (12:7.) Perhaps this helps to explain why the introductory statements are so similar in the blessings to Oliver Cowdery (section 6), Hyrum Smith (section 11), Joseph Knight, Sr. (section 12), and David Whitmer (section 14).

Again, love, faith, hope, charity, and temperance are listed as characteristics that help qualify a person for the work of the Lord. (Compare with section 4.)
