Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 14

Background information on section 14

"Shortly after commencing to translate, I became acquainted with Mr. Peter Whitmer, of Fayette, Seneca County, New York, and also with some of his family. In the beginning of the month of June, his son, David Whitmer, came to the place where we were residing, and brought with him a two-horse wagon, for the purpose of having us accompany him to his father's place, and there remain until we should finish the work. [See Sec. 6:14-24, Orson Pratt commentary.] It was arranged that we should have our board free of charge, and the assistance of one of his brothers to write for me, and also his own assistance when convenient. Having much need of such timely aid in an undertaking so arduous, and being informed that the people in the neighborhood of the Whitmers were anxiously awaiting the opportunity to inquire into these things, we accepted the invitation, and accompanied Mr. Whitmer to his father's house, and there resided until the translation was finished and the copyright secured. Upon our arrival, we found Mr. Whitmer's family very anxious concerning the work, and very friendly toward ourselves. They continued so, boarded and lodged us according to arrangements; and John Whitmer, in particular, assisted us very much in writing during the remainder of the work.

"In the meantime, David, John and Peter Whitmer, Jun., became our zealous friends and assistants in the work; and being anxious to know their respective duties, and having desired with much earnestness that I should inquire of the Lord concerning them, I did so, through the means of the Urim and Thummim, and obtained for them in succession the following revelations: [Sections 14, 15, and 16 follow.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:48-49.)

14:1-5

Blessing for David Whitmer

For biographical information on David Whitmer, see David Whitmer in Appendix B. The first five verses of this blessing to David Whitmer are virtually word-for-word the same as the blessing given previously to Oliver Cowdery as recorded in section 6. For information concerning the terms and expressions of these verses, read the materials listed for the corresponding verses in section 6.

14:7

"if you keep my commandments and endure to the end"

"In the revelation given to David Whitmer (Sec. 14), the Lord made him the promise that if he would keep the commandments and endure to the end, he should have eternal life, moreover he was commanded to assist in bringing forth the Lord's work and that the time would come when he would be a witness 'of the things of which you shall both hear and see, and also that you may declare repentance unto this generation.' This promise was based upon his faithfulness, and David was faithful and sincerely in earnest in his devotion to the Church and Joseph Smith when that witness came and for several years afterwards." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:62.)

14:8

"you may stand as a witness"

In this verse, David Whitmer's blessing differs significantly from the blessings of Joseph Knight, Sr. (section 12) and Hyrum Smith (section 11), which were given only shortly before. Here David Whitmer is specifically promised that he will be a witness in a special way "of the things of which you shall both hear and see." (14:8.) As will be shown in connection with section 17, David Whitmer was called by the Lord as one of the three special witnesses of the Book of Mormon; on that occasion he heard the voice of the Lord and saw the angel and the plates of Mormon, exactly as this blessing promised." There was one incident of significance that occurred when the Angel Moroni presented the plates before the three witnesses. The record states: 'In his hands he held the plates which we had been praying for these to have a view of. He turned over the leaves one by one, so that we could see them, and discern the engravings thereon distinctly. He then addressed himself to David Whitmer, and said, "David, blessed is the Lord, and he that keepeth his commandments," when immediately afterwards, we heard a voice from out of the bright light above us, saying, "These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God."' (HC 1:54.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:63.)

14:9

Jesus Christ created the heavens and the earth

See Jesus Christ in Appendix A. The inspired version of the Bible by Joseph Smith and the latter-day scriptures make it clear that Jesus Christ as the pre-earthly Jehovah and the Firstborn Son of God in the Spirit was the Creator of "the heavens and the earth and all things that in them are." (3 Ne. 9:15.) King Benjamin indicated that the Savior would "be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning." (Mosiah 3:8.)

The inspired version of the gospel of John teaches that the Savior "was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him; and without him was not anything made which was made." (John 1:2-3.)

14:9

"a light which cannot be hid in darkness"

See Light in Appendix A.
