Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 15

Background information on section 15

"John [Whitmer] displayed his eagerness to be of assistance and did some writing for the Prophet at that time [June 1829]. With his brothers, he desired earnestly to know what message the Lord had for him, and due to his solicitation the Lord gave him a revelation (Sec. 15) through the Urim and Thummim." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:64 )

15:1

"my servant John [ Whitmer] "

For biographical information on John Whitmer, see John Whitmer in Appendix B.

15:2

"mine arm is over all the earth"

See Arm of the Lord in Appendix A.

15:3

"no man knoweth save me and thee alone"

In an earlier revelation to Oliver Cowdery, the Lord had said, ". . . there is none else save God that knowest thy thoughts and the intents of thy heart." (D&C 6:16.) The Lord here tells John Whitmer essentially the same thing: "I will tell you that which no man knoweth save me and thee alone."

15:6

"declare repentance"

See Repentance in Appendix A.

In earlier revelations the Lord had counseled his servants to "say nothing but repentance unto this generation." (D&C 6:9; 11:9.) In this revelation, the Lord emphasizes again "that the thing which will be of most worth unto you will be to declare repentance unto this people."

"Cast your minds back to the early days of this Church, and there stood this man John Whitmer, recently come into the Church of Christ. Various occupations in which he might engage were before him. He had the opportunity to labor upon the farm, to engage in merchandising, to follow mining, to study the profession of medicine or law, or to adopt one of the many other occupations in which men employ themselves. The question he asked himself at that time was, What would be the most worth to him? . . . At a critical time in his life, when he must choose which way to go, that voice said unto him that which would be of most worth unto him was to declare repentance unto the people and bring souls unto Christ. The message was of such importance that it came to him with 'sharpness and with power.' It was the voice of Jesus Christ." (Rudger Clawson, CR, April 1902, p. 7.)
