Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 17

Background information on section 17

"In the course of the work of translation, we ascertained that three special witnesses were to be provided by the Lord, to whom He would grant that they should see the plates from which this work (the Book of Mormon) should be translated; and that these witnesses should bear record of the same, as will be found recorded, Book of Mormon [Ether 5:2-4, 1920 ed.], also p. 86 [2 Ne. 11:3, 1920 ed.]. Almost immediately after we had made this discovery, it occurred to Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and the aforementioned Martin Harris (who had come to inquire after our progress in the work) that they would have me inquire of the Lord to know if they might not obtain of him the privilege to be these three special witnesses; and finally they became so very solicitous, and urged me so much to inquire that at length I complied; and through the Urim and Thummim, I obtained of the Lord for them the following: [D&C 17.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:52-53.)

"In March, 1829, the Lord declared to Joseph that three men should have the privilege of seeing the plates and bearing witness to their existence. (Sec. 5; HC 1:52.) A similar prediction was found also in the Book of Mormon itself. (2 Ne. 11:3; Ether 5:3.) Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris were later designated as these witnesses. In full conformity with the prediction, in June 1829, when the translation of the plates was approaching the end, this promise was realized. [Sec. 17 was received by Joseph Smith at Fayette, New York, June 1829.]

"Joseph and his three friends at the Peter Whitmer, Sr., home in Fayette, Seneca County, New York, went into the nearby woods one day, and there engaged in earnest prayer that the plates might by shown to them by Moroni. (HC 1:52-59.) To this they testified in a written and published statement. This event is related by Joseph Smith in his history, and published while the witnesses were living." (John A. Widtsoe, JS, p. 46.)

17:1

"you shall have a view of the plates . . . breastplate . . . sword . . . Urim and Thummim. . . directors"

In this one verse, the Lord lists five sacred objects that will be shown to the three special witnesses (Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris):

It is not clear as to which of the ancient prophets had originally made the breastplate, but evidently it was prepared to be used with the "two stones" or Urim and Thummim.

Lucy Mack Smith, mother of the Prophet, indicated that she was privileged to handle the breastplate. Her description follows:

He [Joseph Smith] handed me the breast-plate spoken of in his history.

It was wrapped in a thin muslin handkerchief, so thin that I could feel its proportions without any difficulty.

It was concave on one side and convex on the other, and extended from the neck downwards, as far as the center of the stomach of a man of extraordinary size. It had four straps of the same material, for the purpose of fastening it to the breast, two of which ran back to go over the shoulders, and the other two were designed to fasten to the hips. They were just the width of two of my fingers (for I measured them), and they had holes in the end of them, to be convenient in fastening. After I had examined it, Joseph placed it in the chest with the Urim and Thummim. (History of Joseph Smith by His Mother, Lucy Mack Smith [Bookcraft, 1958 ed.], p. 112)

The people of Lehi brought this sword with them to the promised land, and it became a sacred object to them (Mosiah 1:16), was used in helping to preserve the freedom of the people (Jacob 1:10), and was also used as a pattern for making other swords (2 Ne. 5:14).

Another similar description of these sacred stones was given by the Prophet's mother: "The Urim and Thummim consisted of two smooth three-cornered diamonds, set in glass, and the glasses were set in silver bows, which were connected with each other in much the same way as old fashioned spectacles only much larger." (Edward Stevenson, Reminiscences of the Prophet Joseph, p. 24.)

Joseph Fielding Smith has explained the use of the Urim and Thummim as follows:

The Urim and Thummim shown to the witnesses and which Joseph Smith received were prepared by the Lord for the purpose of translating these sacred records. They were given to the brother of Jared on the mount and he sealed them up with the writings which he made of the visions of the Lord, so that at a later day they were to be used to bring to light his record of the Jaredite people. [Ether 3:23, 28.] These "stones" were in the possession of King Mosiah and by him were used in translating the Jaredite record. [Moses 28:11-19.] They were later hidden up by Moroni with the abridgment of Nephite history, with the other articles mentioned in section seventeen. (CHMR 1:40-42.)

(Note: for other scriptural references to Urim and Thummim or "holy interpreters," as they were sometimes called, see Omni 1:20-22; Mosiah 8:13-19; 21:27-28; 28:11-20; Alma 37:21-26; Ether 4:5; Ex. 28:20; Lev. 8:8; Deut. 33:8; Ezra 2:63; Neh. 7:65. See also Urim and Thummim in Appendix A.)

5."The miraculous directors." As indicated in this revelation, the miraculous directors "were given to Lehi while in the wilderness, on the borders of the Red Sea." (D&C 17:1.) A description of this sacred object was given by Nephi as "a round ball of curious workmanship; and it was of fine brass. And within the ball were two spindles; and the one pointed the way whither we should go into the wilderness." (1 Ne. 16:10.) Nephi later discovered that writings would sometimes appear on the ball (1 Ne. 16:26-27), and he observed that "the pointers which were in the ball . . . did work according to the faith and diligence and heed which we did give unto them" (1 Ne. 16:28).

Smith and Sjodahl have provided the following information on the miraculous directors:

When the time had come for Lehi to leave the Valley of Lemuel, the voice of the Lord came to him during the night, commanding him to begin the perilous journey across the desert. It was no easy undertaking. Who was to act as guide? Undoubtedly, Lehi spent the night in prayer, asking for light and guidance. Early in the morning he stood in the tent door, anxiously surveying the surroundings, and then he beheld on the ground a brass ball. On examining this, he found that it had two spindles, one of which pointed the way (1 Nephi 16:10). When Lehi perceived the wonderful qualities of this instrument, he exclaimed, in ecstasy, Liahona! and that became its name (Alma 37:38). Liahona is a Hebrew word with, possibly, a Nephite termination, added later. L means "to"; Jah is an abbreviated form of the sacred name, "Jehovah," and on means "light." The meaning, then, is, "To Jehovah is light"; that is, "God has light; light comes from God," for He had answered his prayers for light and guidance. Similarly, Hagar, after having seen the Angel of the Lord, said, Beer-lahai-roi; that is, "The well of the Living One who seeth me" (Gen. 16:13).

The Prophet Joseph renders the word, "compass," as the nearest modern equivalent to it, just as one might properly apply the modern term "dreadnought" to an ancient viking ship; but it was not a compass, for it pointed out only the way the travelers were to follow, and it worked according to their faith; it was not dependent on the magnetic pole. (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, P. 78.)

17:3

"you shall testify of them"

Each copy of the Book of Mormon contains a copy of the testimony of the three special witnesses. In the first edition of the Book of Mormon, this testimony occupied a page by itself in the back; since then the testimony has been published at the front of the book together with the testimony of the eight witnesses.

17:6

"as your Lord and your God liveth it is true"

Sometimes when the Lord intends that his words be accepted as though they were part of a sacred covenant with the receiver, he states a fact and then reaffirms it with a strong statement that might even be considered a sacred oath. In this revelation, a good example is the strong, definite, unequivocating, declarative words: "As your Lord and your God liveth it is true."

17:4, 8-9

"this you shall do that. . . "

The Lord indicates in this revelation several reasons why the three special witnesses are being privileged to see the plates and other sacred objects:

In an earlier revelation the Lord had promised Joseph Smith that "these things" should be shown to three others of his servants; that they "should know of a surety that these things are true," for the Lord would declare it unto them "from heaven"; that they would "behold and view these things as they are"; that "to none else" would this same testimony be given; and that they were to testify to these things or they would be condemned. (D&C 5:10-15, 26-27. See also 14:8.) Also, in an earlier revelation the Lord had declared "in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established." (D&C 6:28. See also 5:11, 15; 2 Cor. 13:1; and Deut. 19:15).
