Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 18

Background information on section 18

"We now became anxious to have that promise realized to us, which the angel that conferred upon us the Aaronic Priesthood had given us [Sec. 13], viz., that provided we continued faithful, we should also have the Melchizedek Priesthood, which holds the authority of the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. We had for some time made this matter a subject of humble prayer, more particularly to seek of the Lord what we now so earnestly desired; and here, to our unspeakable satisfaction, did we realize the truth of the Savior's promise—'Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you'—for we had not long been engaged in solemn and fervent prayer, when the word of the Lord came unto us in the chamber [of old Father Whitmer in Fayette, Seneca County (Sec. 128:21)], commanding us that I should ordain Oliver Cowdery to be an Elder in the Church of Jesus Christ; and that he also should ordain me to the same office; and then to ordain others, as it should be made known unto us from time to time. We were, however, commanded to defer this our ordination until such times as it should be practicable to have our brethren, who had been and who should be baptized, assembled together, when we must have by vote whether they were willing to accept us as spiritual teachers or not; when also we were commanded to bless bread and break it with them, and to take wine, bless it, and drink it with them; afterward proceed to ordain each other according to commandment; then call out such men as the Spirit should dictate, and ordain them; and then attend to the laying of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, upon all those whom we had previously baptized, doing all things in the name of the Lord. The following commandment will further illustrate the nature of our calling to this Priesthood, as well as that of others who were yet to be sought after. [Section 18.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:60-62.)

"Nearly six years before the calling of the Twelve Apostles in this dispensation, and several months before the organization of the Church, the Lord indicated by revelation that a council of twelve Apostles would be chosen, and Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer were informed that it was to be their privilege to choose out the Twelve and instruct them in the duties of that calling. . . .

"At this early day, Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer, who had sought the privilege of acting as two of the three witnesses of the Book of Mormon were appointed by divine revelation to seek out the Twelve. Martin Harris, who had been named as the other witness, was not named in this revelation as one who should share in this great honor. It was by sore and sincere repentance that the privilege was granted him to become a witness of the Book of Mormon, and the Lord still withheld from Martin the full exercise of his spirit when the call of the other two men came to choose out the Twelve. Before the time arrived for the choosing of the twelve special witnesses for Christ six years later, Martin had placed himself in a position where he could be recognized, and therefore the Prophet, by the revelation of the Lord, included Martin Harris with the other brethren in the choosing and ordaining of the Twelve Apostles." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:80, 82.)

"Before the Church could be organized it was essential that there be revealed such matters as pertained to the organization of the Church. This was done between the time the witnesses viewed the plates of the ancient record and the sixth of April, 1830. The first of these (D&C Sec. 18) was given to Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer, at Fayette. It made known the calling of the Twelve Apostles who should be chosen in this dispensation, although it was about six years before they were called. It gave instructions 'relative to the building up of the Church of Christ according to the fulness of the Gospel.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, ECH, pp. 84-85.)

18:2

"the things you have written are true"

"I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts than by any other book." (Joseph Smith, HC 4:461.)

18:2

"you [Oliver Cowdery] know that they are true"

"In this revelation, Oliver Cowdery was informed that he had received a witness by the Spirit of Truth of the work, especially of the Book of Mormon. Many times during the translating of the record, manifestations of this kind had come to him. Not only had the Spirit made this truth manifest, but he had previous to this revelation stood in the presence of a heavenly messenger and under his hands received the Holy Aaronic Priesthood. Therefore, the Lord could say to him: 'I have manifested unto you by my Spirit in many instances, that the things which you have written (i.e., as scribe) are true; wherefore you know that they are true.' " (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:81.)

18:4, 5,17

"my church, my gospel, and my rock"

The Lord uses the three words church, gospel, and rock several times in sequence and in close relationship to each other. Here he states that in the scriptures are all things "concerning the foundation of my church, my gospel, and my rock. Wherefore, if you shall build up my church, upon the foundation of my gospel and my rock, the gates of hell shall not prevail against you." Later in this same revelation, he states, "You have my gospel before you, and my rock, and my salvation." (18:17.)

These statements throw additional light on Matthew's account of the words of the Savior to Peter, "Upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." (Matt. 16:18.)

See (1) Church, (2) Gospel, and (3) Rock in Appendix A.

18:8

"his name is Joseph"

"Attention is called to the name, because the Scriptures predict the coming of a great deliverer in the latter days, so named. Nephi says that Joseph, the Patriarch, predicted the coming forth of the House of Israel on the American continents, of a 'righteous branch' and a Seer, whose name, he said, 'shall be called after me' (Joseph), and after the name of his father (2 Ne. 3:1-15). (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 83.)

18:9

"you are called even with that same calling with which [Paul] was called"

The priesthood of God is the power and authority to act for and in behalf of God. Certainly God, who is unchangeable—the same yesterday, today, and forever—has the right and the power to select whomever he will to represent him and act for him on the earth. In New Testament times, the Savior called and ordained twelve men whom he called both disciples and apostles to be special witnesses for him. Later other men, including Paul, were called and ordained as apostles. In this revelation, the Lord announces that he is going to give some men in this dispensation the same powers and authority he gave anciently to Paul. (18:9.)

18:15-16

"how great shall be your joy" if you bring souls unto Jesus Christ

"And how are we to determine the value of souls? This matter has been determined for us also by revelation: [Sec. 18:16, quoted.] The souls of men are so precious in the sight of God that he gave to the world his Only Begotten Son, that by the shedding of his blood he might draw all men unto him. That is why the great Prophet of this dispensation, Joseph Smith, and these others, John Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and the rest, were called to bring souls unto Christ. And if one of these men should labor all his days, and bring save it be but one soul unto Christ, and that one should be his wife, what great joy he would have with his wife in heaven. Then if he should labor all his days and bring unto Christ the souls of his wife and his children, and none else perchance, how great would be his joy in heaven with his wife and children." (Rudger Clawson, CR, April 1901, pp. 7-8.)

"And now . . . let me emphasize that the noblest aim in life is to strive to live to make other lives better and happier. The most worthy calling in life is that in which man can serve best his fellow man. . . .

"Such is the divine message given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in these words: 'Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God.' (D&C 18:10.) Such is the philosophy expressed by the Redeemer in the seemingly paradoxical statement 'Whosoever will lose his life for my sake will find it.' ( Matt. 16:25.)

"The meaning of this becomes clear in the light of another passage which says: 'Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.' (Matt. 25:40.)" (David O. McKay, CR, April 1961, p. 131.)

"There are many reasons why the worth of souls is great in the sight of God, and why he desired to have them redeemed. First, man is the offspring of God in the spirit; we are his children, and as such he has a deep love and earnest concern for us one and all. . . . Second, it is the privilege of those who are faithful to become like God. The human soul will not only become immortal through the resurrection, but may be exalted to godhood, as a joint heir with Jesus Christ. Man's possibilities as a son of God are unlimited, because he, too, like his father, will be infinite. A soul, therefore, is worth more than a world which is created for his habitation." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:83.)

18:20

"contend against no church"

"When we are commanded to 'contend against no church save it be the church of the devil,' we must understand that this is instruction to us to contend against all evil, that which is opposed to righteousness and truth. James declares that 'every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning,' and the scriptures also teach, 'for there is nothing which is good save it comes from the Lord; and that which is evil cometh from the devil.' (Omni 1:25.) All who go forth to teach should do so in wisdom and not contend with the churches or engage in profitless debates, but teach in the spirit of kindness and try to persuade people to receive the truth." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:83.)

18:20

"the church of the devil"

"The Devil has his church, his kingdom, 'I beheld this great and abominable church: and I saw the devil, that he was the foundation of it' (1 Ne. 13:6). 'There are two churches only; the one is the church of the Lamb of God, and the other is the church of the devil' (1 Ne. 14:10). The church of the adversary may be known by its fundamental principle of government. In the beginning he declared himself in favor of salvation by compulsion, and although he was cast out of heaven for refusing to submit to the divine Council, he has continued his agitation for that plan among the children of men ever since. His church consists of those who adopt his plan and seek to destroy the free agency of man by brute force. . . . The church of the adversary may also be known by contention and strife, by false doctrines, and by all manner of iniquity. A minister of the Lord makes war upon the domain of the adversary by the sword of the Spirit; not by persecution." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 85-86.)

"I do not understand that when the Lord states that those churches shall be overthrown—I mean the church of the devil, using his expression, and those that are making false claims, and shall be thrown into the fire, as he says [Rev. 18]—I do not understand that all members of those churches are to meet destruction, physically or otherwise. He is speaking there of the church collectively, and he is not pleased with it; but individually he may be well pleased with many of his sons and daughters who have been under an environment that has led them into those churches which are not of God." (James E. Talmage, CR, October 1928, p. 120.)

18:23

"Jesus Christ is the name, . . . and there is none other name given"

Jesus Christ is the divine Savior and Redeemer of all mankind. It is through his atonement that all mankind are saved (1) from the permanent effects of physical death through the resurrection and (2) from the effects of spiritual death through repentance of all their sins. Thus faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and in his divine atonement is absolutely essential for a man to be saved from hell. These concepts are not only clearly taught in the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, but they are also taught in the Book of Mormon and other scriptures. The prophet Nephi declared, "There is none other name given under heaven save it be . . . Jesus Christ . . . whereby man can be saved." (2 Ne. 25:20.) King Benjamin's words are equally definite: ". . . there shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent." (Mosiah 3:17.)

See also Jesus Christ in Appendix A.

"In the New Testament He has revealed Himself as Jesus, the Savior, and Christ, the Anointed One (see v. 22). 'Thou shalt call His name JESUS: for he shall save his people from their sins' (Matt. 1:21). To take upon oneself His name is, therefore, more than to become a disciple; it is to engage in His service for the salvation of men. JESUS CHRIST is the name given of the Father, and there is no other through which man can be saved. It is the name in which men shall be called at the last day—the day of judgment (Mosiah 5:9)—and those who know not the Name can have no place in the Kingdom of God (vv. 23-25)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 86.)

"I am thankful that the Church to which I belong preaches Christ and him crucified, and resurrected, the Christ that ascended into heaven, the Christ that was the offspring in the flesh, as well as in the spirit, of the very eternal Father, the Christ who is the Savior and Redeemer of mankind, beside whom there is none, beside whose name there is no name under heaven whereby mankind may be saved." (James E. Talmage, CR, April 1916, p. 131.)

8:26-38

"the Twelve shall be my disciples"

The Lord herein makes known to his prophet and to at least two of his associates (Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer) that eventually twelve disciples will be chosen and called to be special witnesses of Jesus Christ "to go into all the world to preach my gospel unto every creature." (18:28, 31-36.) Oliver and David are given the specific commandment to "search out the Twelve," which they subsequently do. (18:37.)

When these twelve are selected, called, and ordained, the Lord indicates they "are called to be the Twelve Apostles, or special witnesses of Christ in all the world." (107:23.)

For additional responsibilities of the Twelve Apostles, see Council of the Twelve in Appendix A.

"After the opening of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times the Lord made it known that the organization of the primitive Church of Jesus Christ was to be restored. As early as June, 1829, before the Church was organized, a revelation came calling the witnesses of the Book of Mormon to choose the twelve who should constitute the council of the apostles. In this revelation the Lord gave this instruction to the future twelve: [Sec. 18:26-36, quoted.]

"It was nearly six years after this revelation that the apostles were chosen. After the return of Zion's Camp from Missouri to Kirtland the Prophet Joseph Smith called together all the brethren who went forth on that journey. From these men who had been willing to risk their lives in the service of the Lord, the three witnesses, who were set apart to choose out the twelve, made the selection of the apostles. This was on the 14th day of February, 1835, and the men were chosen in the following order: (1) Lyman E. Johnson, (2) Brigham Young, (3) Heber C. Kimball, (4) Orson Hyde, (5) David W. Patten, (6) Luke S. Johnson, (7) William E. McLellin, (8) John F. Boynton, (9) Orson Pratt, (10) William Smith, (11) Thomas B. Marsh, (12) Parley P. Pratt.

"After the twelve had all been selected and ordained they were organized according to age in the council. Thomas B. Marsh, the oldest, became the senior and the first man ordained. Lyman E. Johnson, the junior." (Joseph Fielding Smith, IE, April 1935, p. 212.)

18:26-36

The Twelve to preach and testify

"All these, your brethren, who are called to the Apostleship, and to minister in the midst of the house of Israel, are endowed, or ought to be endowed richly, with the spirit of their calling. For instance, these twelve disciples of Christ are supposed to be eye and ear witnesses of the divine mission of Jesus Christ. It is not permissible for them to simply say, I believe; I have accepted it, just because I believe it. Read the Revelation. The Lord informs us that they must know, they must get the knowledge for themselves, it must be with them as if they had seen with their eyes and heard with their ears, and they know the truth. That is their mission, to testify of Jesus Christ and Him crucified, and risen from the dead and clothed now with almighty power at the right hand of God, the Savior of the world." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 89.)

18:34-36

"these words are . . . of me . . . you can testify that you have heard my voice"

"In the first part of this dispensation, He [the Lord] gave a revelation directly to the Twelve in which He added to what He had previously given, when He said, 'And I, Jesus Christ, your Lord and your God, have spoken it. These words are not of men nor of man, but of me; wherefore you shall testify they are of me and not of man; for it is my voice which speaketh them unto you; for they are given by my Spirit unto you, and by my power you can read them one to another; and save it were by my power you could not have them. Wherefore you can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my words.' (D&C 18:34-36.)

"Now I ask you to think of the import of the Lord's revelation. In the scriptures are contained His words, and when one having power to teach them speaks them to you it is as though it were by His own voice, so that those who hear can testify that they have both heard His voice and that they know his words. . . .

"I wish that our faith was sufficiently simple that we could read what I have just read to you, and I shall repeat it now, and I ask you to think about it again. The words that are in these scriptures are the words of the Lord, and when one like these authorized servants read them to you by the power and authority they possess and by the Spirit, you, all of you, all of us, can say, I have now heard His words, and I have heard His voice. Because whether it be 'by His own voice or by the voice of his servants, it is the same.'" (Harold B. Lee, CN, Dec. 3, 1960, p. 14.)

18:42

"the years of accountability"

This revelation was given within two months of when John the Baptist had restored the Aaronic Priesthood and Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery had subsequently baptized each other (D&C 13). Earlier in this revelation (18:7), the Lord had already referred to this baptism.

In this verse the Lord provides additional information on the sacred ordinances of baptism: men, women, and children who have repented should be baptized, but children are not to be baptized unless they "have arrived at the years of accountability." This instruction was repeated in a revelation given in April 1830 at about the time the Church was organized wherein the Lord explicitly said, "No one can be received into the church of Christ unless he has arrived unto the years of accountability before God, and is capable of repentance." (D&C 20:71.)

Still later the Lord revealed the exact age when he considers children to be accountable, the age at which they should be baptized—"when eight years old." (D&C 68:25.)

For additional information as to why infants should not be baptized, read Moroni 8:5-26. See also Children in Appendix A.
