Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 19

Background information on section 19

"This revelation was given some time in March, 1830 [Manchester, New York]. It would seem that Martin Harris had come to Joseph Smith seeking further assurance in relation to his standing before the Lord, being sorely troubled in his spirit because of his transgression. He had already been granted the privilege on his earnest solicitation of being one of the three witnesses, and that wonderful vision had been given. [Sections 5 and 17.] Perhaps out of this came much serious reflection and he sought further light. However, there is no indication in the History of the Church as to the reason why the revelation was given and the exact day is unknown when it was given. It was without question a revelation of great comfort to Martin, and it is one of the great revelations given in this dispensation; there are few of greater import than this. The doctrine of the atonement of the Lord, as directly applying to the individual, and his exposition of 'eternal punishment,' as here set forth, give to the members of the Church light which was not previously known." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 180-81.)

19:1

Names of the Lord

See (1) Alpha and Omega, and (2) Jesus Christ in Appendix A.

"Our Lord begins this Revelation by introducing Himself under five different names, each indicating His nature or work:

"Alpha and Omega] The first and the last letter of the Greek alphabet, used as symbols of the beginning and the ending. Christ is so called, because He is the Author and the Preserver of all things (Heb. 1:2, 10).

"Christ the Lord] 'Christ' means 'anointed.' Prophets, Priests, and Kings were anointed, and our Lord unites all these offices in Him. He is the anointed Lord. The Greek word Christ is the same as the Hebrew Messiah (Mashiac), the title used in John 1:41, and 4:25.

"I am He] This is equivalent to Jehovah (See notes on Sec. 18:21).

"The Beginning and the End] He was in the beginning and will remain throughout all eternities. He is endless (v. 4).

"The Redeemer of the World] Christ is our Redeemer. He delivers those who turn to Him from the bondage of sin and guilt. He has 'bought' us (1 Cor. 6:20; 7:23; 2 Pet. 2:1). And the world will in due time be delivered from the power of Satan, from sin and all its consequences, such as war, poverty, ignorance, sickness, and even death." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 91.)

19:3

"the destroying of Satan and his works at the end of the world"

"The works of Satan cannot be destroyed until the end of the world, and the last day of judgment (v. 3), when every man shall be judged 'according to his works and the deeds which he hath done.' Paul told the Corinthian Saints that the last enemy to be destroyed is death. This of necessity must be so, for when death is destroyed mortality comes to an end. At that time all the children of God, except sons of perdition, will be redeemed from hell and the second death." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:86-87.)

19:4-12

"endless. . . eternal"

"The explanation given in this revelation of eternal punishment, endless punishment and eternal damnation, throws a flood of light on many passages of ancient scripture. The Lord permitted the prophets of old to speak of endless punishment, and the fire that is not quenched—even Christ did this himself—that the sinners might be impressed and brought to repentance. It was done, so the Lord reveals, in a manner 'more express than other scriptures, that it might work upon the hearts of the children of men, altogether for my name's glory.' Here the Lord explains the mystery. 'Eternal punishment' is God's punishment, since he is Eternal. All the laws of God are eternal, but in meting out punishment to men in mortality, he has not declared that there is no opportunity for forgiveness even in the life to come. The Savior said, [Matt. 12:21-32 quoted]. This shows that the Savior taught that sins—all sins, in fact, which were not unto death—could be forgiven in the world to come.

"The same punishment follows the same offense or transgression of the law. The prison remains, it has been explained, even when the prisoner goes free; also the same punishment awaits each transgressor of each particular offense, but when the law is satisfied the prisoner goes free." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:87-88.)

"During this hundred years many other great truths not known before, have been declared to the people, and one of the greatest is that to hell there is an exit as well as an entrance. [Sec. 76:81-85; Matt. 5:25-26.] Hell is no place to which a vindictive Judge sends prisoners to suffer and to be punished principally for his glory; but it is a place prepared for the teaching, the disciplining of those who failed to learn here upon the earth what they should have learned. True, we read of everlasting punishment, unending suffering, eternal damnation. [Matt. 18:8; 25:41, 46; Rev. 14:10-11.] That is a direful expression, but in his mercy the Lord has made plain what those words mean. 'Eternal punishment,' he says, 'is God's punishment,' for he is eternal; and that condition or state or possibility will ever exist for the sinner who deserves and really needs such condemnation; but this does not mean that the individual sufferer or sinner is to be kept in hell longer than is necessary to bring him to a fitness for something better. When he reaches that stage the prison doors will open and there will be rejoicing among the hosts who welcome him into a better state. The Lord has not abated in the least what he said in earlier dispensations concerning the operation of his law and his Gospel, but he had made clear unto us his goodness and mercy through it all, for it is his glory and his work to bring about the immortality and eternal life of man. [Moses 1:39.]" (James E. Talmage, CR, April 1930, p. 97.)

"'Endless torment,' 'eternal damnation' are expressions which denote the punishment inflicted by the Endless One, the Eternal One. 'Eternal punishment' is contrasted with such punishment as man can inflict on man in time here on earth." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 94.)

19:15-21

"I command you to repent. . ."

See Repentance in Appendix A.

It is of interest to note that the heading of this section of the Doctrine and Covenants indicates that it is "A Commandment of God" rather than referring to it only as a "revelation" as is the usual format. Section 19 might thus be referred to as a revelatory commandment, for the revelation contains not only instruction but also a definite and clear commandment—to repent: "I command you to repent" (verse 15), "I command you again to repent" (verse 20), "I command you that you preach naught but repentance" (verse 21).

When the doctrine of repentance is fully understood, then it is seen that repentance is all that ever needs to be taught, for repentance means not only to stop doing those things which are wrong but also to start doing those things which are right.

19:17

"if they would not repent they must suffer"

"The unrepentant are to be sorely punished. This is evident from the words of the Lord in this revelation (verses 15-19). Our Father in heaven is very merciful, long-suffering and forgiving. He has promised to forgive the repentant sinner. Never has greater love been manifest than that by our Father in sending his Son, and by that Son in coming to the earth, to die for man. But one of the immutable, or eternal laws of God is that the unrepentant sinner must suffer even as Christ suffered (verses 15-18), for the blood of Christ will not cleanse those who will not repent and in humility accept the free gift which comes from God." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:88.)

19:18

"Which suffering caused myself even God . . . to bleed at every pore"

"We cannot comprehend the great suffering that the Lord had to take upon himself to bring to pass this redemption from death and from sin. . . .

"We get into the habit of thinking, that his great suffering was when he was nailed to the cross by his hands and his feet and was left there to suffer until he died. As excruciating as this pain was, that was not the greatest suffering that he had to undergo, for in some way which I cannot understand, but which I accept on faith, and which you must accept on faith, he carried on his back the burden of the sins of the whole world. It is hard enough for me to carry my own sins. How is it with you? And yet he had to carry the sins of the whole world, as our Savior and the Redeemer of a fallen world, and so great was his suffering before he went to the cross, we are informed that blood oozed from the pores of his body. . . ." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, October 1947, pp. 147-48.)

"Christ's agony in the garden is unfathomable by the finite mind, both as to intensity and cause. . . . In that hour of anguish Christ met and overcame all the horrors that Satan . . . could inflict. . . . In some manner, actual and terribly real though to man incomprehensible, the Savior took upon Himself the burden of the sins of mankind from Adam to the end of the world." (James E. Talmage, JC, p. 613.)

"It . . . was in the garden. That is where he bled from every pore in his body.

"Now I cannot comprehend that pain. I have suffered pain, you have suffered pain, and sometimes it has been quite severe; but I cannot comprehend pain, which is mental anguish more than physical, that would cause the blood, like sweat, to come out upon the body. It was something terrible, something terrific; so we can understand why he would cry unto his Father: '. . . If it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt.' [Matthew 26:39]." (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 1:130.)

19:22

"they cannot bear meat now, but milk they must receive"

This descriptive expression teaches the necessity of "first steps." The basic principles of the gospel should be taught first; then when the truly converted person is strengthened by the reception of the Holy Ghost, he can better understand and appreciate the higher ordinances.

19:26

"impart [of your property] freely to the printing of the Book of Mormon"

"On February 28, 1828, Martin Harris, a prosperous farmer of Palmyra, friendly to Joseph, took one of these transcripts [copy of characters from the gold plates] to New York City. There two eminent students of ancient languages, Doctors Anthon and Mitchell, examined them. In later years both of these men acknowledged that the characters were presented to them. Martin Harris declared that the 'experts' said the characters were a mixture of ancient alphabets. However, when they learned how the characters had been obtained and that part of the 'book' or plates were sealed, they repudiated their first positive statement. Egyptology was in its early infancy at that time. The visit and the statements of the two men were sufficient, however, to induce Harris to become a scribe for the Prophet, and later, when the Book of Mormon was to be published, to mortgage his farm for $3,000 with which to pay the printer." (John A. Widtsoe, JS, p. 39.)

19:27

"the Jew, of whom the Lamanites are a remnant"

See Jew in Appendix A.

19:28

"pray vocally as well as in thy heart"

See Prayer in Appendix A.

The scriptures contain numerous references and statements from the Lord and his prophets concerning the purpose, power, and efficacy of prayer. Over a hundred references are listed under the topic "Prayer" in A Topical Guide to the Scriptures of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and these are only examples of many more that could have been listed. In this revelation the Lord counsels us not to limit our prayers either to all public prayers or to all private prayers: "I command thee," he says, to "pray vocally as well as in thy heart," "before the world as well as in secret," and "in public as well as in private."

"How impressive are those few simple words [19:28, 38] in regard to prayer! How far-reaching! They center into a man's life and comprehend his whole existence, at least from the years of his accountability until he passes into the grave. He must pray under all circumstances. Prayer is not reserved for the Sabbath day or for any particular occasion. It is not only to be used at the general conferences of the Church, but the spirit of prayer must be in our hearts unceasingly. We must pray in our families, we must pray in secret; we must pray in our hearts. The spirit of prayer must be with us when we retire at night and when we arise in the morning. It must be upon us when we leave our homes or in the valleys, or wherever we are. We are told in the words which I have quoted that if the spirit is upon us the Lord will bless us, and the blessings which will come in answer to prayer will be of more importance to us than treasures of earth." (Rudger Clawson, CR, April 1904, pp. 42-43.)

19:30

"reviling not against revilers"

"Some there are who think we are afraid to meet anyone in debate. Not so. It is much harder for our young brethren to keep from debating than it is to engage in it; for they feel that they have the truth, and they are not afraid to meet anyone in defense of principles in which they believe. But we have only one object in view in going out amongst the nations, and that is to follow the Master's instructions—to go out and teach men. That is our work. We do not go out to win battles as debaters; but we go out to teach men that which we have received, and which we know is true. . . . Those who seek to debate with our Elders and thirst for the honor of beating them in argument, do not want to be taught; they simply want contention. Paul tells us to avoid contention. He said: 'But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the churches of God.' [1 Cor. 11:16.] So we say, contention is not our custom, and we advise our missionaries not to contend, but simply go out and teach the principles of the Gospel." (Anthon H. Lund, CR, October 1902, pp. 80-81.)

19:31-32

"a great and the last commandment"

The good news of the gospel of Jesus Christ might be said to include many laws and commandments. However, a major purpose of the gospel is to reveal and teach those principles or laws which are necessary to be obeyed in order to be saved in the presence of our Heavenly Father.

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, and the Church has accepted as an article of faith, "that the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are: first, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost." (A of F 4.) These are the absolute essentials, the basics, for without them it would be impossible to understand or to keep the other commandments; without them no person could be saved.

When the resurrected Jesus Christ appeared to the righteous Lehites on the western continent, his disciples wanted to know what the true church should be called. The Savior answered that it should be called after his name if it were built upon his gospel. (3 Ne. 27:3-12.) He then reviewed for his disciples the essential aspects of the gospel and summarized in these words: "Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye might stand spotless before me at the last day. Verily, verily I say unto you, this is my gospel." (3 Ne. 27:20-21.)

In this revelation (D&C 19) the Lord reiterates these basic teachings and indicates this is a great and last commandment.

19:37

"Hosanna, hosanna"

See Hosanna in Appendix A.

19:39

"canst thou read this without rejoicing"

Frequently when we read the scriptures we read them piecemeal in a rather disjointed, unorganized manner in order to find a particular statement for a sacrament meeting talk or a reference that can be used in teaching a class.

It is the testimony of the compiler of this volume that, as members of the true and living church, we would benefit greatly by taking the time and finding the privacy to read and ponder the scriptures, placing them in the context in which they were given. It was in such privacy and spirit of meditation and contemplation that this section (19) was read in preparing these materials. When so read and pondered, the words of this revelation are so overpowering and overwhelming that it is difficult to read them all without melting into tears.

Truly the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants are the words of "Alpha and Omega, Christ the Lord . . . the beginning and the end, the Redeemer of the world" (verse 1). And how can one read them "without rejoicing and lifting up thy heart for gladness" (verse 39)?
