Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 20

Background information on section 20

"The Prophet states that after he and Oliver Cowdery received the Priesthood they continued to receive instructions from the Lord, and they waited for the fulfilment of the promise made by John for the organization of the Church. In the meantime they had received several revelations." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:90.)

"In this manner did the Lord continue to give us instructions from time to time, concerning the duties which now devolved upon us; and among many other things of the kind, we obtained of Him the following, by the spirit of prophecy and revelation; which not only gave us much information, but also pointed out to us the precise day upon which, according to His will and commandment, we should proceed to organize His Church once more here upon the earth: [D&C 20.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:64.)

"This revelation (Sec. 20), instructing the Prophet and his brethren to organize the Church, was given either on or a very short time before the sixth day of April, 1830." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:90.)

20:1

"being one thousand eight hundred and thirty years since the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in the flesh"

"The time of Messiah's birth is a subject upon which specialists in theology and history, and those who are designated in literature 'the learned,' fail to agree. Numerous lines of investigation have been followed, only to reach divergent conclusions, both as to the year and as to the month and day within the year at which the 'Christian era' in reality began. . . .

"Without attempting to analyze the mass of calculation data relating to this subject, we accept the Dionysian basis as correct with respect to the year, which to us is B.C. 1, and, as shall be shown, in an early month of that year. In support of this belief we cite the inspired record known as the 'Revelation on Church Government, given through Joseph the Prophet, in April, 1830,' which opens with these words: 'The rise of the Church of Christ in these last days, being one thousand eight hundred and thirty years since the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in the flesh.'

"Another evidence of the correctness of our commonly accepted chronology is furnished by the Book of Mormon record. Therein we read that 'in the commencement of the first year of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah,' the word of the Lord came to Lehi at Jerusalem, directing him to take his family and depart into the wilderness. [1 Ne. 1:4; 2:2-4.] In the early stages of their journey toward the sea, Lehi prophesied, as had been shown him of the Lord, concerning the impending destruction of Jerusalem and the captivity of the Jews. Furthermore, he predicted the eventual return of the people of Judah from their exile in Babylon, and the birth of the Messiah, which latter event he definitely declared would take place six hundred years from the time he and his people had left Jerusalem. [1 Ne. 10:4.] This specification of time was repeated by later prophecy [1 Nephi 19:8; 2 Ne. 25:19]; and the signs of the actual fulfilment are recorded as having been realized 'six hundred years from the time that Lehi left Jerusalem.' [3 Ne. 1:1.] These scriptures fix the time of the beginning of Zedekiah's reign as six hundred years before the birth of Christ. According to the commonly accepted reckoning, Zedekiah was made king in the year 597 B.C. This shows a discrepancy of about three years between the commonly accepted date of Zedekiah's inauguration as king and that given in the Book of Mormon statement; and, as already seen, there is a difference of between three and four years between the Dionysian reckoning and the nearest approach to an agreement among scholars concerning the beginning of the current era. Book of Mormon chronology therefore sustains in general the correctness of the common or Dionysian system.

"As to the season of the year in which Christ was born, there is among the learned as great a diversity of opinion as that relating to the year itself. It is claimed by many Biblical scholars that December 25th, the day celebrated in Christendom as Christmas, cannot be the correct date. We believe April 6th to be the birthday of Jesus Christ, as indicated in a revelation of the present dispensation already cited [Sec. 20:1; 21:3], in which that day is made without qualification the completion of the one thousand eight hundred and thirtieth year since the coming of the Lord in the flesh. This acceptance is admittedly based on faith in modern revelation, and in no wise is set forth as the result of chronological research or analysis. We believe that Jesus Christ was born in Bethlehem of Judea, April 6, B.C. 1." (James E. Talmage, JC, pp. 102-4.)

20:1

"the sixth day of . . . April"

"A wonderful day, the sixth day of April! Many notable things have occurred on it. The organization of the Church for one great and notable thing The Prophet Joseph recites in his own story that it was early in the spring of 1820, one hundred and ten years ago, when he went into the woods to pray. I like to think of that also as being on the sixth day of April. We have no definite knowledge of it, but I believe it in my heart and in my soul. . . . I believe with all my heart and soul that the sixth day of April was the birthday of the Lord Jesus, our Savior and Redeemer. . . . More likely was it in the spring of the year than on the twenty-fifth day of December, which is celebrated as the birthday of the Savior; yet we go on celebrating that day, and it is all right to do so, inasmuch as that is the day the world generally accepts. But I repeat, it is my individual opinion, firmly fixed in my mind, that the sixth day of April is the birthday of the Savior of the world. I further like to believe that the resurrection of the Redeemer, which marked his triumph over death and the grave, also occurred on the sixth of April, though I have no definite proof.

" Another notable event that occurred on this day is part of the history of this glorious country of ours—the United States of America. The Lord says in the revelations given through the Prophet Joseph Smith that he raised up wise men for the very purpose of framing the constitution, which guarantees liberty to all. [Sec. 101:80.] It was born on the sixth of April. It had previously been adopted by the Constitutional Convention and submitted to the various States for ratification. While it was intended that the returns should all be in by the fourth of March, it was not until the sixth day of April that the electoral votes of the different States were counted by the Senate and House then in session. And on the sixth day of April, George Washington was declared to be the President of the United States. So the nation had its real birth at that time." (Charles W. Nibley, CR, April 1930, pp. 26-27.)

20:1

"the fourth month . . . on the sixth day"

The following statement by Joseph Smith indicates that he believed the Savior was crucified on April 6 in the thirty-third year of our present calendar (April 6, A.D. 33). This would mean that April 6 would have marked both the birth date and the death date of the Savior.

On the 6th of April, in the land of Zion . . . met for instruction and the service of God, at the Ferry on Big Blue River. . . .

The day was spent in a very agreeable manner, in giving and receiving knowledge which appertained to this last kingdom—it being just 1,800 years since the Savior laid down his life that men might have everlasting life, preparatory for the last dispensation. (HC 1:337 )

"Let us inquire if the day observed by the Christian world as the day of his (Christ's) birth—the 25th of December—is or is not the real Christmas day. A great many authors have found out from their researches that it is not. I think that there is scarcely an author at the present day that believes that the 25th of December was the day that Christ was born. . . . It is generally believed and conceded by the learned who have investigated the matter that Christ was born in April. . . . It is stated that according to the best of their judgment from the researches they have made, Christ was crucified on the 6th of April. That is the day on which this Church was organized. But when these learned men go back from the day of his crucifixion to the day of his birth, they are at a loss, having no certain evidence or testimony by which they can determine it." (Orson Pratt. Quoted by B. H. Roberts in Outlines of Ecclesiastical History, p. 17.)

20:2-3

Use of the word "apostle"

"In this section [section 20; see also 27:12] the Lord declares that Joseph Smith, Jr., and Oliver Cowdery 'were called of God and ordained' apostles. This is verily true; however, attention has already been called to the fact that Peter, James and John conferred the Melchizedek Priesthood with its keys upon them, and not any office. Moreover, that by command of the angel, and later the voice of God, Joseph Smith ordained Oliver Cowdery an elder, and Oliver Cowdery ordained Joseph Smith an elder on the 6th day of April, 1830, when the Church was organized. Again, by command of the Lord, Joseph Smith was ordained a high priest in the Church, June 3, 1831, and Oliver Cowdery was ordained to the same office August 28th of that same year. Later they received other ordinations. It is very improbable that either of these men would be ordained to the office of apostle before they were ordained elders or high priests. This has been a mystery to some. It will all be clear enough if we keep in mind that these two men received under the hands of the ancient apostles the Melchizedek Priesthood, out of which, the Lord has said, all the offices come, and, as President Joseph F. Smith has said, 'the Priesthood is greater than any of its offices,' and when Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery stood in the presence of holy heavenly messengers and under their hands had the Priesthood conferred upon them, they became apostles, that is to say, special witnesses for Christ, even before any office had been conferred upon any man in this dispensation. An apostle is an especial witness for Christ, and these two men were fully prepared by testimony to officiate as such before all the world before the organization of the Church, and the office of elder had been conferred upon them." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:9 1-92.)

20:5

"first elder . . . was entangled again in the vanities of the world "

"It seems that this has reference [D&C 20:5] to Joseph Smith's early youth, between the time of his great vision of the Father and the Son and the coming of Moroni. The Prophet calls attention to this folly during that period, but also says that no one need think that he was guilty of any grievous sin, but being shunned by those who should have befriended him, he says, 'I was left to all kinds of temptations; and, mingling with all kinds of society, I frequently fell into many foolish errors, and displayed the weakness of youth, and the foibles of human nature.' (HC 1:1-9.)" Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:92.)

"Joseph had received a marvelous manifestation of divine favor, in the answer given to his first prayer, but afterwards he was 'entangled again in the vanities of the world.' In his autobiography the Prophet ascribes this, in part, to the unkind treatment accorded him by the religious people. He was young and inexperienced; they ostracized and slandered him, and, consequently, he 'was left to all kinds of temptations.' And this is placed on record for our instruction. Christians cannot be too careful in their conduct among their fellow men. It is a mark of integrity and veracity that this weakness of youth is made as prominent in the record as are the divine manifestations. In the sacred Scriptures the failings of Moses, or the difficulties between Paul and Peter, are recorded as well as their good qualities and victories over sin. A mere human history would conceal such imperfections, as far as possible. God places them on record for the instruction of others." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 99-100.)

20:6

"God ministered unto him [Joseph Smith] by an holy angel "

"When he repented and sought God in prayer the angel Moroni was sent to him. This was another marvelous manifestation that his repentance had been accepted and his sins forgiven." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 100.)

20:9

Book of Mormon contains "the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ"

See Gospel in Appendix A.

"We are told that the Book of Mormon contains the fulness of the gospel, that those who like to get up a dispute, say that the Book of Mormon does not contain any reference to the work of salvation for the dead, and there are many other things pertaining to the gospel that are not developed in that book, and yet we are told that book contains 'the fulness of the everlasting gospel.' Well, what is the fulness of the gospel? You read carefully the revelation in regard to the three glories, section 76, in the Doctrine and Covenants, and you find there defined what the gospel is. [Sec. 76:40-43.] There God, the Eternal Father, and Jesus Christ, his Son, and the Holy Ghost, are held up as the three persons in the Trinity—the one God, the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost, all three being united and being one God. When people believe in that doctrine and obey the ordinances which are spoken of in the same list of principles [Sec. 20:17-28], you get the fulness of the gospel for this reason: if you really believe so as to have faith in our Eternal Father and in his Son, Jesus Christ, the Redeemer, and will hear him, you will learn all about what is needed to be done for the salvation of the living and the redemption of the dead." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, April 1922, pp. 27-28.)

"The Lord has stated a number of times that the Book of Mormon contains the fulness of the Gospel, or 'all things written concerning the foundation; of the Church and Gospel. Some people have wondered in regard to this, when in the Book of Mormon there is nothing recorded pertaining to the eternity of marriage and baptism for the dead. A careful reading will show that the Lord does not say that it contains all of the principles in their fulness, but the fulness necessary for the foundation of his Church and his Gospel. . . . Let us not forget that baptism for the dead is not a new doctrine, but merely the application of the principle of baptism for the dead. . . . Moreover, the meaning of the word 'fulness' as used in these scriptures is 'abundance,' or sufficient for the purposes intended. . . . (See 3 Ne. 26:8-9.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:81-82.)

20:11

The Book of Mormon to prove "that the holy scriptures are true"

See Book of Mormon in Appendix A.

"This book [Book of Mormon] is the strongest corroborative evidence to the divinity of the things contained in the Bible, that there is in the world. It is the strongest evidence of the divinity of the mission of the Redeemer of the world, that can be found, the Bible alone excepted. . . . Not one line in it, not one doctrine which it reaches, not one truth which it sets forth, has been found to be out of harmony with the word of the Lord, as contained in the Bible, and as it has come to us through his inspired servants—a thing which can be said of no other book in the world." (Anthony W. Ivins, CR, April 1921, pp. 20-21.)

20:12

God the same "yesterday, today, and forever"

See God in Appendix A.

20:14

"crown of eternal life"

See Eternal life in Appendix A.

20:17, 28

"God in heaven . . . is infinite . . . eternal . . . unchangeable"

See God in Appendix A.

20:19

The true and living God and church

The modifying term "only true and living" is used in the revelations in conjunction with only two nouns: the "only true and living God" (20:19) and the "only true and living church " (1:30).

See Church and God in Appendix A.

20:20

"man became sensual and devilish"

See Carnal, sensual, and devilish in Appendix A.

20:24

"on the right hand of God"

See Right hand in Appendix A.

20:26

"the meridian of time"

See Meridian of time in Appendix A.

20:28

"Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one God"

See Godhead in Appendix A.

20:30

"justification . . . is just and true"

"Justification is true. Through the grace of God, and the promise made to us before the foundation of the world, that we could be redeemed through the blood of Jesus Christ and come back into his presence, we are justified in seeking this gift and have a claim upon this promise through obedience. We are justified, through the grace of our Lord, if we keep his commandments." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:93-94.)

"We know that justification through Christ is just and true (2 Ne. 2:5; Rom. 5:1). Justification is a judicial act, whereby God declares that the sinner who repents and by faith accepts the sacrifice of the Lamb of God, and who is baptized according to the Word of God, is acquitted and received into His Kingdom." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 104.)

20:31

"sanctification . . . is just and true"

See Sanctify in Appendix A.

"Sanctification is the work of the Holy Spirit by which he who is justified is enabled to keep the Commandments of God and grow in holiness (Helaman 3:35)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 104.)

20:31

"mights, minds and strength"

See Might, mind, and strength in Appendix A.

20:31-34

"man may fall from grace"

"As I understand this scripture [D&C 20:31-34] it means that Jesus Christ is kind and merciful to us when we serve him with our whole hearts, but not any of us can take refuge in past righteousness or service. It also means that there is a possibility that any one of us can fall out of good standing, even those who have already achieved a certain degree of righteousness. Therefore, we need to be on our constant guard, each of us, that we not allow ourselves to fall into habits of carelessness in our faith, in our prayers, or in our various Church activities or responsibilities. It is for this reason that I am resolving again to live closer to God each day and to follow his chosen prophets and apostles more diligently than I have ever done in the past." (Theodore M. Burton, Ensign, June 1974, p. 116.)

"I am brought to believe that it is possible for men to repent and then to unrepent, and to fail to keep their repentance good; and I believe that the victory is in the retaining our repentance and making it good, so that the spirit of the Lord may dwell richly with us." (Francis M. Lyman, CR, October 1897, p. 16.)

20:35

"neither adding to, nor diminishing from the prophecy" of the book of John

Because this statement by John appears in the last book of the Bible (Rev. 22:18-19), it has been misinterpreted by some to mean there could not be any other scripture than the Bible itself. However, the Bible had not been canonized in its present form at the time John wrote his book of Revelation. Thus, he must have been referring to his own book only, or perhaps he was cautioning people not to "add to" (include false teachings with) the holy scriptures.

20:37

"commandment to the church concerning baptism"

"In this revelation [section 20] the Church about to be restored is taught in the fundamental principles so that, when that restoration comes, all things for its welfare will be in readiness. For hundreds of years man had been teaching false doctrines, and none more glaring than that in relation to the principle of baptism. Here the Lord makes it very plain, and gives instructions who shall be admitted into the Church. The question is frequently raised whether or not those who have not repented of all their sins should be admitted into the Church, in the hope that they may finish their repentance when they are full-fledged members of the Church. The Lord has been very explicit in this revelation on this point, and if it is followed there will be no mistake." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:94.)

"There are three requirements of an applicant for baptism: (1) He must be humble, so that he asks for it as a favor. He who comes with broken heart and contrite spirit is in the proper frame of mind for that ordinance; (2) He must show before the Church that he is repentant and willing to take upon him the name of Jesus Christ (Sec. 18:21). This confession is made before the Church when it is made in the presence of an Elder, or Elders, representing the Church; (3) he must manifest by his works that he has received the Spirit. An infant cannot comply with these conditions." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 104.)

20:37

"broken hearts and contrite spirits"

"Mark you, the Lord says before a man comes into the Church he must have a desire, he must come with a broken heart and contrite spirit. What is a broken heart? One that is humble, one that is touched by the Spirit of the Lord, and which is willing to abide in all the covenants and the obligations which the Gospel entails. . . . Every baptized person who has fully repented, who comes into the Church with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, has made a covenant to continue with that broken heart, with that contrite spirit, which means a repentant spirit." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, October 1941, p. 93.)

20:37

"truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins"

Oliver Cowdery felt that the above statement was wrong and so notified the Prophet. Joseph Smith relates how Oliver was led to see the error of his thinking:

Whilst thus employed in the work appointed me by my Heavenly Father, I received a letter from Oliver Cowdery, the contents of which gave me both sorrow and uneasiness. Not having that letter now in my possession, I cannot of course give it here in full, but merely an extract of the most prominent parts, which I can yet, and expect long to, remember. He wrote to inform me that he had discovered an error in one of the commandments—Book of Doctrine and Covenants: "And truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto a remission of their sins."

The above quotation, he said, was erroneous, and added: "I command you in the name of God to erase those words, that no priestcraft be amongst us!"

I immediately wrote to him in reply, in which I asked him by what authority he took upon him to command me to alter or erase, to add to or dimish from, a revelation or commandment from Almighty God.

A few days afterwards I visited him and Mr. Whitmer's family, when I found the family in general of his opinion concerning the words above quoted, and it was not without both labor and perseverance that I could prevail with any of them to reason calmly on the subject. However, Christian Whitmer at length became convinced that the sentence was reasonable, and according to Scripture; and finally, with his assistance, I succeeded in bringing, not only the Whitmer family, but also Oliver Cowdery to acknowledge that they had been in error, and that the sentence in dispute was in accordance with the rest of the commandment. And thus was this error rooted out. (HC 1:104-5.)

20:38-67

"duty of elders, priests, teachers, deacons"

See Priesthood offices in Appendix A.

"The Lord could not reveal to the Church in the beginning all the knowledge and organization which would be essential to the full and complete organization of the Church. Had this been done, it would have been like an overwhelming flood that would have brought destruction. The truth had to come piecemeal—line upon line, precept upon precept, just like knowledge comes to all of us. However, all that was revealed in this section was expedient for the government of the Church at the time of its organization. What the Lord revealed at this time is just as expedient and necessary today. We have had nothing, for instance, given since that day to add to or improve on the instruction concerning the duties of teachers. We learn at this time the Lord revealed that the designation 'Elder' is one applicable to the apostles and likewise to all others who hold the Melchizedek Priesthood. The use of this designation makes it needless to use unnecessarily sacred terms as 'Apostle,' 'Patriarch,' 'High Priest,' etc. It is proper in general usage to speak of the apostles, the seventies and all others holding the Melchizedek Priesthood as 'elders.' Of course, the term President, in speaking of the First Presidency, is the proper designation." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:95.)

". . . I know that the Lord wants us to have our boys, at twelve [deacons] in groups of twelve, presided over by sweet, clean, wholesome boys of their age. I know that he wants to have our boys [teachers] in groups of twenty-four, under presidencies of their own group, watching over the Church, to see that there is no iniquity, evil-speaking, or backbiting in the Church.

"It seems so fitting to me to think that the Lord has made provision that the young men [priests] shall sit at the feet of the bishop and be instructed, with him as president; that he shall be taught, and that he shall go into the house of the saints; that he shall preach, teach, exhort, and expound the scripture; that ninety-six men, older, maturer, and receiving the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood [elders] shall stand next to the presidency of the stake and be a standing ministry of the stake. . . . So beautiful, so perfect, so complete, is the Lord's way! [Sec. 107:85-89.]" (Alonzo A. Hinckley, CR, April 1935, pp. 74-75.)

20:61

"meet in conference once in three months"

In the very early days of the Church some of these conferences were priesthood conferences. When the stakes were the major ecclesiastical units of the Church under the general authorities, these quarterly conferences were primarily stake conferences. Today, they might include ward, region, and even area conferences.

20:64

Certificates of ordination to offices in the priesthood

The practice of issuing certificates of ordination to those receiving the various offices of the priesthood has continued to the present time.

20:68-69

"The duty of. . . members"

"Now, when people come into this Church they should, by all means, subscribe to the regulations which the Lord himself has laid down by commandment. But does that mean after we are in the Church, after we have confessed our sins and have forsaken them, that we can return to them after membership has been secured? That would not be consistent." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, October 1941, p. 93.)

20:70

Blessing of children

"We have nothing to say against a father blessing his children, the genius of the Priesthood being primarily patriarchal, with God himself, the great Father of us all, at the head. Indeed, we claim that every man holding the Melchizedek Priesthood is a patriarch in his own home, with the right to bless all his children and grandchildren, even all the fruits of his loins, nor do we object to the father taking his babe on the eighth day and giving it a father's blessing. But we do not think that this privilege, whether exercised or unimproved, should interfere with our obedience to that law of the Lord wherein it is stated: [new edition Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 20, verse 70, 117, quoted.] Outside of the all-important fact that this is a direct command of Jehovah, and as such should be studiously complied with without hesitancy or objection, we think quite a number of excellent reasons can be adduced to prove that this command is attended with beneficial results to babe and to parents, who, by bringing their child before the Church, manifest their faith in the sight of their brethren and sisters, in God's word and to his promises, as well as their thankfulness to him for increasing their posterity and for the safe delivery of his handmaiden. The child is also benefited by the united faith and responsive prayers of the assembled saints, which faith seals the 'more sure word of prophecy' pronounced upon the head of the child, as it also gives more abundant power to the officiating High Priest or Elder to manifest the good pleasure of the Lord with regard to it. And again, the blessing is thus given in the presence of the Church recorder, and there is much less likelihood of the record being omitted or errors entering therein than there would be should the rite be attended to at home. In this, as in all other things, the path of revelation is the path of safety." (John Taylor, MS 40:235-36.)

20:71

"the years of accountability"

For information on years of accountability, read the materials for 18:42 and see Children in Appendix A.

20:71-74

Instructions regarding baptism

"The mode of baptism is here taught [20:72-74]. This is in conformity with all that is recorded in the New Testament and makes it clear that the teachings in the world called baptism by sprinkling or pouring water on the head is a false doctrine. We are taught that baptism is only by immersion and that it cannot be performed except it be by one who has divine authority. The elder or the priest shall go down into the water with the candidate, and after repeating the prayer the Lord has given for that ordinance, shall immerse the candidate in water. Another point which should be remembered is that 'no one can be received into the Church of Christ unless he has arrived unto the years of accountability before God, and is capable of repentance.'" [See Moroni 8 and D&C 29:46.] (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:96.)

20:75-79

Instructions regarding the sacrament

See Sacrament in Appendix A.

"Bread and wine] These are the Emblems. Bread is the proper emblem of the spiritual food we receive in the Sacrament. 'Wine' is here used as a synonym for the Cup, the term found in Matt. 26:27; Mark 14:23; Luke 22:20; 1 Cor. 11:25 (Sec. 27:2). The essential part of the Sacrament is that those who partake of it receive broken bread and drink of the cup, in remembrance of the broken body and spilt blood of the Redeemer, for the broken bread and the cup are the emblems; both must be blessed, and both must be received by the communicants." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 111.)

"The Lord has given to the Church very few forms. In the ordinance of baptism, definite words are given which must be used by the priest or elder who officiates. The blessings on the Sacrament are also set prayers." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:96.)

20:80

"Any member. . . transgressing. . . shall be dealt with"

See Excommunication in Appendix A.

"The Lord anticipated the fact that there would be transgressors in the Church. We are reminded of the parable of the net cast into the sea, which gathered of all kinds, some of which had to be thrown away. As long as the world remains in its present condition, there will be those who will not endure to the end. There will be the fault-finders, the critics of those who hold the Priesthood and of the doctrines of the Church. Therefore, it is necessary that regulations be given for treating all transgressors fairly and with justice. Where the extreme penalty is inflicted, the names of those expelled are no longer to be kept on the records, but are to be blotted out." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:97.)

20:81-84

Record of members to be kept

See Records in Appendix A.

"The matter of record keeping is one of the most important duties devolving on the Church. . . . If a man values his membership in the Church he will guard with the most jealous care his standing in the ward or branch to which he belongs. One of the most deplorable things with which we have to contend is the fact that members of the Church will move from one ward or branch to another, and fail to keep in touch with the local organization of the Church. Sometimes this is done because such members desire to hide and avoid being handled for their standing. Others do this evil thing because they are afraid they will be called upon to attend to Church duties; others out of pure neglect. Membership in the Church is our very valued possession and treasure. Why? Because without it we are deprived, not only of the fellowship of the Church but of all its blessings, and a continued course of aloofness will in time place us outside the pale of the Church entirely." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:96-97, 99.)
