Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 21

Background information on section 21

"Whilst the Book of Mormon was in the hands of the printer, we still continued to bear testimony and give information, as far as we had opportunity; and also make known to our brethren that we had received a commandment to organize the Church; and accordingly we met together for that purpose, at the house of Mr. Peter Whitmer, Sen., (being six in number) on Tuesday, the sixth day of April, A.D. one thousand eight hundred and thirty. Having opened the meeting by solemn prayer to our Heavenly Father, we proceeded, according to previous commandment, to call on our brethren to know whether they accepted us as their teachers in the things of the Kingdom of God, and whether they were satisfied that we should proceed and be organized as a Church according to said commandment which we had received. To these several propositions they consented by a unanimous vote. I then laid my hands upon Oliver Cowdery, and ordained him an Elder of the 'Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints'; after which, he ordained me also to the office of an Elder of said Church. We then took bread, blessed it, and brake it with them; also wine, blessed it, and drank it with them. We then laid our hands on each individual member of the Church present, that they might receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and be confirmed members of the Church of Christ. The Holy Ghost was poured out upon us to a very great degree—some prophesied, whilst we all praised the Lord, and rejoiced exceedingly. Whilst yet together, I received the following commandment: [Section 21, follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:74-78.)

"It was on a Tuesday morning when this little band convened in one of the most solemn meetings, and one of the greatest moments, that had been held in eighteen hundred years. The organization was made in accordance with the laws of the State of New York, which required six members to effect such an organization. All of these six members, namely, Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer Jr., David Whitmer and Samuel H. Smith, were young men." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:98.)

21:1

"there shall be a record kept among you"

"At the beginning of this revelation [Sec. 21] we were told that there should be a recorder in the Church, that records should be kept among the people. This important work in the Church, of keeping records, was commanded; and if we read farther we will find that John Whitmer was appointed to be Church recorder, to write the events of the Church. I mention this to show you how important this part of our Church government is, to keep history, to keep a record of what takes place." (Anthon H. Lund, CR, April 1913, p. 11.)

21:1

"a seer, a translator, a prophet"

See Seer in Appendix A.

The titles "prophet, seer, and revelator" are used in sustaining the general officers of the Church. The president of the Church is sustained first; then his counselors are sustained with him as the quorum of the First Presidency. The president and members of the Council of the Twelve are sustained next. Then the conducting officer makes the proposal that the members of the First Presidency, the members of the Council of the Twelve, and the Patriarch to the Church be sustained as "prophets, seers, and revelators."

"A Seer has the divine gift of 'seeing,' or having visions. Moses, Samuel, Isaiah, Ezekiel, and many others were seers, so called because they were privileged to have a nearer view of the divine glory and power than other mortals have. Joseph Smith also was a seer. (See Mosiah 8:13.). . . A translator renders the spoken, or written, word into another language. Here it means one who does so by the gift of divine inspiration. . . . A prophet is one who speaks for another. Aaron was the prophet of Moses (Ex. 7:1), when, as his brother's spokesman, he appeared before Pharaoh. Paul (Titus 1:12) quotes Epimenides, a Cretan poet, as a prophet. A Prophet of God is one who speaks for the Almighty, by divine authority. He does not always foretell future events. Sometimes he reveals the past; sometimes he speaks of the present, and sometimes he predicts things to come. Some of the Old Testament Prophets were eminent statesmen, historians, and privy councilors of kings; others occupied less prominent positions, but all were the divinely inspired instructors of the people, whose special function it was to maintain the worship of Jehovah against adverse influences.

"Originally the Hebrews called the Prophets, Seers (1 Sam. 9:9), and that designation is used by Lehi, when he blesses his sons and quotes to them the prophecies of his ancestor, Joseph (2 Ne. 3:5-22)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 115-16.)

21:24

"to lay the foundation " of the Church

"These words [Sec. 21:1-12] were the words of Jehovah, delivered to the Prophet Joseph Smith upon the day that the Church was organized. The Church was very weak in numbers then, but strong in spirit. In this revelation the Lord intimates that he was about to move the cause of Zion in mighty power, and talked to the Prophet as if it were an accomplished fact. He desired, it seems, that his people, though few in number, should be impressed with the fact that a Prophet, Seer and Revelator stood at the head; for he instructed that a record to this effect should be kept. He also desired to impress the people with the great truth that this Church should be built up, not by the power of man, but by the power of the Holy Ghost; that no man, though he might be a Prophet or an Apostle, should take the honor unto himself of building up the Church of Christ, but that the honor and the glory must be given to God. Did not the Lord say to the Prophet Daniel that in the latter days the God of heaven would set up his kingdom, and it should be as a stone cut out of the mountain without hands, which should roll until it filled the whole earth. [Dan. 2:34-35, 44.] The God of heaven was to do this, but he would use men as his instruments." (Rudger Clawson, CR, October 1901, pp. 7-8.)

21:5

"his word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth"

See Voice of the Lord in Appendix A.

"There has been much speculation in relation to the statement of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith: 'For his word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith.' This is the word which the Lord gave to Israel in relation to Moses. It is just as true in the case of any other person who is sustained as mouthpiece of the Almighty. Later, in speaking of his inspired servants, the Lord said: 'And whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation.' (D&C 68:4.) In this dispensation the same characteristics are shown by the people as were in ancient times. We are more inclined to accept as the word of the Lord something which was uttered in some former dispensation, but look with critical eye and unbelief upon that which the Lord delivers today through his chosen servants. Yet the word of the Lord is very clear on this matter." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:107-8.)

"Now the only safety we have as members of this church is to do exactly what the Lord said to the Church in that day when the Church was organized. We must learn to give heed to the words and commandments that the Lord shall give through his prophet, 'as he receiveth them, walking in all holiness before me; . . . as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith.' (D&C 21:4-5.) There will be some things that take patience and faith. You may not like what comes from the authority of the Church. It may contradict your political views. It may contradict your social views. It may interfere with some of your social life. But if you listen to these things, as if from the mouth of the Lord himself, with patience and faith, the promise is that 'the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name's glory.' (D&C 21:6.)" (Harold B. Lee, CR, October 1970, p. 152.)

21:10

"be ordained by. . . Oliver Cowdery"

The same pattern was followed by Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in this ordination as was followed in their baptism earlier. Oliver Cowdery first laid his hands upon the head of Joseph Smith and ordained him; then the Prophet laid his hands upon the head of Oliver Cowdery and ordained him.

21:11

"you [Oliver Cowdery] are an elder. . ., he [Joseph Smith] being the first"

The general administrative organization was kept rather simple in the early days of the restored Church. Joseph Smith was designated by the Lord as the "first elder," and Oliver Cowdery served as the "second elder."

"Joseph had informed the little flock that gathered there when the Church was organized of what the Lord commanded, and it was proposed to them that Joseph Smith be the first Elder of the Church, and Oliver the second. Then Joseph ordained Oliver and Oliver ordained Joseph to the office of an Elder. This was not bestowing the Melchizedek Priesthood on either of them. They held that before. It had been conferred upon them by Peter, James and John. [Sec. 27:12-13.]" (Anthon H. Lund, CR, April 1913, pp. 9-10.)

"Now the Church was organized [April 1830], but not all the officers of the Church as we have them today, for the simple reason they did not have enough members in the Church to make a complete organization. Ten months after the Church was organized, Edward Partridge was ordained a Bishop to the Church, and in June following the first High Priests were ordained. In December, 1833, Joseph Smith, Senior, was ordained a Patriarch, and two months later the first High Council was organized. The Quorum of Twelve Apostles was organized. [Feb. 1835.] All the offices in the Priesthood were now established and men were ordained to fill them." (Anthon H. Lund, CR, April 1917, pp. 14-15.)

21:10, 12

"Oliver Cowdery . . . the first preacher of this church unto the church"

"The first public meeting of the Church after the day of its organization was held at the house of Peter Whitmer in Fayette, on the 11th day of April, 1830. On that occasion, Oliver Cowdery, under Joseph's direction, proclaimed the word of God for the comfort and instruction of saints and strangers. The appointment for this meeting had gone forth through all the neighborhood; and many persons came to hear what wonderful things were to be spoken by the men who professed to be called directly of God to the ministry. This was the first public discourse delivered by an authorized servant of God in these last days. At the conclusion of the services a number of persons demanded baptism and membership among the people of God." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, p. 61.)
