Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 22

Background information on section 22

"Immediately after the Church was organized, converts were made. Some of these had belonged to churches which believed in baptism by immersion. In fact, many of the early converts of the Church had previously accepted this mode believing that it was right. The question of divine authority, however, was not firmly fixed in their minds. When they desired to come into the Church, having received the testimony that Joseph Smith had told a true story, they wondered why it was necessary for them to be baptized again when they had complied with an ordinance of baptism by immersion.

"The revelation in section 22 indicates that the baptism they had received had not been made in the true spirit because it was unauthorized and performed by those not having authority, although it was done in sincerity, but in ignorance." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:109.)

In chronological sequence, this is the first revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants that is designated as being given "to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." All the revelations given before were to individuals or for general instruction.

22:1

"a new and an everlasting covenant"

The term "new and everlasting covenant" is sometimes used to refer to individual ordinances as well as to the gospel in general.

See Covenant in Appendix A.

22:2

"strait gate"

See Strait in Appendix A.

22:4

"enter ye in at the gate"

"The divine command to all men is that they enter in by the door. 'He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.' The scriptures are very definite in their instruction that there is but one plan of salvation, and one way by which we may be saved. Yet the notion prevails abundantly among all men that the Lord is so liberal, so kind, so loving, that he will permit every man to seek his own salvation in any organization which he desires to join, and that there are no set rules, except that a person live a clean life, in order to return into the presence of the Lord." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:111.)

22:4

"seek not to counsel your God"

One of the lessons to be learned in this life is to put implicit faith in our Heavenly Father, who knoweth all things, who is kind, loving, and merciful, and who wants his children to be happy and to have joy. If all mankind believed in these qualities of God and had faith in his plan, then all would seek eagerly to take counsel at his hand rather than to counsel him.
