Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 23

Background information on section 23

"The following persons being anxious to know of the Lord what might be their respective duties in relation to this work, I inquired of the Lord, and received for them the following:

"Revelation to Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Samuel H. Smith, Joseph Smith, Sen., and Joseph Knight, Sen. Given at Manchester, New York, April 1830. [Section 23, follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:80.)

For biographical information on these six brethren, check each of their names in Appendix B.

23:1-2

"Oliver. . . beware of pride"

In this brief blessing for Oliver Cowdery, the Lord indicates the weakness of Oliver that eventually led him out of the Church for several years. As indicated in his biographical sketch (see Appendix B), Oliver later found it hard to take direction from the Prophet Joseph Smith, set himself up as being equal or superior to the Prophet, and apostatized from the truth.

"Pride . . . was one of Oliver Cowdery's besetting sins. If he could have humbled himself in the troubled days of Kirtland he would not have lost his place and membership in the Church. That which had been bestowed upon him was exceedingly great and had he been willing to humble himself, it was his privilege to stand with the Prophet Joseph Smith through all time and eternity, holding the keys of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. However, at this particular time when this word was sought, he was free from condemnation." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:120-21.)

23:3

"Hyrum . . . thy duty is unto the Church forever"

"Hyrum Smith, the beloved brother of Joseph, successfully proclaimed the gospel, after his tongue had been loosened. On November 7th, 1837, he was appointed a counselor to the Prophet instead of Fred. G. Williams, who was rejected by the Conference at Far West. On January 19th, 1841, he was appointed Patriarch to the Church, for which office he had been blessed by his father, it being his by birthright. He was continually strengthening the Church." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 120.)

"There is another thing of great significance in this brief blessing to Hyrum Smith (Sec. 23:3) which is: 'Wherefore thy duty is unto the church forever, and this because of thy family. Amen.' It is doubtful if the Prophet Joseph fully understood the meaning of this expression when this revelation was given. In later years it was made clear. Evidently it has reference to the office of Patriarch and in this office, it was his duty and that of his family forever." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:121.)

23:4

"Samuel, thou art not as yet called to preach before the world "

At the time of this blessing, Samuel Smith, a younger brother of the Prophet, would have been only 22 years old. He had already served as one of the eight special witnesses to the plates of the Book of Mormon. Here, however, he is notified by the Lord that he is not "as yet called to preach before the world."

"Samuel was the third person baptized in this dispensation. He was one of the first to be ordained to the office of Elder, and it was not long after this revelation when he was sent forth to teach, which he did with marked success, far beyond his own realization." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:113.)

23:5

"Joseph [Smith Sr.] . . . this is thy duty henceforth and forever"

As was evidently the case with Hyrum, the words "this is thy duty henceforth and forever" in regard to Joseph Smith, Sr., have reference to the office of patriarch that Father Smith received shortly thereafter (D&C 107:40; 124:91) and held to his death September 14, 1840.

23:6

"Joseph [Knight] . . . take up your cross"

See Cross in Appendix A.

23:6

"pray vocally before the world as well as in secret"

See Prayer in Appendix A.
