Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 24

Background information on section 24

"After our departure from Colesville, after the trial, the Church there was very anxious, as might be expected, concerning our again visiting them, during which time Sister Knight, wife of Newel Knight, had a dream which enabled her to say that we would visit them that day, which really came to pass, for a few hours afterwards we arrived; and thus was our faith much strengthened concerning dreams and visions in the last days, foretold by the ancient Prophet Joel [Joel 2:28-29]; and although we this time were forced to seek safety from our enemies by flight, we did feel confident that eventually we should come off victorious, if we only continued faithful to him who had called us forth from darkness into the marvelous light of the everlasting Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

"Shortly after our return home we received the following commandments: [Sections 24, 25, and 26, follow.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:101.)

"Accompanied by his wife and three of the Elders, he [Joseph Smith] went again to Colesville. Here they found many people awaiting baptism. Joseph prepared to accede to their demand. A suitable portion of a little stream in that locality was prepared for the purpose of the administration of the ordinance; but in the night sectarian priests, fearful of losing their congregations and their hire, instigated evil men to desecrate the spot and to destroy all the preparations of the Elders. . . . A few days later the ordinance was administered by Oliver Cowdery to thirteen persons at Colesville. . . .

"While the baptisms were in progress an angry mob collected, and threatened destruction to the Elders and believers. The mob surrounded the house of Joseph Knight and his son Newel and railed with devilish hatred at the inmates. The Prophet spoke to them and made an effort to calm their passions, but without avail. Wearied with their own impotent wrath, the mobs departed; but only to concoct new plots.

"That night a meeting was to be held, and when the believers and sympathizers had assembled, and Joseph was about to offer them instruction and consolation, a constable approached and arrested him on a warrant charging him with being a disorderly person, for setting the country in an uproar by circulating the Book of Mormon and by preaching a gospel of revelation. . . .

"A court was convened to consider the strange charges brought against the young man, Joseph Smith; and hateful lies, of every form which the father of falsehood could devise, were circulated to create popular dislike. . . . The bitter feeling of endangered priestcraft was visible throughout the trial; but all the accusations which were made were but lies, and none were sustained. The court declared an acquittal. The evidence in the trial was a high tribute to the character of Joseph Smith. . . .

"This paper [a warrant] was secured on the oath of a sectarian bigot; and no sooner was Joseph acquitted by the court in Chenango County than he was seized under the new warrant and dragged back to Colesville. . . .

"When the morning came, Joseph was arraigned before the magistrate's court of Colesville. Arrayed against him were some of the people who had been discomfited at the trial in Chenango County. This time they were determined to secure a conviction. By the side of the Prophet were his friends and advocates who had aided him in the former trial. Despite the vindictive effort of the mob, the court discharged the Prophet, declaring that nothing was shown to his dishonor." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, p.64-67.)

24:2

"thou art not excusable in thy transgressions"

"Instead of being lifted up by the favor which had been shown to him, Joseph was made to feel his own weaknesses. Chosen to be a prophet and the leader of God's people, he was conscious that he was only human, subject to human temptations and human frailties. Having the honesty and courage inspired by the Spirit of the Lord, he dared to confess this openly; and, under the same inspiration, acknowledge his transgression and make his contrition known. He was not above any law which applied to his fellow-man. Of his responsibility to God and his brethren of the Church, he was required by the law revealed through himself to the Church, to give as strict an account as any other member. They who participated with him in authority owed it not to him as an individual, but to the eternal power to which they were alike responsible." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, pp. 58-59.)

24:3, 9

"magnify thine office"

"Sometimes we speak loosely of magnifying our priesthood, but what the revelations speak of is magnifying our callings in the priesthood, as elders, seventies, high priests, patriarchs, and apostles.

"The priesthood held by man is the power and authority of God delegated to man on earth to act in all things for the salvation of mankind. Priesthood offices or callings are ministerial assignments to perform specially assigned service in the priesthood. And the way to magnify these callings is to do the work designed to be performed by those who hold the particular office involved.

"It does not matter what office we hold as long as we are true and faithful to our obligations. One office is not greater than another, although for administrative reasons one priesthood holder may be called to preside over and direct the labors of another. . . .

"We are called upon to magnify our callings in the priesthood and to do the work which goes with the office we receive. And so the Lord says, in the revelation on priesthood: 'Therefore, let every man stand in his own office, and labor in his own calling; . . . that the system may be kept perfect.' (D&C 84:109-110.)

"This is one of the great goals toward which we are working in the priesthood program of the Church, to have elders do the work of elders, seventies the work of seventies, high priests the work of high priests, and so on, so that all priesthood holders may magnify their own callings and reap the rich blessings promised from such a course." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, October 1970, pp. 90-92.)

24:9

"in temporal labors thou shalt not have strength"

The Prophet's strength was in spiritual guidance of the people and in establishing the Church in all its fulness. To attend to this grave responsibility required nearly all of his time, and there was no time for him to spend his strength in temporal matters. However, the dividing line between the spiritual and the temporal is very hazy. The Lord taught the Prophet how to build cities, to make roads, to establish schools, and to build temples. However, his field was in spiritual knowledge and in imparting this knowledge to the world. (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:122-23.)

24:13

Oliver, "require not miracles"

See Miracles and Signs in Appendix A.

"You will recollect that I have often told you that miracles would not save a person, and I say that they never should. . . . What will make me believe? What made the Twelve Apostles of Jesus Christ witnesses? What constituted them Apostles, special witnesses to the world? Was it seeing miracles? No. What was it? The visions of their minds were opened, and it was necessary that a few should receive light, knowledge, and intelligence, that all the powers of earth and hell could not gainsay or compete with. [Matt. 16:13-18; Gal. 1:11-12.]" (Brigham Young, JD 3:206.)

24:15

"leave a cursing. . . by casting off the dust of your feet"

See Feet in Appendix A.

"Our Lord instructed His Disciples to shake the dust off their feet, when departing from a house where they had not been received (Matt. 10:14). Paul did so when leaving Antioch, in Pisidia (Acts 13:51). Those who rejected the gospel message were to be considered as pagans, with whom Jews held no social intercourse. Even the dust of their dwellings and their cities, was to be treated as defilement, necessitating a cleansing. But this is not an act to be performed on slight provocation. A disciple of the Lord must learn of Him patience and long-suffering." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 126.)

24:18

"take no purse nor scrip"

See Purse or scrip in Appendix A.

"For me to travel and preach without purse and scrip was never hard; I never saw the day, I never was in the place, nor went into a house when I was alone, or when I would take the lead and do the talking, but what I could get all I wanted. . . . I could make the acquaintance of the family, and sit and sing to them and chat with them, and they would be friendly." (Brigham Young, JD 4:34.)

24:19

"prune my vineyard"

See Vineyard in Appendix A.
