Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 25

Background information on section 25

"This revelation was given to Emma Smith, wife of Joseph Smith. She was the daughter of Isaac and Elizabeth Lewis Hale, and was born July 10, 1804. She was married to the Prophet in 1827, while he was under the tutelage of the Angel Moroni. She believed in the Prophet, although her parents did not, and she was baptized by Oliver Cowdery in June, 1830. Her life from that time on was a very trying one, due to constant persecution and mobbings. She passed through these trials with her husband and shared them, as did the faithful wives of the leaders of the Church. The calling given to Emma Smith in this revelation was an important one, and was fulfilled.

"Emma Smith was human, possessing many of the characteristics which are found in most of us. Being the wife of the man whom the Almighty had blessed, she felt, as most women would have felt under like circumstances, that she was entitled to some special favors. It was difficult for her to understand why she could not view the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and other sacred things, which view had been given to special witnesses. At times this human thought caused her to murmur and ask the questions of the Prophet why she was denied this privilege. In this revelation the Lord admonishes her and tells her that it is for a wise purpose to be made known in time to come, why she and the world were deprived of this privilege." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:117.)

For biographical information on Emma Smith, see Emma Smith in Appendix B.

25:1

"those who receive my gospel are sons and daughters in my kingdom"

"The Lord has revealed that his work and his glory is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

Moreover, he has said . . . that the greatest of all his gifts is the gift of eternal life, and all who receive this gift partake of the fulness of his kingdom. While the ancient scriptures teach that those who keep their covenants and are true to the end shall become sons of God, yet this promise became obscure to men in the great apostasy. In fact, it was not understood by the Jews in the days of our Lord's ministry, and they accused him of blasphemy because he said he was the Son of God. His answer was that in the law it is written that God called them gods unto whom his words came, and 'the scriptures cannot be broken.' In the primitive Church of Jesus Christ this doctrine was plainly taught, but later, when false teachers crept into the church, and ordinances were changed, the true value of this expression became lost, and remained so until the restoration of the Gospel. In these early revelations the Lord frequently declared to those who sought him, that if they would be true to the cause they should inherit eternal life, and become his sons and his daughters. This promised blessing is based on the redemption made through the shedding of the blood of Jesus Christ." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:124-25.)

25:3

Emma Smith an "elect lady"

"Emma was an elect lady. 'In the early days of this dispensation Emma Smith, the Prophet's wife, was in such complete harmony with the Lord's program that he forgave her of her sins and addressed her as an elect lady.' . . . An elect lady is a female member of the Church who has already received, or who through obedience is qualified to receive, the fulness of gospel blessings. This includes temple endowments, celestial marriage, and the fulness of the sealing power. She is one who has been elected or chosen by faithfulness as a daughter of God in this life, an heir of God, a member of his household. Her position is comparable to that of the elders who magnify their callings in the priesthood and thereby receive all that the Father hath. (D&C 84:38.). . . Just as it is possible for the very elect to be deceived, and to fall from grace through disobedience, so an elect lady, by " failing to endure to the end, can lose her chosen status." (Bruce R. McConkie, MD, p. 217.)

"I assisted in commencing the organization of 'The Female Relief Society of Nauvoo' in the Lodge Room. Sister Emma Smith, President, and Sister Elizabeth Ann Whitney and Sarah M. Cleveland, Counselors. I gave much instruction, read in the New Testament, and Book of Doctrine and Covenants, concerning the Elect Lady, and showed that the elect meant to be elected to a certain work, etc., and that the revelation was then fulfilled by Sister Emma's election to the Presidency of the Society, she having previously been ordained to expound the Scriptures. [Sec. 25:3, 7.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 4:552-53.)

25:4

"Murmur not because of the things which thou hast not seen "

"In this revelation the Lord admonishes her and tells her that it is for a wise purpose to be made known in time to come, why she and the world were deprived of this privilege [of seeing the gold plates, etc.]. Her duty was to be obedient to her husband, hearken to him in faith, and she should have an inheritance in Zion. Even greater blessings were in store for her, she should be a daughter of God in his kingdom, and a crown of righteousness should she receive. Moreover, she was told that her duty was to be a comfort with consoling words to her husband in his afflictions, for he should have many. (D&C 24:8.) Any man who has had afflictions knows what a comfort a confiding wife can be." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:125.)

25:6

"be unto him for a scribe"

Emma Smith had served as a scribe for her husband, Joseph Smith, during the early days of the translation of the Book of Mormon.

25:7

"thou shalt be ordained . . . to expound scriptures"

"The term 'ordain' was used generally in the early days of the Church in reference to both ordination and setting apart, and, too, correctly according to the meaning of the word. Men holding the Priesthood were said to have been 'ordained' to preside over branches and to perform special work. Sisters also were said to have been 'ordained' when they were called to some special duty or responsibility. In later years we developed a distinction between ordain and setting apart. Men are ordained to offices in the Priesthood and set apart to preside over stakes, wards, branches, missions, and auxiliary organizations. The sisters are set apart—not ordained—as presidents of auxiliary organizations, to missions, etc. This saying that Emma Smith was 'ordained' to expound scripture, does not mean that she had conferred upon her the Priesthood, but that she was set apart to this calling, which found its fulfillment in the Relief Society of the Church." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:126.)

"I was in Nauvoo at the time the Relief Society was organized by the Prophet Joseph Smith, and I was present on the occasion. . . . At that meeting the Prophet called Sister Emma to be an elect lady. That means that she was called to a certain work; and was in fulfillment of a certain revelation concerning her. [Sec. 25:13.] She was elected to preside over the Relief Society, and she was ordained to expound the scriptures. In compliance with Brother Joseph's request, I set her apart and also ordained Sister Whitney, wife of Bishop Newel K. Whitney, and Sister Cleveland, wife of Judge Cleveland, to be her counselors. Some of the sisters have thought that these sisters mentioned were in this ordination ordained to the Priesthood. And for the information of all interested in this subject I will say, it is not the calling of these sisters to hold the Priesthood, only in connection with their husbands, they being one with their husbands." (John Taylor, JD 21:367-68.)

25:11

"make a selection of sacred hymns"

"The necessity of having a book of hymns became apparent at the time of the organization of the Church, and while Emma Smith may have felt she had been slighted in not having the privilege of viewing the plates, yet it was a signal honor to her to be called to be an 'elect lady' and . . . to have the privilege of divine appointment to expound scriptures in the Church, and also to be chosen to select hymns to be published for the use of the Church. Evidently she had talent for this work. That talent is shown in the selection which was made. With the help of Elder William W. Phelps, she went to work, and a selection of hymns was made." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:126.)

"It was not until 1835 . . . that the commission given to Emma Smith was fulfilled. In that year the first hymnbook for the Church was published in Kirtland by 'Frederick G. Williams and Co.' Following is the Preface to this hymnbook:

PREFACE

" 'In order to sing by the Spirit, and with the understanding, it is necessary that the church of the Latter-day Saints should have a collection of "Sacred Hymns," adapted to their faith and belief in the gospel, and, as far as can be, holding forth the promises made to the fathers who died in the precious faith of a glorious resurrection, and a thousand years' reign on earth with the Son of Man in his glory. Notwithstanding the church, as it were, is still in its infancy, yet, as the song of the righteous is a prayer unto God, it is sincerely hoped that the following collection, selected with an eye single to his glory, may answer every purpose till more are composed, or till we are blessed with a copious variety of the songs of Zion.'

"Twenty of the hymns in this book which are found in later editions, are by William W. Phelps; two are by Parley P. Pratt and one by Eliza R. Snow. Other hymns were selected from other publications, but with wisdom and care. There were all told 90 hymns." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:326.)

"Not only does the spoken word touch the hearts of the children of men, but our Heavenly Father, knowing the importance of appropriate singing in worship, called Emma Smith and appointed her to select the hymns that were published in the first hymn book of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. They have been added to from time to time, until today the songs of Zion are sung in many lands, and the words of the Gospel of Jesus Christ have been interpreted in many lands, not only by the spoken word, but by the hymns that are sung from the hearts of those who accept the Gospel of our Lord." (George Albert Smith, CR, October 1938, pp. 27-28.)

25:12

"the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me"

"A Church without sacred singing would be cold and dead. Music is one of the most ancient of the fine arts. . . . Music is an expression of the feelings and emotions of man. Our singing in our sacred places should be done unto edifying.

". . . Matthew tells us that after the feast of the Passover, when Christ introduced the Sacrament before they went forth in the spirit of sadness from that supper table from whence Christ knew he was going to his betrayal and death, they had 'sung an hymn,' a sad hymn depicting their feelings without doubt.

"Since singing is pleasing to the Lord and a prayer unto him when it is 'sacred' and a song of the heart, Latter-day Saints should endeavor always to sing in harmony with the Spirit and with understanding. Frequently the spirit of a meeting is hampered by improper music and singing. Jazz, under no condition, can be called sacred. Light, frivolous songs are always out of place in the sacred services of the Church. . . .

"Choir leaders should endeavor to be prepared with songs which will harmonize perfectly with the theme of the meeting. Musical numbers should be made to harmonize with the spirit of such meetings." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:127-28.)

"There are many references in the scriptures, both ancient and modern, that attest to the influence of righteous music. The Lord, Himself, was prepared for His greatest test through its influence, for the scripture records: 'And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.' (Mark 14:26.)" (Boyd K. Packer, CR, October 1973, pp. 24-25.)

"God delights in the song of the heart; not in the mere sounds of the lips. Singing from the heart is worship; wherefore Paul says, 'I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also' (I Cor. 14:15). In such singing God takes delight. No music is as sweet as religious compositions; none is so majestic, so inspiring." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 129.)

"I believe that we can worship in song as acceptably to him as in any other way. . . . I know of no people on earth who have written into their songs the principles of the Gospel they believe in more than have the Latter-day Saints." (Reed Smoot, CR, October 1912, pp. 50-51.)

25:12

"it [song of the righteous] shall be answered with a blessing"

"Good music is gracious praise of God. It is delightsome to the ear, and it is one of our most acceptable methods of worshipping God. And those who sing in this choir and in all the choirs of the saints should sing with the spirit and with the understanding. They should not sing merely because it is a profession, or because they have a good voice; but they should sing also because they have the spirit of it and can enter into the spirit of prayer and praise to God who gave them their sweet voices." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, October 1899, p. 69.)

25:14

"beware of pride"

"Emma Smith is admonished to beware of pride and told to let her soul delight in her husband. . . . After the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother, the Patriarch Hyrum Smith, Emma Smith refused to hearken to the counsels of the presiding authorities of the Church. President Brigham Young endeavored to treat her with kindness and offered to furnish her with teams and provisions and care for her and bring her to Salt Lake Valley, but she refused this offer, resented the counsels of the Apostles and departed from the body of the Church." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:126-27.)
