Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 27

Background information on section 27

"Early in the month of August, Newel Knight and his wife paid us a visit at my place in Harmony, Pennsylvania; and as neither his wife nor mine had been as yet confirmed, it was proposed that we should confirm them and partake together of the sacrament, before he and his wife should leave us. In order to prepare for this I set out to procure some wine for the occasion, but had gone only a short distance when I was met by a heavenly messenger, and received the following revelation, the first four paragraphs of which were written at this time, and the remainder in September following: [Section 27.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:106.)

"This heavenly messenger told Joseph Smith that it mattered not what should be used for the Sacrament, and he was not to purchase wine or strong drink from his enemies. The reason for this is obvious, for the Prophet had many enemies. However, this reason went further than merely protection against his enemies, for it was a caution against evil and designing persons who would adulterate these things. (See Word of Wisdom, section 89.) Joseph Smith was also told that wine should not be used for the Sacrament unless it was made by the Saints, and should be had new among them. While the Church did not adopt the custom of using water exclusively in the Sacrament at that early time, yet it was from this time that water was used as a substitute for wine, which had been used principally because of its resemblance to blood. Today throughout the Church water is used in the Sacrament in remembrance of the blood of Jesus Christ which was shed for the remission of sins in behalf of all who repent and accept the Gospel." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:132.)

27:2

"it mattereth not what ye shall eat or . . . drink when ye partake of the sacrament"

See Sacrament in Appendix A.

"By some it is very well understood that in the days of ancient Israel while in the land of Palestine they were not blessed so profusely as we are with the crystal streams from the mountains. They were in the habit of drinking a great deal of wine, and among the few who have continued to inhabit that land, this habit I believe has been kept up to the present time. It is a wine country. But the Lord has said to us it mattereth not what we partake of when we administer the cup to the people, inasmuch as we do it with an eye single to the glory of God; it is then acceptable to him. Consequently we use water as though it were wine; for we are commanded to drink not of wine for this sacred purpose except it be made by our own hands." (Brigham Young, JD 19:92.)

27:5

"I will drink of the fruit of the vine with you"

The Savior includes prophets from Old Testament, New Testament, and Book of Mormon times as being among those with whom he will partake of the sacrament in his "Father's kingdom . . . on the earth." It is interesting to note that Joseph who was sold into Egypt was included (usually the Bible refers to the God of "Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob"); he is mentioned prominently in both the Bible and the Book of Mormon and, of course, is the forefather of many of the peoples of the Book of Mormon.

"The Savior informed his Apostles on the night he ate the Passover that he would not drink of the 'fruit of the vine' with them again, until he should 'drink it new with them in the kingdom of God.' [See Matt. 26:29 and Luke 22:18.] This was reiterated in the revelation to Joseph Smith, wherein the Lord promised to drink and eat with his prophets and saints, in his Father's kingdom which shall be built up on the earth." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:132-33.)

"Can a resurrected being eat food of earth? [Luke 24:39-43.] A resurrected being can function upon any lower plane. A resurrected personage can do anything that a mortal personage can do, and much besides." (James E. Talmage, CR, April 1928, p. 93.)

27:5

"the record of the stick of Ephraim"

The "stick of Ephraim" might include additional records than are included in our present Book of Mormon—for example, (1) the sealed portion of the plates of Mormon, (2) the brass plates of Laban, (3) the unabridged large plates of Nephi.

27:7

"Elias"

See Elias in Appendix A.

"It was Gabriel who appeared to Zacharias and promised him a son, and who appeared to Mary and announced the coming of the Son of God as recorded by Luke. It was also Gabriel as an Elias who is mentioned in the Doctrine and Covenants, Section 27, verse 7, and was Gabriel or Noah, who stands next to Michael or Adam in the Priesthood." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, April 1960, p. 72.)

27:13

"dispensation of the gospel for the last times; and for the fulness of times"

See Dispensation in Appendix A.

"Now the thing to be known is, what the fulness of times means, or the extent or authority thereof. It means this, that the dispensation of the fulness of times is made up of all the dispensations that have been given since the world began, until this time. Unto Adam first was given a dispensation. It is well known that God spake to him with his own voice in the garden, and gave him the promise of the Messiah. [Moses 4:14-21; 5:9.] And unto Noah also was a dispensation given; for Jesus said, 'As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of Man' [Matt. 24:37]; and as the righteous were saved then, and the wicked destroyed, so it will be now. And from Noah to Abraham, and from Abraham to Moses, and from Moses to Elias, and from Elias to John the Baptist, and from them to Jesus Christ, and from Jesus Christ to Peter, James and John, the Apostles—all received in their time a dispensation by revelation from God, to accomplish the great scheme of restitution spoken of by all the holy prophets since the world began; the end of which is the dispensation of the fulness of times, in the which all things shall be fulfilled that have been spoken of since the earth was made. [Sec. 128:20-21.]" (David W. Patten, HC 3:51-53.)

"It is called the 'dispensation of the fulness of times,' wherein God will gather together all things in one, whether they be things in the heavens or things in the earth. It is a dispensation in which all the holy prophets that ever lived upon the face of the earth are interested. They prophesied about it as the grand and great consummation in the accomplishment of the purposes of God [Acts 3:19-21]; purposes which he designed before the morning stars sang together, or the sons of God shouted for joy, or this world itself rolled into existence. It is a work in which we, our progenitors and our posterity are especially interested. . . . " (John Taylor, JD 24:260-61.)

27:15-18

"take upon you my whole armor. . . breastplate . . . shield . . . helmet. . . sword"

See Armor of God in Appendix A.

27:16

"the preparation of the gospel of peace"

"'Preparation' is the word used in Eph. 6:15, where it means 'equipment.' He who desires victory in this conflict, must have the entire equipment of the gospel. This includes the holy Priesthood, the ordinances of the Church, continuous revelation, and all other divinely-appointed means of salvation. . . . " (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 138.)

If the principles of the gospel were lived by all the peoples on the earth, we would have peace; thus it is indeed the "gospel of peace."
