Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 28

Background information on section 28

"To our great grief, however, we soon found that Satan had been lying in wait to deceive, and seeking whom he might devour. Brother Hiram Page had in his possession a certain stone, by which he had obtained certain 'revelations' concerning the upbuilding of Zion, the order of the Church, etc., all of which were entirely at variance with the order of God's house as laid down in the New Testament, as well as in our late revelations. As a conference meeting had been appointed for the 26th day of September, I thought it wisdom not to do much more than to converse with the brethren on the subject, until the conference should meet. Finding, however, that many, especially the Whitmer family and Oliver Cowdery, were believing much in the things set forth by this stone, we thought best to inquire of the Lord concerning so important a matter; and before conference convened, we received the following: [Section 28.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:109-10.)

"Hiram Page was born in Vermont in 1800. He joined the Church five days after its organization and was baptized by Oliver Cowdery in Seneca Lake. Previously he had become one of the Eight Witnesses of the Book of Mormon. Soon after his baptism he obtained a stone by means of which he received certain spurious revelations, at variance with the principles of the Gospel and the revelations received by Joseph Smith. Among other things he claimed to have received a revelation making known the place where the City of Zion would be built. In reading the Book of Mormon (Ether 13) it was discovered that Zion, or the New Jerusalem, was to be built upon this continent. This prediction caused some speculation at that early day, and Hiram Page endeavored to settle the question by means of revelation received through his stone. As it was but a few months after the organization of the Church, the members had not learned that there was but one appointed of the Lord to receive revelations for the Church, and several others thought that Hiram Page or Oliver Cowdery could receive revelations just as well as Joseph Smith. Oliver Cowdery and the members of the Whitmer family were deceived by these false declarations of Hiram Page. This caused serious trouble and Oliver Cowdery took the Prophet to task for not accepting what Hiram Page had given. Finally the Prophet persuaded Oliver Cowdery that these things were wrong, and later the whole membership renounced the revelation given through this stone, but this did not come until the Lord had given to the Church the revelation known as section twenty-eight." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:134-35.)

28:2

"no one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting" the head of the Church

"I will inform you that it is contrary to the economy of God for any member of the Church, or any one, to receive instructions for those in authority, higher than themselves; therefore you will see the impropriety of giving heed to them; but if any person have a vision or a visitation from a heavenly messenger, it must be for his own benefit and instruction, for the fundamental principles, government, and doctrine of the Church are vested in the keys of the kingdom." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:338.)

"Today the doctrine that revelation for the Church comes only through the one who is duly appointed and who holds the keys of the kingdom, and that there is but one at a time called to that position is well understood by all faithful members of the Church. Each member of the Church has the right to receive inspiration and revelation for his or her own guidance, but such revelation is not to be exploited or made common property, but is given for the welfare of the individual who received it." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:136.)

"It is not my business nor that of any other individual to rise up as a revelator, as a prophet, as a seer, as an inspired man, to give revelation for the guidance of the Church, or to assume to dictate to the presiding authorities of the Church in any part of the world, much less in the midst of Zion. . . .

"And the moment that individuals [Church members] look to any other source, that moment they throw themselves open to the seductive influences of Satan, and render themselves liable to become servants of the devil; they lose sight of the true order through which the blessings of the Priesthood are to be enjoyed; they step outside of the pale of the kingdom of God, and are on dangerous ground." (Joseph F. Smith, JD 24:188-89.)

28:3-8

Oliver Cowdery to write, but not by way of commandment

"Oliver Cowdery . . . received at the same time that the Prophet Joseph did the Aaronic Priesthood. . . . He afterwards received, in common with Joseph, the administration of those who held the keys of the Apostleship in the flesh on the earth—that is, Peter, James and John. . . . He [Oliver Cowdery] became an Apostle with Joseph, being the second Apostle in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Now, it might be thought a man thus favored . . . would have stood alongside of the Prophet and been of equal authority in giving the word of God in writing unto the people. But no. God drew a distinction and plainly told Oliver Cowdery that that which he wrote to this Church should not be by way of commandments to the Church, but by wisdom. The Lord said to him [Sec. 28:4, quoted]. It was only one man's privilege, one man's authority to stand preeminent in the earth at one time, holding the keys and giving the commandments of God—or rather the Lord—giving his commandments through him in writing to the Church." (George Q. Cannon, JD 24:363-64.)

28:6

"thou shalt not command him who is at . . . the head of the church"

"It was very necessary that Oliver Cowdery should receive this admonition, for he was inclined to take issue with the Prophet even in regard to matters of revelation. Much good came out of this unpleasant incident, for the members were taught that there was order in the Church and only one appointed to receive commandments and revelations for their guidance, and he was the one God had called. The members at that time were largely excusable for falling into this error, because they had but recently come into the Church and had to be taught in all things pertaining to the kingdom of God and its government. They did not know that it was wrong for a man other than the Prophet to claim to be the spokesman for the Almighty, and this revelation taught them that confusion would result from such a course, and that Joseph Smith held the keys of revelation until another was appointed to succeed him." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:135-36.)

28:7

"appoint . . . another in his stead"

"Some of the enemies of the Church try to make a point out of the saying that Joseph Smith was to 'appoint another in his stead.' This provision was made at the time this revelation was given so that the Church would know the order even if Joseph Smith should fall. Later, after the Prophet had been tested and proved, the Lord said: [D&C 90:1-4, quoted.]

"Thus, we see, that the Lord placed upon Joseph Smith the keys of this dispensation and said that because of his faithfulness he should hold them throughout all eternity. In Nauvoo, a few months before the martyrdom, the Prophet conferred upon the heads of the Twelve Apostles all the keys and authorities which he held, and told them that henceforth they would have to bear off the kingdom, for he would be taken away." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:137.)

28:11-13

Hiram Page deceived by Satan

"Hiram Page was born in the year 1800, and, when a young man, traveled considerably as a physician. He joined the Church on the 11th of April, 1830, and became one of the Eight Witnesses to the Book of Mormon. In due time he removed to Independence, Mo., and later became one of the pioneers of the City of Far West. In 1838, however, he drifted away from the Church. He never rescinded his testimony. He died on the 12th of August, 1852." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 143.)

28:13

"Common consent"

See Common consent in Appendix A.
