Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 29

Background information on section 29

"In these early days of the Church the Lord revealed to the Prophet for the benefit of the members, line upon line and precept upon precept, thus unfolding to them the great truths of the Gospel. This revelation [Sec. 29] was given a few days before the conference of September 26, 1830, and in anticipation of that gathering. The Lord had commanded Oliver Cowdery to tarry [Sec. 28:10] until after this conference should be held, before departing on his mission to the Lamanites. The wonderful doctrines explained in this revelation were of such importance that it was well for Oliver and his companions to know them that they might teach the people on their way, and to the Lamanites when they arrived at their destination, with a more complete comprehension of the plan of Salvation than they otherwise would have had." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:130.)

"The Saints at Fayette were looking forward with anticipation to the conference that was to be held on the 26th of September, 1830. The first conference had been the occasion of a Pentecostal outpouring of the Holy Spirit, and there was every reason to believe that the second would be a similar spiritual feast. Some time before the September Conference this Revelation was given in the presence of six Elders." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 145.)

29:1

"Listen to the voice of Jesus Christ"

"In giving revelations our Savior speaks at times for himself; at other times for the Father, and in the Father's name, as though he were the Father, and yet it is Jesus Christ, our Redeemer who gives the message. So, we see, in Doctrine and Covenants 29:1, that he introduces himself as 'Jesus Christ, your Redeemer,' but in the closing part of the revelation he speaks for the Father, and in the Father's name as though he were the Father, and yet it is still Jesus who is speaking, for the Father has put his name upon him for that purpose." (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 1:27-28.)

29:1

"the Great I AM"

See I AM in Appendix A.

29:1

"your Redeemer. . . hath atoned for your sins"

See Jesus Christ in Appendix A.

"Again the Lord declares that through his mercy he has offered atonement for sin. As Paul said, through that atonement we were bought with a price and therefore we belong to Jesus Christ who purchased us with his blood. (See 1 Cor. 6:20; 7:23.) Man was under the bondage of sin and unable to free himself, and Jesus Christ came into the world, offering himself a ransom to pay the price of transgression through the shedding of his blood that all men might be freed from death and have remission of their sins, on condition of their repentance. Previously the Lord had made it known that his blood would not free the unrepentant sinner, who should suffer for his transgressions even as he, Christ, suffered. (Sec. 19:15-19.) Frequently in these revelations our Lord refers to himself as 'your Redeemer,' and speaks of his suffering for the remission of sin in behalf of all who will repent and obey him." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:140-41.)

29:2

"as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings"

See material for D&C 10:65.

29:5

"I am . . . your advocate with the Father"

See Advocate and Jesus Christ in Appendix A.

29:7

"the gathering of mine elect"

See Elect in Appendix A.

"Where people are pure and chaste in their thoughts and actions, the Spirit of God has such power with them that they readily perceive and comprehend the truth. It is by this means that the best among the children of God are being gathered out from the nations. Truth cleaves to truth, light to light and purity to purity. [Section 88:40.] The Gospel gathers within its influence those who love its principles; and if any should be gathered in who cannot abide its requirements, they pass off and mingle with the elements that are congenial to the spirit they possess." (George Q. Cannon, LJS 25:169.)

29:9-10

"the hour is nigh"

See Second coming in Appendix A.

"This Church proclaims the doctrine of the impending return of the Christ to earth in literal simplicity, without mental or other reservation in our interpretation of the scriptural predictions. He will come with the body of flesh and bones in which his Spirit was tabernacled when he ascended from Mount Olivet. One of the characteristic features of the Church concerning that great, and in the language of the scripture, both glorious and terrible event, is its nearness. It is close at hand. The mission of the Church is to prepare the earth for the coming of its Lord. Biblical prophecies are numerous [Luke 21:7-28; Mark 8:38; Acts 1:11;1 Thess. 4:16]; the Book of Mormon prophecies are abundant, respecting the return of the Christ [1 Ne. 22:24; Mosiah 15:20; 3 Ne. 21:25; 29:2]. His own words, both before and after his crucifixion and resurrection are unambiguous, definite, convincing, and convicting unto those . . . in this day and age of the world he has spoken with his own voice unto his prophets, impressing upon them the fact that the time of his coming in judgment is near at hand. [Sec. 34:7, 8, 12; 63:34; 133:17.] Thus, within a few months after the Church was organized, in the year 1830, as recorded in the 29th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord Jesus Christ said unto his Prophet Joseph Smith: [Sec. 29:9-11, quoted.]" (James E. Talmage, CR, April 1916, pp. 126-27.)

29:9

"I will burn them up"

See Burned in Appendix A.

29:11

"I will. . . dwell. . . on earth a thousand years"

See Millennium in Appendix A.

"That our Lord will reign upon this Earth, and that the Saints will reign with Him for a thousand years, is clearly revealed. This truth was generally accepted among the Christians till the fourth century. From that time till the Reformation, the general opinion was against a literal Millennium. At the time of the Reformation, the so-called Anabaptists declared their belief in it, and that was enough to damn the doctrine in the eyes of their bigoted opponents. In England it was condemned as 'Jewish dotage.' Later, Rome declared against a literal Millennium, while Protestants took the opposite view. Some who believe in a Millennium hold that Christianity will be gradually diffused until the entire race is Christianized, and that will be the Millennium. This is an error. The world will be redeemed through the mighty arm of Jehovah; through judgments and tribulation. The general conversion will take place during the Millennium." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 15.)

29:12

"the Twelve. . . shall. . . judge"

"We may here state that Christ is called the judge of the quick and the dead, the judge of all the earth. We further read that the Twelve Apostles who ministered in Jerusalem 'shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.' (Matt. 19:28.)

"And Nephi writes in the Book of Mormon: [1 Ne. 12:8-10, quoted.]

"This exhibits a principle of adjudication or judgment in the hands, firstly, of the Great High Priest and King, Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of God; secondly, in the hands of the Twelve Apostles on the continent of Asia, bestowed by Jesus himself; thirdly, in the Twelve Disciples on this continent, to their people, who . . . are under the presidency of the Twelve Apostles who ministered at Jerusalem; . . . and, further, the First Presidency and Twelve who have officiated in our age." (John Taylor, MA, pp. 152-53.)

29:13

"a trump shall sound . . . even as upon Mount Sinai"

See Trump in Appendix A.

29:14-21

"before. . . [that] day shall come . . ."

For information on the calamities on the earth that shall precede the second coming of Jesus Christ in power and glory, read the material listed for Second coming in Appendix A.

29:17

"cup of mine indignation"

When read in context, it is quite clear that the Lord's cup of indignation is full when the people have become so wicked that the law of justice must take effect and the prophesied punishments must come.

29:17

"my blood shall not cleanse them if they hear me not"

"On the cross our Savior paid the debt that made mankind free. He bought us with the price of his precious blood. We are not our own for we are bought with a price. [Acts 20:28.] His blood atones for all our sins, through obedience to righteousness, but it shall not cleanse those who obey not his commandments." (Charles A. Callis, CR, October 1937, p. 122.)

29:18-20

"flies. . . maggots. . . their flesh shall fall"

Some of these predicted plagues were also listed by Zechariah:

"'And this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the people that have fought against Jerusalem; Their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongues shall consume away in their mouth.' (Zech. 14:12.) There is no promise that this great plague of hail, destruction and disease shall be confined to any one section of the earth. It is a calamity which will come upon the wicked because they will not repent. We may well believe that in addition to the plague of flies there shall be included in this prediction the plague of microbes, or bacilli, new to the scientific world and with which they will not be able to cope, much of which will be the result of impure lives." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 152.)

29:21

The destruction of "the great and abominable church"

This is the only place in the Doctrine and Covenants in which the term great and abominable church is used. However, it is mentioned many times in the Book of Mormon (1 Ne. 13:5-6, 26, 28, 32, 34; 14:3, 9-17), and the cross-reference in the Doctrine and Covenants suggests it is the church of the devil referred to in D&C 10:56.

29:22-25

"there shall be a new heaven and a new earth"

See New heaven and a new earth in Appendix A.

"This does not mean that this earth shall pass away and another take its place, and the heaven thereof shall pass away, and another heaven shall take its place, but that the earth and its heaven shall, after passing away, through death, be renewed again in immortality. This earth is living and must die, but since it keeps the law it shall be restored through the resurrection by which it shall become celestialized and the abode of celestial beings. . . . The Lord intends to save, not only the earth and the heavens, not only man who dwells upon the earth, but all things which he has created. The animals, the fishes of the sea, the fowls of the air, as well as man, are to be re-created, or renewed, through the resurrection, for they too are living souls." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, October 1928, pp. 99-100.)

29:25

"not one hair, neither mote, shall be lost"

This distinctive phrase indicates the thoroughness of God and of his judgment.

29:27

"on my right hand"

See Right hand in Appendix A.

29:28

"Depart from me, ye cursed"

See Perdition in Appendix A.

"This is the final fate of the sons of perdition (See 76:32-39). It should be noted that in Matthew those on the right side are 'blessed of my Father,' while those of the left side are 'cursed.' This curse they bring upon themselves by their disobedience, and not because it pleases the Creator to see them punished. 'For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved. What, do ye suppose that mercy can rob justice? I say unto you, nay; not one whit. If so, God would cease to be God.' (Alma 42:24-25.)" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 155.)

"The Lord never authorized [anyone] to say that the devil, his angels [Sec. 76:44-48] or the sons of perdition, should ever be restored; for their state of destiny was not revealed to man, is not revealed, nor ever shall be revealed, save to those who are made partakers thereof: consequently those who teach this doctrine, have not received it of the Spirit of the Lord. Truly Brother Oliver [Cowdery] declared it to be the doctrine of devils. We therefore command that this doctrine be taught no more in Zion." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:366.)

29:28

"everlasting fire "

See Everlasting fire in Appendix A.

29:30

"the first shall be last, and . . . last shall be first"

The Lord has indicated that he is no respecter of persons. (Deut. 1:17; Acts 10:34; Moro. 8:12; D&C 1:35; 38:16, 26.) Thus the practice that the first shall be last and the last shall be first is evidently the operation of a divine principle showing the impartiality of God. Once a people has had full opportunity to accept the gospel and has refused to accept it, justice would seem to indicate that other peoples should have opportunity to hear the gospel before the first group has another chance.

In the former dispensation, the gospel was first preached to the Jews and then, after they rejected it, it was taken to the Gentiles. In the dispensation in which we live, the gospel was first taken to the Gentile nations, and scattered Israel other than the Jews were gathered out; and after being preached among the Gentile nations, it shall go to the Jews, the first being last and the last being first, as the Savior promised. (Luke 13:28-30; see also 1 Ne. 13:42.) (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 3:259.)

Doctrine and Covenants references pertaining to this principle are: 29:30; 88:59; 90:9; 107:33-35, 97.

29:31-35

All things created by the power of the Lord's Spirit—"first spiritual, secondly temporal"

See Spiritual and Temporal in Appendix A.

"In the twenty-ninth section of the Doctrine and Covenants, God says that he made all things. He speaks there of the earth and the animals upon it, and the vegetation that grows out of the ground, and of the material things which men handle. The Lord says he created them all by the word of his power, 'firstly spiritual, and secondly temporal'; and the last of his works will be 'firstly temporal, and secondly spiritual.' But he explains further, that to him all these things are spiritual, because they are eternal. The elements are eternal, and therefore God calls them spiritual; for the things that are temporal are those that pass away, and the things that are spiritual are those that remain. . . . The elements . . . cannot be annihilated. Not one particle of matter can be annihilated; not one particle of spirit can be annihilated; for they are eternal. They always were, in their essential particles, in their primary elements, and they always will abide, though their forms may be changed by the power of the great Creator." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, April 1905, p.71.)

"In our mortal, or carnal, way of thinking, many of the commandments the Lord has required seem to be temporal, but he has said that at no time has he given a temporal law. (D&C 29:34.) All things to him are spiritual, or in other words intended to be eternal. The Lord does not think in temporal terms; his plan is to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. In his eyes, therefore, all the commandments that have to do with our present welfare, are considered to be but steps on the way to his eternal salvation." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:307-8.)

"Not at any time. . . law which was temporal] Man makes a distinction between temporal and spiritual laws, and some are very much concerned about keeping the two separate. To the Lord everything is both spiritual and temporal, and the laws He gives are consequently spiritual, because they concern spiritual beings. When He commanded Adam to eat bread in the sweat of his brow, or Moses to strike the rock that the people might drink, or the Prophet Joseph to erect the Nauvoo House, or the Saints in Utah to build fences and roads, such laws were for their spiritual welfare, as well as physical. To obey such laws, when given, is a spiritual duty. One who performs his daily labor 'as to the Lord, and not to men' (Eph. 6:7) derives spiritual benefit from whatever his duties are." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 156.)

29:36-40

"the devil and his angels"

See Satan in Appendix A.

29:40

"Adam . . . partook . . . transgressed . . . yielded unto temptation "

"How did Adam and Eve sin? Did they come out in direct opposition to God and to his government? No. But they transgressed a command of the Lord, and through that transgression sin came into the world. The Lord knew they would do this, and he had designed that they should." (Brigham Young, JD 10:312.)

"Here let me say, that therein consisted the fall—the eating of things unfit, the taking into the body of things that made of that body a thing of earth; and I take this occasion to raise my voice against the false interpretation of scripture, which has been adopted by certain people, and is current in their minds, and is referred to in a hushed and half-secret way, that the fall of man consisted in some offense against the laws of chastity and virtue. Such a doctrine is an abomination. . . . Our first parents were pure and noble, and when we pass behind the veil we shall perhaps learn something of their high estate, more than we know now. But be it known that they were pure; they were noble. It is true that they disobeyed the law of God, in eating things they were told not to eat; but who amongst you can rise up and condemn?" (James E. Talmage, CR, October 1913, pp. 118-19.)

"Our first ancestor was actually tempted. This was possible, because he was endowed with free agency. There can be no free agency where there is no possibility to choose between right and wrong. . . . Hence, God gave the law concerning the fruit of the trees in the garden. Adam was tempted, but, as Paul informs us, 'he was not deceived' (1 Tim. 2:14), as was Eve. He partook of the forbidden fruit in order not to be separated from his wife, fully understanding the consequences. 'Adam fell that man might be' (2 Nephi 2:25)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 158.)

29:41-45

The "first death" and the "last death" are both spiritual

See Spiritual in Appendix A.

"When Adam transgressed in the Garden of Eden he died the spiritual death, as well as changing his nature and bringing upon himself mortality. Spiritual death is banishment from the presence of God, and Adam was shut out from the presence of the Lord. Angels were sent to him, however, to teach him the plan of salvation. The earth probation was prolonged that he might repent and accept the plan offered to him. Through his repentance, baptism and confirmation he was brought back again into the presence of God through the Holy Ghost. This same spiritual death comes upon all unrepentant and unbaptized men, and the only way they can be brought from spiritual death to spiritual life is through obedience to the Gospel. By this means all men may be redeemed, as Adam was, from the spiritual fall, but all who will not receive the Gospel 'cannot be redeemed from their spiritual fall, because they repent not.' (D&C 29:44.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:144.)

29:46

"little children are redeemed"

See Children in Appendix A.

"Through the atonement of Jesus Christ all little children are redeemed, for they cannot sin, and the power is not given to Satan to tempt them. The question naturally may arise as to the meaning of the words of the Lord (verse 46) that 'little children are redeemed through the Only Begotten.' This does not mean that redemption was made for them before, or at, the foundation of the world, but at that time when the plan of salvation was received provision was made for the redemption of little children and also for those who are without the law, and this was consummated in the atonement made by Jesus Christ. In a vision given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord revealed 'that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability, are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven.' (HC 2:381.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:144.)

29:46

"from the foundation of the world"

See Pre-earthly existence in Appendix A.

The term from the foundation of the world indicates that the particular item being discussed was provided for in the pre-earthly councils before the earth was ever created in its present condition. Thus, all things related to the atonement of Jesus Christ (resurrection; possibility of sanctification and eternal life; redemption of children, etc.) were made part of the gospel plan from the very beginning, and they pertain to those who lived before the time of Christ as well as to those who lived later.

29:47

"become accountable before me"

See materials listed for 18:42.
