Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 30

Background information on section 30

"At length our conference assembled. The subject of the stone previously mentioned was discussed (Section 28), and after considerable investigation Brother Page, as well as the whole Church who were present, renounced the said stone, and all things connected therewith, much to our mutual satisfaction and happiness. We now partook of the Sacrament, confirmed and ordained many, and attended to a great variety of Church business on the first of the two following days of the conference, during which time we had much of the power of God manifested amongst us; the Holy Ghost came upon us, and filled us with joy unspeakable; and peace, and faith, and hope, and charity abounded in our midst.

"Before we separated we received the following: [Sections 30 and 31, follow.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:115.)

For biographical information on David Whitmer, Peter Whitmer, Jr., and John Whitmer, see the material listed after their names in Appendix B.

30:1-4

"David . . . your mind has been on the things of the earth . . . and you have not given heed unto my Spirit"

"It seems a little strange that so soon after the wonderful manifestation which he [David Whitmer] had received and the witnessing of the outpouring of the Spirit at other times, that he would forget, but human nature is such that all of us need constant reminding of our responsibilities or we are likely to lapse into some indifference. The need of constant prayer and concentration of our thoughts on the things of the kingdom, and sincere attention to duty, is apparent with most of us, lest we slip. How frequently the Lord has had to caution his people against the weaknesses of the flesh!" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:146.)

30:5-8

"Peter. . . take your journey with. . . Oliver"

"To Peter Whitmer, Jr., the Lord gave a commandment that he should take his journey with Oliver Cowdery on a mission to the Lamanites. From the very beginning the attention of the Prophet and his brethren had been drawn to the Lamanites. This was due, of course, to the fact that great promises had been made to them in the Book of Mormon that the Gospel would be given to them in this dispensation and eventually they would be restored to full fellowship and favor before the Lord. . . . Moreover, Peter was informed that there was none appointed to be Oliver's counselor, except Joseph Smith. Thus Peter understood that it was his duty to take, not to give, counsel while on this journey. The fact that Oliver Cowdery had shared with Joseph Smith in the conferring of Priesthood and authority on all occasions naturally gave to him the authority to stand second in the Church to Joseph Smith in the government of the Church." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:136.)

30:9-11

"John . . . proclaim my gospel"

"John Whitmer was commanded to proclaim the Gospel. . . . He was not to fear man but devote his entire time to the cause of the Gospel. Later he was to be called to take the responsibility of keeping the history from the shoulders of Oliver Cowdery [Sec. 47:1-4]." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:136-37.)
