Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 31

Background information on section 31

For additional biographical information on Thomas B. Marsh, who became one of the members of the initial Council of the Twelve Apostles in this dispensation, read the material after his name in Appendix B. Section 112 (verses 10-12, 14-15, 27, 34) also contains specific instructions to him.

"At [the] time Thomas B. Marsh joined the Church, he had been a member of the Methodist Church, but when comparing their doctrines with the scriptures, he failed to make them agree, so he withdrew from that sect and sought some other organization teaching the doctrines as he felt he discovered them in the Bible. He predicted that such an organization would arise. He was moved by the Spirit of the Lord to move west. His home was in Massachusetts. He met Martin Harris while the Book of Mormon was being printed and remained with him for several days and then returned to his home in Boston, but kept up correspondence with the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery, and upon learning of the organization of the Church, he moved to Palmyra in September, 1830, and was baptized by David Whitmer and a few days later was ordained an elder by Oliver Cowdery. . . .

"Thomas B. Marsh was a man of ability and could have been very useful in the Church, but he failed when persecution became strong and did not endure in his afflictions. When the opposition to the Church became severe and his feelings were disturbed, he left the Church and spoke in an evil and bitter spirit against the Prophet and the Church, thus encouraging our enemies. The falsehoods which he uttered have been used by the enemies of the Church to this day. Later in his life, however, when he was a broken man, he returned to the Church and, standing before the congregation, called upon them to look upon him as an object of apostasy, and he warned the members to avoid a course which would bring them to a similar condition." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:147-48.)

31:2

"you have had many afflictions because of your family"

"About the time he [Thomas B. Marsh] was preparing to leave this Church, he received a revelation in the Printing Office. He retired to himself, and prayed, and was humble, and God gave him a revelation, and he wrote it. There were from three to five pages of it; and when he came out he read it to Brother Brigham [Young] and me. In it, God told him what to do, and that was to sustain Brother Joseph and to believe that what Brother Joseph had said was true. But no; he took a course to sustain his wife and oppose the Prophet of God, and she led him away. . . .

"Thomas B. Marsh was once the President over the Quorum of the Twelve—over Brother Brigham, me, and others; and God saw fit to give him a revelation to forewarn him of the course he would take; and still he took that course. We told him that if he would listen to that revelation he had received, he would be saved; but he listened to his wife, and away he went. His wife is now dead. . . . She led him some eighteen years; and as soon as she died, he came to Winter Quarters—now Florence—and has written to us, pleading for mercy. We have extended it to him, and he will probably be here this season or the next." (Heber C. Kimball, JD 5:28-29.)

31:1-13

"Thomas. . . Pray always, lest you.. . lose your reward"

"Many have said to me, 'How is it that a man like you, who understood so much of the revelations of God as recorded in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, should fall away?' I told them not to feel too secure, but to take heed lest they also should fall, for I had no scruples in my mind as to the possibility of men falling away. [Sec. 20:32-34.]

"I can say, in reference to the Quorum of the Twelve, to which I belonged, that I did not consider myself a whit behind any of them, and I suppose that others had the same opinion; but, let no one feel too secure; for, before you think of it, your steps will slide. You will not then think nor feel for a moment as you did before you lost the Spirit of Christ; for when men apostatize, they are left to grovel in the dark. . . . Had I known as much of the Church of Jesus Christ and its doctrines before I apostatized as I now know, I think I could not have back-slidden." (Thomas B. Marsh, JD 5:206, 208-9.)
