Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 32

Background information on section 32

"During this conference [at Fayette, New York], which continued three days, the utmost harmony prevailed, and all things were settled satisfactorily to all present, and a desire was manifested by all the saints to go forward and labor with all their powers to spread the great and glorious principles of truth, which had been revealed by our Heavenly Father. A number were baptized during the conference, and the word of the Lord spread and prevailed.

"At this time a great desire was manifested by several of the Elders respecting the remnants of the house of Joseph, the Lamanites, residing in the west—knowing that the purposes of God were great respecting that people, and hoping that the time had come when the promises of the Almighty in regard to them were about to be accomplished, and that they would receive the Gospel, and enjoy its blessings. The desire being so great, it was agreed that we should inquire of the Lord respecting the propriety of sending some of the Elders among them, which we accordingly did, and received the following: [D&C 32]." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:118.)

For biographical information on Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson, see the materials listed after each of their names in Appendix B.

32:1

"Parley P. Pratt. . . be meek and lowly of heart"

"Parley P. Pratt was admonished to be meek and lowly of heart. In the year 1837, there were 'jarrings and discord' in the Church at Kirtland, and he was overcome with that spirit. He even tried to turn John Taylor from the Prophet by pointing out to him what he regarded as Joseph's error. Elder Taylor rebuked him as a brother, and Parley P. Pratt went to the Prophet in tears and confessed his sin, whereupon the Prophet frankly forgave him, prayed with him, and blessed him. This was meekness. It was also manliness. Only a really strong character can possess true humility." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 171.)

32:1-2

"declare my gospel . . . among the Lamanites"

"The revelation formerly given through the Prophet to Oliver Cowdery [Sec. 28:14-16], enunciating the divine decree concerning the Lamanites and the work to be accomplished among them, created great interest in the minds of the Elders of the Church. . . . Joseph and his brethren realized the purposes of God toward the Indians of this land were great and far-reaching, and that the time would come when they must receive the Gospel and enjoy its blessings. Many of the Elders expressed a desire to take up the work of the ministry among their brethren . . . but before appointing anyone to aid Oliver and Peter Whitmer in this mission, Joseph inquired of the Lord. [Oct. 1830.]" (George Q. Cannon, LJS, pp. 78-79.)

"These missionaries [Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt, Peter Whitmer, Jr., Ziba Peterson], left in the fall of 1830. On the way they stopped at Kirtland, Ohio, and the neighboring villages. There they preached the newly restored gospel with astonishing results. . . . There Parley P. Pratt presented to Sidney Rigdon, his old friend and teacher, a copy of the Book of Mormon.

"Before long several persons applied for baptism. Sidney Rigdon, a Campbellite writer and eloquent preacher, entered the waters of baptism. Branches were organized. The field there seemed fertile for the preaching of the restored gospel. The missionaries spent several weeks in the Kirtland territory to expound the gospel to interested listeners.

"However, the missionaries had been called to go to the Indian territory. Winter was coming, so about November 1st, they left the congenial Kirtland area and moved westward. On the way they proselyted and left copies of the Book of Mormon here and there.

"Then the winter of 1830-31, the severest in the memories of men, descended upon them. . . . Despite the weather, and under great suffering, they walked through snow and over ice for three hundred miles. At last they reached Independence, Missouri. Since they had disposed of all their copies of the Book of Mormon, Parley P. Pratt was selected to return for a new supply.

"Meanwhile, under restrictions set up by the Indian agents, the missionaries had little access to the Indians. But they preached long and loud to the Missouri settlers. To support themselves they did such work as was available. They set up a tailor shop in Independence; some of their patrons became defenders of the Latter-day Saints later when persecution raged.

"All in all, this mission bore rich fruit." (John A. Widtsoe, JS, pp. 136-37.)

Oliver Cowdery also went on this mission to the Lamanites. Following are excerpts from a letter he wrote on May 7, 1831, from Kaw Township, Missouri, concerning this trip:

"Brother Ziba Peterson and myself went into the county east, and in the name of Jesus, we called on the people to repent, many of whom are, I believe, earnestly searching for truth, and if sincerely, I pray they may find that precious treasure, for it seems to be wholly fallen in the streets; and equity cannot enter. The letter we received from you, informed us that the opposition was great against you. Now, our beloved brethren, we verily believe that we also can rejoice that we are counted worthy to suffer shame for His name; for almost the whole country, . . . with all the devils from the eternal pit, are united and foaming out their shame [against us]. God forbid that I should bring a railing accusation against them, for vengeance belongeth to Him who is able to repay." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:182.)
