Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 33

Background information on section 33

"The Lord, who is ever ready to instruct such as diligently seek in faith, gave the following revelation at Fayette, New York; [Section 33, follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:126.)

"Ezra Thayre and Northrop Sweet came in the Church at the time of the preaching of the Lamanite missionaries. In October, 1830, they were called by revelation to enter the ministry and hearken to the voice of the Lord, 'whose word is quick and powerful, sharper than a two-edged sword, to the dividing asunder of the joints and marrow.' It was not long after this that Northrop Sweet left the Church and, with some others, formed what they called 'The Pure Church of Christ,' an organization that soon came to its end." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:152.)

For biographical information on Ezra Thayre, see the material listed after his name in Appendix B.

33:1

The Lord's "word is. . . sharper than a two-edged sword"

See Sword and Armor of God in Appendix A.

33:1

"the Lord . . . is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart"

See Thoughts in Appendix A.

33:2

"sound of a trump"

See Trump in Appendix A.

33:3

"it is the eleventh hour"

"This is 'the eleventh hour.' The time in which we live is compared to the eleventh hour, and so it is in the Lord's reckoning, for we are in the closing scenes of the present world. Elder Orson F. Whitney referred to our dispensation as the 'Saturday night' of time. And, according to the parable of the men employed in the vineyard, we who labor in this hour will be rewarded if we are faithful, with equal compensation with those who labored in the previous hours, or dispensations, in the history of mankind." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:153.)

"This expression is from Matt. 20:6. Our Lord had taught the Twelve that it was almost impossible for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of Heaven. Then the disciples said, in substance, 'We, at any rate, left all and followed Thee; what shall our reward be?' Christ's answer was the parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard, in which He taught them that all His servants should have a great reward, but that those who are called last will receive just as much as the first. The time in which we live is the eleventh hour, and those who obey the call now will receive just as much as the laborers of former dispensations. The reward which God gives is not on the same basis as that which obtains in the world of industry among men. It is, after all, a gift. 'The wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord' (Rom. 6:23). 'The wage at best is a free gift; for on the basis of strict accounting who of us is not in debt to God?' (Talmage, Jesus the Christ, p. 482)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 172.)

See also Parables in Appendix A.

33:3

"the last time"

"By the 'last time' the Lord meant the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, April 1946, p. 155.)

33:4

"my vineyard has become corrupted"

See Vineyard in Appendix A.

"This is equivalent to the expression of our Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the year 1820. Because of false doctrines, theories and practices, not only in the religious world, but in the world of philosophy, and science, it became necessary for the Lord to open the heavens and make his will known. The time is not far from the condition in Noah's day when the Lord declared that 'all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth.' (Gen. 6:12.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:153.)

33:4

"all having corrupt minds"

" Let me explain, when I use the term 'corrupt' with reference to these ministers of the gospel, that I use it in the same sense that I believe the Lord used it when he made that declaration to Joseph Smith, the Prophet, in answer to the Prophet's prayer. He did not mean, nor do I mean, that the ministers of religion are personally unvirtuous or impure. I believe as a class they, perhaps in personal purity, stand a little above the average order of men. When I use the term 'corrupt' I mean, as I believe the Lord meant, that they had turned away from the truth, and have turned to that which is false. A false doctrine is a corrupt doctrine; a false religion is a corrupt religion; a false teacher is a corrupt teacher. Any man who teaches a false doctrine, who believes in and practices and teaches a false religion is a corrupt professor, because he teaches that which is impure and not true." (Hyrum M. Smith, CR, October 1916, p. 43.)

33:5

"called forth out of the wilderness"

"In the book of Revelation, Chap. 12, we have a very vivid symbolical description of the Church being driven into the wilderness by the great dragon. 'And to the woman (Church) were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.' The Lord calls attention to this in the revelation on 'the wheat and the tares.' (Sec. 86.) 'And after they had fallen asleep, the great persecutor of the church . . . behold he soweth the tares; wherefore, the tares choke the wheat and drive the church into the wilderness.' Now in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, the Church is again called forth from the wilderness, and her man-child (the Priesthood) is restored to her again." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:1 53-54.)

33:6

"I will gather mine elect from the four quarters of the earth"

See Elect and Earth in Appendix A.

33:7

"the field is white . . . thrust in your sickles, and reap"

See Harvest symbols in Appendix A.

33:7

"might, mind, and strength"

See Might, mind, and strength in Appendix A.

33:9

"you shall be laden with sheaves"

See Harvest symbols in Appendix A.

33:13

"gates of hell shall not prevail against you"

See Hell and Revelation in Appendix A.

33:15

"I will bestow the gift of the Holy Ghost"

"The great promise the Lord has given to all who humbly repent, is that they shall receive the guidance of the Holy Ghost. Of course, this cannot come to them unless they are confirmed by the laying on of hands by one in authority. The world does not have the guidance of the Holy Ghost, but are blessed with the light of Christ as a guide, which, if they are humble and seek the light, will lead them to the light." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:1 54.)

33:17

"praying always, having your lamps trimmed and burning"

See Prayer, Bridegroom, and Virgins in Appendix A.

"The Lord requires his people to bow the knee before him every night and morning, and to remember him in their secret prayers. Every Latter-day Saint who neglects this requirement has not that supply of oil which is necessary to prepare him for the coming of the Son of Man. The Lord requires us to be obedient to the counsels of the Priesthood, and to look to them for counsel. Every Latter-day Saint who is obdurate in his feelings and will not listen to the counsels of the servants of the Lord shows a lack of oil. The Lord requires that we shall meet together on the fast day, fasting, praying, and remembering our offerings for the relief of the poor. Every Latter-day Saint who follows his daily avocation and neglects this duty shows a lack of oil. The Lord requires us to love our wives, our husbands, our children, and to love our neighbors. The Latter-day Saint who does not do this shows a dearth of that oil that is necessary to enable him to stand and be prepared for the coming of the Son of Man. The Lord requires us to preach the Gospel to all the world, and for this reason above all others has endowed us with his divine authority. If we neglect to honor and magnify the Priesthood, as we ought to do every day of our lives, we evidence a lack of oil." (Francis M. Lyman, CR, April 1901, p.46.)
