Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 34

Background information on section 34

"In the fore part of November, Orson Pratt, a young man nineteen years of age, who had been baptized at the first preaching of his brother Parley P. Pratt, September 19th (his birthday), about six weeks previous, in Canaan, New York, came to inquire of the Lord what his duty was and received the following answer: [Section 34, follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:127-28.)

For additional biographical information on Orson Pratt, see the material listed after his name in Appendix B.

34:1

"Jesus Christ your Redeemer"

See Jesus Christ in Appendix A.

"Christ is our Redeemer. Redemption means deliverance by means of ransom. There is a deliverance from guilt (Eph. 1:7; Col. 1:14); from the power and dominance of sin, through the sanctifying influence of the Holy Spirit (1 Peter 1:18); and from death through the resurrection (Rom. 8:23). There is, finally, a deliverance from all evil (Eph. 1:14; 4:30; 1 Cor. 1:30; Titus 2:14). All this is the work of Christ, through obedience to the gospel." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 177.)

34:2

"a light which shineth in darkness and the darkness comprehendeth it not"

See Light in Appendix A.

34:3-4

"you are my son . . . you have believed"

"The Gospel has been preached to us, and we have essayed to obey it, that we might become the sons and daughters of God—heirs of God and joint-heirs with his Son." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, April 1900, p. 40.)

"I remained therefore, apart from all of them [churches], praying continually in my heart that the Lord would show me the right way.

"I continued this for about one year; after which, two Elders of this Church came into the neighborhood. I heard their doctrine, and believed it to be the ancient Gospel; and as soon as the sound penetrated my ears, I knew that if the Bible was true, their doctrine was true. They taught not only the ordinances, but the gifts and blessings promised the believers, and the authority necessary in the Church in order to administer the ordinances. All these things I received with gladness. . . .

"I called upon the Lord with more faith than before, for I had then received the first principles of the Gospel. The gift of the Holy Ghost was given to me; and when it was shed forth upon me, it gave me a testimony concerning the truth of this work that no man can ever take from me. It is impossible for me, so long as I have my reasoning faculties and powers of mind, to doubt the testimony I then received as among the first evidences that were given, and that, too, by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost." (Orson Pratt, JD 7:177-78.)

34:6

"cry repentance, preparing the way of the Lord for his second coming"

See Repentance and Second coming in Appendix A.

34:7-9

Events associated with the second coming of Jesus Christ

See Second coming in Appendix A.

34:10

"lift up your voice . . . prophesy "

"He [Joseph Smith] inquired of the Lord, and obtained a revelation for your humble servant. He retired into the chamber of old Father Whitmer, in the house where this Church was organized in 1830. John Whitmer acted as his scribe, and I accompanied him into the chamber, for he had told me that it was my privilege to have the word of the Lord; and the Lord in that revelation, which is published here in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, made a promise which to me, when I was in my youth, seemed to be almost too great for a person of as humble origin as myself ever to attain to. After telling in the revelation that the great day of the Lord was at hand, and calling upon me to lift up my voice among the people, to call upon them to repent and prepare the way of the Lord, and that the time was near when the heavens should be shaken, when the earth should tremble, when the stars should refuse their shining, and when great destructions awaited the wicked, the Lord said to your humble servant: 'Lift up your voice and prophesy, and it shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost.' This was a particular point in the revelation that seemed to me too great for me ever to attain to, and yet there was a positive command that I should do it. I have often reflected upon this revelation, and have oftentimes inquired in my heart—'Have I fulfilled the commandment as I ought to have done? Have I sought as earnestly as I ought to obtain the gift of prophecy, so as to fulfill the requirement of heaven?' And I have felt sometimes to condemn myself because of my slothfulness and because of the little progress that I have made in relation to this great heavenly and divine gift. I certainly have had no inclination to prophesy to the people unless it should be given to me by the inspiration and power of the Holy Ghost; to prophesy out of my own heart is something perfectly disagreeable to my feelings, even to think of, and hence I have oftentimes, in my public discourses, avoided, when a thing would come before my mind pretty plain, uttering or declaring it for fear that I might get something out before the people in relation to the future that was wrong." (Orson Pratt, JD 17:290-91.)

34:11

"If you are faithful"

"Orson Pratt was faithful. In the obituary the Editor of the Deseret News said:

" 'Orson Pratt was a true Apostle of the Lord. Full of integrity, firm as a rock to his convictions, true to his brethren and his God, earnest and zealous in defense and the proclamation of the truth, ever ready to bear testimony to the Latter-day work, he had a mind stored with Scripture, ancient and modern, was an eloquent speaker, a powerful minister, a logical and convincing writer, an honest man and a great soul who reached out after eternal things, grasped them with the gift of inspiration, and brought them down to the level and comprehension of the common mind. Thousands have been brought into the Church through his preaching in many lands, thousands more by his writings. He set but little store on the wealth of this world, but he has laid up treasures in heaven which will make him eternally rich.' " (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 179.)

34:12

"I come quickly"

See Quickly in Appendix A.
