Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 35

Background information on section 35

"In December, 1830, two men came from Kirtland, Ohio, to visit the Prophet at Fayette. They were Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge. Both had accepted the gospel, as declared to them by the western missionaries, and Sidney Rigdon had been baptized. After reaching Fayette, Edward Partridge demanded and received baptism under the Prophet's hands. These two men offered to Joseph, for the work of the Lord, their time, their talents, and all they possessed. Like all the early members of the Church, having not yet gained full understanding of the purposes of God, having not yet gained confidence in their own ability to rightly determine their conduct, they desired that the Lord should give them his special commands. Joseph prayed for revelation on their behalf, and was speedily answered." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, p. 83.)

35:1

"Alpha and Omega"

See Alpha and Omega in Appendix A.

35:2

"I am one in the Father, as the Father is one in me"

See Godhead in Appendix A.

35:3-4

"Sidney . . . thou wast sent forth . . . to prepare the way"

"The Lord told Sidney that he had looked upon him and his works, having reference to his ministry as a Baptist and later as one of the founders of the 'Disciples' with Alexander Campbell and Walter Scott. During those years the hand of the Lord was over him and directing him in the gathering of many earnest souls who could not accept the teachings of the sects of the day. His prayers in which he sought further light than the world was able to give, were not to be answered. The Lord informed him that he had been sent to prepare the way, and in the gathering of his colony and the building up of his congregation in and around Kirtland, the hand of the Lord was directing him, and the way for the reception of the fulness of truth was being prepared. . . . While Sidney was preaching and baptizing by immersion without authority, which the Lord informed him in this revelation, yet it all resulted in good when the Gospel message reached them. These men were not only convinced and ready for baptism, but were in a condition by which the Priesthood could be given them, and this was done." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:160.)

"A striking instance of divine purpose in the labors of men outside the true Church is pointed out in a revelation given in December, 1830, to Joseph Smith, Jr., and Sidney Rigdon. The Lord said: [Sec. 35:3-6, quoted.] . . .

"The labors of Sidney Rigdon, referred to in the quotation, must have alluded to his ministry in the Campbellite church, for he had been in the Church of Christ only about six weeks when this revelation was given, having embraced the Gospel at the hands of Parley P. Pratt and fellow missionaries.

"As is well understood, the followers of Alexander Campbell preach faith, repentance and baptism by immersion for the remission of sins. These views Sidney Rigdon espoused as being better than what he already had, and when the true Gospel, in its fulness, with authority from God to administer the ordinances thereof, found him, he gladly obeyed the same. In about three weeks from the time Brother Pratt and co-laborers entered Kirtland, 127 persons were baptized. Subsequently the numbers were augmented to about 1,000 souls. In the providence of the Lord, Kirtland soon became the gathering place of the Saints, the facilities there being greatly enhanced by so many people embracing the Gospel and thus making a foothold for the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Saints who should follow him from the East. There the Kirtland Temple was built." (Matthias F. Cowley, Cowley's Talks on Doctrine, pp. 447-48.)

35:6

"they shall receive the Holy Ghost . . . even as the apostles of old"

"As the people in Kirtland had been baptized by Sidney Ridgon without authority, even so they had not received the gift of the Holy Ghost. Now, with authority, he was to go forth and baptize in water and authority, and those baptized should receive the Holy Ghost." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:160.)

"A man cannot preach with effect and power to another the forgiveness of sins through faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, or baptism for the remission of sins unless he has himself been baptized for the remission of sins and has faith in the Lord Jesus Christ himself. No man can administer in the ordinances of the Gospel of Christ with effect and with power unless he has first been made partaker of them himself." (Franklin D. Richards, CR, October 1897, pp. 24-25.)

"The people of the world of mankind today have not that Holy Ghost that was enjoyed by those holy men of God who gave the scriptures. If they had the Holy Ghost in the same degree of power that was had by those holy men who gave us the scriptures, then they would understand the scriptures just as did men who gave the scriptures to us." (George F. Richards, CR, October 1944, p. 88.)

35:7

"the Gentiles"

See Gentiles in Appendix A.

35:8

"mine arm is not shortened"

See Arm of the Lord in Appendix A.

35:11

Babylon

See Babylon in Appendix A.

35:11

"drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication"

This distinctive phrase appears in three sections of the Doctrine and Covenants: 35:11; 86:3; 88:94, 105. In each instance it is used in connection with Babylon (representing the apostate world and church) or with the "great church, the mother of abominations" (representing the apostate church of the devil). Those who "drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication" participate in the worldly pleasures and sins of the apostate world and church, and thus will reap the desolations and destruction that will come upon the wicked when they are judged.

35:13

"weak things of the world"

See Weak things of the world in Appendix A.

35:13

"Thrash the nations"

"This expression is found in Habakkuk 3:12. Threshing, in olden times, was done by treading out the grain on a threshing-floor. The going forth of the messengers of the gospel among the nations is like trampling the wheat sheaves on the hard floor. The valuable kernels are carefully gathered up; the straw is left." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 186.)

The term is used twice in the Doctrine and Covenants: 35:13 and 133:59.

35:14

"shield and their buckler"

See Armor of God in Appendix A.

35:16

"parable of the fig-tree"

"'Behold the fig tree and all trees; when they now shoot forth, ye see and know of your own selves that summer is now nigh at hand.' (Luke 21:29-30.) . . . This sign of events near at hand was equally applicable to the premonitory conditions which were to herald the fall of Jerusalem and the termination of the Jewish autonomy, and to the developments by which the Lord's second advent shall be immediately preceded." (James E. Talmage, JC, p. 574.)

35:18

"keys of the mystery"

See Mysteries in Appendix A.

35:18

"from the foundation of the world"

See Pre-earthly existence in Appendix A.

35:18

"the time of my coming"

See Second coming in Appendix A.

35:20

"thou shalt write for him [Joseph Smith]"

"To Sidney he [the Lord] gave a special command that he should write for Joseph. The Lord made known to Sidney what Joseph already understood—that the Scriptures should be given, even as they were in God's own bosom, to the salvation of his elect. And soon after this time, Joseph began a new translation of the Scriptures. While he labored, many truths, buried through scores of ages, where brought forth to his understanding, and he saw in their purity and holiness all the doings of God among his children, from the days of Adam unto the birth of our Lord and Savior." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, pp. 83-84.)

35:24

"I will cause the heavens to shake"

See Second coming in Appendix A.

35:24

"Satan shall tremble and Zion shall rejoice"

See Satan and Zion in Appendix A.

35:27

"Fear not, little flock, the kingdom is yours until I come"

"Do you know that it is the eleventh hour of the reign of Satan on the earth? Jesus is coming to reign, and all you who fear and tremble because of your enemies, cease to fear them, and learn to fear to offend God, fear to transgress his laws, fear to do any evil to your brother, or to any being upon the earth, and do not fear Satan and his power, nor those who have only power to slay the body, for God will preserve his people." (Brigham Young, JD 10:250.)
