Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 36

Background information on section 36

See background information for section 35.

"In December Sidney Rigdon came to inquire of the Lord, and with him came Edward Partridge; the latter was a pattern of piety, and one of the Lord's great men. . . . And the voice of the Lord to Edward Partridge was: [Section 36, follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:128, 131.)

For biographical information on Edward Partridge, see the material following his name in Appendix B.

36:1

"voice of a trump"

See Trump in Appendix A.

36:2

"the peaceable things of the kingdom"

The principles of the gospel are based on the love of our Heavenly Father and his Son Jesus Christ for all mankind. The living of these principles results in an inner spiritual peace, "the peace of God, which passeth all understanding." (Philip. 4:7.) Such peace is a gift of God to all the obedient. (See Ps. 37:37; 119:165; Isa. 26:3; 48:18, 22; 57:21; Rom. 8:6; 10:15; 14:17-19; 1 Cor. 14:33; Eph. 6:15.)

The "peaceable things of the kingdom" are the basic principles of the gospel, for their observance will lead to peace. If all the people on the earth would live the principles of the gospel fully, peace would be the natural and inevitable result. The gospel of Christ is truly the gospel of peace, and one of the Savior's titles is the Prince of Peace.

"The peace of Christ does not come by seeking the superficial things of life, neither does it come except as it springs from the individual's heart. Jesus said to his disciples: 'Peace I leave with you. My peace I give unto you; not as the world giveth, give I unto you.' [John 14:27.] Thus the Son of Man as the executor of his own will and testament gave to his disciples and to mankind the 'first of all human blessings.' It was a bequest conditioned upon obedience to the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It is thus bequeathed to each individual. No man is at peace with himself or his God who is untrue to his better self, who transgresses the law of right either in dealing with himself by indulging in passion, in appetite, yielding to temptations against his accusing conscience, or in dealing with his fellow men, being untrue to their trust. Peace does not come to the transgressor of law; peace comes by obedience to law, and it is that message which Jesus would have us proclaim among men." (David O. McKay, CR, October 1938, p. 133.)

36:3

"Hosanna"

See Hosanna in Appendix A.

36:6

"Untoward generation"

If a person is in favor of a particular thing or position, he is said to favor or "lean toward" it. An "untoward generation" concerning the things of God is a generation that disobeys the commandments and thus proves it is not in favor of the plan of God. The characteristics of an untoward generation include disobedience, wickedness, and rebellion. This term is used once in the Bible (Acts 2:40) and twice in the Doctrine and Covenants (36:6 and 109:41). "This is an untoward generation, walking in spiritual darkness." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:150.)

36:6

"garments spotted with the flesh"

See Garments in Appendix A.

"He [Edward Partridge] was baptized by the Prophet in December 1830, while on the visit to Fayette, and was commanded to proclaim the Gospel with a loud voice along with others who were ordained, to cry repentance saying: [Sec. 36:6, quoted.] . . . Garments spotted with flesh are garments defiled by the practices of carnal desires and disobedience to the commandments of the Lord." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:150.)

36:8

"gird up your loins"

See Armor of God in Appendix A.

36:8

"I will suddenly come to my temple"

"The Lord said to Edward Partridge that he would suddenly come to his temple. There are several comings spoken of wherein the Lord will come to his temple. This promise Edward Partridge witnessed, for he was present at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, and the Lord came suddenly there to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and ministered unto them. He was also present at that dedication by his Spirit." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:163.)
