Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 38

Background information on section 38

"The year 1831 opened with a prospect great and glorious for the welfare of the kingdom; for on the 2nd of January, 1831, a conference was held in the town of Fayette, New York, at which the ordinary business of the Church was transacted; and in addition, the following revelation was received: [D&C 38.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:140.)

"While the Church was in New York, the Lord gave this commandment that they should move the headquarters of the Church to Kirtland, Ohio, and there he would give them his law for the government of the Church. . . . This law is embodied in Section 42, which was received shortly after the Church moved to Ohio." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:169-70.)

38:1

Titles of the Lord

See I AM, Alpha and Omega, Creator, and Jesus Christ in Appendix A.

38:1

"seraphic hosts of heaven"

"Seraphs are angels who reside in the presence of God. . . . It is clear that seraphs include the unembodied spirits of pre-existence, for our Lord 'looked upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made.' (D&C 38:1.) Whether the name seraphs also applies to perfected and resurrected angels is not clear . . . In Hebrew the plural of seraph is seraphim." (Bruce R. McConkie, MD, pp. 702-3.)

"In a vision of the Prophet Isaiah (6:2-3) seraphim are standing over the throne of God, in the attitude of service. They are the attendants of Jehovah, reflecting His glory and majesty, and, in His presence, they sing in chorus, 'Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts: The whole Earth is full of His glory.' Our Lord looked upon these hosts. They were standing before Him, awaiting His commands, even before the Earth had been created." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 198.)

For scriptural references to seraphs or seraphim, see Isa. 6:2, 6; 2 Ne. 16:2, 6; D&C 38:1; 109:79.

38:2

God "knoweth all things, for all things are present" before his eyes

See Knowledge of God in Appendix A.

38:3

Jesus Christ created the world and "all things" came by him

See Creator in Appendix A.

38:4

"I . . . have taken the Zion of Enoch into mine own bosom "

See Zion in Appendix A.

"This city called 'Zion' because its inhabitants were all righteous and 'pure in heart' (D&C 97:21) will return when the Millennial reign is come. (Moses 7:63.)

"Enoch, the seventh from Adam (Jude 14) built a city called Zion, after the people of God, so named by the Lord, because they were united, righteous, and prosperous. This city of Enoch flourished for three hundred and sixty-five years and then the Lord, by some process not known to us, took it with all its inhabitants, 'to His bosom,' thus saving them from destruction in the flood that was to come. 'And from thence went forth the saying, Zion is fled' (Moses 7:18, 19, 68, 69). The building up of another Zion in the latter days was predicted by the prophets of old. David, for instance, says, 'When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory' (Psalm 102:16). That the people of God in the latter days should be found in a mountain region, was also foretold. 'O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into a high mountain' (Isaiah 40:9, see also Ezekiel 40:2, etc.)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 199.)

"If we would carry out that which the Lord revealed, . . . it would only be a matter of a very short time until this great people would be in the same condition, absolutely, as were the people in the city of Enoch. We would be able to walk with God, we would be able to behold his face, because then faith would abound in the hearts of the people to the full extent that it would be impossible for the Lord to withhold himself, and he would reveal himself unto us as he has done in times past." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, April 1921, p. 40)

38:9

"gird up your loins"

See Armor of God in Appendix A.

38:12

"the angels are waiting . . . to gather the tares that they may be burned"

See Tares in Appendix A.

"It certainly is time that we prepare ourselves for that which is to come. Great things await this generation—both Zion and Babylon. All these revelations concerning the fall of Babylon will have their fulfillment. Forty-five years ago, in speaking to the Church, the Lord said —[Sec. 38:10-11, quoted.] This causes silence to reign, and all eternity is pained. The angels of God are waiting to fulfill the great commandment given forty-five years ago, to go forth and reap down the earth because of the wickedness of men. How do you think eternity feels today? Why there is more wickedness, a thousand times over, in the United States now, than when that revelation was given. The whole earth is ripe in iniquity; and these inspired men, these Elders of Israel, have been commanded of the Almighty to go forth and warn the world, that their garments may be clear of the blood of all men." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 18:128.)

38:16-17

"I have made the earth rich"

"The Lord has made the earth rich. On it is to be found everything which is essential to the welfare and happiness of man. All things are placed here for the use of man, and it is pleasing to our Father in Heaven when we use them in righteousness. But beyond all the wealth and comforts of the world, the greatest riches, we are told, are those which come through obedience to the Gospel. 'He that hath eternal life is rich!'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:169.)

38:18

"deign "

One basic meaning of deign is "to condescend to give or offer." It is evidently in this sense that the word is used here.

38:21

"I will be your king and watch over you"

"This will be when he descends in the clouds of heaven in power and glory. Let all people know that the parable of the fig tree is being fulfilled today. The tree puts forth its leaves and the summer is nigh. We are told that when we see these things we may know that in this generation, when these things take place, all that has been said concerning the coming Christ will be fulfilled." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Progress of Man, p. 490.)

38:24

"let every man esteem his brother as himself"

"This is made possible in the kingdom of God, because there the standard of superiority is different from that which governs in the world. It is, in fact, inverted: 'He that is greatest among you shall be your servant' (Matt. 23:11). There is no exalted position in the kingdom of God but that of service. 'I,' saith the Lord, 'am among you as he that serveth' (Luke 22:27). In this kingdom, therefore, there can be no competition for 'first' places; no envy, no agitation for offices. And it is, consequently, not impossible for every man to 'esteem his brother as himself.'" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 205.)

38:27

"if ye are not one ye are not mine"

"If we are not united, we are not his. Here unity is the test of divine ownership as thus expressed. If we would be united in love and fellowship and harmony, this Church would convert the world, who would see in us the shining example of these qualities which evidence that divine ownership." (Harold B. Lee, CR, April 1950, p. 96.)

"In union there is strength, but how can a people become united while their interests are diversified? How can they become united in spiritual matters, and see eye to eye, which they can only partly understand, until they become united in regard to temporal things, which they do comprehend?" (First Presidency, MS 16:427, July 8, 1854.)

"The unity of the members of the Church is essential to their happiness and eternal welfare. Jesus said to his disciples, 'Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say!' If we are divided and permit contention and strife to prevail among us, then we cannot receive the blessings which the Lord has for us." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:169.)

38:28

"the enemy in the secret chambers"

"The hatred of the wicked always has and always will follow the Priesthood and the saints. The devil will not lose sight of the power of God vested in man—the Priesthood. He fears it, he hates it, and will never cease to stir up the hearts of the debased and corrupt in anger and malice towards those who hold this power, and to persecute the saints, until he is bound." (Joseph F. Smith, JD 19:24.)

38:29

"ye know not the hearts of men in your own land"

"We cannot know the hearts of men, nor the will of God concerning nations, kingdoms and people only as it is revealed to us by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost." (Wilford Woodruff, JD 10:215.)

38:30

"if ye are prepared ye shall not fear"

"My text today is from a revelation of the Lord to Joseph Smith, the Prophet, at a conference of the Church January 2, 1831, as follows: '. . . if ye are prepared ye shall not fear.' (D&C 38:30.) [D&C 1:12, 17 also quoted.]

"What are some of the calamities for which we are to prepare? In section 29 the Lord warns us of 'a great hailstorm sent forth to destroy the crops of the earth.' (D&C 29:16.) In section 45 we read of 'an overflowing scourge; for a desolating sickness shall cover the land.' (D&C 45:31.) In section 63 the Lord declares he has 'decreed wars upon the face of the earth. . . . ' (D&C 63:33.)

"In Matthew, chapter 24, we learn of 'famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes. . . . ' (Matt. 24:7.) The Lord declared that these and other calamities shall occur. These particular prophecies seem not to be conditional. The Lord, with his foreknowledge, knows that they will happen. Some will come about through man's manipulations; others through the forces of nature and nature's God, but that they will come seems certain. Prophecy is but history in reverse—a divine disclosure of future events.

"Yet, through all of this, the Lord Jesus Christ has said: '. . . if ye are prepared ye shall not fear.' (D&C 38:30.)

"What, then, is the Lord's way to help us prepare for these calamities? The answer is also found in section 1 of the Doctrine and Covenants, wherein he says: [D&C 1:17-18, 37 quoted].

"Here then is the key—look to the prophets for the words of God, that will show us how to prepare for the calamities which are to come. [D&C 1:38 quoted.]" (Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, January 1974, pp. 68-69.)

"No man need fear in his heart when he is conscious of having lived up to the principles of truth and righteousness as God has required it at his hands, according to his best knowledge and understanding." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, April 1904, p.2.)

38:32

"go to the Ohio"

"While the Church was in New York, the Lord gave this commandment that they should move the headquarters of the Church to Kirtland, Ohio, and there he would give them his law for the government of the Church. He had already given them much of his law in the revelations received up to this time, but he had in store for them something more. The Church had grown in membership and it was time for other instruction to be given for the benefit of the members. This law is embodied in Section 42, which was received shortly after the Church moved to Ohio. The Elders were also promised an endowment when they were located in Ohio. This necessitated also the building of the temple at that place." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:169-70.)

38:39

"riches of eternity"

See Riches of eternity in Appendix A.

38:42

"Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord"

See Vessels of the Lord in Appendix A.
