Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 40

Background information on section 40

See background information for section 39.

"We are led to believe that in this promised blessing, this foolish man was convinced of the truth, for it is clear that the Lord revealed to him things which he and the Lord alone knew to be the truth. However, when he withdrew from the influence of the Spirit of the Lord and had time to consider the fact that he would lose the fellowship of the world, and his place and position among his associates, he failed and rejected the promises and blessings which the Lord offered him." (Joseph Fielding Smith. CHMR 1:174.)

40:1-3

Satan tempted James Covill and he rejected the gospel

See Satan in Appendix A.

"When the Gospel came in its purity and plainness, and they did not receive it, then commenced their condemnation. This was the condemnation of the people in the days of Jesus. When light came into the world they were condemned because they rejected it. 'This is condemnation,' says Jesus, 'that light is come into the world and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil.' [John 3:19.] . . . There are many instances, doubtless, in your own experience of this kind; and they have gone backward from the time they rejected the truth; they have lost the favor of man, which they rejected the truth to obtain, have been disgraced in the sight of their fellow men and have met with the very things they desired to shun. Because of the rejection of the truth by men, the anger of the Lord is kindled against them and his judgments come upon them." (George Q. Cannon, MS 25:118.)

"There are still others who love the truth and who recognize it, but they dare not espouse it; they are afraid of the social consequences. This whole broad land, this whole broad world, is sprinkled with such people. When the principles of the Gospel are presented to them they say, in surprise and astonishment. 'Is that Mormonism? I never dreamed it. Why, that is true—I believe it with all my heart.' And the tears spring to their eyes as they acknowledge it. But they don't come out in the open and fight for it." (Orson F. Whitney, CR, April 1915, p. 102.)
