Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 41

Background information on section 41

"The latter part of January [1831], in company with Brothers Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge, I started with my wife for Kirtland, Ohio, where we arrived about the first of February, and were kindly received and welcomed into the house of Brother Newel K. Whitney. My wife and I lived in the family of Brother Whitney several weeks, and received every kindness and attention which could be expected, and especially from Sister Whitney.

"The branch of the Church in this part of the Lord's vineyard, which had increased to nearly one hundred members, were striving to do the will of God, so far as they knew it, though some strange notions and false spirits had crept in among them. With a little caution and some wisdom, I soon assisted the brethren and sisters to overcome them. The plan of 'common stock,' which had existed in what was called 'the family,' whose members generally had embraced the everlasting Gospel, was readily abandoned for the more perfect law of the Lord; and the false spirits were easily discerned and rejected by the light of revelation.

"The Lord gave unto the Church the following: [D&C 41.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:145-47)

"Because there were those who had professed the name of the Lord and made covenant to serve him, like James Covill, for instance, and then they showed by their works that they did not act in sincerity, the Lord gave a revelation [section 41] for the guidance of the members and a warning to those who had professed his name who had not obeyed him. This is one of the most solemn and pointed declarations that can be found in any scripture against the hypocrite and the person who professes in sincerity, and apparently accepts in good faith, a covenant and then departs from the covenant." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:177-78.)

41:1-4

"elders of my church . . . ye shall see that my law is kept"

"I desire now to read a few words in relation to the duty which devolves upon the men who have been speaking during this conference. I will read a portion of the 41st Section of the Doctrine and Covenants. [Sec. 41:1-4, quoted.]

"The Lord here especially demands of the men who stand at the head of this Church and who are responsible for the guidance and direction of the people of God, that they shall see to it that the law of God is kept. It is our duty to do this. . . . The Lord requires of us that we shall see that his law is kept among the people." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, October 1899, p. 41.)

41:4

"I will be your ruler"

"In the Church of Jesus Christ, it is our Redeemer who is the ruler. Many times we have heard President Joseph F. Smith, and other Presidents, say, when they have been addressed, or spoken of, as being the head of the Church, that this was not the case. No man stands at the head of the Church but Jesus Christ, whose Church it is. This is vital to the true Church. The President of the Church on earth is the representative and 'mouthpiece' of our Lord, appointed to conduct the affairs of the Church in this mortal sphere. 'I will be your ruler when I come,' said the Lord. In the meantime his officers are to see that his law is kept." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:164.)

41:6

"it is not meet that the things which belong to the children of the kingdom should be given to them that are not worthy"

See Meet in Appendix A.

"The things of the kingdom are not for the unworthy, whether they are in or out of the Church. It is the duty of the members to hold in the most solemn and sacred manner every commandment, every covenant, every principle of truth which the Lord has revealed for their salvation. He has given to the members, if they will humbly receive them, covenants and obligations which are not for the world. Things that are most holy and sacred, which are revealed to those who have made covenant to be 'just and true,' and who have 'overcome by faith,' things which are imparted to them as a means of bringing to pass their exaltation, should not be lightly treated, ridiculed, or spoken of before the world." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:179-80.)

41:7

"Joseph Smith, Jun., should have a house built"

"After the Prophet arrived in Kirtland, and away from the opposition and hate that was so prevalent in and around Fayette, New York, the Lord called upon him to commence a very important work, that of revising the Bible and restoring to the words of the ancient Hebrew prophets many of the things that had been taken away. He was without a home and without any kind of office. For a time he boarded with the Whitney family. The Lord said to the members of the Church: [Sec. 41:7, quoted.] It was also necessary that Sidney Rigdon be cared for in some manner, as he was to be scribe for the Prophet in his great undertaking. Under all the conditions, some of them very unfavorable, it is remarkable what was accomplished." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:164.)

41:9

"Edward Partridge . . . should be appointed . . . and ordained a bishop unto the church"

For biographical information on Edward Partridge, see the material following his name in Appendix B.

"It was a magnificent tribute that the Lord paid to Edward Partridge in this revelation of February 4, 1831. He was called to be a bishop of the Church, and to be 'ordained a bishop unto the Church, and to leave his merchandise and to spend all his time in the labors of the Church.' . . . In subsequent revelations these duties were explained and the knowledge imparted that men called to this office were to be engaged in the temporal affairs of the Church particularly. There is such an inference in the fact that the Lord directed Edward Partridge to discontinue his merchandising and devote all of his time to the Church. Immediately following his appointment, he was assigned to actual duties according to the calling of a bishop and was engaged in caring for the members of the Church in relation to their lands, inheritances, and other temporal matters which were vital to the members concerned." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:180-81.)

41:11

Edward Partridge compared to Nathanael of old

In John 1:45-49 the Savior remarked concerning Nathanael, "Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!"
