Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 42

Background information on section 42

"In December, 1830, the Church was commanded to move its headquarters from New York state to Ohio, where the Lord promised to give his law for its government. February 9, 1831, after the Church had removed to Kirtland and had been augmented by many converts from among the Disciples, or followers of the Campbells and Sidney Rigdon, who were living in Kirtland and its vicinity, the Lord gave to the Church this revelation (Sec. 42) as a law. In this revelation many commandments given from the very beginning and reiterated in the days of Moses were again proclaimed as being in force for the government of the Church in these latter days. By grave and solemn proclamation, the members of the Church were commanded to observe all these laws and others which were yet future, but would be given for the establishment of the City of Zion—New Jerusalem—which was to be built by the law of consecration and obedience to the fulness of the Gospel." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:1 83-84.)

"Altogether this was a most important revelation. It threw a flood of light upon a great variety of subjects and settled many important questions. Faithful men and women were greatly delighted at being members of a Church which the Lord acknowledged as His own, and to which He communicated His word through his inspired Prophet as he did at this time." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, pp. 87-88.)

"This Revelation is called the Law of Christ (v. 2). In the Scriptures the Law of God is always a manifestation of His will. In nature the laws of nature are His laws. God's will determines the moral standards. It is the rule of conduct. It is necessary that God should give laws to His children. There is in every man a disposition to lord it over others. Everyone, as soon as he has formed an opinion on a subject, is inclined to force it upon others, just as Lucifer proposed to do with regard to the plan of salvation. But when God manifests His will, all men and women are brought to a level of equality, without which there can be no true liberty. Hence, under the divine law liberty is possible, since all are under equal obligation to obey, and have an equal chance of obtaining the reward of obedience." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 238.)

42:1

"Jesus Christ the Son of the living God"

See Jesus Christ and Living God in Appendix A.

42:5

"for a little season"

See Season in Appendix A.

42:6

"preaching my gospel, two by two"

See Missionary in Appendix A.

"We have been and are, willing to make much sacrifice for those who have not heard the truth. . . . Why do they do this? It does not help them financially. They do it because it is a duty they owe their fellow men, and therefore, when they are called they go forth gladly. They do not ask what their salary will be nor where the money will come from. If they have the means, they are willing to make the sacrifice and spend their time in this labor of love amongst their fellow men." (Anthon H. Lund, CR, April 1905, p. 14.)

42:6

"sound of a trump"

See Trump in Appendix A.

42:9

"New Jerusalem"

"Without modern revelation we would be in complete ignorance, as is the outside religious world, concerning the New Jerusalem. Being without revelation and relying solely on what is written in the Bible, the world has erroneously interpreted the revelations and prophecies in the Bible regarding the New Jerusalem. They have confounded these prophetic sayings as having reference to the old Jerusalem. This is true also of the references to Zion. These terms, Zion and Jerusalem, are used frequently interchangeably and if the Lord had not given us light we would have been as badly confused as are other people. However, there are many references which point clearly to the fact that Zion and Jerusalem are two separate and distinct places." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:412.)

42:10

"my servant Edward Partridge"

For biographical information on Edward Partridge, see the information following his name in Appendix B.

42:11-14

"preach my gospel "

See Missionary service in Appendix A.

"As agents of the Lord we are not called or authorized to teach the philosophies of the world or the speculative theories of our scientific age. Our mission is to preach the doctrines of salvation in plainness and simplicity as they are revealed and recorded in the scriptures.

"After directing us to teach the principles of the gospel found in the standard works, as guided by the Spirit, the Lord then made that great pronouncement which governs all the teaching of his gospel by anyone in the Church: 'And the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith; and if ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach.' (D&C 42:14.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, IE, December 1970, p. 2.)

42:11

"except he be ordained by some one who has authority"

"In section 42 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord sets forth the conditions for service in his kingdom. . . . [D&C 42:11 quoted.]

"This indicates that the Lord will select those who are to act for him. No one is authorized to take this authority or honor to himself; rather, an authorized servant of the Lord will ordain them or set them apart to a specific assignment, and it will be known that the authorizing agent has such authority because he will have been regularly ordained to his position by the heads of the Church." (Hartman Rector, Jr., Ensign, January 1974, p. 105.)

42:12

"elders, priests and teachers. . . shall teach the principles of my gospel"

"Apparently there were in the early Church those who taught for doctrines the sophistries of men. There are those today who seem to take pride in disagreeing with the orthodox teachings of the Church and who present their own opinions which are at variance with the revealed truth. Some may be partially innocent in the matter; others are feeding their own egotism; and some seem to be deliberate. Men may think as they please, but they have no right to impose upon others their unorthodox views. Such persons should realize that their own souls are in jeopardy. The Lord said to us through the Prophet Joseph Smith: [Sec. 42:12-14, quoted.]

"The great objective of all our work is to build character and increase faith in the lives of those whom we serve. If one cannot accept and teach the program of the Church in an orthodox way without reservations, he should not teach. It would be the part of honor to resign his position. Not only would he be dishonest and deceitful, but he is also actually under condemnation, for the Savior said that it were better that a millstone were hanged about his neck and he be cast into the sea than that he should lead astray doctrinally or betray the cause or give offense, destroying the faith of one of 'those little ones' who believe in him. And remember that this means not only the small children; it includes even adults who believe and trust in God. . . .

"In our own society, the murderer who kills the body is hunted, imprisoned, and executed, but the character who kills the soul by implanting doubt and shattering faith is permitted not only to go free but also is often retained in high places. The body which is killed will rise again in the resurrection with little damage to its eternal welfare, but he whose faith has been shattered may suffer long ages before complete restoration of spiritual stature can be had, if at all." (Spencer W. Kimball, CR, April 1948, p. 109.)

42:12

"the Book of Mormon" contains "the fulness of the gospel"

See Gospel in Appendix A.

42:14

"the prayer of faith"

"To continue with the revelation, now that the Lord has established the necessity for the Spirit, he proceeds to explain how to get the Spirit. The formula is apparently so simple:

"'And the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith.' (D&C 42:14.)

"On the surface it appears that all that is necessary to receive the Spirit is to ask for it, but it is not quite so easy a question! What is the difference between just ordinary prayer and a 'prayer of faith'?

"As we consider that question, the difference is immediately apparent. The difference is faith, and what is faith? Of course, there are many definitions of faith, but one definition is 'a strong belief plus action.' It is not perfect knowledge (as Alma explains in Alma 32), but real faith lets a man act as if he knows it is true when he really doesn't.

"Therefore, faith in a real sense is power—power to act and perform without actual knowledge. The Lord's formula for receiving the Spirit, then, is to get on our knees and communicate with him. Tell him what we are going to do—make commitments with him—outline our program—and then get up off our knees and go and do precisely what we have told him we would do. In the doing the Spirit comes." (Hartman Rector, Jr., Ensign, January 1974, pp. 106-7.)

42:14

"if ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach"

"All are to preach the Gospel, by the power and influence of the Holy Ghost; and no man can preach the Gospel without the Holy Ghost." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:477.)

"No man can teach the Word of Wisdom by the Spirit of God who does not live it. No man can proclaim this Gospel by the Spirit of the Living God unless that man is living his religion." (Heber J. Grant, CR, October 1937, p. 130.)

"One very important bit of instruction given to these early missionaries of the Church, which should be observed strictly today in all organizations, quorums and classes, as well as in the missions, is the commandment (verse 14) that those who received not the Spirit of the Lord should not teach. No one should be called upon to teach and no one should attempt to teach the doctrines of the Church unless he is fully converted and has an abiding testimony of their truth. This testimony can only be received through prayerful study and obedience to all the commandments of the Lord. No man or woman can teach by the Spirit what he or she does not practice. Sincerity, integrity and loyalty are essential factors, and these will be accompanied by the spirit of prayer. The Comforter, 'who knoweth all things,' we should rely on, and then our teachings shall be approved of our Father in heaven." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:184-85.)

42:17

"the Comforter knoweth all things, and beareth record of the Father and of the Son"

One of the major missions of the Comforter (Holy Ghost) is to testify of both the Father and the Son. The resurrected Jesus Christ taught: "I bear record of the Father, and the Father beareth record of me, and the Holy Ghost beareth record of the Father and me." (3 Ne. 11:32.)

42:18-28

"Thou knowest my laws . . . in my scriptures"

See Ten Commandments in Appendix A.

"Strange as it may seem, there are some people who believe that the Ten Commandments pertained to the law of Moses, and therefore when Christ came, these laws of the Decalogue were done away. Nothing could be farther from the truth. There is not a single commandment in the Decalogue that was not accepted by the people of God as a commandment from the very beginning. . . . In this Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, the Lord restated these fundamental laws and commanded us to observe them with the strictest obedience." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:185.)

42:18, 79

Murderer not to be forgiven

See Killing in Appendix A.

42:20

"Thou shalt not steal"

See Stealing in Appendix A.

"This commandment forbids all violations of the rights of property. But it also forbids those who have property and the power and influence that go with it, to use these in such a way as to prevent others from acquiring a just proportion of the resources of nature, or the accumulated wealth of mankind. Monopolies may be just as condemnable as anarchist plots. Dishonesty in the payment of wages, in weights and measures, in quality of commodities for which payment is exacted—all is stealing." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 224.)

42:21

"Thou shalt not lie"

See Lie in Appendix A.

"This commandment forbids the violation of all obligations of truth. It should be noted that lying is a crime, not merely a fault, or a weakness. To bear false witness against a neighbor is an aggravated form of offense against this law, but to lie about him, or her, in private circles is very little better than testifying falsely in court." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 255.)

42:22

"love thy wife . . . cleave unto her and none else"

"There are those married people who permit their eyes to wander and their hearts to become vagrant, who think it is not improper to flirt a little, to share their hearts, and have desire for someone other than the wife or the husband, the Lord says in no uncertain terms: [Sec. 42:22, quoted.] "And, when the Lord says all thy heart, it allows for no sharing nor dividing nor depriving. And, to the woman it is paraphrased: 'Thou shalt love thy husband with all thy heart and shalt cleave unto him and none else.' The words none else eliminate everyone and everything. The spouse then becomes pre-eminent in the life of the husband or wife, and neither social life nor occupational life nor political life nor any other interest nor person nor thing shall ever take precedence over the companion spouse." (Spencer W. Kimball, IE, December 1962, p. 928.)

42:24-26

"Thou shalt not commit adultery"

See Adultery and Sex sins in Appendix A.

"Unlawful associations of the sexes have been designated by the Lord as among the most heinous of the sins; and the Church today regards individual purity in the sexual relation as an indispensable condition of membership. . . . Moreover, the Lord regards any approach to sexual sin as inconsistent with the professions of those who have received the Holy Spirit, for He has declared that 'he that looketh on a woman to lust after her, or if any shall commit adultery in their hearts, they shall not have the spirit, but shall deny the faith.' [See Sec. 63:16.]" (James E. Talmage, AF, p. 446.)

42:27

"Thou shalt not speak evil of thy neighbor"

"Speaking evil of one is classed as a sin against the law of the Gospel. It may be necessary when on the witness stand, or before an ecclesiastical court, to testify of one's sins, but to do so promiscuously is a sin. Even when called upon to testify, the testimony should be given in the spirit of brotherly kindness, not in the spirit of vindictiveness or gloating over the predicament of a fellow being where punishment awaits him. Speaking words that may prove harmful to another is a crime. Such words constitute the 'idle words' condemned by our Savior, for which there will come a day of judgment. (Matt 12:35-36.)" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 226.)

42:29

"If thou lovest me thou shalt serve me and keep all my commandments "

"I believe this is the greatest lesson that can be learned—to do the right thing because you love the Lord. It is so vitally important that, I feel, if you do anything in righteousness for any other reason than you love the Lord, you are wrong—at least you are on very shaky ground. And, somewhere your reasons for acting in righteousness will not be strong enough to see you through. You will give way to expediency, or peer group pressure, or honor, or fame, or applause, or the thrill of the moment, or some other worldly reason. Unless your motives are built upon the firm foundation of love of the Lord, you will not be able to stand. . . .

"I pray that we may walk in righteousness because we love the Lord, for surely this is the right reason." (Hartman Rector, Jr., Ensign, January 1973, p. 130.)

42:30-36

"consecrate of thy properties"

See Consecration in Appendix A.

"In this revelation [section 42] the Law of Consecration is stated definitely as the law on which the New Jerusalem is to be built. This law is given for the benefit of the poor, for the building of Zion and the work of the ministry. . . . Let it be remembered that at this time (1831) the full organization of the Church had not been revealed, and some temporary arrangements were necessary until the full and complete organization should be established." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:185.)

42:35, 67

"New Jerusalem"

See New Jerusalem in Appendix A.

42:42

"Thou shalt not be idle"

See Work in Appendix A.

"There is such a thing as encouraging idleness and fostering pauperism among men. Men and women ought not to be willing to receive charity unless they are compelled to do so to keep from suffering. Every man and woman ought to possess the spirit of independence, a self-sustaining spirit, that would prompt him or her to say, when they are in need, 'I am willing to give my labor in exchange for that which you give me.' No man ought to be satisfied to receive, and to do nothing." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, April 1898, pp. 48-49.)

42:43-44, 48

"the elders. . . shall be called . . . and lay their hands upon [the sick]"

See Healing in Appendix A.

"In this revelation we get a very clear understanding of the law in relation to administration. The sick are to be nursed by members of the Church, not by enemies. The leaders are to lay hands upon the sick and if the sick have not been appointed unto death, and they and those who officiate for them have faith, they shall recover. We should remember that too frequently we lack the necessary faith, not because the Lord is not willing to give it to us, but because of our own disobedience and failure to live in accordance with the principles on which the Spirit of the Lord operates. (See Matt. 17:14-21.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:185-86.)

42:46

"those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them"

"Some people are confused on this subject [the doctrine of translated beings] by the following two statements by the Savior: '. . . ye shall never taste of death . . . ye shall never endure the pains of death.' (3 Nephi 28:7-8.) These statements do not mean the same as though the Savior had said 'Ye shall never die.' This is made clear in a revelation by the resurrected Jesus Christ to the Prophet Joseph Smith: 'And it shall come to pass that those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them; And they that die not in me, wo unto them, for their death is bitter.' (D&C 42:46-47. Italics added.) In other words, death will be either a sweet or a bitter experience for people: if they are righteous, death will be a sweet experience—they will not taste of death nor feel the pains of death; if they are wicked, death will be a bitter experience. But both groups of people must die. As Paul stated, 'For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.' (l Corinthians 15:22.)

"Joseph Fielding Smith has written the following concerning the present mortal condition of John the Beloved and the three Nephite disciples: '. . . translated beings are still mortal and will have to pass through the experience of death . . . although this will be instantaneous. . . . Translated beings have not passed through death; that is, they have not had the separation of the spirit and the body.' (Answers to Gospel Questions 1:165; 2:46.)

"And finally, the Prophet Joseph Smith has indicated that translated beings have future missions to perform: 'Translated bodies cannot enter into rest until they have undergone a change equivalent to death. Translated bodies are designed for future missions.' (HC 4:425.)" (CBM, pp. 293-94.)

"To some members of the Church the saying that those who die in the Lord shall not taste of death has been a hard saying. They have seen good faithful men and women suffer days and at times for months before they were taken. But here the Lord does not say they shall not suffer pain of body, but that they shall be free from the anguish and torment of soul which will be partaken of by the wicked, and although they may suffer in body, yet death to them will be sweet in that they will realize that they are worthy before the Lord. The Savior said to Martha: 'And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die.' That is to say, they shall never die the second death and feel the torment of the wicked when they come face to face with eternity." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:186.)

42:61

"peaceable things"

See material for D&C 36:2.

42:64

"secret combinations"

The devil works through secret combinations to gain power and influence over the souls of men. Wicked people take secret oaths and vows in an attempt to protect themselves from the law and from the knowledge of other people as they murder, rob, plunder, and seek to obtain power by destroying the freedom of others.

Satan introduced these secret combinations in the days of Cain (Moses 5:16-59; 6:15), and they have been perpetuated by evil persons and secret societies since that time (Hel. 6:17-41; Ether 8:20). According to Moroni, such secret combinations led to the destruction of both the Jaredite and Nephite civilizations, and will lead to the overthrow of freedom in "all lands, nations, and countries" that allow these secret combinations to get power over the people. (Ether 8:14-26.) "One of the most urgent, heart-stirring appeals made by Moroni as he closed the Book of Mormon was addressed to the gentile nations of the last days. He foresaw the rise of a great world-wide secret combination among the gentiles which '. . . seeketh to overthrow the freedom of all lands nations, and countries. . . .' (Ether 8:25, italics added.) He warned each gentile nation of the last days to purge itself of this gigantic criminal conspiracy which would seek to rule the world. . . .

"The Prophet Moroni described how the secret combination would take over a country and then fight the work of God, persecute the righteous, and murder those who resisted. Moroni therefore proceeded to describe the working of the ancient 'secret combinations' so that modern man could recognize this great political conspiracy in the last days: . . . [Ether 8:23-25 quoted.]

"The Prophet Moroni seemed greatly exercised lest in our day we might not be able to recognize the startling fact that the same secret societies which destroyed the Jaredites and decimated numerous kingdoms of both Nephites and Lamanites would be precisely the same form of criminal conspiracy which would rise up among the gentile nations in this day.

"The stratagems of the leaders of these societies are amazingly familiar to anyone who has studied the tactics of modern communist leaders." (Ezra Taft Benson, CR, September 1961, p. 71.)

". . . Latter-day Saints should have nothing to do with secret combinations and groups antagonistic to the constitutional law of the land, which the Lord suffered to be established, and which 'should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh according to just and holy principles.'" (David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals, p. 306.)

42:65

"mysteries of the kingdom"

See Mysteries in Appendix A.

42:73

"the bishop . . . shall receive . . . a just remuneration for all his services in the church"

This reference pertains to the Presiding Bishop of the Church, as no wards had been established nor bishops of wards ordained and set apart at the time this revelation was given.

42:74

"fornication "

"This term is sometimes used for all kinds of sexual sins (See 1 Cor. 7:2; Matt. 5:32; 1 Cor. 5:1), and also, figuratively, for idolatry (2 Chron. 21:11). But generally it stands for the sin of impurity when committed between unmarried persons." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 236.)

42:78

"keep all the commandments"

"No man can find forgiveness for one sin because he is righteous in some other direction. In other words, the payment of tithing will never compensate for the desecration of the Sabbath day. The faithful keeping of the Sabbath day will never make amends for the breaking of the Word of Wisdom. The refraining from murder, and adultery, will not satisfy the law which forbids bearing false witness against neighbors, or coveting their possession. And the doing of good to men will never blot out the sin of blaspheming the name of the living God. We must keep the commandments, all of them, every one of them, every day of our lives, and then we will prove ourselves wise and of understanding hearts." (Hyrum M. Smith, CR, October 1917, p. 39.)

42:84-92

"if he or she" commits a sin

"Note the perfect equality in responsibility of the sexes, in the Law of God. 'If he or she' is guilty, the consequences are the same. There is no sex in crime. Equal 'rights,' to use a familiar expression, presuppose equality in responsibility." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 237.)

"Our standard requires a young man to be as clean and as chaste and as pure as the girl he asks to be his wife, the mother of his children . . . We have no double standard. . . . We expect our boys to be as good as our girls, and as clean." (Melvin J. Ballard, CR, April 1929, pp. 67-68.)
