Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 43

Background information on section 43

"In a revelation given in September, 1830 (Sec. 28), the Lord gave a law to the Church in regard to the receiving of revelation. This was called forth because of the Hiram Page incident. . . . Now, again, it becomes necessary for the Lord to give further instruction on this matter. The incident which called for this direction and law was due to the activity of a woman, Mrs. Hubble, who followed the lead of Hiram Page and endeavored to give revelation for the Church, and there were some who were willing to follow her. . . .

"This law is given for our government for all time. It is the one who holds the keys and who stands as the Presiding High Priest and President of the Church, who is the spokesman of the Lord for the members of the Church. Individual members may receive the inspiration and revelation for their own guidance, but not for the Church. Moreover, no member of the Church will profess to receive a revelation for his own guidance that is contradictory of any revelation coming from the President of the Church." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:172.)

"This woman's name, according to the history of the church kept by John Whitmer, was Hubble. 'She professed to be a prophetess of the Lord, and professed to have many revelations, and knew the Book of Mormon was true, and that she should become a teacher in the church of Christ. She appeared to be very sanctimonious and deceived some who were not able to detect her in her hypocrisy; others, however, had the spirit of discernment and her follies and abominations were manifest. (John Whitmer's History of the Church, ch. iii.)" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:154, footnote.)

"Soon after the foregoing revelation was received [Section 41], a woman, (Hubble) came making great pretensions of revealing commandments, laws and other curious matters; and as almost every person has advocates for both theory and practice, in the various notions and projects of the age, it became necessary to inquire of the Lord, when I received the following: [Section 43, follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:154.)

43:3

"there is none other appointed . . . to receive commandments" for the Church

"It is not the business of any individual to rise up as a revelator, as a prophet, as a seer, as an inspired man, to give revelation for the guidance of the Church, or to assume to dictate to the presiding authorities of the Church in any part of the world. . . .

"And the moment that individuals look to any other source, that moment they throw themselves open to the seductive influences of Satan, and render themselves liable to become servants of the devil; they lose sight of the true order through which the blessings of the Priesthood are to be enjoyed; they step outside of the pale of the kingdom of God, and are on dangerous ground. Whenever you see a man rise up claiming to have received direct revelation from the Lord to the Church, independent of the order and channel of the Priesthood, you may set him down as an impostor." (Joseph F. Smith, JD 24:188-90.)

43:4

"he shall not have power except to appoint another"

"This clause, at first sight, may appear difficult to understand. If the Prophet should be removed through apostasy, for instance, would he, in his fallen condition, be willing, or have authority, to ordain a successor? Would he not, more probably, make an effort to retain the position for himself? On the other hand, if the Prophet should be removed by death, how could he 'appoint another in his stead?' But whatever difficulty the passage may present, has been removed by God, when He inspired His servant to appoint a Council of Twelve Apostles and to confer upon this body all the keys, power, and authority which he held himself. Thus provision was made for a successor appointed and ordained, as the Revelation says he should be, through, or by, the Prophet, before his removal, fully equipped to step into the vacant place." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 241.)

43:7

"he that is ordained of me shall come in at the gate"

"Let the members of the Church remember that the Lord has said that when a man is called to any position of responsibility, and especially to preside over the Church, he will 'come in at the gate and be ordained as I have told you before, to teach those revelations which you have received and shall receive through him whom I have appointed.' (D&C 43:7.) This counsel and commandment was given that the Saints should know how to be edified and instructed and how to direct the Church in all holiness before the Lord. For many years our communities have been troubled with impostors claiming to be called of God to lead the Church as the 'one mighty and strong, holding the scepter of power,' and to set in order the inheritances. Some of these impostors have passed away, but others come, and at times are able to lead away unwise members who lack the understanding and knowledge by which the Church is governed. These revelations, given in 1830 and 1831, are for our benefit and guidance in all such matters. The Lord would have us know that he does all things in order, and whenever he calls one to lead the Church, that one will come in at the gate and be ordained by those who hold authority. It has been so from the beginning and will continue so to the end." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:137-38.)

43:8

"instruct and edify each other"

"By study of the principles of the Gospel, and by teaching each other, we learn how to act and how the Church should be governed. Every member of the Church should so live that by study, reflection, faith and prayer, and association with his fellow members in study, he may understand the order of the Church and how it is governed. Then if we will be faithful to the principles of truth that have been given for our guidance, we will be sanctified and will act in all holiness before the Lord." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:190.)

43:9, 11

"be sanctified"

See Sanctify in Appendix A.

"This means to be made clean and pure and fit for the service of the Lord. . . . By obedience to the Law of Christ the Saints are sanctified." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 243.)

43:13

"the mysteries of the kingdom"

See Mysteries in Appendix A.

43:13

"provide for him . . . whatsoever thing he needeth "

"The Prophet's duties were many and arduous. It was impossible for him to attend to all that the Lord required of his hands and at the same time care for himself and family. Therefore, the Lord called upon the Saints, if they desired 'the glories of the kingdom,' which he was called upon to reveal to them, to provide for him food, raiment, shelter and 'whatsoever thing he needeth to accomplish the work wherewith I have commanded him.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:190.)

43:15

"Ye are not sent forth to be taught, but to teach"

"This is a truth which all our missionaries and teachers of the Gospel should comprehend. We have been given the privilege of the guidance of the Holy Ghost. This guidance will not come to us unless we obey the commands of the Lord and seek to know his doctrines. These we are sent out to teach as they have been revealed for the benefit of mankind. Therefore, we are duty bound to seek for our inspiration and knowledge through these revelations and commandments, and not from the doctrines and philosophies and theories of uninspired men in the world. . . . Above all, let us remember that, with the light of truth, we should be the teachers of the world, and not be partakers of their false teachings." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:190.)

"We have only one object in view in going out amongst the nations, and that is to follow the Master's instructions—to go out and teach men. That is our work. We do not go out to win battles as debaters; but we go out to teach men that which we have received, which we know is true." (Anthon H. Lund, CR, October 1902, pp. 80-81.)

43:17, 30

"the great day of the Lord is nigh at hand"

See Second coming in Appendix A.

"This is the message that the Prophet Joseph brought to the earth. At a general conference in Nauvoo, April 6th, 1843, he said, 'There are those of the rising generation who shall not taste death till Christ comes.' At the same time he was well aware that the coming of the Lord in the clouds was not to be expected immediately. Our Savior had told him, in answer to prayer, that, 'If thou livest until thou art eighty-five years old, thou shalt see the face of the Son of Man' (Sec. 130:15); but he was left in doubt as to whether this meant that Christ would come in power and glory at the end of the year 1890, or whether he (the Prophet) at that time, should be admitted to His presence. The Prophet says, 'I took the liberty to conclude that if I did live till that time, He would make his appearance.' (HC 5:336). This conclusion does not appear improbable. The work the Lord did accomplish through the Prophet Joseph in a few years, from 1830 to 1844, was certainly wonderful. What would it have been in 60 years! At the same time, the Prophet knew that many great events were to precede the Millennium." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 246.)

43:21-22

"the thunders . . . [and] lightnings . . . shall utter forth their voices"

"The Lord will cause the thunders to utter their voices from the ends of the earth until they sound in the ears of all that live, and these thunders shall use the very words here predicted—'Repent, O ye inhabitants of the earth, and prepare the way of the Lord, prepare yourselves for the great day of the Lord.' These words will be distinctly heard by every soul that lives, whether in America, Asia, Africa, Europe, or upon the islands of the sea. And not only the thunders, but the lightnings will utter forth their voices in the ears of all that live, saying, 'Repent, for the great day of the Lord is come.' Besides the voices of thunder and lightning, the Lord himself, before he comes in his glory, will speak by his own voice out of heaven in the ears of all that live commanding them to repent and to prepare for his coming." (Orson Pratt, JD 15:332-33.)

43:24

"as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings"

See material for 10:65.

43:26

"cup of. . . indignation"

See material for 29:17.

43:30

"the great Millennium . . . shall come"

See Millennium in Appendix A.

43:31

"then cometh the end of the earth"

See Earth in Appendix A.

"This earth is a living body. It is growing old like its in habitants. After the Millennium, and the little season when Satan will be loosed to gather his forces and wickedness is found on the earth again, then this earth shall die. It will be consumed by fire and purified and receive its celestial resurrection that the righteous may inherit it forever." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:192.)

43:31

"Satan shall be bound"

See Satan in Appendix A.

"There are many among us who teach that the binding of Satan will be merely the binding which those dwelling on the earth will place upon him by their refusal to hear his enticings. This is not so. He will not have the privilege during that period of time to tempt any man. (D&C 101:28.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:192.)

43:34

"let the solemnities of eternity rest upon your minds"

This interesting statement indicates that we should ponder or think seriously about the truths that have to do with the eternities, such as the pre-earthly existence, the purposes of our mortal earthly experience, the plan of progression our Heavenly Father has for his children, the post-earthly spirit world, the kingdoms or degrees of glory, the promised possibility of Godhood, etc.
