Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 45

Background information on section 45

"At this age of the Church [i.e., early in the spring of 1831] many false reports, lies, and foolish stories, were published in the newspapers, and circulated in every direction, to prevent people from investigating the work, or embracing the faith. A great earthquake in China, which destroyed from one to two thousand inhabitants, was burlesqued in some papers, as '"Mormonism" in China.' But to the joy of the Saints who had to struggle against every thing that prejudice and wickedness could invent, I received the following: [D&C 45.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:158.)

"This earthquake in China is a matter of some interest in connection with the history of the church, since it was the means of bringing Simonds Ryder, a somewhat noted preacher of the Campbellite faith, into the Church. According to Hayden's History of the Disciples on the Western Reserve (a Campbellite book), Mr. Ryder was much perplexed over 'Mormonism,' and for a time was undecided whether to join the Church or not. 'In the month of June' (1831), writes Mr. Hayden, 'he read in a newspaper an account of the destruction of Pekin in China, and he remembered that six weeks before, a young "Mormon" girl had predicted the destruction of that city.' J. H. Kennedy, in his Early Days of Mormonism (Scribner's & Sons, 1888), refers to the same thing, and adds: 'This appeal to the superstitious part of his nature was the final weight in the balance and he threw the whole power of his influence upon the side of "Mormonism"' (pp. 103-4). It was doubtless this prophecy and the conversion connected with it that led the papers mentioned in the text to refer to it as '"Mormonism" in China.' " (Joseph Smith, HC 1:148, footnote.)

"Brothers and sisters, this is the day the Lord is speaking of. You see the signs are here. Be ye therefore ready. The Brethren have told you in this conference how to prepare to be ready. We have never had a conference where there has been so much direct instruction, so much admonition; when the problems have been defined and also the solution to the problem has been suggested. Let us not turn a deaf ear now, but listen to these as the words that have come from the Lord, inspired of him, and we will be safe on Zion's hill, until all that the Lord has for his children shall have been accomplished." (Harold B. Lee, CR, October 1973, p. 170.)

45:1-10

Titles and powers of the Lord

See Jesus Christ in Appendix A.

45:2

"the summer shall be past"

"One of the great failings of mankind is to ignore warnings of punishment for sin. In all ages of the world it has been the peculiar belief of men that the sayings of the prophets were to be fulfilled in times still future. That is true of the people today. We have had ample warning of the nearness of the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. The signs are upon us in all their power. . . . In this revelation we are given the warning that the summer is passing and if we are heedless of the warning we will find the summer past, the harvest ended and our souls not saved. While no man knows the day or the hour, yet if we are taken unawares, we will be without excuse, for the signs are ample and we now see them being fulfilled." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:195.)

45:6

"while it is called today"

See Today in Appendix A.

45:7

"a light that shineth in darkness"

See Light in Appendix A.

45:8

"mine own received me not"

See Jews in Appendix A.

45:9

"mine everlasting covenant . . . [and] standard"

See Covenant in Appendix A.

"This Church is the standard which Isaiah said the Lord would set up for the people in the latter days. [Isa. 49:22.] This church was given to be a light to the world and to be a standard for God's people and for the Gentiles to seek to. This Church is the ensign on the mountain spoken of by the Old Testament prophets. It is the way, the truth, and the life." (Marion G. Romney, CR, April 1961, p. l 19.)

45:9

"Gentiles"

See Gentiles in Appendix A.

45:11-14

"Epoch, and his brethren . . . were separated from the earth"

See Enoch in Appendix A.

45:16-33, 35-39

The words of Jesus Christ to his disciples on the Mount of Olives in New Testament times

This remarkable discourse of the Savior to his disciples is recorded in three of the Gospels (Matthew 24; Mark 13; Luke 21) and was restored to Joseph Smith and included as Joseph Smith—Matthew (JS 1) in the Pearl of Great Price. This thrilling and descriptive account in the Doctrine and Covenants (vv. 16-60) should be prayerfully and carefully compared with the other accounts.

45:19

"thief in the night"

This term has reference to the Lord's statement: ". . . if the goodman of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken up. Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not the Son of man cometh." (Matt. 24:43-44.)

Thus, the statement that the Lord will come as a "thief in the night" indicates that many people will be surprised and not prepared for him at his coming. In his epistle to the Thessalonian saints, Paul uses this analogy and suggests that saints who are guided by the Spirit and who watch for the signs of the times are not in darkness; therefore that day should not overtake them as a thief. (See 1 Thes. 4:16-18; 5:1-4.)

45:19

"this people [Jews] shall be destroyed and scattered"

"Jewish and Roman thought were incompatible, and in A.D. 66, thirty years after the crucifixion, a general revolt against Rome occurred, and the Jews took possession of Jerusalem. Vespasian and his son Titus were sent with a Roman army to bring them back into submission, and after a siege which continued about four years, one of the most frightful and atrocious sieges of history characterized by unspeakable horrors, the city was taken by Titus, who burned the temple, leveled the city to the ground and scattered the Jewish people to the four corners of the earth. Historians tells us that the very foundation stones were dug up by the Romans in the hope that treasure might be found buried there. . . .

"I have gone briefly over the history of the past in order to bring before you . . . the undeniable evidence that the words uttered by Christ our Lord, in which he declared the destruction of the temple at Jerusalem and the scattering of the Jews, have been literally fulfilled. [Matt. 24:1-21.]" (Anthony W. Ivins, CR, October 1930, pp. 120-21.)

"I have before me a quotation of Will Durrant in his book, The Story of Civilization, in which he states that 'no people in history fought so tenaciously for liberty as the Jews, nor any other people against such odds.' He says further, 'No other people has ever known so long an exile, or so hard a fate.'

"Then referring to the siege of Jerusalem under Titus, lasting for 134 days, during which 1,110,000 Jews perished and 97,000 were taken captive, he states that the Romans destroyed 987 towns in Palestine and slew 580,000 men, and still a larger number, we are told, perished through starvation, disease, and fire. . . . Scarcely eight thousand Jews were left in all of Palestine. And even their banishment and scattering didn't end their persecution. . . .

"Yes, the prophecies regarding the dispersion and the suffering of Judah have been fulfilled." (Ezra Taft Benson, CR, April 1950, pp. 74-75.)

45:25

"until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled"

See Gentiles in Appendix A.

"The prophecy in Section 45, verses 24-29, of the Doctrine and Covenants regarding the Jews was literally fulfilled. Jerusalem, which was trodden down by the Gentiles, is no longer trodden down, but is made the home for the Jews. They are returning to Palestine, and by this we may know that the times of the Gentiles are near their close.

"The words of the prophets are rapidly being fulfilled, but it is done on such natural principles that most of us fail to see it." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, April 1966, pp. 13, 15.)

45:26

"men's hearts shall fail them"

"We live in an age when, as the Lord foretold, men's hearts are failing them, not only physically but in spirit. (See D&C 45:26.) Many are giving up heart for the battle of life. Suicide ranks as a major cause of the deaths to college students. As the showdown between good and evil approaches with its accompanying trials and tribulations, Satan is increasingly striving to overcome the Saints with despair, discouragement, despondency, and depression.

"Yet, of all people, we as Latter-day Saints should be the most optimistic and the least pessimistic. For while we know that 'peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion,' we are also assured that 'the Lord shall have power over his saints, and shall reign in their midst.' (D&C 1:35-36.)" (Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, November 1974, p. 65.)

45:27

"the love of men shall wax cold"

"The expression is the same as that found in Matt. 24:12, where we read (translated literally), 'And because lawlessness has abounded, the love of the many [this indicates more than a few] shall wax cold.' 'Love' here means Christian unity, harmony. Where in the Christian world does that love, that oneness, prevail? There is an abundance of co-operation based on self-interest, or family connections: but where is there genuine Christian love, true, unselfish, constant? Its absence in the majority of men is one of the signs of the end." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 262.)

45:28

"a light shall break forth . . . it shall be the fulness of my gospel"

See Light in Appendix A.

The word light is used in the scriptures to refer to several things having to do with the Lord and his gospel. Jesus Christ is the light and life of the world (John 1:4-5; 1 John 1:5; D&C 10:70; 11:28; 12:9; 34:2; 45:7). Truth is light (D&C 84:45; 88:6). In this revelation (D&C 45:28), light is given as being representative of the fulness of the gospel.

Also, the Savior uses the word light many times in sections 88 and 93 in referring to himself.

45:30

"in that generation"

See Generation in Appendix A.

45:31

"a desolating sickness shall cover the land"

See Second coming in Appendix A.

One of the impending signs of the second coming of Jesus Christ is that a desolating scourge or sickness shall cover the land. (D&C 5:19; 45:31.) Elder McConkie suggests that after the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled, "new and unheard of diseases will attack the human system." (MD, p. 654.) The following will result from at least one of these afflictions: "their flesh shall fall from off their bones, and their eyes from their sockets." (D&C 29:18-19.)

45:34-38

Fulfillment of the parable of the fig tree

One characteristic of a fig tree is that it does not put forth its leaves until relatively late in the year, long after most of the trees are in full leaf. The Savior used this feature in a parable concerning his second coming. Although the world will not know the day nor the hour of his coming, we should observe the signs of the times, for when the fig tree puts forth its leaves, we know that summer is nigh. In other words, when the signs of the second coming begin to be made manifest, we know that the second coming is nigh or near at hand.

"When Jesus said to his disciples in answer to their query: 'Show us when the end of the world shall come, and the time of thy coming' [Matt. 24:3], he spoke of certain signs that would indicate the time of his coming, the very signs that the world, if they only had eyes to see, could be beholding today: Said he: judge the matter even as you would judge the coming of spring. When you see the fig tree putting forth its leaf, ye know that summer is near, and so when you see these signs, you may know that the coming of the Son of man is nigh at hand." (Melvin J. Ballard, CR, October 1923, p. 32.)

45:40-44

Events associated with the second coming

See Second coming in Appendix A.

"If the signs of the coming of our Lord were apparent in the days of the Prophet, surely we have evidence today that the great day of his coming is drawing very near, for the signs have multiplied a thousand fold. . . . Troubles, wars, pestilence, one after another, will continue until the Ancient of Days shall come. He [Joseph Smith] saw men hunting the lives of their own sons, brother murdering brother, mothers and daughters at enmity. Armies were arrayed against armies, and there shall be blood, desolation, war and fire. Satan will rage, and then, he adds: 'I know not how soon these things will take place; but with a view of them, shall I cry peace? No! I will lift up my voice and testify of them. How long you will have good crops, and the famine be kept off, I do not know; when the fig tree leaves, know then that the summer is nigh at hand.' (HC 3:290-301.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:226-27.)

45:46

"the saints shall come forth "

"There must come a time, for the Lord has spoken it, when by some miraculous manner, he will gather from the four ends of the earth his people in a gathering which does not have to do with that which has already taken place.

"This seems to be a time to come—near the great day of resurrection (D&C 45:46 and Moses 7:62-63) and just preceding the time when the 'arm of the Lord shall fall upon the nations.' In that day the City of Enoch—the other City of Zion—will return and men shall again exercise perfect faith and have the guidance of divine power." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Signs of the Times, pp. 169-70.)

45:47

"Then shall the arm of the Lord fall"

See Arm of the Lord in Appendix A.

45:48

"then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount"

"Prior to the glorious coming of the Son of God, the Jews are going to be beleaguered by the nations who threaten the very existence of the Jewish race. Then, according to Zechariah, down through the gates of heaven shall come the Lord Jesus Christ, the Captain and King for whom the Jews have wept and prayed so long, and he shall set his feet upon the Mount of Olives, and the Mount shall cleave asunder, and the Jews shall escape destruction. The God of heaven shall then, with the armies of heaven, have judgment upon the wicked, and the wicked shall be destroyed. When Jesus stands before the Jews, they will see the wounds in his hands and, recognizing their Lord and God, they shall say: '. . . What are these wounds in thine hands?' And then Jesus shall break the hearts of the Jews by saying: 'Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends.' (Zech. 13:6.) And that nation then, and not until then, shall be born in a day. By the authorized servants of God they shall receive the baptism of repentance; they shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and become the children of God their Father and the servants of the great Jehovah." (Charles A. Callis, CR, October 1945, p. 81.)

45:52

"Then shall they [the Jews] know that I am the Lord"

"Before the second coming of Jesus Christ, the remnant of the Jews will be gathered to Palestine. . . . Part of the city of Jerusalem shall fall when a great earthquake shall take place and the Mount of Olives shall cleave in twain and into the valley thus formed the persecuted Jews shall flee for safety. At this time, Christ will appear to them and show them his hands and his feet and the predictions of Zacharias will be fulfilled. Then the Jews who have only partly believed in Christ and who have not been willing to accept him as their Redeemer, will be converted and forgiven on their repentance and a nation will be born in a day." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:197.)

45:54

"it shall be tolerable" for the heathen in the resurrection

"The heathen nations who have not known God shall have their part in the first resurrection. The extent of their blessing, or degree of salvation is not stated, but the Lord says it will be 'tolerable' for them. Tolerable, according to the dictionary means 'passably good; commonplace.' The Lord being just to all men, we may be assured that he will give to them in justice and according to divine law." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 265.)

"The statement that the heathen dead will have place in the first resurrection is sustained by the word of scripture, and by a consideration of the principles of true justice according to which humanity is to be judged. Man will be accounted blameless or guilty, according to his deeds as interpreted in the light of the law under which he is required to live. It is inconsistent with our conception of a just God, to believe Him capable of inflicting condemnation upon any one for noncompliance with a requirement of which the person has no knowledge. Nevertheless, the laws of the Church will not be suspended even in the case of those who have sinned in darkness and ignorance; but it is reasonable to believe that the plan of redemption will afford such benighted ones an opportunity of learning the laws of God; and surely, as fast as they so learn, will obedience be required on pain of the penalty." (James E. Talmage, AF, p. 519)

45:55

"Satan shall be bound"

See Satan in Appendix A.

"We read that Satan shall be bound a thousand years. How is this to be accomplished? By our becoming so impregnated with the principles of the Gospel—with the Holy Ghost—that the enemy will have no place in us or in our families. He will be chained to all intents and purposes when he can have no influence—no power—no tabernacles into which he can enter." (Daniel H. Wells, JD 5:43.)

45:56-59

"the parable . . . concerning the ten virgins" shall be fulfilled

See Virgins in Appendix A.

45:60-61

"until the New Testament be translated"

The Lord herein authorizes Joseph Smith to work on his inspired translation of the New Testament—"I give unto you that ye may now translate it." The Lord also indicates that one purpose of the new translation of the scriptures is to help the saints "be prepared for the things to come." (D&C 45:61.)

See Inspired Version of the Bible in Appendix A.

45:64-71

"it shall be called the New Jerusalem"

"From the very beginning of the Church in this dispensation there has been agitation in relation to the place of the city New Jerusalem. The first knowledge given that this city was to be built on this continent came from the record of Ether in the Book of Mormon. (Chap. 13.) Naturally the Saints were desirous to learn of the site of this city and to assist in building it. In Section 45 the Lord called upon the Saints to gather their wealth for the purchasing of lands and for the preparation for the building of the New Jerusalem, which was to be built somewhere in the western country." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:197.)

"This Church was less than one year old when that revelation [Sec. 45:62-71] was given, and but little more than a year old when an attempt was made to carry out the divine instruction. The place for the City was revealed—Jackson County, Missouri—and the plan whereby Zion would be established was also made known." (Orson F. Whitney, CR, October 1917, pp. 50-51.)

45:67, 75

"the terror of the Lord . . . shall be there"

The Lord will be a terror unto the wicked at the time of judgment (including the time of his second coming, which is a day of judgment) in that the wicked will be terrified of him. Fear will then seize upon them, for they will know they have been wicked, have not repented, and are to receive the consequences of their evil acts.

Paul also uses the term in connection with judgment: "For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men; but we are made manifest unto God; and I trust also are made manifest in your consciences." (2 Cor. 5:10-11.)

45:72-75

"keep these things from going abroad unto the world until it is expedient in me"

Evidently "these things" mentioned here refer to the contents of verses 64-71 wherein the Lord commands the Saints to leave the eastern countries, assemble in the western countries, build up churches unto him, and prepare to build Zion.
