Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 46

Background information on section 46

"The next day after the above was received [Section 45], I also received the following revelation, relative to the gifts of the Holy Ghost: [Section 46, follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:163.)

46:2

"conduct all meetings as . . . directed and guided by the Holy Spirit"

"Speaking to the members of the Church in March, 1831, the Lord said: [Sec. 46:22, quoted.] This is one of the marks of the Church of Jesus Christ. In this manner the apostles and elders of old conducted their meetings, but as time passed and false philosophy and pagan practices crept into the Church, this method was changed. . . . We are commanded in this revelation to conduct such meetings as we are led and guided by the Holy Ghost. Meetings which partake of the inspiration of the hour are filled with interest and instruction.

"John Whitmer records in his history that 'in the beginning of the Church, while yet in her infancy, the disciples used to exclude unbelievers which caused some to marvel and converse on this matter because of the things written in the Book of Mormon. (3 Nephi 18:22-24.) Therefore, the Lord deigned to speak on this subject, that his people might come to an understanding, and he said that he had always given to his elders to conduct all meetings as they were led by the Spirit.' [HC 1:163-64.] " (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:182-83.)

46:3-5

Instructions regarding sacrament meetings

See Sacrament in Appendix A.

"After the Lord gave this revelation this practice of forbidding non-members to attend sacrament services ceased. The word of the Lord to the Nephites is very clear and positive on this point, he said: '. . . ye shall not suffer any one knowingly to partake of my flesh and blood unworthily, when ye shall minister it.' [3 Ne. 18:28.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:182-83.)

46:4

"if any have trespassed, let him not partake" of the sacrament

"To partake of the Sacrament unworthily is to take a step toward spiritual death. No man can be dishonest within himself without deadening the susceptibility of his spirit. Sin can stun the conscience as a blow on the head can stun the physical senses. He who promises one thing and deliberately fails to keep his word, adds sin to sin. On natural principles such a man 'eats and drinks condemnation to his soul.'" (David O. McKay, CR, October 1929, pp. 14-15.)

46:7-10

"beware lest ye are deceived " by evil spirits

"We may look for angels and receive their ministrations, but we are to try the spirits and prove them, for it is often the case that men make a mistake in regard to these things. God has so ordained that when he has communicated, no vision is to be taken but what you see by the seeing of the eye, or what you hear by the hearing of the ear. When you see a vision, pray for the interpretation; if you get not this, shut it up; there must be certainty in this matter. An open vision will manifest that which is more important." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:391.)

"In order to have the power to distinguish between truth and error and to interpret properly a dream or vision, one must have a pure heart and a contrite spirit and be living a righteous life. Satan's mission is to deceive, and he can, and does, give revelation to those who permit themselves to fall into his power. 'Lying spirits are going forth in the earth. There will be great manifestations of spirits, both false and true.' (HC 3:391-92.)

"The Lord has given us sound counsel in relation to all such matters in Section 46, verses 7-10. Men are often deceived by the revelations from lying spirits. This is a danger confronting all those who yield to temptation; who violate covenants, speak evil of authorities, etc. When a man does any of these things he becomes subject to deception and inspiration from an evil source." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:228.)

46:8-33

"seek ye earnestly the best gifts"

See Gifts of the Spirit in Appendix A. Also check in Appendix A the materials for each specific gift such as Discernment, Faith, Healing, Miracles, Prophecy, Revelation, Teaching, Tongues, and Visions.

"That the Saints might not be deceived, the Lord pointed out to them the proper gifts of the Spirit (Sec. 46) which are distributed among the members as the Lord sees good to bestow. Yet more than one gift may be received by any person who diligently seeks for these things. All members of the Church should seek for the gift of prophecy, for their own guidance, which is the spirit by which the word of the Lord is understood and his purposes made known. (See 1 Cor. 14:1.) Men who are called to positions of responsibility in the government of the Church are entitled to have many gifts, and the President all of them. . . . " (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:201.)

46:13

"to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God"

"This knowledge is placed first among the special gifts, because it is obtained only by revelation. To believe that Jesus of Nazareth was the Anointed One, the Messiah, and that He was crucified for the sins of the world, is not to know it. Knowledge is a special gift." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 274.)

46:15

"to know the differences of administration"

"This is another special gift. The term, as used by Paul (1 Cor. 12:5) means the different divisions or courses of the priests and Levites engaged in the temple service, and in this Revelation it may refer to the different duties and responsibilities of the Priesthood in its two divisions, the Melchizedek and Aaronic. To know this is a gift of the Spirit." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 274.)

46:16

"to know the diversities of operations"

"This refers to various spiritual influences at work, for instance such as are manifested in Spiritism, anarchism, and the numerous other 'isms.' To know whether an influence with a professedly moral, or reformatory, aim is from the Holy Spirit, or from another source, is a special gift." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 274.)

46:17

"the word of wisdom"

"The . . . gift of the gospel which I present is that of wisdom. Wisdom cannot be disassociated from discernment, but it involves some other factors, and its applications are rather more specific. Wisdom is sometimes defined as sound judgment and a high degree of knowledge. I define wisdom as being the beneficent application of knowledge in decision. I think of wisdom not in the abstract but as functional. Life is largely made up of choices and determinations, and I can think of no wisdom that does not contemplate the good of man and society. Wisdom is true understanding. . . . [Prov. 3:15-17, 13 quoted.]

"I do not believe that true wisdom can be acquired or exercised in living without a sound fundamental knowledge of the truth about life and living. The cry of the world is for wisdom and wise men. . . . The fundamental knowledge which the Church brings you will bring you understanding. Your testimony, your spirit, and your service will direct the application of your knowledge; that is wisdom." (Stephen L Richards, CR, April 1950, pp. 163-64.)

46:18

"the word of knowledge"

"Refers to the gift to instruct others. There is a difference between wisdom, knowledge, and ability to instruct. According to Coleridge, 'common sense in an uncommon degree' is what men call wisdom. It is almost a direct operation of intuition. Knowledge is a carefully-stored-up supply of facts, generally slowly acquired. The ability to instruct is the gift to impart of this supply to others. Each is a gift of God." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 274.)

46:21

"working of miracles"

"A special divine power is needed for the working of miracles. The Prophet Joseph had this power in a very high degree. It was one of the evidences that he had the authority of the holy Priesthood. One of the numerous miracles God performed through him was the healing of one Mrs. Johnson, who, in company with others, visited his home in Kirtland, 1831. She had, for some time, been afflicted with a lame arm. She could not raise it to her head. The conversation turned on supernatural power, and someone in the company asked if there was anybody on Earth that could heal Mrs. Johnson for instance. The Prophet arose, walked over to Mrs. Johnson, took her by the hand and said, 'Woman, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, I command thee to be whole,' whereupon he left the room. Mrs. Johnson at once lifted up her arm, and the next day was able to do her washing (History of the Church, Vol. I, p. 215)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 275.)

46:22

"to prophesy"

"That is, to speak in the name of the Lord, whether of things present, past, or future. This is a special gift. The Prophet Joseph had it in the highest degree. Heber C. Kimball also had the gift highly developed. At times he could see into the future as if it were an open book. During the time of famine in Salt Lake valley in 1847, when many subsisted on roots and hides of animals, and knew not where to obtain bread or clothing necessary, owing to the devastation by crickets, President Kimball declared in a public meeting that, within a short time, 'state goods' would be sold in the streets of Salt Lake City cheaper than in New York, and that the people should be abundantly supplied with food and clothing. Many who heard him refused to believe. He himself said he was afraid he had missed it. But the prophecy came true. Very soon the California gold-hunters came through the Valley. Salt Lake City became their resting-place, and they were glad to exchange their goods for whatever they could get. Many of them threw goods away, or sold them for a song, in order to lighten their wagons and be able to make better progress. (Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 401-2)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 275.)

46:31

"all things must be done in the name of Christ"

"Everything in this Church is to be done in the name of Jesus Christ; so we have been commanded. This Church is called 'The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.' That was given by revelation and commandment. [Sec. 115:3-4.] It is not merely the Church of man: and though men are called of God to work in it and to occupy prominent places in it, and use great influence in building it up, we are building it up to him who is our living Head, even Jesus Christ. We are to do all things in his name. . . .

"So, my brethren, in administering in any of the ordinances of the house of God, it is to be done in the name of Jesus Christ." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, April 1920, pp. 28-29.)
