Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 47

Background information section 47

"Previous to this Oliver Cowdery had acted as historian and recorder. John Whitmer, according to his own representations, said he would rather not keep the Church history, but observed—'The will of the Lord be done, and if He desires it, I wish that He would manifest it through Joseph the Seer.'—John Whitmer's History of the Church, ch. vi—Accordingly the revelation was given." (HC 1:166, footnote.)

"John Whitmer was now appointed custodian of the records of the Church. When he was excommunicated, March 10, 1838, at Far West, he refused to deliver up the documents in his possession, and at his death they were taken charge of by his nephew, John C. Whitmer, of Richmond, Mo." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 279.)

47:1-4

"my servant John should write and keep a regular history"

For biographical information on John Whitmer, see Appendix B.

Roy W. Doxey has indicated the extent of John Whitmer's efforts as a historian and what subsequently happened to his record:

"The history of the Church written by John Whitmer was only 'a mere sketch of the things that transpired.' His total work consisted of eighty-five pages which included many of the revelations given while he was in office. During the period when many brethren became disaffected, he was in the Presidency of the Church in Missouri. The members of the Church in that area did not sustain him and his associates in the Presidency. Although the presiding brethren demanded that he deliver the history of the Church to them he refused. Years after his death, a copy of the history was obtained by the Church." (Doctrine and Covenants Speaks 1:327.)

"Oliver Cowdery was the first historian of the Church. Afterwards the Lord, in revelation, appointed John Whitmer as the historian. John Whitmer was one of the eight witnesses of the Book of Mormon. He was very zealous in helping the prophet. In the later days of the translation of the Book of Mormon he acted as scribe, and afterwards he helped the prophet in preparing the revelations to be printed, and he went to Missouri for that purpose. He felt how important the work was that the Lord had commenced, and if he had only kept the spirit with him he would not have met the fate he did, that of being excommunicated from the Church. But love of worldly things took possession of him and he left the Church. But I want to say this to his credit, he never denied the testimony which he subscribed to when the Book of Mormon was printed." (Anthon H. Lund, CR, October 1917, pp. 10-12.)
