Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 49

Background information on section 49

"At about this time [March 1831] came Leman Copley, one of the sect called Shaking Quakers, and embraced the fulness of the everlasting Gospel, apparently honest-hearted, but still retaining the idea that the Shakers were right in some particulars of their faith. In order to have more perfect understanding on the subject, I inquired of the Lord, and received the following: [D&C 49.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:167.)

"'This sect of Christians [the Shaking Quakers] arose in England, and Ann Lee has the credit of being its founder. They derive their name from their manner of worship, which is performed by singing and dancing, and clapping their hands in regular time, to a novel but rather pleasant kind of music. This sect was persecuted in England, and came to America in 1774. They first settled in Watervliet, near Albany, New York. They have, or think they have, revelations from heaven, or gifts from the Holy Spirit, which direct them in the choice of their leaders, and in other important concerns. Their dress and manners are similar to those of the society of Friends (Quakers): hence they are often called Shaking Quakers.'—Hayward's Book of All Religions, pp. 84-85. 'They assert, with the Quakers, that all external ordinances, especially baptism and the Lord's supper, ceased in the apostolic age; and that God had sent no one to preach since that time till they were raised up, to call in the elect in a new dispensation. They deny the doctrine of the Trinity and a vicarious atonement, as also the resurrection of the body.'—Burder's History of All Religions, p. 502.)" (HC 1:167, footnote.)

"The Shakers, or 'The United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing,' had their origin in England in a Quaker revival in 1747, of which Jane and James Wardley were the leaders, but it is due to the activity of Ann Lee that the Society has been perpetuated. This organization is a celibate and communistic sect, which did not prohibit marriage but refused to accept it as a Christian principle. The Shakers believed in 'a life of innocence and purity, according to the example of Jesus Christ and his first true followers, implying entire abstinence from all sensual and carnal gratifications. . . . '

"Under the leadership of 'Mother' Ann Lee a band of six men and two women came to America, August 6, 1774. 'A group of Shakers came out of the Kentucky revival in 1800-02, and from this the branches in Kentucky and Ohio were formed. The Shakers held that God was both male and female, that Adam, having been created in the image of God, had in him the nature of both sexes, that even angels and spirits are both male and female. Christ, they believe, was one of the superior spirits and appeared in Jesus, the son of a Jewish carpenter, representing the male principle. In Mother Ann, daughter of an English blacksmith, the female principle in Christ was manifested, and in her the promise of the second coming was fulfilled. Christ's kingdom on earth began with the establishment of the Shaker communities.' (Encyc. Brit., Art. Shakers.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:191-92.)

49:1

"Sidney . . . Parley . . . Leman . . . preach my gospel . . . unto the Shakers"

"Leman Copley had been a Shaker. When he embraced the gospel he was anxious to impart the truth to his former associates. He was, therefore, by revelation, chosen to accompany Sidney Rigdon and Parley P. Pratt on a mission to them." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 282.)

"Elders Rigdon and Pratt fulfilled the mission appointed to them by this revelation. In company with Leman Copley, who at his own earnest request had been ordained to the Priesthood (John Whitmer's History of the Church, p. 20), they visited the settlement of the Shakers, near Cleveland, Ohio, and preached the Gospel to them; 'but,' writes Elder Pratt, 'they utterly refused to hear or obey the gospel.'—Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, p. 65 (first ed.). John Whitmer also remarks upon this incident: 'The above-named brethren went and proclaimed [the Gospel] according to the revelation given them, but the Shakers hearkened not to their words and received not the Gospel at that time, for they are bound in tradition and priestcraft; and thus they are led away with foolish and vain imaginations.'—John Whitmer's History of the Church. Ms. p. 20." (HC 1:169, footnote.)

49:6

"Son of Man"

See Son of Man in Appendix A.

49:7

"the hour and the day no man knoweth"

See Second coming in Appendix A.

49:8

"I have reserved unto myself, holy men that ye know not of "

"The reference to the need of repentance by all men, except those which I have reserved unto myself, holy men that we know not of, may require some explanation. The Shakers felt that they were living lives approaching perfection, or at least, free from sin in their celibacy, etc. The Lord informs us that all men in their mortal state are subject to sin and all who have not repented and received the remission of their sins in baptism are subject to repentance and baptism for the remission of sin. The Shakers did not believe in baptism. 'Holy men that ye know not of,' who were without sin, and reserved unto the Lord, are translated persons such as John the Revelator [Sec. 7] and the Three Nephites [3 Nephi ch. 28], who do not belong to this generation and yet are in the flesh in the earth performing a special ministry until the coming of Jesus Christ." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:191.)

49:9

"mine everlasting covenant"

See Covenant in Appendix A.

49:15-17

"marriage is ordained of God"

See Marriage in Appendix A.

"The statement in relation to marriage in Section 49, was given to the Church several years before the revelation known as Section 132 [plural marriage] was revealed. Hence it is worded, as we find it here, according to the law of the Church in 1831. This statement in relation to marriage was given to correct the false doctrine of the Shakers that marriage was impure and that a true follower of Jesus Christ must remain in the condition of celibacy to be free from sin and in full fellowship with Christ." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:192.)

49:16

"that the earth might answer the end of its creation"

"The people who inhabit this earth were all living in the spirit life before they came to this earth. The Lord informs us that this earth was designed, before its foundations were formed, for the abode of the spirits who kept their first estate, and all such must come here and receive their tabernacles of flesh and bones, and this is according to the number, or measure, of man according to his creation before the world was made. (Compare 32:8-9.) It is the duty of mankind, in lawful and holy wedlock, to multiply according to the commandments given to Adam and Eve and later to Noah, until every spirit appointed to receive a body in this world has had that privilege. Those who teach celibacy and look upon marriage as sinful are in opposition to the word and commandment of the Lord. Such a doctrine is from an evil source and is intended to defeat the plan of redemption and the bringing into the world the spirits who kept their first estate. Satan, in every way that he can and with all his power, endeavors to defeat the work of the Lord. It is his purpose to destroy the souls of men and if he can prevent them from having bodies by teaching men and women that marriage is unrighteous and sinful, or that they should not after they are married bring children into the world, he thinks he will accomplish his purpose. All who hearken to these evil whisperings and practice this evil will stand condemned before the throne of God." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:209-10.)

49:18

"whoso forbiddeth to abstain from meats . . . is not ordained of God"

See material listed for D&C 89:12-13.

49:18-21

"wo be unto man that. . . wasteth flesh"

"After Noah came out of the Ark the Lord gave him a commandment, saying: 'Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things.' Since blood is the life of mortal bodies, the commandment was also given that the blood should be shed, not eaten, when animal flesh is used for food. Moreover, the killing of animals just for sport is a sin. In the revelation under consideration the Lord pronounced a woe on whosoever wasteth flesh and hath no need and who needlessly shed the blood of his creatures. In the word of the Lord to Noah as it is interpreted in revelation to Joseph Smith, the following is found: 'And surely, blood shall not be shed, only for meat, to save your lives; and the blood of every beast will I require at your hands.'

"It is a grievous sin in the sight of God to kill merely for sport. Such a thing shows a weakness in the spiritual character of the individual. We cannot restore life when it is taken, and all creatures have the right to enjoy life and happiness on the earth where the Lord has placed them. Only for food, and then sparingly, should flesh be eaten, for all life is from God and is eternal." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:210.)

"But although God has ordained animals for the use of man, He has not sanctioned the order of things under which some have an abundance of food and clothing, while others are destitute; for that very reason 'the world lieth in sin' (v. 20). Nor must man waste animal life. To kill, when not necessary, is a sin akin to murder. 'A righteous man regardeth the life of his beast' (Prov. 12:10). Man has been entrusted with sovereignty over the animal kingdom (Gen. 1:21), that he may learn to govern, as God rules, by the power of love and justice, and become fit for his eternal destiny as a ruler of worlds." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 286.)

49:20

"it is not given that one man should possess that which is above another"

"Every individual should be in a position to add something to the wealth of the whole. Everyone should be increasing, improving, and advancing in some way, and accomplishing something for his or her good and for the good of the whole.

"Then again, it is written that 'It is not given that one man should possess that which is above another.' Of course, there is some allowance to be made for this expression. A man who has ability superior to another man, and who is able to manage and control larger affairs than another, may possess far more than another who is not able to control and manage as much as he. But if they each had what they were capable of managing and of using wisely and prudently, they would each have alike." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, October 1898, pp. 23-24.)

49:22

"the Son of Man cometh not in the form of a woman"

"The Shakers taught that 'in this Christ-order there is neither male nor female, in the fleshly generative sense.' This originated the notion that our Savior might come as a woman just as well as a man. The idea that the Son of God, our elder Brother, is without sex, is contrary to the Word of God." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 286.)

"Since the Shakers held that God was both male and female, it was easy for them to believe in 'Mother' Ann Lee as 'the female principle in Christ,' and to believe that in her Christ had made his second appearance. The Lord corrects this foolish idea and says that the Son of Man cometh not in the form of a woman, neither of a man traveling on the earth, but when he shall appear it shall be as the Only Begotten Son of God, full of power, might and dominion, who will put all enemies under his feet." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:210.)

49:24

"the Lamanites shall blossom"

See material for 32:2.

"The Lamanites must rise in majesty and power. We must look forward to the day when they will be 'white and delightsome' [2 Ne. 30:6], sharing the freedoms and blessings which we enjoy; when they shall have economic security, culture, refinement, and education; when they shall be operating farms and businesses and industries and shall be occupied in the professions and in teaching; when they shall be organized into wards and stakes of Zion, furnishing much of their own leadership; when they shall build and occupy and fill the temples, and serve in them." (Spencer W. Kimball, CR, October 1947, p. 22.)

49:25

"Zion shall flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains"

"On Sunday night the Prophet called on all who held the Priesthood to gather into the little log school house they had there. It was a small house, perhaps 14 feet square. But it held the whole of the Priesthood of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who were then in the town of Kirtland, and who had gathered together to go off in Zion's camp. . . .

"When we got together the Prophet called upon the Elders of Israel with him to bear testimony of this work. When they got through the Prophet said, 'Brethren, I have been very much edified and instructed in your testimonies here tonight, but I want to say to you before the Lord, that you know no more concerning the destinies of this Church and kingdom than a babe upon its mother's lap. You don't comprehend it.' I was rather surprised. He said, 'It is only a little handful of Priesthood you see here tonight, but this Church will fill North and South America—it will fill the world.' Among other things he said, 'It will fill the Rocky Mountains. There will be tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints who will be gathered in the Rocky Mountains, and there they will open the door for the establishing of the Gospel among the Lamanites, who will receive the Gospel and their endowments and the blessings of God. This people will go into the Rocky Mountains; they will there build temples to the Most High. They will raise up a posterity there, and the Latter-day Saints who dwell in these mountains will stand in the flesh until the coming of the Son of Man. The Son of Man will come to them while in the Rocky Mountains.'

"I name these things because I want to bear testimony before God, angels and men that mine eyes behold the day, and have beheld for the last fifty years of my life, the fulfillment of that prophecy." (Wilford Woodruff, CR, April 1898, p. 57.)

49:27

"I will go before you and be your rearward"

In this revelation the Lord promises his faithful saints that he will be with them wherever they go. He will "go before" them, will follow after them ("be your rearward"), and will "be in [their] midst."
