Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 50

Background information on section 50

"As I went forth among the different branches some very strange spiritual operations were manifested, which were disgusting rather than edifying. Some persons would seem to swoon away, and make unseemly gestures, and be drawn or disfigured in their countenances. Others would fall into ecstasies, and be drawn into contortions, cramps, fits, etc. Others would seem to have visions and revelations, which were not edifying, and which were not congenial to the doctrine and the spirit of the gospel. In short, a false and lying spirit seemed to be creeping into the Church.

"All these things were new and strange to me, and had originated in the Church during our absence, and previous to the arrival of Joseph Smith from New York.

"Feeling our weakness and inexperience, and lest we should err in judgment concerning these spiritual phenomena, myself, John Murdock, and several other Elders, went to Joseph Smith, and asked him to inquire of the Lord concerning these spirits or manifestations." (Parley P. Pratt, APPP, pp. 61-62.)

Parley P. Pratt has given us the following information concerning Joseph Smith receiving the revelation now in section 50:

After we had joined in prayer in his translating room, he dictated in our presence the following revelation: [section 50]—Each sentence was uttered slowly and very distinctly, and with a pause between each, sufficiently long for it to be recorded, by an ordinary writer, in long hand.

This was the manner in which all his written revelations were dictated and written. There was never any hesitation, reviewing, or reading back, in order to keep the run of the subject, neither did any of these communications undergo revisions, interlinings, or corrections. As he dictated them so they stood, so far as I have witnessed; and I was present to witness the dictation of several communications of several pages each. . . . (Parley P. Pratt, APPP, p. 62.)

Following is a footnote from the History of the Church concerning this matter:

This statement of Elder Pratt's is true in a general way, and valuable as a description of the manner in which revelations were dictated by the Prophet; and needs modifying only to the extent of saying that some of the early revelations first published in the "Book of Commandments," in 1833, were revised by the Prophet himself in the way of correcting errors made by the scribes and publishers; and some additional clauses were inserted to throw increased light upon the subjects treated in the revelations, and paragraphs added, to make the principles or instructions apply to officers not in the Church at the time some of the earlier revelations were given. (HC 1:173.)

50:2-36

"there are many. . . false spirits"

"In the early history of the Church, because the elders did not understand the manifestations of different spirits abroad which were disturbing the members, the Lord, in answer to prayerful inquiry, warned: [Sec. 50:2, quoted.]

"What was true then is true now, and ever will be until Satan and his evil hosts are forever bound and shorn of their power to deceive and destroy. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, '. . . Nothing is a greater injury to the children of men than to be under the influence of a false spirit when they think they have the Spirit of God.' (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 205.) How true this statement is, and how important to know correct Church doctrine and procedures to prevent stumbling along life's way. It is a great blessing and gift to be able to discern and choose rightly between truth and error." (Delbert L. Stapley, CR, October 1959, p. 71.)

"I want to bear you my solemn witness that I know there are such forces [Satan's] in the world today. . . . Latter-day Saints, the prince of darkness which is of this world cometh among us today. He is knocking without the door of every one of us, of you and me and all who bear the names within themselves of the gospel of Jesus Christ, of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and I pray God that he may find nothing in us, and will go away and let us alone.

"I bear you my testimony that I know these powers are in the world and I know the powers of the gospel of Jesus Christ are sufficient to thwart these powers of darkness." (Harold B. Lee, CR, September 1949, pp. 58-59.)

50:5

"eternal life"

See Eternal life in Appendix A.

50:14-24

"preach my gospel by the Spirit . . . [be] edified and rejoice together"

"The Lord's rebuke and instruction to the Elders who went forth to teach (Sec. 50:10-26) should be thoroughly studied and taken to heart by all the brethren in the Church holding the Priesthood. How necessary it is that we should be in possession of the Spirit of God that we may teach. If we do not have that spirit we should not attempt to teach until, in the spirit of repentance, prayer and faith we may obtain the guidance of the Holy Ghost. There is no saying of greater truth than 'that which doth not edify is not of God.' And that which is not of God is darkness, it matters not whether it comes in the guise of religion, ethics, philosophy or revelation. No revelation from God will fail to edify and it is a wonderful promise which is here given that [Sec. 50:24, quoted]. There have been some foolish persons who have concluded that they have become so wise that they have outgrown the Church and the revelations of the Lord. No truth is in conflict with the revealed word of the Lord, and that which our Heavenly Father has given through his prophets shall stand for it is truth, eternal truth; while that which may appear as truth in the commandments of men and devils shall cease when the fulness of truth is come." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:184-85.)

"The Lord here [Sec. 50:17-24] makes it plain that, in bringing converts into the Church, the teacher must have the Spirit of the Comforter, the Spirit of truth, the light of truth. And the one that receives that testimony must also partake of that same Spirit. Both then are edified; both are enlightened by the power of the Spirit of the Lord, the one that teaches and the one that receives.

"Now, I want to say . . . that the presidency of this Church, the Twelve Apostles, the Seventies, the leading brethren in the stakes and wards and missions, can build up this Church only by the Spirit about which I have read to you. In no other way can it be built up; assuredly not by the spirit of man. Churches may be established. Lodges may be organized, many organizations formed for the help and benefit of man—and many of them do much good too, and are praiseworthy; but they have not this distinctive feature that this Church has, which was revealed in the beginning and is emphasized, iterated and reiterated all through the revelations, namely, that without that Spirit of light and truth, that Spirit of the Lord, that Spirit of the Comforter, that power of the Holy Ghost, His Church cannot be built up. [Secs. [^1]; [^2]; [^3]; [^4]; [^5].] If it be attempted by any other way than the Lord speaks of here in the passages which I have read [Sec. 93:19-20, also], then it is not of God. So . . . let us take it to heart; all of us who labor for Zion must know and understand that we must keep that influence and that power which comes from God in our hearts, the light of His Spirit burning in our souls." (Charles W. Nibley, CR, April 1929, pp. 90-92.)

50:22

"he that preacheth and he that receiveth . . . are edified"

"The speaker and hearer together must be guided by the voice that comes from God's presence. Then there is mutual understanding and comprehension. That principle was beautifully told to the Prophet Joseph Smith at the very beginning of the Church. The doctrine is set forth in section 50, of the book of Doctrine and Covenants, in which is explained that when both the hearer and the speaker are moved upon by the same power and spirit the greatest joy is attained. . . . [Sec. 50:22-23, quoted.]

"When apostasy comes, it is because the spirit of revelation departs from us. The wire is broken between us and the source of truth. We cannot understand, though truth be spoken, since we are not possessed of the spirit of truth. We misunderstand and misinterpret.

"There is only one way . . . to obtain and possess this mighty spirit . . . which guides the Church today and enlightens every soul, and that is by obeying strictly, with all our might, as far as we poor mortal beings are able, the laws of the Gospel. If we obey, if we practice in our lives the truths given us, then as certainly as we do that, the enlivening spirit of light, of revelation, of understanding will come to us, comprehension will enter our minds and hearts and we shall know the true joy of being Latter-day Saints." (John A. Widtsoe, CR, October 1934, p. 11.)

50:37

"Joseph Wakefield"

See material for 52:35.

50:37

"Parley P. Pratt"

For biographical information on Parley P. Pratt, see material following his name in Appendix B.

50:38

"John Corrill"

"John Corrill was also appointed to labor in the Church. He took a prominent part in the affairs of the Church for some time. In 1832 he baptized Emily Dow Partridge, a daughter of Edward Partridge, at Independence, Jackson Co., Mo. About that time he was one of seven High Priests appointed to preside over the Saints of Zion. The others were, Oliver Cowdery, W. W. Phelps, John Whitmer, Sidney Gilbert, Edward Partridge, and Isaac Morley. In 1837 he was made keeper of the Lord's storehouse, by the same Conference that sustained David Whitmer as president of the Church in Missouri, and John Whitmer and W. W. Phelps as his counselors. But notwithstanding the trust placed in him, when the fires of persecution raged with terrifying fury, he faltered, and signified his intention of publishing a booklet called, Mormonism Fairly Delineated, the appearance of which the mob looked forward to with hopeful anticipation (Historical Record, p. 458). At a special conference at Quincy, Ill., March 17, 1839, he was excommunicated for acting against the interests of the Saints. Among others who were similarly dealt with at that time were Geo. M. Hinckle, Sampson Avard, W. W. Phelps, Frederick G. Williams, and Thomas B. Marsh—all of whom were, at one time, prominent in the Church." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 294.)

50:39

"Edward Partridge"

For biographical information on Edward Partridge, see material following his name in Appendix B.

50:43

"the Father and I are one"

See Godhead in Appendix A.

50:44

"I am . . . the stone of Israel"

See Rock in Appendix A.

---
Notas:
[^1] "The plates." Joseph Smith at different times had been translating from two sets of plates: (1) the small plates of Nephi, the translation of which comprises the first 132 pages in the present Book of Mormon, and (2) the plates of Mormon, which include an abridgment of the large plates of Nephi, some writings by Moroni, and a sealed portion. From the descriptions later provided by the Three Witnesses, it was evidently the plates of Mormon that they beheld at this time. that "Joseph Smith may not be destroyed" (v. 4);
[^2] "The breastplate." When the Angel Moroni first told Joseph Smith of the sacred records in his possession, he also indicated that hid up with the plates "were two stones, in silver bows—and these stones, fastened to a breastplate, constituted what is called the Urim and Thummim." (JS-H 1:35.) When the Prophet later looked into the stone box where the records were deposited, he said that he "looked in, and there indeed did I behold the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate." (JS-H 1:52.) The Prophet recorded that later, September 22, 1827, "the time arrived for obtaining the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate." (JS-H 1:59.) that the Lord might bring about his "righteous purposes unto the children of men" (vv. 4 and 9);
[^3] "The sword of Laban." This sword is first mentioned by Nephi about 600 B.C. and is described as follows: ". . . the hilt thereof was of pure gold, and the workmanship thereof was exceeding fine, and . . . the blade thereof was of the most precious steel." (1 Ne. 4:9.) that "the gates of hell shall not prevail" against the three witnesses (v. 8).
[^4] "The Urim and Thummim." These particular Urim and Thummim "were given to the brother of Jared upon the mount, when he talked with the Lord face to face." (D&C 17:1.) This incident is recounted in Ether, where the Lord said to the brother of Jared, ". . . these two stones will I give unto thee, and ye shall seal them up also with the things which ye shalt write . . . in my own due time . . . these stones shall magnify to the eyes of men these things which ye shall write." (Ether 3:23-24.) Joseph Smith described the Urim and Thummim and their function as "two transparent stones set in the rim of a bow fastened to a breastplate. Through the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated the record by the gift and power of God." (HC 4:537.)
[^5] Build upon the gospel, denying not either the spirit of revelation nor the spirit of prophecy. (11:24-25.)
