Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 51

Background information on section 51

"Shortly after the Revelation recorded in Section 50 had been received, the Saints from Colesville, N. Y., began to arrive in Ohio. They had been directed to gather in that locality (Sec. 37:3) and they had been promised that there they would receive The Law (Sec. 38:32). The Saints in Ohio had been instructed to divide their land with their Eastern brethren (Sec. 48:2), and it was the duty of Edward Partridge, who had been appointed Bishop (Sec. 41) to take care of the newcomers, as far as possible. Under the circumstances, Bishop Partridge asked for divine guidance. The Prophet inquired of the Lord for him, and received this answer to his prayers.

"In this Revelation our Lord gives instructions concerning the temporal organizations of His people. We learn from it that it was the special duty of the Bishopric to have charge of the temporal affairs of the Church, under the direction of the Prophet." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 296.)

"In this manner the Lord endeavored to teach these members, in part, at least, and train them in the great principle of consecration as a preparatory step before they should be permitted to journey to Zion, for it was in keeping with this law upon which the City of Zion was to be built. Thus these saints from the East were to be organized according to the law of God. (Sec. 51:4-6.) This land in Ohio was in this manner to be consecrated unto them 'for a little season,' until the Lord should provide for them otherwise, and command them to go hence. (Sec. 51:15-16.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:204.)

51:1

"I. . . speak unto. . . Edward Partridge"

See Appendix B for biographical information on Edward Partridge.

51:2

"it must needs be that they be organized according to my laws"

"In May, 1831, the Saints from New York began to arrive in Ohio and the Lord appointed Bishop Edward Partridge to assign to them their lands. They were to be made equal according to their families and their needs. The head of each family was to receive a certificate insuring for him his portion and inheritance. Should a man transgress after receiving his portion, he was not to have power to claim that portion which had been consecrated to the Bishop for the use of the poor and needy, but could retain the portion which had been deeded unto him. A storehouse was provided where the substance needful for the people in want could be kept by the Bishop. In this manner the Lord endeavored to teach these members in part, at least, and train them in the great principle of consecration as a preparatory step before they should be permitted to journey to Zion, for it was in keeping with this law upon which the City of Zion was to be built. Thus these Saints from the East were to be organized according to the Law of God. (Sec. 51:4-6.) This land in Ohio was in this manner to be consecrated unto them 'for a little season,' until the Lord should provide for them otherwise, and command them to go hence. (Sec. 51:15-16.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:187.)

51:13

"let the bishop appoint a storehouse"

See Storehouse in Appendix A.

"And also, in this revelation [Sec. 51], he told Edward Partridge that he should have the privilege of organizing, for this was an example unto him, in all other places, in all other churches. So it was not confined to any particular locality, to Kirtland, nor Thompson, nor to Jackson County; but in that revelation it was told the Bishop that this should be an example unto him in organizing all Churches [branches]. So that wherever Edward Partridge should find a Church, he would have the privilege of organizing them according to the United Order, the Celestial Law, or the Order of Enoch." (Lorenzo Snow, JD 19:344.)

51:17-18

"let them act upon this land as for years"

Even though the Lord has just notified the Saints that they will be on this particular land "for a little season," yet he still asks them to act in regard to the land as though they were going to stay "for years." He also indicated that this should be "an example . . . in other places." (51:18.) The Lord promised further that all this should "turn unto them for their good." (51:17.) The Saints would have occasion to remember and follow this advice not only in Ohio, but also in Missouri, in Illinois, and when they emigrated to the Great Basin.
