Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 52

Background information on section 52

"On the 3rd of June [1831], the Elders from the various parts of the country where they were laboring, came in; and the conference before appointed, convened in Kirtland; and the Lord displayed His power to the most perfect satisfaction of the Saints. The man of sin was revealed, and the authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood was manifested and conferred for the first time upon several of the Elders. It was clearly evident that the Lord gave us power in proportion to the work to be done, and strength according to the race set before us, and grace and help as our needs required. Great harmony prevailed; several were ordained; faith was strengthened; and humility, so necessary for the blessing of God to follow prayer, characterized the Saints.

"The next day, as a kind continuation of this great work of the last days, I received the following: [D&C 52.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:175-77.)

52:2,42

The land of Missouri designated as the "land of your inheritance"

"In the midst of the congregation [June 1831] the Lord made known, through Joseph, that their next conference should be held far away, in the State of Missouri, upon the spot consecrated by God unto the children of Jacob, the heirs of His covenant. In the same revelation the Lord directed the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon to prepare for their journey into the land of Zion; promising to them that through their faith they should know the land which was to be forever the inheritance of the Saints of the Most High." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, p. 95.)

52:2

"heirs according to the covenant"

See material for 86:8-11.

52:3

Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, etc.

For information on the persons mentioned by name in section 52, see Appendix B.

52:10

"the laying on of the hands by the water's side"

See Laying on of hands in Appendix A.

52:14

"Satan is abroad in the land"

See Satan in Appendix A.

52:27

"Solomon Hancock and Simeon Carter"

"Solomon Hancock] He was among a party of fifteen brethren who were called to go from Clay County to Kirtland, on June 23, 1834, to receive their endowments, because 'they had proved themselves faithful and true during the late persecutions.' A month afterwards he was appointed a member of the High Council in Clay County.

"Simeon Carter] The same note may refer to him. Parley P. Pratt, while on his mission to the Lamanites, stayed at the house of Simeon Carter, fifty miles west of Kirtland. They were in the act of reading the Book of Mormon, when an officer entered and arrested Elder Pratt. The book was left in the house. Pratt managed to escape, and Carter read the Book of Mormon with great interest. He was baptized and ordained an Elder, and soon organized a Branch of sixty members." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 308.)

52:29

"Levi W. Hancock and Zebedee Coltrin"

"Levi Hancock] He was one of the First Council of Seventies, organized in Kirtland, in 1835.

"Zebedee Coltrin] He was another member of the Council." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 308.)

52:30

"Reynolds Cahoon and Samuel H. Smith"

For additional biographical information on each of these brethren, see entries for individual names in Appendix B.

"Reynolds Cahoon and Samuel Smith] While on this journey, they preached the gospel to William E. McLellin, and so much impressed was he, that he wound up his business and followed them to Jackson County. In 1838 Cahoon was appointed first counselor to John Smith, who was made president of a Stake of Zion organized at Adam-ondi-Ahman. Lyman Wight was the second counselor. The following year, these three presided over the Saints in Iowa. In 1848, when President Brigham Young led a company of 1,229 souls across the plains to the Mountain valleys, Isaac Morley was appointed president, with Reynolds Cahoon and William W. Major as counselors." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 308.)

52:31

"William Carter"

"William Carter] One of the Utah Pioneers who put the first ploughs into the ground and planted the first potatoes in Salt Lake Valley. George W. Brown and Shadrach Roundy were the others (Whitney's History of Utah, Vol. I., p. 331)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 308.)

52:33

"one man shall not build upon another's foundation, neither journey in another's track"

"Special instructions were also given to others of the Elders, commanding them to go forth two by two in the proclamation of the word of God by the way, to every congregation where they could get a hearing. Though the western frontier of Missouri was their destination, they were commanded to take different routes and not build on each other's foundation or travel in each other's track." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, p. 95.)

52:35

"Joseph Wakefield and Solomon Humphrey"

"During the fall of 1830, a gentleman who lived in our neighborhood went to Western New York and saw the Prophet, got baptized and ordained an Elder; and that was Elder Solomon Humphrey. Very few knew the old gentleman: he died in Missouri in 1835. He was a very faithful man. Previous to joining the Church he was a Baptist exhorter. He came back to our place of residence in company with a man named Joseph Wakefield, who is named in the book of Doctrine and Covenants. They came and preached and baptized for the remission of sins." (George A. Smith, JD 5:104.)

52:37

"Simonds Ryder"

"Shortly after this, Ryder joined Ezra Booth and the Johnson boys in inflicting the outrage upon the Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon, at Hiram, on the 25th of March, 1832 (Andrew Jenson, Hist Rec., p. 112.)" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 309.)

"Some people apostatize for very trivial reasons. Simonds Ryder furnishes an illustration of this. He received a letter at one time, in which the Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon informed him that it was the will of the Lord that he should preach the gospel. In this letter, as in the Revelation (Sec. 52:37), his surname was spelled with an 'i' instead of 'y,' and that was his pretext for apostatizing (Hist. of the Church, Vol. I., p. 261)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 487.)

52:39

"watch over the churches"

"Brethren—you to whom these words of admonition apply, for your own sakes, if not for the sake of those whose welfare is your charge—beware of indolence and neglect. The adversary is only too eager to take advantage of your apathy, and you may lose the very testimony of which you have been sent to bear record before the world." (Joseph F. Smith, GD, p. 363.)

52:39

"let them labor with their own hands"

"Labor with their own hands] It is an excellent rule in the Kingdom of God that those who labor in the ministry be independent. For the word of God does not always suit those who are rebuked by it, and if these hold the purse-strings, they are liable to draw them tight and strangle truth. Paul, in his farewell address to the Elders at Ephesus (Acts 20:34, 35), charged them to follow his example in this respect. 'Ye yourselves know,' he said, 'that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me.' . . . It is not displeasing to God if the Saints share temporal blessings with those who minister to them in spiritual things, as long as it is voluntary and an expression of gratitude and love, but to preach for hire is, according to the gospel, to encourage 'idolatry' and 'wickedness.' " (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 310.)
