Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 54

Background information on section 54

"It is difficult to determine with exactness in what the transgressions of the Saints at Thompson consisted; but it is evident that selfishness and rebellion were at the bottom of their trouble, and that Leman Copley and Ezra Thayre were immediately concerned in it. The Saints comprising the Colesville branch, when they arrived at the gathering place, in Ohio, were advised to remain together and were settled at Thompson, a place in the vicinity of Kirtland. On their arrival Bishop Edward Partridge urged the Prophet Joseph to inquire of the Lord concerning the manner of settling them, and providing for them. Whereupon the Prophet inquired of the Lord and received the revelation found on page 173. [Section 51.] It will be seen from that revelation that the Saints of the Colesville branch were to be organized under the law of consecration and stewardship. That is, in brief, the Saints were to make a consecration of whatsoever things they possessed unto the Bishop, and then each man receive from the Bishop a stewardship. Every man was to be equal in his stewardship, according to his family, his circumstances, and his needs. For details in the matter the reader is referred to the revelation itself. It is evident that some of the brethren already living at Thompson, had agreed to enter into the law of consecration and stewardship with the Saints from Colesville; and that afterwards they broke this covenant. Among these were Leman Copley and Ezra Thayre. 'A man by the name of Copley,' says Newel Knight in his journal, 'had a considerable tract of land there [in Thompson] which he offered to let the Saints occupy. Consequently a contract was agreed upon, and we commenced work in good faith. But in a short time Copley broke the engagement, and I went to Kirtland to see Brother Joseph,' etc." (HC 1:180, footnote.)

54:1-10

"Newel Knight . . . stand fast in the office whereunto I have appointed you "

For biographical information on Newel Knight, see Appendix B.

54:1-9

"take your journey into the regions westward . . . seek ye a living like unto men"

"The Saints from New York, principally the Colesville Branch, on their arrival in Ohio were located at a place called Thompson, about sixteen miles from Kirtland, where they were organized according to the law of the Lord. [See Sec. 51:1-15.] Leman Copley, recently converted and formerly a Shaker, owned a tract of land which he agreed to turn over to the Colesville Branch to occupy in the manner of stewardship, which was to be held for a 'little season,' or until the time should come for these people to move to Missouri. The leading Elders had been commanded to go to Missouri (Sec. 52:1-2), where the next conference of the Church was to be held. This was to prepare the way for the gathering of the Saints after the preliminary plans were arranged. It was not intended that any of the branches in Ohio should go to Missouri at that early date, but it appears that Copley, who had not been fully converted, and some others in Thompson violated their covenants, which caused confusion among the Colesville Saints and placed them at the mercy of their enemies. In their distress they sent Newel Knight, who was in charge of this branch, to the Prophet to learn what they should do. The Lord spoke to them by revelation (Sec. 54). . . . Because of this broken covenant the Saints were released from the commandment to live according to the Lord's law, of having things in common, they were to take their journey to the borders of the Lamanites, and therefore, the Lord said, 'seek a living like unto men, until I prepare a place for you.' In other words they were to seek a living as other men and not attempt to live in the united order until the Lord should command them. Almost immediately because of the word of the Lord and the pressure brought against them by enemies, they took up their journey to the 'borders of the Lamanites.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:187-88.)

54:10

"they who have sought me early shall find rest to their souls"

"The ancient prophets speak of 'entering into God's rest' [Isa. 14:3, Heb. 4:3, ; what does it mean? To my mind, it means entering into the knowledge and love of God, having faith in His purposes and in his plans to such an extent that we know we are right, and that we are not hunting for something else; we are not disturbed by every wind of doctrine or by the cunning and craftiness of men who lay in wait to deceive." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, October 1919, p. 8.)
