Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 55

Background information on section 55

"About the middle of June, while we were preparing for our journey to Missouri, William W. Phelps and his family arrived among us—'to do the will of the Lord,' he said: so I inquired of the Lord concerning him and received the following: [D&C 55]." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:184-85.)

55:1

"William . . . after thou hast been baptized"

For biographical information on William W. Phelps, see the material following his name in Appendix B.

"He [William W. Phelps] had not yet been baptized, but he was promised the remission of his sins and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, if he would submit to the ordinances with the proper feeling, and he was to be ordained to do the work of printing for the Church; and for this cause was required to take his journey with Joseph and Sidney Rigdon to the west." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, p. 96.)

55:1-5

"do the work of printing, and of selecting and writing books for schools in this church"

"William W. Phelps, one of the most competent of the early converts, was an editor, writer, and politician. His hymns are favorites among the Latter-day Saints." (John A. Widtsoe, JS, p. 143.)

"Scarcely had the Church been organized before he [Joseph Smith] began to provide for common schools for children. At that time public schools were few on the frontier. In June, 1831, a year after the organization of the Church, Oliver Cowdery and W. W. Phelps were appointed a committee to select and write books for the schools." (John A. Widtsoe, JS, p. 223.)

"The Latter-day Saints have always been far in advance of the majority of their neighbors in regard to education of their children. Even in the earliest days they had schools that made real men and women; not schools that produced weaklings and sycophants. The old schools made for character and real worth; they took the raw material, and moulded it into beings of personality and culture." (Levi Edgar Young, quoted in Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 319.)
