Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 56

Background information on section 56

"Soon after I received the foregoing [Section 55], Elder Thomas B. Marsh came to inquire what he should do; as Elder Ezra Thayre, his yoke-fellow in the ministry, could not get ready to start on his mission as soon as he (Marsh) would; and I inquired of the Lord, and received the following: [D&C 56]." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:186.)

56:1

"mine arm"

See Arm of the Lord in Appendix A.

56:2

"he that will not take up his cross"

See Cross in Appendix A.

56:4

"I, the Lord, command and revoke"

This earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof. Also, it is his gospel and his plan of life and salvation. In his love and concern for us, he is free to give us those commandments that he knows we can keep and thus receive those blessings that are predicated upon those commandments. In his mercy, however, he often revokes his commandments when his children cannot or will not obey them; otherwise, he brings his children under even more severe condemnation.

56:8

"Ezra Thayre must repent of his pride"

For biographical information on Ezra Thayre, see the material following his name in Appendix B.

56:14

"you have many things to do and to repent of"

See Repentance in Appendix A.

56:14

"your sins have come up unto me"

"This refers to the sin of not organizing under the law of consecration. Those who were responsible for the failure to do so had not been pardoned, because they preferred their own counsel to that of God." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 324.)

56:16

"Wo unto you rich men, that will not give your substance to the poor"

"In this and the following verse the Lord indicates the main reasons why the United Order cannot be practiced on Earth at present. The rich are not willing to serve the poor with their substance. They love mammon, not their fellowmen." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 325.)

"I would say to you rich men, bring in your treasures to assist in building up God's kingdom. . . . I suppose the reason why so few of the wealthy embrace the Truth is, because they are too much choked up with pride, prejudice and the things of this life, so that there is scarcely room for anything else. 'The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof' [1 Cor. 10:26], and if the Lord gives a man means, he gives him an increase of power to do good, and he will consequently have more to account for." (Daniel H. Wells, MS 26:787.)

"The rich are as dependent upon God for the light of His Spirit to guide them, and for the blessings and ordinances of the Holy Priesthood as are the poorest of the poor. The Lord, in this regard is 'no respecter of person.' [Acts 10:34.]" (Joseph F. Smith, JD 24:173-74.)

"The revelation of the Lord does not indicate that he has taken up either the side of the rich or the poor, and certainly he is opposed to selfishness and to class distinctions and to groups interested only in themselves. Let me read, from the fifty-sixth section, what the Lord has to say concerning both groups: [Sec. 56:16, quoted.] But on the other hand: [Sec. 56:17, quoted.] I am sure that in perfect harmony with this revelation I could add 'and blessed are the rich, too, who are pure in heart, whose hearts are broken, whose spirits are contrite, for they shall see the kingdom of God coming in power and great glory unto their deliverance.' This indicates an obligation upon both groups toward each other, the rich and the poor." (Melvin J. Ballard, CR, April 1937, pp. 89-90.)

56:17

"Wo unto you poor men . . . whose eyes are full of greediness"

"But not only the rich are to blame. The poor are also responsible, for many of them are not humble, nor honest. Many of them are dishonest; many are as greedy as any miser, and many are lazy, or given to violence on the slightest provocation. A United Order cannot be built up of mammon-slaves and belly-worshipers, be they rich or poor. Both classes must repent, and enter upon a new life before the highest ideal of a human society can be realized." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 325.)

56:18

"blessed are the poor who are pure in heart"

"It is the state of the heart, not outward circumstances, that makes us 'blessed' or happy. 'Pure in heart' means pure in affections, unselfish in one's love of fellowmen. Purity of doctrine is not sufficient; nor the most faithful observance of ceremonies. It is the 'pure in heart' that shall see God (Matt. 5:8)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 325.)

56:19-20

"the Lord shall come, and his recompense shall be with him"

"He [God] holds the reins of judgment in His hands; He is a wise Lawgiver and will judge all men, not according to the narrow, contracted notions of men, but, 'according to the deeds done in the body whether they be good or evil,' or whether these deeds were done in England, America, Spain, Turkey, or India. He will judge them, 'not according to what they have not, but according to what they have,' those who have lived without law will be judged without law, and those who have a law will be judged by that law. We need not doubt the wisdom and intelligence of the Great Jehovah; He will award judgment or mercy to all nations according to their several deserts, their means of obtaining intelligence, the laws by which they are governed, the facilities afforded them of obtaining correct information, and His inscrutable designs in relation to the human family; and when the designs of God shall be made manifest, and the curtain of futurity be withdrawn, we shall all of us eventually have to confess that the Judge of all the earth has done right." (Joseph Smith, HC 4:595-96.)
