Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 57

Background information on section 57

"The meeting of our brethren, who had long awaited our arrival [in Missouri], was a glorious one, and moistened with many tears. It seemed good and pleasant for brethren to meet together in unity. But our reflections were many, coming as we had from a highly cultivated state of society in the east, and standing now upon the confines or western limits of the United States, and looking into the vast wilderness of those that sat in darkness; how natural it was to observe the degradation, leanness of intellect, ferocity, and jealousy of a people that were nearly a century behind the times, and to feel for those who roamed about without the benefit of civilization, refinement, or religion; yea, and exclaim in the language of the Prophets: 'When will the wilderness blossom as the rose? When will Zion be built up in her glory, and where will Thy temple stand, unto which all nations shall come in the last days?' [Isa. 35:1; Ps. 87:1-3; Isa. 2:2-3.] Our anxiety was soon relieved by receiving the following: [Section 57, follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:189.)

"In the Book of Mormon the Saints were told (Ether 13:1-12), that the new Jerusalem and Holy Sanctuary of the Lord should be located in America (Comp. 3 Nephi 20:22; 21:23), and they were anxious to know where the site for the City was. In September, 1830, the Lord gave them to understand that the City should be erected 'on the borders by the Lamanites' (Sec. 28:9). In February, 1831, they were promised that a Revelation should be given on that subject, if they would pray for it (Sec. 42:62). On the 7th of March, the same year, they were given to understand that the gathering from the eastern States and the sending out of Elders on the mission to the West were preparatory steps to the establishment of that City, wherefore the Saints should gather up their riches and purchase an inheritance in the place to be indicated, which should be a place of refuge for the Saints of the most High God (Sec. 45:64-66). The time had now come for the fulfillment of the promise referred to (Sec. 42:62), and this Revelation was received. [D&C 57.]" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 327-28.)

"As rapidly as possible they [the Prophet and his party] journeyed by wagon and stage and occasionally by canal boat to Cincinnati, Ohio. From the latter point they went to Louisville, Kentucky, by steamer, . . . they reached St. Louis by steamer, and there made a brief pause. From this city on the Mississippi, the Prophet of God walked across the entire state of Missouri to Independence, Jackson County, a distance of nearly three hundred miles as traveled. This journey through the blazing heat of June and July [1831] was sweet to Joseph. There was a charm about it which lightened toil. The pains and burdens were unworthy of notice in the delightful anticipation of seeing the land for which the Lord, as had been shown to him by vision and prophecy [Sec. 57:1-3], had reserved so glorious a future. It was about the middle of July when the Prophet and his party reached Independence. During the month of their journey Joseph had taught the gospel, in the cities, the villages and the country places, in vigor and simplicity." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, pp. 96-97.)

57:3

"Independence is the center place"

"The city of Independence is situated in one of the most attractive and healthful parts of Missouri, 338 feet above the level of the Missouri River, and 1,075 feet above sea level. It is an old town. It was laid out in 1827, but in 1831 it was only a village. It is now a suburb of Kansas City." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 331.)

"That temple [Independence, Mo.] will be built, as well as other things that have been projected by the inspired servants of God, for the Lord knows how to work it out. All we need to do . . . is to keep on the Lord's side and make him our friend, stand in his favor, keep his commandments, and he will work out the salvation of Zion and her redemption." (Melvin J. Ballard, CR, April 1921, p. 101.)

57:4

"the line running directly between Jew and Gentile"

"This expression—'lying westward, even unto the line running between Jew and Gentile,' has reference to the line separating the Lamanites from the settlers in Jackson County. At this time the United States Government had given to the Indians the lands west of the Missouri, only later to take them away again. The Lamanites, who are Israelites, were referred to as Jews, and the Gentiles were the people, many of whom were the lawless element, living east of the river." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:188.)

57:1-5

"the land of Missouri . . . is . . . the place for the city of Zion "

"I removed from Seneca County, New York, to Geauga County, Ohio, in February, 1831.

"I received, by a heavenly vision, a commandment in June following, to take my journey to the western boundaries of the State of Missouri, and there designate the very spot which was to be the central place for the commencement of the gathering together of those who embrace the fullness of the everlasting Gospel. . . . After viewing the country, seeking diligently at the hand of God, He manifested Himself unto us, and designated, to me and others, the very spot upon which He designed to commence the work of the gathering, and the upbuilding of an 'holy city,' which should be called Zion—Zion, because it is a place of righteousness, and all who build thereon are to worship the true and living God, and all believe in one doctrine, even the doctrine of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 'Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion.' [Isa. 52:8.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 2:254.)

57:6-7, 11, 13

Sidney Gilbert, Edward Partridge, William W. Phelps, Oliver Cowdery

For biographical information on those mentioned in these verses, see the material following their names in Appendix B.
