Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 58

Background information on section 58

"The first Sabbath after our arrival in Jackson county, Brother W. W. Phelps preached to a western audience over the boundary of the United States, wherein were present specimens of all the families of the earth; Shem, Ham and Japheth; several of the Lamanites or Indians—representative of Shem; quite a respectable number of negroes—descendants of Ham; and the balance was made up of citizens of the surrounding country, and fully represented themselves as pioneers of the West. At this meeting two were baptized, who had previously believed in the fulness of the Gospel.

"During this week the Colesville branch, referred to in the latter part of the last revelation, and Sidney Rigdon, Sidney Gilbert and wife and Elders Morley and Booth, arrived. I received the following: [D&C 58.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:190-91.

58:2

"he that is faithful in tribulation, the reward . . . is greater"

See Adversity in Appendix A.

58:4

"after much tribulation come the blessings"

"The Saints should always remember that God sees not as man sees; that he does not willingly afflict his children, and that if he requires them to endure present privation and trial it is that they may escape greater tribulations which would otherwise inevitably overtake them. If He deprives them of any present blessing it is that he may bestow upon them greater and more glorious ones by and by." (George Q. Cannon, MS 25:634.)

58:4

"the hour [of the redemption of Zion] is not yet, but is nigh at hand"

"That Zion was to be established and the city built at once was evidently the idea possessed by some of the Saints. . . . That the city was not to be built at that time is indicated in his word: [Sec. 58:3-7, quoted.] From this we see that the glory and greatness of the city Zion was reserved for the future; although in the scriptural sense, the time 'is nigh at hand.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, ECH, p. 131.)

58:7

"that you might be honored in laying the foundation "

"These early settlers were to lay the foundation, and prepare the way for the Saints, who were yet to come, after the preaching of the Gospel 'to the uttermost parts of the earth,' for the elders were to 'push the people together from the ends of the earth.' It was a great honor conferred upon the first laborers in the vineyard, if they would be faithful to every commandment." (Joseph Fielding Smith, ECH, pp. 130-31.)

58:8

"that a feast of fat things might be prepared for the poor"

"The Lord also promised to prepare a feast of fat things, even a supper of the house of the Lord, unto which all nations shall be invited. This invitation is to be given first to the rich and the learned, the wise and noble-classes who do not readily embrace the Gospel, and then in the day of his power, the poor, the lame, and the blind, and the deaf, should come in unto the marriage of the Lamb. In this manner the parable of the great supper (Luke 14) will be fulfilled." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:195.)

58:11

"marriage of the Lamb "

See Bridegroom and Lamb in Appendix A.

58:15

"sins. . . are unbelief and blindness of heart"

"'Blindness of heart' means affections not guided by the light of the Spirit. Those who place their affection upon wrong objects, such as belong to the world, in preference to those that pertain to the Kingdom of God, are blind at heart, no matter how clear the physical or mental vision may be. He that loveth his own kindred more than the Lord, is blind at heart, for he is not worthy of the Lord and, consequently, not of His household (Matt. 10:37).

"'Unbelief,' in this case means 'weak faith' (as in Mark 9:24), and it was, perhaps, the cause of the blindness of heart.

"Unbelief and blindness are sins. They must be repented of. Some teach that we are not responsible for our beliefs. This is not the Lord's view. If we are weak in faith and blind in affections, we need to go to this Great Physician, who can heal us, and if we neglect to do this, we are guilty." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 338-39.)

58:19-22

"my law shall be kept on this land"

"Very strict was the command to the Saints that the law of God should be kept on the land of Zion. . . . The covenants given then were pertaining to the fulness of the Gospel upon which the City of Zion was to be built. Into this city none were to come except the pure in heart, who were willing to pledge themselves to keep the 'law of God.' At the same time they were to be subject to 'the powers that be,' and not break the law of the land, for they were to consider themselves as a part of the United States, and to this power—the Saints were to be obedient until the time should come when Christ shall take control and assert his right as the Divine ruler of the earth.

"Many of the members of the Church forgot the covenant they had made to 'keep the law of God' upon the land, which was mandatory, and this brought them into trouble. Persecutions came and eventually they were driven from their inheritances. The tribulation in part, but not all, which the Lord had promised they should suffer, came upon them because of their disobedience." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:213.)

58:21

"he that keepeth the laws of God hath no need to break the laws of the land"

"We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law." (Joseph Smith, A of F 12.)

58:26

"a slothful . . . servant"

"One day in South America we had the interesting experience of seeing in a hot jungle area a small brownish gray animal hanging upside down in a tree. It had rather long front paws and short back legs. Its movements were so slow that it was hard to know whether it was alive or dead. We were told that it was a sloth. I was intrigued because reference to the sloth appears in scripture. The Lord used it with disdain, referring to those who were slow to act. The word sloth or slothfulness appears in scripture twenty-five times, generally to condemn those who were slow to act. As we watched that sloth hanging in the tree, it reached out ever so slowly to pull off a leaf, then slower still brought it back and put it into its mouth. As we watched it we could understand the words impatient, irritated, exasperated. The Savior's reference to the sloth and slothfulness illustrates His displeasure and impatience with the person who is slow to act, who is slothful." (A. Theodore Tuttle, Ensign, May 1978, pp. 87-88.)

58:28

"inasmuch as men do good they shall in nowise lose their reward"

"If any man or any woman does good in this world, they shall not lose their reward, whether they be Latter-day Saints or not. But, if they would have all the good, all that the Lord has to bestow upon them, it is necessary for them to have faith in Him, repent of their sins, humble themselves before God and enter into covenant with Him, as the Latter-day Saints have done, and then endure in the faith to the end of their lives." (Francis M. Lyman, CR, October 1912, p. 44.)

58:29-33

"he that doeth not anything until . . . commanded . . . is damned "

See Damned in Appendix A.

"The word 'damned,' which occurs in this Revelation (v. 29), and elsewhere, means to be deprived of the highest glory. It does not mean 'lost.'" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 347.)

"Today, as in the day when this revelation was given for the government of Zion, men are expected to bring to pass much righteousness without being commanded in all things. The Lord has given us the great gift of agency, but he expects us to use this gift in his service. If we do good, we shall receive the reward; if we obey the covenants we make, the promised blessings are assured. If, however, we break these covenants and do not abide in the law of God, then we have no promise and the blessings shall be withdrawn. The fact that covenants are sealed upon our heads does not entitle us to the blessings except we abide by the law upon which these blessings are based. (D&C 130:20-21.) There may be many disappointments to those who have not, in faithfulness, kept the law." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:213-14.)

58:42-43

The Lord does not remember the sins of those who confess, repent, and are forgiven

See Forgiveness in Appendix A.

58:43

"he will confess [his sins]"

See Confess in Appendix A.

"This does not mean that the person who has sinned is under obligation to make public his transgression, and proclaim it from the housetops, but that he will make confession in the proper place and way before those who are appointed to hear the case, according to the law given to the Church. (Sec. 42.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:214.)

58:50

"Sidney Rigdon" to write "a description of the land of Zion "

"As we had received a commandment for Elder Rigdon to write a description of the land of Zion, we sought for all the information necessary to accomplish so desirable an object. The country is unlike the timbered states of the East. . . .

"The soil is rich and fertile. . . . [It] bids fair—when the curse is taken from the land—to become one of the most blessed places on the globe. . . . The disadvantages here, as in all new countries, are self-evident—lack of mills and schools; together with the natural privations and inconveniences which the hand of industry, the refinement of society, and the polish of science, overcome.

"But all these impediments vanish when it is recollected what the Prophets have said concerning Zion in the last days; how the glory of Lebanon is to come upon her; the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box tree together, to beautify the place of His sanctuary, that He may make the place of His feet glorious. Where for brass, He will bring gold; and for iron, He will bring silver; and for wood, brass; and for stones, iron; and where the feast of fat things will be given to the just; yea, when the splendor of the Lord is brought to our consideration for the good of His people, the calculations of men and the vain glory of the world vanish, and we exclaim, 'Out of Zion the perfection of beauty, God hath shined.' [Isa. 60; Ps. 50:2.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:197-98.)

58:53

"lest they receive none inheritance"

"The Saints were instructed to be patient and not overzealous in their desires to gather to Zion, but to prepare their way and not come in haste. The Elders of the Church were to give counsel in these matters and none were to go up to Zion until they had received the approval of those who presided. In the course of the next few months many members of the Church located in Jackson County, but they were not permitted to enjoy their inheritances. The work of the Lord was interfered with by enemies of the Saints, and the building of Zion was postponed until some future day when the Lord shall take matters into his own hands and then all opposition shall vanish away. When that day comes, all who are deemed worthy of inheritances shall have earned the right through faithful obedience to the laws of God." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:214.)

58:57

"consecrate and dedicate this . . . spot for the temple"

"It was also the duty of Sidney Rigdon to consecrate and dedicate the land and the Temple lot unto the Lord.

"The land was dedicated the day after that on which this Revelation was received. Sidney Rigdon asked the Saints present:

"'Do you receive this land for the land of your inheritance with thankful hearts, from the Lord?'

"Answer from all:—'We do.'

" 'Do you pledge yourselves to keep the law of God in this land, which you never have kept in your own lands?'

"'We do.'

"'Do you pledge yourselves to see that others of your brethren who shall come hither do keep the laws of God?'

"'We do.'

"After prayer Elder Rigdon said, 'I now pronounce this land consecrated and dedicated unto the Lord for a possession and inheritance for the Saints, and for all the faithful servants of the Lord to the remotest ages of time. In the name of Jesus Christ, having authority from Him. Amen.' (HC 1:196.)

"The Temple lot was dedicated on August 3rd. Joseph Smith the Prophet, Edward Partridge, William W. Phelps, Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, and Joseph Coe were present. 'The scene,' says the Prophet, 'was solemn and impressive.'" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 345.)

"On the second day of August, 1831, I assisted the Colesville Branch of the Church to lay the first log, for a house, as a foundation of Zion in Kaw township, twelve miles west of Independence. The log was carried and placed by twelve men, in honor of the twelve tribes of Israel. At the same time, through prayer, the land of Zion was consecrated and dedicated by Elder Sidney Rigdon for the gathering of the Saints. It was a season of joy to those present, and afforded a glimpse of the future, which time will yet unfold to the satisfaction of the faithful." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:196.)

58:65

"the Son of Man cometh"

See Son of Man and Second coming in Appendix A.
