Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 59

Background information on section 59

"On the 7th, I attended the funeral of Sister Polly Knight, the wife of Joseph Knight, Sen. This was the first death in the church in this land, and I can say, a worthy member sleeps in Jesus till the resurrection.

"I also received the following: [D&C 59.]

"Polly Knight's health had been failing for some time, according to a statement made by her son, Newel. She was very ill during her journey from Kirtland to Missouri, 'Yet,' says her son, 'she would not consent to stop traveling; her only, or her greatest desire was to set her feet upon the land of Zion, and to have her body interred in that land. I went on shore and bought lumber to make a coffin in case she should die before we arrived at our place of destination—so fast did she fail. But the Lord gave her the desire of her heart, and she lived to stand upon that land.'—Scraps of Biography, p. 70." (HC 1:199, footnote.)

59:2

"those that live shall inherit the earth"

"The Lord said, in the greatest sermon of which we have any record:'Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.' This saying has been made the butt for jokes by the vulgar and ignorant who do not comprehend the sayings of our Lord. One man recently said that if the earth were given to the meek today, the 'unmeek' would take it from them tomorrow. Nevertheless, the meek shall inherit the earth, when the time comes for the Lord to give it unto them. Today, with the earth subject to Satan's rule, it is quite generally the selfish, self-centered, proud and haughty people of the earth who apparently inherit it. This is in harmony with the spirit of unrighteousness which has prevailed on the earth since the fall of man. When Christ comes to take possession of the earth and rule in his right as King of kings, he will keep his promise and the meek shall come into their own. If they die, even then their inheritance shall stand, for the earth is to be the eternal abode of those who inherit the celestial kingdom. The Lord said to Abraham: 'For all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed.' (Gen. 13:15.) This expression 'forever' in some texts has reference to this mortal existence, but in the case of this promise to Abraham, it had no such meaning, and when the Lord said he would multiply him and make his seed as numerous 'as the stars of heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore,' that also was a promise extending beyond the bounds of mortality and time, for his blessing of increase was to extend forever. This earth eventually will be prepared for the righteous, or the meek, and it is their everlasting inheritance." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:215-16.)

59:2

"their works shall follow them"

"Suppose, then, that a man is evil in his heart—wholly given up to wickedness, and in that condition dies; his spirit will enter the spirit world intent upon evil. On the other hand, if we are striving with all the powers and faculties God has given us to improve upon our talents, to prepare ourselves to dwell in eternal life, and the grave receives our bodies while we are thus engaged, with what disposition will our spirits enter their next state? They will be still striving to do the things of God, only in a much greater degree—learning, increasing, growing in grace and in the knowledge of the truth." (Brigham Young, JD 7:333.)

59:4

Revelations to be given "in their time"

"Revelation continues in the Church: the prophet receiving it for the Church; the president for his stake, his mission, or his quorum; the bishop for his ward; the father for his family; the individual for himself.

"Many revelations have been received and are found in evidence in the onrolling work of the Lord. Perhaps one day other revelations which have been received and have been recorded will be published, and we stand in expectation that '. . . He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.' (Ninth Article of Faith.)" (Boyd K. Packer, CR, April 1974, p. 139.)

"There are many revelations to be made known . . . when we are worthy and willing to receive them. These revelations and commandments cannot be made known now because of our lack of faith and unworthiness before the Lord. (See 2 Nephi 27:7-10; 3 Nephi 26:6-10; Ether 4:6-8.) We have not, after one hundred years of instruction, shown ourselves willing as a united people to receive the 'lesser things' which have been revealed to us and, therefore, are not worthy to receive these greater things which are withheld from us to our condemnation." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:216.)

59:5-6

The Lord's reiteration of the first and second great commandments

"In answering the question of the lawyer, 'Master, which is the great commandment in the law?' Jesus said unto him: 'Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it. Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.' (Matt. 22:36-40.) This commandment which was given to Israel before they entered into their inheritances in the Promised Land, has again, in this dispensation, been commanded of all members of the Church, and particularly of all who receive inheritances in Zion. So important is this commandment that the Latter-day Saints have had their attention called to it in a number of revelations. It is plain to be seen that on these commandments hang all the law and the prophets. If a person observes these commandments as they are given in verses 5 and 6 of this section (59) he will keep the full law of God. We cannot love our Heavenly Father, and worship him in the name of his Only Begotten Son, our Redeemer, with all our 'heart, might, mind, and strength' without keeping all other commandments. It naturally follows that we will love our neighbor as ourselves and have sympathy and love for all men who are the children of God. There would be no occasion for us to be constantly reminded that we should keep the Sabbath holy, or pay our honest tithes, or keep our bodies clean by observing the Word of Wisdom, or that we should not neglect our prayers, secret and in the family circle, we would observe all of these things and all else that we are instructed to do, IF we loved the Lord our God with all our heart, might, mind, and strength. To the extent that members of the Church observe the laws of the Lord may their love for him be measured." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:215-16.)

59:5

"with all thy might, mind, and strength"

See Might, mind, and strength in Appendix A.

"Our Lord has declared that these are the greatest commandments in the Law, because upon them 'hang' all the Law and the Prophets. The Word of God presupposes and depends on love of God and fellowmen. If there is no such love, laws and instructions are of but little avail.

"'Heart' stands for 'emotions,' 'sentiment.' 'Might' here stands for 'soul,' the term used in Matthew 22:37, and means the spiritual faculties. 'Mind' refers to the intellect, and 'strength' to the physical attributes. This commandment enjoins on us to love our heavenly Father so that our entire beings—our emotions, our spiritual faculties, our mental and physical activities are all devoted to Him and His service." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 349-50.)

59:6

"Thou shalt not steal . . . commit adultery . . . kill"

See (1) Ten Commandments, (2) Adultery, (3) Killing, and (4) Stealing in Appendix A.

59:9

"offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day"

See Sabbath and Sacrament in Appendix A.

"God has given His children the Law of the Sabbath, in order that they may manifest their love for Him by observing that day.

"On the Sabbath, the Saints should be in the house of prayer and offer up their 'sacraments'; that is, present their devotions before the Lord, in the form of songs of praise, prayer and thanksgiving, testimonies, partaking of the Sacrament, and contemplation of the Word of God. All this is meant by the word 'sacrament,' which, in its widest range, stands for any sacred rite or ceremony whereby we affirm our allegiance to our divine Lord." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 351.)

59:10

"to rest from your labors"

"Instead of suffering our labors to occupy the Sabbath—instead of planning our business to infringe upon the first day of the week, we should do as little as possible; if it is necessary to cook food, do so; but even if that could be dispensed with, it would be better. . . . Under the new covenant, we should remember to preserve holy one day in the week as a day of rest—as a memorial of the rest of the Lord and the rest of the Saints; also for our temporal advantage, for it is instituted for the express purpose of benefiting man." (Brigham Young, JD 6:277.)

59:11

"on all days and at all times"

"We do not believe in worshiping God, or being religious on the Sabbath day only; but we believe it is as necessary to be religious on Monday, Tuesday and every day of the week, as it is on the Sabbath day; we believe that it is as necessary to do unto our neighbors as we would they should do unto us, during the week as it is on the Sabbath. In short, we believe it is necessary to live our religion every day in the week, every hour in the day, and every moment. Believing and acting thus, we become strengthened in our faith, the Spirit of God increases within us, we advance in knowledge, and we are better able to defend the cause we are engaged in." (Joseph F. Smith, JD 12:329.)

59:12

"the Lord's day"

"The Church of Jesus Christ teaches that Sunday is the acceptable day for Sabbath observance, on the authority of direct revelation specifying the Lord's day as such. . . . The law of the Sabbath has been reaffirmed unto the Church. It is to be noted that the revelation . . . was given to the Church on a Sunday. (August 7, 1831.)" (James E. Talmage, VM, p. 332.)

59:12

"thou shalt offer thine oblations"

"In the Mosaic dispensation, an oblation, or offering, was anything presented to God to atone for sins, to merit favors, or to express gratitude for favors received. The firstlings of the flock, first fruits, tithes, incense, the shewbread, all these were oblations or offerings; some prescribed by law, some entirely voluntary. In the New and Everlasting Covenant the Lord graciously accepts tithes and offerings, donations and gifts; and the Lord's day is a very proper day upon which to remember such oblations, as well as to confess sins, publicly among the brethren, if necessary; privately before the Lord, which is always necessary." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 352.)

59:13

"let thy food be prepared with singleness of heart"

"Upon the Sabbath, even the food should be prepared 'with singleness of heart'; that is to say, in simplicity. Our hearts, our desires, on that day should not be elaborate feasts, whereby some are prevented from having a Sabbath. A simple meal should suffice. To that extent every Sabbath should be a fast day, one bringing perfect joy.

"Our Lord, on one occasion, entered the house of Martha and Mary. Martha was cumbered about much serving, desirous of giving the Master many courses, and all in grand style. Mary was anxious to listen to the Master. To Martha's rebuke of her younger sister, our Lord gently replied, 'But one thing is needful.' This might well be always remembered on our Lord's day." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 352.)

59:13

"that thy fasting may be perfect"

See Fasting in Appendix A.

59:16-24

Bounties of the earth intended to be for a blessing to mankind

"The intentions and purposes of the Lord towards his children have always been to make them happy. This is the very purpose for existence. Lehi has well expressed the thought in these words: 'Adam fell that men might be; and men are that they might have joy.' The Lord does not find happiness in the misery, unhappiness and suffering of men. Men have to pay the price of sin if they will not repent, but that punishment does not come because our Father, who is loving, kind and merciful, delights in giving it. He made the world good (Genesis 1:31) and placed in and upon it every needful thing to bring to its inhabitants happiness, peace and contentment, while they remain here in mortality. True, we would, under mortal conditions, have to come in contact with some sorrow, pain and restriction, no matter how well we kept the commandments of the Lord, for all of this was intended to give us experience, broaden our natures and prepare us to be like our Eternal Father; but the pain, sorrow and distress would be of such a nature that even in it we could find joy, if we were true to the will of the Lord. This would be true, because we would understand the purpose of all the vicissitudes of life and know that they are given for our knowledge and education, and that we may have this necessary experience. . . .

"This world, even in its fallen state, is beautiful with its many gifts and beneficent blessings all arranged for use of man. Our misery, poverty and jealousy come because of selfishness and greed and in the failure to heed the word of the Lord. There is no peace, no happiness, no real prosperity, except through obedience to the will of our Heavenly Father. He has reason to expect us to acknowledge his hand in all things and to keep his commandments." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:218-19.)

59:20

"neither by extortion"

"'Extortion' is the act of taking something by violence, by threats, by overcharge, etc., unlawfully. It is lawful to procure, by honest labor, the means whereby the good things of the Earth may be obtained, but it is not lawful to wrest anything from another by methods contrary to this great law: 'Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.'" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 354.)

59:23

"peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come "

See Eternal life in Appendix A, and the material for 36:2.

"Peace is the gift of God. Do you want peace? Go to God. Do you want peace in your families? Go to God. Do you want peace to brood over your families? If you do, live your religion, and the very peace of God will dwell and abide with you, for that is where peace comes from, and it doesn't dwell anywhere else. . . . " (John Taylor, JD 10:56-58.)
