Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 60

Background information on section 60

"On the 8th day of August, 1831, at the close of the first conference held in Missouri, the elders inquired what they were to do. The Prophet inquired of the Lord and received a revelation giving them direction in relation to their return journey." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:220.)

60:2

"they will not open their mouths . . . they hide the talent"

See Missionary service in Appendix A.

"It is true that not every man is a natural missionary, and there are those who shrink from the responsibility of raising their voices in proclamation of the Gospel, and yet this is an obligation that we owe to this fallen world. The elders in the very beginning had been commanded to serve the Lord with all their 'heart, might, mind and strength' [Sec. 4:2], for the field is white and ready for the harvest. A penalty was to be inflicted upon those who failed and they were not to stand blameless at the last day. The preaching of the Gospel was to be a means to them by which they were not to perish, but bring salvation to their souls. There are many who have been sent forth who have had a fear of man, yet the Lord has promised to support them in their labors if they will trust in him." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:203-4.)

60:4

"I shall make up my jewels"

Jewels are precious things. Thus the jewels of the Lord are the things which are precious to him—his righteous (obedient) sons and daughters.

"This is an expression found in Malachi 3:17, where 'jewels' refers to the people of God, and where the meaning seems to be that when God segregates His people from the world, His power, as that of a monarch wearing a crown of jewels, will be made manifest to all men." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 358.)

60:6

For biographical information on the persons mentioned, see Appendix B.

60:7

"I am able to make you holy, and your sins are forgiven you"

See Jesus Christ and Forgiveness in Appendix A.

In the final sense, only Jesus Christ is able to forgive, as the law of mercy and thus the principle of forgiveness are effective in our lives because of his atonement. The Savior is able to make us holy (sanctify us) when we receive the gift of the Holy Ghost and repent of all our sins.

60:8, 13-14

"congregations of the wicked"

Wicked people are those who disobey the commandments of God and rebel against his teachings. A congregation is "an assembly of people." The term congregations of the wicked refers to those groups or clusters of people who disobey the commandments of God and fight against him. President Joseph Fielding Smith has indicated that wicked in this term refers in a sense to "all who had not repented and received the Gospel." (CHMR 1:258.)

"Frequently the Lord refers to the people scattered abroad as 'congregations of the wicked.' We have good reason to believe that wickedness prevailed among the congregations. The elders were to seek out from among the people the honest in heart and leave their warning testimony with all others, thus they would become clean from their blood." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:223.)

60:15-16

"shake off the dust of thy feet"

See Feet in Appendix A.
