Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 61

Background information on section 61

"On the 9th [of August, 1831], in company with ten Elders, I left Independence landing for Kirtland. We started down the river in canoes, and went the first day as far as Fort Osage, where we had an excellent wild turkey for supper. Nothing very important occurred till the third day, when many of the dangers so common upon the western waters, manifested themselves; and after we had encamped upon the bank of the river, at McIlwaine's Bend, Brother Phelps, in open vision by daylight, saw the destroyer in his most horrible power, ride upon the face of the waters; others heard the noise, but saw not the vision.

"The next morning after prayer, I received the following: [D&C 61.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:202-3.)

61:1

"from everlasting to everlasting "

See Eternity to eternity in Appendix A.

61:1

"Alpha and Omega "

See Alpha and Omega in Appendix A.

61:2

"I, the Lord, forgive sins"

See Forgiveness in Appendix A.

61:5

"I. . . have decreed . . . many destructions upon the waters"

"The next morning, after prayer the Prophet received a revelation in which the elders received counsel in regard to their travels on the waters. . . . It was stated that it was not needful for the entire company to travel by water while people on both sides of the river were perishing for want of the Gospel. Then the Lord points out that there are many dangers upon the waters, and more especially upon these waters many of which were to come hereafter." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:206.)

61:14, 17

"I, the Lord, in the beginning blessed the waters; but in the last days. . . I cursed the waters"

"I, the Lord, in the beginning cursed the land, even so in the last days have I blessed it, in its time"

"In the beginning the Lord blessed the waters and cursed the land, but in these last days this was reversed, the land was to be blessed and the waters to be cursed. A little reflection will bear witness to the truth of this declaration. In the early millenniums of this earth's history, men did not understand the composition of the soils, and how they needed building up when crops were taken from them. The facilities at the command of the people were primitive and limited, acreage under cultivation was limited, famines were prevalent, and the luxuries which we have today were not obtainable. Some one may rise up and say that the soil in those days was just as productive as now, and this may be the case. It is not a matter of dispute, but the manner of cultivation did not lend itself to the abundant production which we are receiving today. . . . In those early periods we have every reason to believe that the torrents, floods, and the dangers upon the waters were not as great as they are today, and by no means as great as what the Lord has promised us. . . . In regard to the Missouri-Mississippi waters, we have seen year by year great destruction upon them, and coming from them. Millions upon millions of dollars, almost annually are lost by this great stream overflowing its banks. Many have lost their lives in the sea floods as they sweep over the land, and even upon this apparently tranquil, or sluggish stream there can arise storms that bring destruction. Verily the word of the Lord has been, and is being, fulfilled in relation to those waters. While the Lord has spoken of the sea heaving itself beyond its bounds, and the waves roaring, yet we must include the great destruction upon the waters by means of war, and especially by submarine warfare as we have learned of it in recent years." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:206-7.)

61:19

"the destroyer rideth upon the face" of the waters

"These brethren while encamped at McIlwaine's Bend on the Missouri, beheld the power of the destroyer as he rode upon the storm. One of that number saw him in all his fearful majesty, and the Lord revealed to the entire group something of the power of this evil personage. It may seem strange to us, but it is the fact that Satan exercises dominion and has some control over the elements. . . . Paul speaks of Satan as the 'prince of the power of the air.' (Eph. 2:2.) The Lord revealed to these brethren some of the power of the adversary of mankind and how he rides upon the storm, as a means of affording them protection. They were commanded to use judgment as they traveled upon these waters, and the saints coming to Zion were instructed to travel by land on their way up to Zion. Moreover, notwithstanding the great power of Satan upon the waters, the Lord still held command and he could protect his people whether on land or by water as they journeyed." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:224-25.)

"On the 8th of August, 1831, the Lord in a Revelation (Sec. 60) directed the Prophet Joseph and his companions to return to Kirtland by way of St. Louis. The following day the Prophet, in company with ten Elders, left Independence in canoes and proceeded down the river. The journey was uneventful, until the third day, when the dangers of river-navigation became manifest. The travelers had landed at McIlwair's, or McIlwaine's, Bend, where they encamped on the bank of the river. While here William W. Phelps had a vision in which he saw 'the destroyer' riding upon the face of the waters. Some of the Elders heard a noise, though they did not see anything. The 'destroyer' seen by William W. Phelps in a vision, was, in all probability, the Evil One himself." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 361.)

61:30

"congregations of the wicked . . . at Cincinnati"

See material for 60:8, 13-14.

"Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were commanded that they were not to preach among the people on their return journey until they came to the city of Cincinnati, and there they were to raise their voices 'among the congregations of the wicked,' for the anger of the Lord was kindled against their wickedness, 'a people who are well-nigh ripened for destruction.' At the time of this revelation Cincinnati was only a village, yet it was like other western towns, such as Independence, the gathering place of many who had been forced to flee from the larger cities because of the violation of the law. In all the border towns in that day wickedness to a very great extent prevailed." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:207-8.)

61:35

"let them journey together. . . two by two"

"Our Lord sent His disciples out in pairs. It is not good for men to be alone; nor to travel alone. In congenial companionship there is spiritual strength. It is, moreover, desirable that baptisms and other ordinances be performed in the presence of witnesses. For these reasons the Lord sends His messengers forth in pairs or companies. Elders traveling two by two became a protection to each other against false accusers." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 368.)

"The Lord called upon these brethren to travel two by two. This is how he sent his disciples out in the days of his ministry. [Mark 6:7.] When they traveled two by two they had protection. They were not as likely to fall into sin, and they were not as likely to be attacked. We ask our missionaries today to travel two by two among the 'congregations of the wicked,' as a matter of protection. Many would have been saved from temptation and sin had they adhered to this regulation and were overcome because they fell into traps set for them which never could have been sprung had they not been alone. Although they were to travel in pairs, yet the Lord cautioned them against temptation while on the way." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:208.)

61:38

"Gird up your loins"

See Armor of God in Appendix A.

61:39

Be prepared for the second coming "whether in life or in death"

See Second coming in Appendix A.
