Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 63

Background information on section 63

"In these infant days of the Church, there was a great anxiety to obtain the word of the Lord upon every subject that in any way concerned our salvation; and as the land of Zion was now the most important temporal object in view, I inquired of the Lord for further information upon the gathering of the Saints, and the purchase of the land, and other matters, and received the following: [D&C 63.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:207.)

"When the report spread among the members of the Church that the Lord had revealed definitely where the city New Jerusalem was to be built, naturally there was rejoicing and many expressed the desire to know what they were to do in order to obtain inheritances. The Lord has given instruction repeatedly that all who go to Zion shall obey His law—the celestial law on which Zion was to be built. Those who were weak in the faith, or indifferent to the commandments, were warned that they would not be made welcome in that land unless they repented. 'Hearken, O ye people, and open your hearts and give ear from afar; and listen, you that call yourselves the people of the Lord, and hear the word of the Lord and his will concerning you.' These are the words by which this revelation is introduced." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:229.)

63:7-12

"he that seeketh signs shall see signs, but not unto salvation "

See Signs in Appendix A.

"Signs shall be given, but not unto salvation, and those who have come into the Church seeking signs and not for the glory of God, shall be punished. We have learned that signs are for the believer and are to follow faith, not to precede it, or to bring to pass conversion to the Gospel. It is a contrite spirit and a broken heart which bring the blessings of the Father. It is the duty of man, through obedience to the Gospel principles, humility and prayer, to worship God, and these bring faith. Without faith it is impossible for man to please God, and faith is not given to those who are rebellious or unbelieving." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:230.)

63:14-16

"adulterers. . . shall not have the Spirit"

See Adultery and Sex sins in Appendix A.

"One of the outstanding evidences of the truth of this latter-day work is the fact that those who are unclean and guilty of immoral conduct will, if they repent not, in time deny the faith. It is this class also which seeks after signs. The Lord said to the Jews who sought a sign: 'An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign. . . . ' (Matt. 12:39; see also 1 Cor. 6:9.) This sin stands in the sight of God second only to murder (Alma 39:5) and denying the Holy Ghost. Those who are guilty and do not repent in a short time become fault-finders, criticizing their brethren, then the principles of the Gospel, and finally become bitter in their souls against the work and those who are engaged in it. The most bitter opponents of the Church and the Gospel many times have been proved to be immoral and leading unclean lives. The Prophet Joseph Smith has said: 'Whenever you see a man seeking after a sign you may set it down that he is an adulterous man.' (HC 3:385.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:230.)

63:14-16

"if any shall commit adultery in their hearts"

"Immorality was made manifest among some who had joined the Church. Evidently these thought they could hide their sins from the leaders of the Church, but some of them were discovered. Others were to be discovered, for they were known unto the Lord and their evil practices could not be hid. Of these the Lord said, 'Let such beware and repent, lest judgment shall come upon them as a snare, and their folly shall follow them in the eyes of the people.' Not only are men to be judged because of their evil deeds, but for the evil thoughts of their minds. Therefore the Lord repeated the warning which he gave in his sermon on the mount. 'And verily I say unto you, as I have said before, he that looketh upon a woman to lust after her, or if any shall commit adultery in their hearts, they shall not have the Spirit, but shall deny the faith and shall fear.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, (CHMR 1:230.)

63:17

"fire and brimstone"

One of the most excruciating physical pains known to man is the burning of the flesh. Brimstone is a very flammable sulfur compound that burns with blue flame and emits a strong odor. The mental pain of the sinner in anguish has been compared to the severity of the physical pain caused by the burning of brimstone on the flesh; hence, the mental and spiritual pain of the sinner is "as a lake of fire and brimstone." (2 Ne. 9:16; Alma 12:17.)

"The nature of burning brimstone is such that it perfectly symbolized to the prophetic mind the eternal torment of the damned. Accordingly we read that the wicked are 'tormented with fire and brimstone' (Rev. 14:9-11; 19:20; 20:10), or in other words that 'their torment is as a lake of fire and brimstone, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever and has no end.' (2 Ne. 9:16; Alma 12:17.) This burning scene, a horrifying 'lake of fire and brimstone,' symbolizes 'endless torment' (2 Ne. 9:19, 26; 28:23; Jacob 6:10; Alma 14:14; D&C 76:36); those who find place therein are subject to the second death. (Jacob 3:11; D&C 63:17.) They suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. (D&C 29:28; 43:33; 76:44, 105.) When the sons of perdition come forth in the resurrection, they 'rise to that resurrection which is as the lake of fire and brimstone.' (TPJS, p. 361.)" (Bruce R. McConkie, MD, pp. 280-81.)

63:17

"second death"

See Second death in Appendix A.

63:18

"first resurrection"

See Resurrection in Appendix A.

63:20-21

"the earth shall be transfigured"

See Earth in Appendix A.

"We have taught that we are living in the day of restoration, in which all things are to be brought back to a similar condition to that which was in the beginning. . . . Moreover in the Articles of Faith the Prophet declares that there will be such a restoration in which the earth shall be 'renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory.' (A of F 10.) All of this is to take place in the Dispensation of the Fulness of times, in which we live. When this is accomplished this earth will again appear as it did in the beginning. The sea will be driven back to the north; the islands will be joined to the main land and the lands will be brought together as they were before the earth was divided. (D&C 133:22-24.)

"We know that when Adam was placed on the earth it was pronounced 'good,' and he, as well as the earth, was not subject to death. There was no 'curse' on the earth. . . . The fall of Adam brought the change upon the earth, and all things upon its face partook of the conditions imposed upon Adam in the fall. (2 Ne. 2:22.)

"The transfigured earth, seen in vision, evidently was this earth in its renewed condition as described by the Prophet Isaiah (ch. 65:17 to end) as it will appear when it is prepared for the millennial reign." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:4-5.)

63:24

"not in haste"

"It [the gathering] was not to be undertaken in haste, but after due preparation, 'lest there should be confusion, which bringeth pestilence' (v. 24). If they went on the long journey without the necessary preparations, proper food and suitable clothing, the consequence would be sickness." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 379.)

"Those who had the privilege of assembling there should not go up to Zion in haste, but gradually. The reason for this advice is apparent, for haste would lead to confusion, unsatisfactory conditions and pestilence, and then, also, it creates consternation and fear in the hearts of their enemies and arouses greater opposition. Satan desired to destroy them and in his anger endeavored to stir them up to strife and contention as well as the older settlers in Missouri." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:232.)

63:26

"I. . . render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's"

This terminology is almost identical to the answer given by the Savior to the Herodians of New Testament times when they asked him whether or not it was lawful to give tribute unto Caesar. The Savior's answer was "Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's." (Matt. 22:21; see also Mark 12:16-17 and Luke 20:24-25.)

The Savior has power over all the earth and over all the governments and administrative powers on the earth. Yet he counseled his saints to purchase the lands of their inheritance. In other words, the Saints should recognize the political power by which these lands were sold and administered.

63:28

"Satan putteth it into their hearts to anger against you, and to the shedding of blood"

"Towards the last of August [1831] he [Joseph Smith] received another revelation in Kirtland, Ohio, on the great importance of speedily gathering up money to purchase the land in Jackson County. We take the following extract: [Sec. 63:24-31, quoted.]

"This remarkable prophecy in conjunction with those to which we have before referred [Sec. 58:6-12, 44-53, was given . . . at a time when no human sagacity could have foreseen such events. No man, unless he were a prophet, could have so clearly portrayed the subsequent history of the Church. . . . No one would for a moment have supposed, that the people of that boasted land of freedom would shed the blood of the Saints, and drive them from the lands which they had purchased, and persecute them from city to city, and from synagogue to synagogue. All other denominations had been tolerated for many years, and no such scenes of persecution had been known in the United States since their Constitution was formed. Religious freedom was the boast of the whole nation. Yet in the midst of such universal freedom and religious liberty, the voice of a great prophet is heard, declaring the word of the Lord, and predicting events that none looked for—events, that to all human appearance, were very unlikely to come to pass—events that have since been fulfilled to the letter." (Orson Pratt, MDOP, pp. 97-98.)

63:29-31

"the land of Zion shall not be obtained but by purchase or by blood"

"We learn from these verses [Sec. 63:25-31] that the Lord determined that the Latter-day Saints could secure the land of Zion only by two ways: One by purchase, the other by the shedding of blood. The Lord also determined that possession of that country should not be gained except by the purchase of the land. It should be bought and paid for by the means furnished by the Latter-day Saints, whether rich or poor. It should be bought as other people buy land. The Lord would not permit them to take possession of the land by force, or by antagonizing the people's interests. . . .

"The Lord provided a way whereby they could secure the means to purchase that country, namely by the law of consecration. . . . The Lord sent Elders throughout the States, where there were Latter-day Saints to collect means for this purpose, and the people in Jackson County were required to observe the law of consecration. [Sec. 105:28-29.] But they failed to do it, and therefore the lands were not secured. The Lord could have sustained the people against the encroachments of their enemies had they placed themselves in a condition where he would have been justified in doing so. But inasmuch as they would not comply with His requirements, the Lord could not sustain them against their enemies. So it will be with us, or with any people whom the Lord calls to comply with His requirements." (Lorenzo Snow, CR, October 1899, pp. 23-24.)

63:34

"the saints also shall hardly escape"

"There is one principle I would like to have the Latter-day Saints perfectly understand—that is, of blessings and cursings. For instance, we read that war, pestilence, plagues, famine, etc., will be visited upon the inhabitants of the earth; but if distress through the judgments of God comes upon this people, it will be because the majority have turned away from the Lord. Let the majority of the people turn away from the Holy Commandments which the Lord has delivered to us, and cease to hold the balance of power in the Church, and we may expect the judgments of God to come upon us." (Brigham Young, JD 10:335-36.)

63:34

"unquenchable fire "

See Everlasting fire in Appendix A.

"This unquenchable fire is, of course, the torment which comes to the wicked who do not repent and who have failed to keep the covenants and commandments. It will be the torment of the mind and soul." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:232.)

63:36

"I, the Lord, have decreed all these things"

"The Lord has told us that these wars would come. We have not been ignorant that they were pending, and that they were likely to burst out upon the nations of the earth at any time. We have been looking for the fulfillment of the words of the Lord that they would come. Why? Because the Lord wanted it? No; not by any means. Was it because the Lord predestined it, or designed it, in any degree? No, not at all. Why? It was for the reason that men did not hearken unto the Lord God, and he foreknew the results that would follow, because of men, and because of the nations of the earth; and therefore he was able to predict what would befall them, and came upon them in consequence of their own acts, and not because he has willed it upon them, for they are but suffering and reaping the results of their own actions." (Joseph F. Smith, Relief Society Magazine 2:13.)

63:39

"Titus Billings"

"In the month of April, 1832, he led a company of Saints from Kirtland to Jackson County. He is said to have been the second person baptized in Kirtland, having joined the Church in Kirtland in November, 1830. In 1837, at Far West, he was appointed second counselor to Bishop Partridge, Isaac Morley being the first counselor, and in 1849 he became a member of the Salt Lake Stake High Council." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 382.)

63:49

"blessed are the dead that die in the Lord"

"God, in his eternal decrees, has ordained that all men must die, but as to the mode and manner of our exit, it matters very little. As part of the household and family of God, as beings associated with eternity as well as time, it behooves us to reflect, and that calmly and deliberately, upon our present position, and our relationship and standing before God our heavenly Father. These are important questions for us to solve, and if we can solve them satisfactorily, then all is right." (John Taylor, JD 17:131.)

63:50

"when the Lord shall come"

See Millennium in Appendix A.

63:51

"old men shall die; but they shall not sleep in the dust, but they shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye"

See Twinkling of an eye in Appendix A.

63:53-54

"there will be foolish virgins among the wise"

See Virgins in Appendix A.

63:55

"I. . . am not pleased with . . . Sidney Rigdon"

For biographical information on Sidney Rigdon, see material following his name in Appendix B.

63:60

"I am Alpha and Omega"

See Alpha and Omega in Appendix A.

63:61

"let all men beware how they take my name in their lips"

See Swearing and Ten Commandments in Appendix A.
