Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 64

Background information on section 64

"The early part of September was spent in making preparations to remove to the town of Hiram [Ohio], and renew our work on the translation of the Bible. The brethren who were commanded to go up to Zion were earnestly engaged in getting ready to start in the coming October. On the 11th of September I received the following: [Sec. 64, quoted.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:211.)

"Because of interference and because he needed a quiet place in which to work, the Prophet on September 12, 1831, moved to the home of John Johnson in the township of Hiram. This was in Portage County, Ohio, about thirty miles southeast of Kirtland. From the time he moved until early in October, the Prophet spent most of his spare time preparing for the continuation of the translation of the Bible. By translation is meant a revision of the Bible by inspiration or revelation as the Lord had commanded him, and which was commenced as early as June 1830. (HC 1:215.) Sidney Rigdon continued to write for the Prophet in the work of revision. The day before the Prophet moved from Kirtland he received an important revelation, Section 64, as it now appears in the Doctrine and Covenants. This revelation contained a wealth of information, counsel and warning, for the guidance of the members of the Church." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:234-35.)

64:2

"ye should overcome the world"

"John, in his First Epistle, says: 'Whatever is born of God overcometh the world,' (5:4); end 'who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God' (v. 5)? What he wants to say is that as long as we follow our desires to conform to the habits and customs of the world, the commandments of God are hard; but when we overcome that desire and do not conform to the spirit of the world, then His commandments are not difficult, and, if we really believe that Jesus is the Son of God, we shall not take any notice of the world, which is in rebellion against Him. . . . The Elders of the Church . . . should not conform to the world in their worship, in their life, in their amusements." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 389.)

64:5

"the keys of the mysteries of the kingdom"

See Mysteries and Keys of the priesthood in Appendix A.

"The keys of the mysteries of the kingdom were to remain with Joseph Smith while he lived inasmuch as he should obey the Lord's ordinances. We learned in an earlier revelation that this same promise was made to him [D&C 28:7, 43:3-6], with the warning that if he should fail he would still have power to appoint or ordain his successor, and the Church was instructed that no other was appointed or would be, to give revelations for the Church and this was to be a law unto the Church. This might have saved some ambitious individuals from the pitfalls laid by the adversary, and some who were foolish enough to follow them, if they had been properly impressed with this plain and logical doctrine." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:8.)

64:7

"I . . . forgive sins unto those who confess"

See Confess and Forgiveness in Appendix A.

64:7

"who have not sinned unto death"

See Perdition in Appendix A.

64:9

"he that forgiveth not his brother . . . there remaineth in him the greater sin"

" 'Forgive as we forgive,' that is the prayer of the followers of Christ, and our Savior comments as follows:

"'For if ye forgive men their trespasses your Heavenly Father will forgive you; but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.' Read also His denunciation of those who treat their brethren with taunts and sneers and contempt (Matt. 5:22). Some people who call themselves Christians are bitter and arrogant. The religion of Christ is humanity and love.

"One of the worst traits of human nature is that exhibited by the debtor who said to his fellow-servant, 'Pay me what thou owest.' But we are all apt to feel that way. We flame into anger at the smallest provocation. We brood over injuries and magnify them. We often hear the coarse threat, 'I'll get even.'

"'When thou sayest "I will not forgive," and standest before God with thy precious pater noster, and mumbles" with thy mouth "Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors," what is it but saying: "I do not forgive him, so do not Thou, God, forgive me"'—Luther." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 391.)

64:10

"of you it is required to forgive all men "

"The Lord declared that when he was in his ministry his disciples sought occasion against one another and failed at times to forgive in their hearts. It was this condition which prompted Peter to ask the Lord how many times he should forgive his brother, 'till seven times?' The Lord answered him, 'I say not unto thee, until seven times, but until seventy times seven.' (Matt. 18:21-22.) As the disciples of old brought upon themselves affliction and chastening, so we, when we do not have in our hearts the spirit of forgiveness, bring upon ourselves affliction and chastening from the Lord." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:8.)

"Now . . . what the Savior meant [Matt. 7:1-2] was that you and I in our capacity as individuals as members outside of any official duty imposed upon us, should not sit in judgment upon one another. . . . It is not our province as members of the Church, to sit in judgment upon one another and call bad names when we reflect upon the acts of people. . . . The bishop's courts and the high councils have the right to sit in judgment, but it must be reached by testimony, not through any feelings or thoughts we may have in regard to the iniquity of some individual." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, October 1916, pp. 22-23.)

"In the ancient days, men made sacrifice that they might be forgiven. [Ex. 29:10-14; Lev. 8:14-17.] Today we are told that we must bring to the Lord for our forgiveness a humble heart and a contrite spirit. [Sec. 59:8.] As to forgiveness, the Lord has said [Sec. 64:10, quoted], which means . . . that where there is repentance, we shall forgive and receive into fellowship the repentant transgressor, leaving to God the final disposition of the sin." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., CR, April 1950, pp. 166-67.)

"If we would have peace as individuals, we must supplant enmity with forbearance, which means to refrain or abstain from finding fault or from condemning others. . . . Christ . . . said:

" 'If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.' (Matt. 5:23-24.)

"Note the Savior did not say if you have ought against him, but if you find that another has ought against you. . . . Many of us, instead of following this admonition, nurse our ill-will until it grows to hatred, then this hatred expresses itself in fault-finding and even slander. . . . " (David O. McKay, CR, October 1938, pp. 133-34.)

"But suppose one should injure me in person, or estate, and I should overlook it, and show mercy to the individual, it would cause him to reflect upon his conduct, and show him the true bearings of his unjust act, and make him ashamed of it much better than if I retaliated. If I were to pay him back in his own coin, I should render myself worthy of what I have received. If I bear an insult with meek patience, and do not return the injury, I have a decided advantage over my adversary." (Brigham Young, JD 2:93.)

64:15-17

"I . . . was angry . . . with . . . Ezra Booth . . . Isaac Morley. . . Edward Partridge"

For additional information on each of these brethren, see Appendix B.

"Among the brethren who received the rebuke from the Lord because they 'sought evil in their hearts,' were Isaac Morley and Bishop Edward Partridge, but they speedily repented. It was not so with Ezra Booth. Before he joined the Church he was a Methodist priest. He had visited the home of the Prophet in company with Mr. John Johnson and his wife and a few other citizens of Hiram. Mrs. Johnson had been afflicted for some time with a lame arm, and was not able to lift her hand. During this visit the conversation turned on the subject of spiritual gifts such as those known in the days of the Savior and his apostles. Some one said, 'Here is Mrs. Johnson with a lame arm; has God given any power now on the earth to cure her?' A few moments later, when the conversation had turned in another direction, Joseph Smith arose, walked over to Mrs. Johnson, took her by the hand, and in a solemn manner said: 'Woman, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, I command thee to be whole.' Immediately he left the room. The record states that the company 'was awe-stricken at the infinite presumption of the man, and the calm assurance with which he spoke. The sudden mental and moral shock—I know not how better to explain the well-attested fact—electrified the rheumatic arm. Mrs. Johnson at once lifted it up with ease, and on her return home the next day she was able to do her washing without difficulty or pain.' This testimony is taken from Hayden's History of the Disciples, pp. 250, 251, and is the testimony of one who did not believe in Joseph Smith. This incident was the means of bringing Ezra Booth into the Church. Having been brought into the Church by the witness of a miracle, he wanted to have power to smite men and make them believe. When he found that this was not the way of the Lord in making converts he was disappointed and turned away, and became a pronounced apostate. He became instrumental in bringing into existence one of the earliest publications against Joseph Smith and the Church. Ezra Booth had accompanied Elder Isaac Morley to Missouri when the elders were appointed to go to that land, but his conduct at that time was not approved. It was not long after his return that he turned away and commenced to fight the Church." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:215-16.)

64:18

"Sidney Gilbert"

See Appendix B for information on this man.

64:21

"Frederick G. Williams"

See Appendix B for information on this man.

64:21

"retain a strong hold in . . . Kirtland for. . .five years"

"There were very significant reasons why the Lord desired to retain a strong hold upon Kirtland and its vicinity for five years. It was in that land where the first temple in this dispensation was to be built. In that Temple the essential keys of restoration were to be revealed. It seems apparent that had all the people moved to Zion in Missouri at that time, the building of a temple would have been frustrated by the enemies of the people. Opposition against them in Missouri was made known as soon as members of the Church began to arrive there. In 1833, they were driven from their homes, and the persecution against them raged until, in 1838, it had reached such a stage that the members of the Church, who had been driven first from Jackson County, and then from Ray and Clay counties, and finally from Caldwell where they endeavored to build up their own community, had to flee from the borders of the State. The revelation in which the Lord called upon the Saints to keep a strong hold in Kirtland, was given Sept. 11, 1831. It was in March, 1836, that the house of the Lord was dedicated and the following April when these holy keys were bestowed. After this glorious event, the members of the Church were at liberty to remove to Zion. In fact there followed a few months later an apostasy, and many turned away from the Church, but some were saved, and they were under the necessity of fleeing from the place. However, the Spirit of the Lord prevailed until his work in that place was accomplished and the appointed time had passed." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:237.)

64:23

"It is called today until the coming of the Son of Man"

See Today in Appendix A.

"'To-day' is the time before the coming of the Lord. The expression is found in Ps. 95:7, and Heb. 3:13. The Psalm referred to was sung at the dedication of the second temple, and it means, now, that we had this manifestation of the goodness of God, 'harden not your heart.' The introduction of this phrase here is a prophetic allusion to the building of the Kirtland Temple and the manifestations there to be given, if the Saints would not harden their hearts." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 393-94.)

64:23

"it is a day of sacrifice. . . for the tithing of my people"

"'Sacrifice' and 'tithing' seem to be used as synonymous terms here, for the law of tithing had not yet been introduced. The law of consecration was still in force. The law of tithing was first given as the standing law of the Church on the 8th of July, 1838, at Far West.

" 'This event signalized the discontinuance of the United Order, which had practically been dissolved some time before. . . . The law of tithing . . . bears about the same relation to the order of Enoch as the Mosaic law to the gospel of Christ.' (Whitney's Hist. of Utah, 1:141.) The mention of tithing here is prophetic, indicating a restoration of that lesser law, instead of the greater." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 394.)

"The people of the Lord have always been called upon to sacrifice. This is an essential principle of the Gospel. Likewise they are instructed to pay their tithes and offerings. It is a very strange thing that there are those in the Church who seem to feel that it will be a happy day when the law of consecration is established, yet they do not keep the law of tithing. They seem to think that it will be much simpler and more easy to obey the law of consecration than it will be to observe the law of tithing. We may say, however, that it is extremely doubtful if any person who could pay tithes honestly and does not do so, will ever have the privilege of partaking of the law of consecration. How can we live the higher law, if we cannot live the lesser law?" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:238.)

64:23-24

"he that is tithed shall not be burned at his coming"

See Burned in Appendix A.

"What does that mean? Does it mean that if man will not pay his tithing, that the Lord is going to send a ball of fire down from heaven and burn him up? No; the Lord does not do that way. The Lord works on natural principles. This is what it means, if I read correctly: a man who ignores the express command of the Lord, by failing to pay his tithing, it means that the Spirit of the Lord will withdraw from him; it means that the power of the priesthood will withdraw from that man, if he continues in the spirit of neglect to do his duty. He will drift away into darkness, gradually but surely, until finally (mark you) he will lift up his eyes among the wicked. That is where he will finally land; and then when the destruction comes and when the burning comes, he will be among the wicked, and will be destroyed; while those who observe the law will be found among the righteous, and they will be preserved. There is a God in heaven, and He has promised to shield and protect them. I tell you there is a day of burning, a day of destruction coming upon the wicked. And where will we be? Will we be with the wicked, or with the righteous?" (Rudger Clawson, CR, October 1913, p. 59.)

"The importance of the law of tithing is here shown. In the day of the Lord the proud and the evil-doers will be destroyed, as completely as straw in a furnace (Mal. 4:1, 2). Those who obey this law will not be counted as 'straw' on that day (v. 24)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 394.)

64:24

"tomorrow"

Tomorrow, referring to the second coming of Jesus Christ.

See Second coming in Appendix A.

64:24

"Babylon "

See Babylon in Appendix A.

64:27

"it is. . . forbidden to get in debt to thine enemies"

"The members of the Church were commanded not to get into debt to their enemies. Whenever this is done we weaken our hands. At the time this revelation was given such a condition as debt to the enemies of the Church would have proved to be fatal to the cause." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:238.)

"I heard day before yesterday from an eminent financier, a remark that struck me with considerable force. He was telling me how to get out of debt. . . .

"I listened with a good deal of attention, because I thought it was worth something, and something that all of us ought to know, for a great many of us don't know and have it yet to learn. It was simply this: 'Stop immediately from going into debt. Don't go into another dollar until you get out and are free.' " (Marriner W. Merrill, CR, April 1899, p. 15.)

64:29

"ye are on the Lord's errand"

Those who are doing the official business of the Lord in his Church are on his errand; that is, they are (or should be) doing his work as he would if he were here.

"The Lord always blesses us when we manifest a living faith in Him, and are not afraid that we cannot accomplish some task that He requires at our hands because it looks so large and hard to perform. When we are sent out to preach the Gospel, if we could only remember all the time that we are upon the Lord's errand and that His purposes are not frustrated, how much more strength would the Elders have than they do have now in some cases. If they would only remember that the Lord commands His people to do nothing save He prepares a way whereby they can accomplish it, what hope and courage it would afford them in their labors." (Abraham O. Woodruff, CR, October 1901, p. 13.)

64:32

"all things . . . come. . . in their time"

"A great many members of the Church are disturbed because the redemption of Zion has not come. Some have lost their faith because it has not come, and they have about concluded that there is not to come such a day. The Lord informs us that his words are sure and shall not fail, 'but all things must come to pass in their time.' (Vs. 31, 32, Sec. 64.) Again the Lord said: 'And, now, verily, I say concerning the residue of the elders of my Church, the time has not yet come, for many years, for them to receive their inheritance in this land, except they desire it through the prayer of faith, only as it shall be appointed unto them of the Lord.' (Sec. 58:44.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:238-39.)

64:33

"be not weary in well-doing"

"In the early days of tribulation in the Church the Lord encouraged the brethren by telling them that they were laying the deliberate foundation of a great and mighty work. I recollect how it used to cheer us up in the midst of our persecutions." (Franklin D. Richards, MS 56:404.)

"Very shortly after the organization of the Church, less than a year and a half, the Lord speaking to the elders of the Church said: [Sec. 64:33, quoted.]

"According to the law that God had revealed, and in keeping with the law of the land, this Church was established with only six members. Yet the early rise of the Church from that humble beginning was great and marvelous, the Lord was pleased, and the brethren engaged in the work of the ministry had been very diligent and devoted. The Lord assuredly didn't want them to be weary in well-doing because they were laying the foundations of a great work." (Delbert L. Stapley, CR, April 1951, pp. 117-18.)

64:33

"out of small things proceedeth that which is great"

"The Lord, in a revelation to the people, known as the 64th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants' says this: [Sec. 64:33, quoted.]

"Daniel's interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's dream, as the Lord gave it to him, was that in the last days—that expression is used—in the days of certain kings also should the God of heaven set up a kingdom that should never be thrown down or be given to another people. It was likened unto a stone cut out of the mountain without hands, that should roll forth until it should fill the whole earth.

"This Church and the Gospel constitute Mormonism, the biggest thing in this world, yet it has a very small beginning." (George F. Richards, CR, October 1932, p. 46.)

"In seeking a testimony of the truth of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Gospel restored in our day, we need chiefly to give attention to the little things of life. The little things are really the great things of life; and the things we call great in life are the little things. Life is made up of little things, our daily duties. We are too prone to say that that which is clear and understandable is of little consequence; while that which is complex and difficult to understand we sometimes hold to be great. Let us remember that the little things of life, the simple things are the ones that lead us into the greater truths." (John A. Widtsoe, CR, October 1938, pp. 129-30.)

64:34-36

"the rebellious are not of the blood of Ephraim"

"He has said unto us in His revelations that 'the willing and obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days.' The obedient are numbered among the children of Ephraim, and the Lord says that 'the rebellious are not of the blood of Ephraim.' He further says that 'they shall be plucked out.' They 'shall be cut off and out of the land of Zion, and shall be sent away, and shall not inherit the land.'

"From the beginning of this Church until the present the men and women who have been obedient to the counsel of God's servants have always been the most favored. . . . There is an order in the Church of Christ which all must observe, and no one can be disobedient without bringing the displeasure of the Lord upon him. This is a principle which all should learn." (George Q. Cannon, JI, 10:222.)
