Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 65

Background information on section 65

"The Prophet Joseph was now living at Hiram, about thirty miles south-east of Kirtland. He had gone there, on invitation of Father Johnson, in order to devote himself to his work on the Bible revision. From Sept. 12, 1831, until the first of October, he did little more than prepare to recommence the translation of the Bible. (HC 1:215.) What the preparations consisted in is not stated, but this Revelation, which is an inspired prayer, indicates that an important part of such preparation was communion with God in prayer.

"At Hiram, several important conferences were held. There thirteen Revelations were received, including the memorable vision recorded in Section 76. There a mob, excited by the agitation of Ezra Booth, who had denied the faith and become an enemy, tried to take the life of the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon. No doubt, this Revelation came to strengthen them for the work and experiences before them." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 397.)

65:2

"the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands"

"The ancient prophets declared that in the last days the God of heaven should set up a kingdom which should never be destroyed [Dan. 2:44], nor left to other people; and the very time that was calculated on, this people were struggling to bring it out. . . . I calculate to be one of the instruments of setting up the kingdom of Daniel by the word of the Lord, and I intend to lay a foundation that will revolutionize the whole world. . . . It will not be by sword or gun that this kingdom will roll on: the power of truth is such that all nations will be under the necessity of obeying the Gospel." (Joseph Smith, HC 6:364-65.)

"Our revelations are filled, revelations ancient and modern, with the statement that this work of the Lord is to roll forth as the stone cut out of the mountain without hands, and fill the whole earth. [Dan. 2:35, 44-45; D&C 109:72-73.] This Gospel of ours . . . is not merely for us. It is, said the Lord, in his time for every creature in the world. . . . This is The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and its destiny as well as its mission is to fill the earth and to bring home to every man, woman and child in the world the truths of the Gospel of which I have spoken." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., CR, October 1937, p. 107.)

65:5-6

"the kingdom of God . . . is set up on the earth . . . that the kingdom of heaven may come"

See Kingdom in Appendix A.

"In this Revelation (65) the two expressions, the kingdom of God, and the kingdom of heaven, occur. The Prophet Joseph tells us that the kingdom of heaven is the Church. 'The kingdom of heaven,' he says, 'is like unto a mustard seed. Behold, then, is not this the kingdom of heaven that is raising its head in the last days in the majesty of its God, even the Church of Latter-day Saints?' (HC 2:268.) He also states that, 'Where there is a prophet, a priest, or a righteous man unto whom God gives His oracles, there is the kingdom of God' (HC 5:268). The Church, then, is also the Kingdom of God. The two terms seem to be used as synonyms, but there may be this distinction between them, if a distinction it be, that the domain of God on the other side of the veil is referred to in a particular sense as the Kingdom of Heaven, while that on this side is the Church or Kingdom of God. The two constitute the Kingdom of God. One is God's Kingdom in heaven; the other is His Kingdom on Earth." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 399.)

"The expression 'Kingdom of God' is used synonymously with the term 'Church of Christ' but the Lord had made plain that He sometimes used the term 'kingdom of Heaven' in a distinctive sense. In 1832 He called attention to that in these words, addressing Himself to the elders of the Church: [Sec. 65:1-6, quoted.]

"Such was the prayer, such is the prayer prescribed for this people to pray, not to utter in words only, not to say only, but to pray—that the Kingdom of God may roll forth in the earth to prepare the earth for the coming of the Kingdom of Heaven. That provision in the Lord's prayer, 'Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven' has not been abrogated. We are praying for the Kingdom of Heaven to come, and are endeavoring to prepare the earth for its coming. The Kingdom of God, already set up upon the earth, does not aspire to temporal domination among the nations. It seeks not to overthrow any existing forms of government; it does not profess to exercise control in matters that pertain to the governments of the earth, except by teaching correct principles of true government, before the Kingdom of Heaven shall come and be established upon the earth with a King at the head. But when He comes, He shall rule and reign, for it is His right." (James E. Talmage, CR, April 1916, pp. 128-29.)

65:5

brightness of the coming of Jesus Christ

See Second coming in Appendix A.
