Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 67

Background information on section 67

"For some months before the Prophet moved to Hiram he was inspired by the Lord to prepare the important revelations from the beginning for publication. This selection was well under way at the close of the conference of October 25th. As Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer were making preparations to go to Missouri to attend to the duties assigned them at an earlier date, a conference was called to assemble November 1, 1831, to consider matters as might need attention before their departure. The most important matter to be considered was the publishing of 'The Book of Commandments,' as it had been decided that the compilation of revelations should be called. On the first day of the conference (November 1st) the Lord gave his endorsement to the publication by giving one of the greatest revelations ever received by man as his Preface to the Book of his Commandments.

"On the second day of the conference, the Prophet said that 'inasmuch as the Lord had bestowed a great blessing upon us in giving commandments and revelations,' he asked the conference what testimony they were willing to attach to these commandments which would shortly be sent to the world. A number of the brethren arose and said that they were willing to testify to the world that they knew that they (the commandments) 'were of the Lord.' . . .

"However there were a few of the brethren present who felt because of their superior education that there should be some improvement in the language of the revelations. Considerable time was spent in discussion concerning the language as it had been given, whereupon the Prophet through prayer received a revelation in which the Lord submitted a challenge to these learned brethren. It appears that this revelation silenced the critics, all except one. William E. M'Lellin who was given to some boasting in his own strength, and evidently who had forgotten the word of the Lord given to him at his request at the conference of October 25th accepted the challenge.

"In this revelation (Sec. 67) the Lord acknowledged the prayers that had been offered, and he declared that he knew the hearts of those who were there assembled." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:246-47.)

67:5-9

"appoint him that is the most wise among you" to write a revelation equal to the least of these

"After the foregoing was received [Section 67], William E. M'Lellin, as the wisest man, in his own estimation, having more learning than sense, endeavored to write a commandment like unto one of the least of the Lord's, but failed; it was an awful responsibility to write in the name of the Lord. The Elders and all present that witnessed this vain attempt of a man to imitate the language of Christ, renewed their faith in the fulness of the Gospel, and in the truth of the commandments and revelations which the Lord had given to the Church through my instrumentality; and the Elders signified a willingness to bear testimony of their truth to all the world. Accordingly I received the following:

"'This testimony of the witnesses to the book of the Lord's commandments, which He gave to His Church through Joseph Smith, Jun., who was appointed by the voice of the Church for this purpose; we therefore feel willing to bear testimony to all the world of mankind, to every creature upon the face of all the earth and upon the islands of the sea, that the Lord has borne record to our souls, through the Holy Ghost, shed forth upon us, that these commandments were given by inspiration of God, and are profitable for all men, and are verily true. We give this testimony unto the world, the Lord being our helper; and it is through the grace of God, the Father, and His Son, Jesus Christ, that we are permitted to have this privilege of bearing this testimony unto the world, that the children of men may be profited thereby.'" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:226.)

"Wm. E. McLellin accepted the offer and, in a spirit of presumption, undertook to imitate the Revelations of the Lord. His effort to produce a Revelation was witnessed with great interest by the Elders, and when they became aware of his complete failure, all doubt concerning the Revelations of God vanished, and they signified their willingness to testify of their truth. Accordingly, a document containing their testimony was drawn up and given to the world." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 406.)

67:10

"you shall see me and know that I am"

"This is a promise which no man could have given with the hope of fulfilling it. But it was fulfilled. On the evening of the first day of the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, there was a gathering of Elders, numbering over four hundred, and many of them testified that they had visions. They heard a sound of a mighty wind. 'Almost every man in the house,' one report says, 'arose, and hundreds of them were speaking in tongues, prophesying and declaring visions, almost with one voice' (JD 40:10). Frederick G. Williams testified that he saw the Savior on that occasion." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 406.)

67:10

"not with the carnal neither natural mind, but with the spiritual"

See Carnal and Spiritual in Appendix A.

"Visions of our Lord are not perceived with the outward eye, or reflected in the natural mind, but with the spiritual eye. There is a spirit within, whose range of vision is limited by the capacity of physical organs, so that it can neither see nor hear that which lies beyond the boundaries of what we call 'matter,' but when the veil is lifted, the spirit can perceive the spiritual world." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 407.)

67:11-13

"no man has seen God at any time in the flesh, except quickened by the Spirit of God"

This statement helps to clarify the puzzling statement in John 1:18: "No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him."

The Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible also clarifies the statement as found in the King James Version: "And no man hath seen God at any time, except he hath borne record of the Son; for except it is through him no man can be saved." (John 1:19.)

God is a Holy Person; no unclean thing can enter into his presence. Therefore, a mortal, sinful man must be quickened by the Spirit (the Holy Ghost) before he can endure the presence of God.

67:14

"continue in patience until ye are perfected"

"Paul tells us that the Church organization was given to us, among other reasons, for the perfecting of the Saints. [Eph. 4:11-12.] In spite of this commandment, and in spite of this statement of Paul, there are some people who believe that it is impossible for us to become perfect. Perfection is not for this life, they say, and so why try?

"I would like to say that I believe with all my heart that if the Lord had any idea that we could not begin in mortality on the march toward perfection, he would never have given us that commandment [Matt. 5:48]; neither would he have given us a Church organization for the perfecting of the Saints.

"I believe that in many ways, here and now in mortality, we can begin to perfect ourselves. A certain degree of perfection is attainable in this life. I believe that we can be one hundred percent perfect, for instance, in abstaining from the use of tea and coffee. We can be one hundred percent perfect in abstaining from liquor and tobacco. We can be one hundred percent perfect in abstaining from eating two meals on fast day and giving to the bishop as fast offering the value of those two meals from which we abstain.

"We can be one hundred percent perfect in keeping the commandment which says that we shall not profane the name of God. We can be perfect in keeping the commandment which says, 'Thou shalt not commit adultery. (Ex. 20:14.) We can be perfect in keeping the commandment which says, 'Thou shalt not steal.' (Ibid., 15.) We can become perfect in keeping various others of the commandments that the Lord has given us.

"I am confident that one of the great desires of the Lord our God is that we shall keep that great commandment which says, 'Be ye therefore perfect.' (Matt. 5:48.)" (Mark E. Petersen, CR, April 1950, pp. 152-53.)

67:13

"in mine own due time, ye shall see and know"

"When I was about ten years of age, I began to pray for a special blessing. But I did not get an answer. Why? Father had taught us that there are three factors that must characterize every prayer that the Lord will answer: We must pray for real needs . . . we must pray worthily, and we must pray with faith.

"In answer to my first prayer, no answer came. The faith was there, I felt, to the extent that I could exert it. The need was there, I felt certainly no doubt about that, but was the worthiness? I could as always think of something, as I prayed night after night without an answer, that I had done that I should not have done, and so I continued to pray, feeling that when I could make myself worthy of an answer, I would get it. . . .

"In the latter part of the month of August, 1887, in my nineteenth year, after I had been praying nightly for nine long years with all the earnestness of my soul for this special blessing, I was alone in the bedroom, and I said, half aloud, 'O Father, wilt thou not hear me?' I was beginning to get discouraged. . . .

"Then something happened. The most glorious experience that I have received, came. In answer to my question I heard as distinctly as anything I have ever heard in my life the short, simple word: 'Yes.' Simultaneously my whole being, from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet, was filled with the most joyous feeling of elation, of peace and certainty that I could imagine a human being could experience. I sprang from my knees and jumped as high as I could, and shouted: 'O Father, I thank thee.' At last an answer had come. I knew it.

"Why did it not come before? I have thanked the Lord many times since, that He withheld the answer. . . . Since which time never has a day passed that I have forgotten to pray. And as long as memory lasts I cannot forget the thrilling experience of that night." (Joseph F. Merrill, CR, April 1944, pp. 151-52.)
