Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 68

Background information on section 68

"At the close of the conference of November 1-2, 1831, Elders Orson Hyde, Luke Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson and William E. M'Lellin, came to the Prophet and sought the will of the Lord concerning themselves, and their ministry. The Prophet made inquiry and received the revelation which appears as Section sixty-eight. Surely the Lord in his wisdom poured out knowledge, line upon line, precept upon precept as the members of the Church were prepared to receive it. While this revelation was given at the request of these brethren it was not intended for them alone, but for the guidance of all officers and members of the Church. There had been bishops ordained some months before this time, but their duties and authority were not clearly defined." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:257-58.)

68:1

"Orson Hyde"

See Appendix B for information on Orson Hyde.

"The prophecy in this verse was literally fulfilled. Orson Hyde proclaimed the gospel 'from people to people, from land to land.' In 1832, he and Samuel H. Smith traveled in the States of New York, Massachusetts, Maine, and Rhode Island—two thousand miles—on foot. In 1835 he was ordained an Apostle, and in 1837 he went on a mission to England. In 1840 he was sent on a mission to Jerusalem. He crossed the Ocean, traveled through England and Germany, visited Constantinople, Cairo, and Alexandria, and, finally, reached the Holy City. On October 24th, 1841, he went up on the Mount of Olives and offered a prayer, dedicating Palestine for the gathering of the Jews." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 409.)

68:1

"everlasting gospel"

See Gospel in Appendix A.

68:1

"congregations of the wicked"

See same title, Appendix A, and material for 60:8, 13-14.

68:4

"whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture"

"Peter said that 'prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.' (2 Peter 1:21.) That which they spoke under this influence we have accepted as scripture. Paul in writing to Timothy said: 'And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. All scripture given by inspiration of God, is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness.' (JST, 2 Tim. 3:16.) That which we accept as scripture today is the utterance of prophets who spoke by inspiration and in the spirit of prophecy in olden times. Age has made it venerable to many because it is ancient. The word of the Lord delivered by the power of the Holy Ghost to the servants of the Lord today is also scripture, just as much as it was in ancient times.

"This is logical and therefore reasonable, and there is no truth in the prevalent doctrine that the word of the Lord came in times of old, but that since the days of the apostles there has been no scripture and cannot be, for the canon of scripture is completed. However, we, the elders of Israel, do not always speak as 'moved upon by the Holy Ghost.' There is danger that we may permit our own inclinations and desires to influence us and we may be stubborn enough to lack the essential humility, so that the Holy Ghost cannot break through the shell with which we surround ourselves. Therefore, we should seek for humility in the spirit of prayer and obedience so that we may always be subject to the teachings of the Spirit of the Lord." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:258-59.)

"What is scripture? When one of the brethren stands before a congregation of the people today, and the inspiration of the Lord is upon him, he speaks that which the Lord would have him speak. It is just as much scripture as anything you will find written in any of these records, and yet we call these the standard works of the Church. We depend, of course, upon the guidance of the brethren who are entitled to inspiration.

"There is only one man in the Church at a time who has the right to give revelation for the Church, and that is the President of the Church. But that does not bar any other member in this Church from speaking the word of the Lord, as indicated here in this revelation, section 68, but a revelation that is to be given as these revelations are given in this book, to the Church, will come through the presiding officer of the church; yet, the word of the Lord, as spoken by other servants at the general conferences and stake conferences, or wherever they may be when they speak that which the Lord has put into their mouths, is just as much the words of the Lord as the writings and the words of other prophets in other dispensations. " (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 1:186.)

"It is not to be thought that every word spoken by the General Authorities is inspired, or that they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost in everything they read and write. Now you keep that in mind. I don't care what his position is, if he writes something or speaks something that goes beyond anything that you can find in the standard church works, unless that one be the prophet, seer, and revelator—please note that one exception—you may immediately say, 'Well, that is his own idea.' And if he says something that contradicts what is found in the standard church works (I think that is why we call them 'standard'—it is the standard measure of all that men teach), you may know by that same token that it is false, regardless of the position of the man who says it." (Harold B. Lee, ASIF, July 8, 1964, p. 11.)

"The question is, how shall we know when the things they have spoken were said as they were 'moved upon by the Holy Ghost?' I have given some thought to this question, and the answer thereto so far as I can determine, is: We can tell when the speakers are 'moved upon by the Holy Ghost,' only when we, ourselves, are 'moved upon by the Holy Ghost.' In a way, this completely shifts the responsibility from them to us to determine when they so speak.

"In considering the problem involved here, it should be in mind that some of the General Authorities have had assigned to them a special calling; they possess a special gift; they are sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators, which gives them a special spiritual endowment in connection with their teaching of the people. They have the right, the power, and authority to declare the mind and will of God to his people, subject to the overall power and authority of the President of the Church. . . . Furthermore, as just indicated, the President of the Church has a further and special spiritual endowment in this respect, for he is the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator for the whole Church. . . .

"He alone has the right to receive revelations for the Church, either new or amendatory, or to give authoritative interpretations of scriptures that shall be binding on the Church, or change in any way the existing doctrines of the Church." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., ASIF, July 7, 1954.)

68:6

"living God"

See Living God in Appendix A.

68:7

See Appendix B for biographical information on the brethren mentioned

68:10-11

"signs"

See Signs and Second coming in Appendix A.

68:13-24

"other bishops . . . shall be high priests. . . except they be literal descendants of Aaron"

"In these paragraphs the Lord gives instructions regarding the appointment of Bishops. Edward Partridge was the first Bishop appointed (Sec. 41:9). Other Bishops were to be called in due time (v. 14). It was, therefore, necessary to have instructions concerning their appointment. Isaac Morley and John Corrill, who had been Bishop Partridge's counselors, were selected as second and third Bishops respectively. Morley was to select Christian Whitmer and Newel Knight for his counselors; and Corrill, Daniel Stanton and Hezekiah Peck (HC 1:363).

"Bishops must be High Priests, and they must be worthy; they must be appointed by the First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood, unless they are literal descendants of Aaron (v. 15); in which case, if they are firstborn, they have a right to the Bishopric, as heirs; but even a lineal descendant of Aaron must be designated, found worthy, anointed, and ordained by the First Presidency (v. 20); any High Priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood may officiate in the Bishopric, if he is called, ordained, and set apart by the First Presidency.

"The Bishop, with his counselors, is the head of the Ward, under the direction of the President of the Stake, of which the Ward is an ecclesiastical division. He presides over the Aaronic Priesthood." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 413.)

"The office of Presiding Bishop of the Church is the same as the office which was held by Aaron. It is the highest office, holding the presidency in the Aaronic Priesthood. It was this office which came to John the Baptist, and it was by virtue of the fact that he held the keys of this power and ministry that he was sent to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to restore that Priesthood, May 15, 1829. The person who has the legal right to this presiding office has not been discovered; perhaps is not in the Church, but should it be shown by revelation that there is one who is the 'firstborn among the sons of Aaron,' and thus entitled by birthright to this presidency, he could 'claim' his 'anointing' and the right to that office in the Church. The Lord has spoken it in these words:'But, by virtue of the decree concerning their right of the priesthood descending from a father to son, they may claim their anointing if at any time they can prove their lineage, or do ascertain it by revelation from the Lord, under the hands of the above named Presidency.' [68:21.] That is to say, if the rightful heir to this office could prove the same he could claim his anointing under the hands of the Presidency of the Church. Today we are under the necessity of having high priests act as bishops in the Church, in all local offices as well as in the presiding office in this Priesthood. The direct descendants of Aaron could act without counselors, but unless they were also high priests, they could not serve as bishops in the same capacity and authority as do the bishops of the present order, who are high priests." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:259.)

68:22-24

The Presiding Bishop to be tried by the First Presidency

"In case of the transgression of the Presiding Bishop of the Church, he could not be tried by a high council in the stake in which he lives, but he would have to be tried by the First Presidency of the Church. The reason for this is that he holds the keys of presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood and is not under the jurisdiction of any ward or stake in this capacity. This order given for the trial of the presiding bishop does not apply to a local bishop in a ward, who is under the jurisdiction of the presidency of the stake." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:30-31.)

68:25-28

Parents are to teach the gospel to their children

"Every soul is precious in the sight of God. We are all his children and he desires our salvation. Free agency is given to each individual, but still the Lord has placed the responsibility upon all parents in the Church to teach their children in light and truth. He has placed the obligation upon all parents that they must teach the first principles of the gospel to their children, teach them to pray, and see that they are baptized when they are eight years of age. Parents cannot shirk or neglect this great responsibility without incurring the displeasure of a righteous God. He has not relinquished his claim upon his children when they are born into this world and therefore commands parents to teach their offspring so that they may be brought up in the truth of the everlasting Gospel. For parents to fail to do this places them in condemnation and the sin of such neglect will have to be answered with punishment on their own heads. This is a law unto Zion and all of her stakes." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:260.)

"And in that same inspired declaration by revelation [Sec. 68:25-28], the Lord gave us what we might style as a five-point program by which parents could teach faith. First, he said, their children were to be baptized when they had reached the age of accountability at eight years; second, they were to be taught to pray; third, they were to be taught to walk uprightly before the Lord; fourth, they were to be taught to keep the Sabbath day holy; and fifth, they were to be schooled not to be idle, either in the church or in their private lives.

"All parents who have followed that formula and have so taught their children have reaped the reward of an increased faith in their family, which has stood and will yet stand the test of the difficulties into which their children would yet go." (Harold B. Lee, CR, October 1952, p. 17.)

"Parents, if we are to teach our children to keep the commandments and walk uprightly before God, we must be their living example. We cannot break any law with impunity and expect our children to honor and obey us or the law. We cannot question the teachings and commandments of the Lord without causing great doubts in the minds of our children as to why they should keep the commandments. We cannot be hypocrites. We cannot teach or profess a belief in one thing and live another, and expect our children to obey the commandment: 'Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.' (Exod. 20:12.)

"Children who are taught obedience, to honor and obey the law, to have faith in God and to keep his commandments, will, as they grow up, honor their parents and be a credit to them; and they will be able to meet and solve their problems, find greater success and joy in life, and contribute greatly to the solution of the problems now causing the world such great concern. It is up to the parents to see to it that their children are prepared through obedience to law for the positions of leadership they will occupy in the future, where their responsibility will be to bring peace and righteousness to the world." (N. Eldon Tanner, IE, June 1970, p. 32.)

"I believe we start to fail in the home when we give up on each other. We have not failed until we have quit trying. As long as we are working diligently with love, patience, and long-suffering, despite the odds or the apparent lack of progress, we are not classified as failures in the home. We only start to fail when we give up on a son, daughter, mother, or father." (Marvin J. Ashton, Ensign, June 1971, pp. 31-32.)

"I have sometimes seen children of good families rebel, resist, stray, sin, and even actually fight God. In this they bring sorrow to their parents, who have done their best to set in movement a current and to teach and live as examples. But I have repeatedly seen many of these same children, after years of wandering, mellow, realize what they have been missing, repent, and make great contribution to the spiritual life of their community. The reason I believe this can take place is that, despite all the adverse winds to which these people have been subjected, they have been influenced still more, and much more than they realized, by the current of life in the homes in which they were reared. When, in later years, they feel a longing to recreate in their own families the same atmosphere they enjoyed as children, they are likely to turn to the faith that gave meaning to their parents' lives.

"There is no guarantee, of course, that righteous parents will succeed always in holding their children, and certainly they may lose them if they do not do all in their power. The children have their free agency.

"But if we as parents fail to influence our families and set them on the 'strait and narrow way,' then certainly the waves, the winds of temptation and evil will carry the posterity away from the path.

"'Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old, he will not depart from it.' (Prov. 22:6.) What we do know is that righteous parents who strive to develop wholesome influences for their children will be held blameless at the last day, and that they will succeed in saving most of their children, if not all." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, November 1974, pp. 111-12.)

68:27

"children shall be baptized . . . when eight years old"

"Have you a child who is eight years of age or older, who has not been baptized into the Church? . . .

"The Lord has told us several things about this matter: First, he says that little children are redeemed from before the foundations of the world. In other words, if a little child dies, he or she receives the blessings of the redemption of Christ. The child is saved in the kingdom of heaven.

"Then he tells us that little children living upon the earth in mortality are not subject to temptation by the devil. 'Wherefore,' he says, 'they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children until they begin to be accountable before me.' (D&C 29:46-47.)

"And next he tells us that children become accountable before him at eight years of age, and that is the time when they shall be baptized. (D&C 18:42; 20:71; 68:25-28.)

"If they are not thus baptized, he explains, the parents will be held responsible. . . .

"There are two main purposes in baptism: to obtain admission to the Church, and to receive remission of sins. For the adult convert both of these blessings come. For the child at the age of eight, who has been in the fold as one of those little ones spoken of by the Savior, again both blessings are conferred. He is perpetuated in his place in the kingdom of God, holding full membership; also he receives the blessing of remission for his sins, as he is now accountable for them.

"Children over eight are held responsible for their sins, according to the law of the Lord, and yet, without repentance and baptism there is no remission of those sins. No unclean thing can come into God's presence. Sin takes us away from the Lord, and places us in the power of Satan. Children who sin, and are not taught the gospel, and therefore do not obey it, are in a precarious position. Their very soul's salvation is in jeopardy." (Mark E. Petersen, YFY, pp. 161-163.)

68:29

"observe the Sabbath day"

See Sabbath in Appendix A.

68:31

"riches of eternity"

See same title in Appendix A.

68:33

"prayers . . . in the season thereof"

"The season of prayer is in the morning before the family separates. A good time for prayer is when you assemble at the table before you partake of the morning meal, and let the members of the family take turns in the praying. That is the season of prayer. The season of prayer for the merchant is in the morning when he goes to his place of business and before he begins his day's work, over his merchandise. The time of prayer for the shepherd is when he is out with his flocks watching over them. The time for the farmer to pray is when he goes with his plow into the field, when he goes to sow his grain, and when he goes to gather his harvest. And if a man will pray as he is commanded to do in the passage of scripture which I have read [Sec. 68:33], then he more than likely will be found in all things righteously keeping the commandments of the Lord. He will not be found scheming to take advantage of his neighbor in some trade or bargain, but in all things dealing justly, because he has prayed in the morning and has in his heart the spirit of prayer throughout the day, that the Lord will bless him in the increase of his goods, of his fields, of his flocks, or whatever it may be he is engaged in. So that is the season of prayer." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, October 1919, p. 143.)

68:33

"the judge of my people"

"The common judge in Israel is the ward bishop. It is his duty to watch over his flock. To aid him he has the force of the Aaronic Priesthood and all of the brethren holding the Melchizedek Priesthood who are at liberty and who may be called to serve as acting teachers and priests in his ward." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:261.)

68:35

"I am Alpha and Omega. . . I come quickly"

See Alpha and Omega and Quickly in Appendix A.
