Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 69

Background information on section 69

See background information for section 67.

"At the Conference held at Hiram, November 1st and 2nd, 1831, it had been decided that Oliver Cowdery should take the Commandments and Revelations, in manuscript, to Independence, Mo., and publish them there; also that the Prophet should dedicate the work to God. After the dedicatory prayer, he received this Revelation, in which he was instructed to send John Whitmer with Oliver Cowdery, and charge him (Whitmer) to continue his labors as Church Historian." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 417.)

69:1-2

Oliver Cowdery to take John Whitmer with him in going "unto the land of Zion"

For biographical information on Oliver Cowdery, see Appendix B.

"In this commandment the Lord declared that it was not wisdom that Oliver Cowdery should make the journey alone. The journey was about one thousand miles and through a sparsely settled country. There were many dangers on the way. The revelations were considered to be priceless and then, besides, Oliver carried with him sums of money to assist in the work in Missouri. John Whitmer was therefore appointed to accompany Oliver. This was not to relieve him, however, of his duty to write history, for he had been called to keep the historical record of the Church. He was to observe and make a record of all the important things which he should observe and know concerning the Church. John Whitmer was also to receive counsel from Oliver Cowdery and others." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:249.)

"It must not be understood from the first paragraph of this revelation that Oliver Cowdery was untrustworthy, and therefore it was necessary that a companion be provided for him. The fact was that much of the journey between Kirtland and Independence, or Zion, was through a sparsely settled country, the western portion of it through frontier country where there is always a gathering, more or less, of lawless people; and it was at considerable risk that a person traveled through such a country, especially when alone and carrying money with him. It was wisdom then, for the sake of Oliver Cowdery, and to insure the safety of the money and the sacred things he was to carry with him, that one should go with him that would be a true and faithful companion, hence the appointment of John Whitmer." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:234.)
