Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 70

Background information on Section 70

"My time [wrote Joseph Smith] was occupied closely in reviewing the commandments and sitting in conference, for nearly two weeks; for from the first to the twelfth of November we held four special conferences. In the last which was held at Brother Johnson's, in Hiram, after deliberate consideration, in consequence of the book of revelations, now to be printed, being the foundation of the Church in these last days, and a benefit to the world, showing that the keys of the mysteries of the kingdom of our Savior are again entrusted to man; and the riches of eternity within the compass of those who are willing to live by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God—therefore the conference voted that they prize the revelations to be worth to the Church the riches of the whole earth, speaking temporally. The great benefits to the world which result from the Book of Mormon and the revelations which the Lord has seen fit in His infinite wisdom to grant unto us for our salvation, and for the salvation of all that will believe, were duly appreciated; and in answer to an inquiry, I received the following: [Section 70 follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:235-36.)

70:14

Stewards appointed over the revelations and commandments

For biographical information on all the persons mentioned in this section, see Appendix B.

"The Lord guarded these revelations with the greatest care. After the Prophet Joseph Smith had made copies and had compiled them for publication, he and Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer, Sidney Rigdon and William W. Phelps were called by revelation to be 'stewards' over the revelations and commandments, and the Lord said that 'an account of this stewardship will I require of them in the day of judgment.' (Sec. 70:3-4.) This indicates the importance with which the Lord held his divine word. Precautions were taken in forwarding these revelations to Zion, which was the 'seat and a place to receive and do all these things.' (i.e. publish the revelations and do the printing for the Church. See Sec. 69:6.)

"The reason for such jealous care is due to the fact that the heavens had been sealed for ages by man's rebellion and rejection of the Gospel as it was delivered by the apostles in the Meridian of Time. Again, the Lord was prepared to make known his covenants and commandments." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:253.)

70:10

"none are exempt from this law" of consecration

See Consecration in Appendix A.

70:12

"He who is appointed to administer spiritual" or temporal things "is worthy of his hire"

The Lord herein indicated that all those who were required to spend full time in the service of the Church, whether in administering spiritual things or temporal things, were worthy to receive their support from the funds of the Church. This would indicate that other service in the Church would be on an unpaid or "Church-service" basis.

"Official service in the church is unpaid. Therefore it is necessarily part-time service. The officer must earn his living while he serves the church. For the government of the church . . . very few persons are called to give their full time to the church. . . . The work of the church may be said correctly to be done by an unpaid ministry. Nevertheless, those who serve the church in this manner of sacrifice unanimously declare that the spiritual reward from the service is far greater than any material reward that might be offered. And, besides, it has been found that active participation in church affairs gives experience which is of real value in the world of affairs outside of the Church." (John A. Widtsoe, GI, pp. 104-5.)

70:14

"in your temporal things you shall be equal"

See material for 78:5-7.

"To be equal did not mean that all should have the same amount of food, but each should have according to his needs. For instance, a man would receive in proportion to the number in the family, not according to the nature of his work. He was to have, 'for food and for raiment; for an inheritance; for houses and for lands, in whatsoever circumstances I, the Lord, shall place them.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:39-40.)
