Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 71

Background information on section 71

"After Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer had departed for Jackson county Missouri, I resumed the translation of the Scriptures, and continued to labor in this branch of my calling with Elder Sidney Rigdon as my scribe, until I received the following: [section 71]." (Joseph Smith, HC 2:238.)

"Ezra Booth, who apostatized after his return from Missouri, did all in his power to injure the Church. He was responsible for the publication of the earliest attacks against the Church. He also caused articles to be published in the press among which were some scandalous letters published in the Ravenna Ohio Star, which created a bitter spirit on the part of many people. December 1, 1831, the Lord gave a revelation to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon (Sec. 71) in which the Lord said: 'Behold, thus saith the Lord unto you . . . that the time has verily come that it is necessary and expedient in me that you should open your mouths in proclaiming my gospel, the things of the kingdom, expounding the mysteries thereof out of the scriptures, according to that portion of spirit and power which shall be given unto you, even as I will.' They were, therefore, released for the time of this mission from translating the scriptures, that they might go forth to confound their enemies." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:269.)

71:1

"the mysteries"

See Mysteries in Appendix A.

"The Prophet, by this time, had learned many great and glorious truths, partly by the direct Revelations he had received, and partly by close study of the Scriptures. To the world, many of these truths were 'mysteries.' The time had come to reveal them, and when they were revealed, or unveiled, they would be mysteries no longer. When the gospel of Christ was first preached by Peter, Paul, and the other Apostles of their day, the doctrine of the Incarnation was a mystery (1 Cor. 2:7; 1 Tim. 3:16); the doctrine of the resurrection (1 Cor. 15:51), and the gathering of the Gentiles into the Church (Col. 1:26, 27) were mysteries. In our dispensation, the doctrines of the gathering and of the building of temples and the City of Zion are as great mysteries, until they are explained by the Holy Spirit of Promise. The Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon were now to go forth and proclaim these and other truths to the Church and the world, for a season." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 422-23.)

71:7

"confound your enemies; call upon them to meet you . . . in public"

"In obedience to this call Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon left Kirtland December 3, 1831, and went forth in Kirtland, Shalersville, Ravenna and other places preaching boldly the truth and calling on their traducers to meet them and face their falsehoods. This was rather an unusual condition. Quite generally the Lord counsels his servants not to engage in debates and arguments, but to preach in power the fundamental principles of the Gospel. This was a condition that required some action of this kind, and the Spirit of the Lord directed these brethren to go forth and confound their enemies which they proceeded immediately to do, as their enemies were unable to substantiate their falsehoods and were surprised by this sudden challenge so boldly given. Much of the prejudice was allayed and some friends made through this action." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:269.)
