Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 72

Background information on section 72

"Knowing now the mind of the Lord, that the time had come that the Gospel should be proclaimed in power and demonstration to the world, from the Scriptures reasoning with men as in days of old, I took a journey to Kirtland, in company with Elder Sidney Rigdon on the 3rd day of December, to fulfill the above revelation. [Sec. 71.] On the 4th, several of the Elders and members assembled together to learn their duty, and for edification, and after some time had been spent in conversing about our temporal and spiritual welfare, I received the following: [D&C 72.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:239.)

72:3

"it is required . . . of every steward"

See Steward in Appendix A.

72:5

"the elders . . . shall render an account of their stewardship unto the bishop"

"At a very early day after the organization of the Church the Lord revealed the need of a bishop to look after the temporalities and stewardships in the Church. Bishop Edward Partridge was called and sent to Zion to engage in the duties of his calling. On the 4th day of December, 1831, while the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon were engaged in their ministry refuting their enemies, a meeting of the elders was called and the Lord gave them a very important revelation. The Lord declared that it was expedient that a bishop should be called to serve in the Kirtland district. One important duty of this bishop was to look after the stewardships pertaining to the inhabitants of Kirtland and other parts of Ohio, and he was 'to render an account of his stewardship, both in time and in eternity.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:269.)

72:8

"Newel K Whitney"

For biographical information on Newel K. Whitney, see Appendix B.

72:9-26

"making known the duty of the bishop"

See Bishop and Priesthood offices in Appendix A.

"The duties of the Bishop in Kirtland are here enumerated. They are, (a) to keep the Lord's storehouse and receive the funds of the Church in that part of the vineyard (v. 10); that is, to look after the needy and preside over the temporal affairs of the Church; (b) to keep an account of property consecrated for public use, as commanded (Sec. 42:31-2), and administer to the need of the Elders (v. 11), whether these were able to pay for the services rendered, or not (vv. 12-13); the Lord here makes it clear that faithful service in administering in spiritual things is also a contribution to the general funds (vv. 14-15). (c) The Bishop is, further, under obligation to furnish every Elder entitled to it, a certificate, by which the Bishop in Zion may know that the bearer has the right to receive an inheritance (vv. 16-18); he is (d) to receive an account of the labors of every Elder, in order that these might be properly recommended to the Branches they might visit (v. 19); (e) he was, finally, to aid, financially, the 'stewards' appointed to look after the literary interests of the Church (Sec. 72:20). 'This,' we read, 'shall be an ensample'—a pattern, or model for imitation—for all Branches of the Church (v. 23). All were to have Bishops with similar duties to perform." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 427.)

72:12-26

"this . . . may be consecrated"

See Consecration and United Order in Appendix A.

"In these revelations the Lord endeavored to teach the members of the Church the law of consecration. It had been decreed that Zion (meaning at that time Jackson County) was to be built up on this divine law. All who went there were expected to consecrate their property, and then they were to receive stewardships severally according to their needs. The Lord's plan was that the poor and the needy should be assisted, and all who had substance should impart according to the Lord's divine law. [Sec. 42:30-42.]

"According to this plan the labors of those who gave their time 'in spiritual things, in administering the gospel and the things of the kingdom of the Church, and unto the world,' were to be counted worthy, but they like all others were to give an account to the bishop in Zion. It was the command—'Every man that cometh up to Zion, must lay all things before the bishop in Zion.' Likewise, those in Kirtland and its vicinity were to give an accounting to the bishop in Kirtland, who in turn was to report to the bishop in Zion. A certificate from the judge or bishop in Kirtland was to be made and it would 'render every man acceptable and answereth all things, for an inheritance, and to be received as a wise steward, and as a faithful laborer; otherwise he shall not be accepted of the bishop in Zion.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:41-42.)

72:20

"stewards over the literary concerns of my church"

"From the very beginning of time the Lord has taken pains to see that proper records have been kept. This was one of the first commandments to the Church in 1830. The jealous care pertaining to the word of the Lord and other publications and documents, is shown forth in a number of revelations. Here (v. 20) the Lord gives instruction that his servants 'who are appointed as stewards over the literary concerns of my Church, (shall) have claim for assistance upon the bishop or bishops, in all things.' These brethren, previously named, had charge of the literary matters of the Church, the publication and care of the revelations which were to go forth unto the ends of the earth. Funds from this source were also to be obtained through the sale of the publications." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:271.)
