Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 74

Background information on section 74

"Upon the reception of the foregoing word [Sec. 73] of the Lord, I recommenced the translation of the Scriptures, and labored diligently until just before the conference, which was to convene on the 25th of January. During this period, I also received the following, as an explanation of the First Epistle to the Corinthians, 7th chapter, 14th verse: [D&C 74.]" (Joseph Smith HC 1:242.)

74:1-7

An inspired explanation of I Corinthians 7:14

"In the Corinthian Church, some evidently held that when the husband, or wife, had been converted, he, or she, ought to abandon the unconverted partner as unclean and contaminating. Not at all! St. Paul says, in substance, that the conversion of one of the partners has brought a sanctifying influence into the family. As Meyer puts it, 'The nonbelieving partner in a marriage . . . becomes partaker—as if by sacred contagion—of the higher, divinely consecrated character of his consort.' 'Else,' the Apostle argues, 'were your children unclean.' If the wife—this is the argument—must abandon a husband because he is not a Church member, she would also be obliged to abandon her children. But this is not required.

"The consecration of the believing parent includes the children. They are sanctified through the atonement of our Lord. They need no ordinance, until they arrive at the age of accountability, when they should be baptized, after proper instruction. Christians were forbidden to marry outside the Church (2 Cor. 6:14), but marriages contracted before conversion were not to be broken up, if the unconverted partner desired to continue the marriage relation." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 432.)

74:2

"among all the Jews"

See Jews in Appendix A.

"Corinth was a Grecian city, the most considerable in the country of the Hellenes at the time Paul visited the place, but there were also many Jews, living there in exile, in consequence of a decree issued by Emperor Claudius (Acts 18:2), expelling the Hebrews from Rome. Some of them had joined the Church. This accounts for a controversy, in a Greek city, concerning a Mosaic rite (v. 3)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 432.)

74:5-7

Some teachings of Paul

"Some of these teachings, evidently, are the view of Paul the man, but when he spoke by the inspiration which the Lord placed upon him, he commanded that certain officers in the Church must by all means be married men. (1 Tim. 3:2, 12; and Tit. 1:6.) Then how truly he declared that 'nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord.' (1 Cor. 11:11.) It was while studying these teachings of Paul that the elders were led to inquire of the Prophet as to Paul's meanings in 1 Cor 7:14. The Prophet asked the Lord and got the answer. In this saying: [Sec. 74:1, quoted], Paul spoke not by commandment, but of himself. His intent, as explained in Section 74, being that where there were mixed families in the Church, the teachings of the Law of Moses and the doctrines which were fulfilled, should not be maintained. Male children in such families were not to be circumcised, and they would be holy. It was the doctrine of the Jews that unless this were done children were unholy. This Paul wished to correct. It was very difficult for the Jewish members of the Church to forsake all of their traditions and turn from the Law of Moses, and from circumcision which were fulfilled." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:44-45.)

74:7

"little children are holy, being sanctified through the atonement of Jesus Christ"

"The central thought expressed here is found in the first and last verses, and may be stated thus: Little children, sanctified through the atonement of Jesus Christ, are holy.

"Two conclusions follow from this proposition. The first, fully set forth in this Revelation, is, that little children do not need circumcision to become sanctified, as taught by the adherents of the Mosaic faith. The second is equally important, that is, little children are holy being sanctified through the atonement of Jesus Christ." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 432.)
