Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 75

Background information on section 75

"A few days before the conference was to commence in Amherst, Lorain county, I started with the Elders that lived in my own vicinity, and arrived in good time. At this conference much harmony prevailed, and considerable business was done to advance the kingdom, and promulgate the Gospel to the inhabitants of the surrounding country. The Elders seemed anxious for me to inquire of the Lord that they might know His will, or learn what would be most pleasing to Him for them to do, in order to bring men to a sense of their condition; for, as it was written, all men have gone out of the way, so that none doeth good, no, not one. I inquired and received the following: [D&C 75.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:242-43.)

75:1

"Alpha and Omega"

See this title in Appendix A.

75:5

"laden with many sheaves"

See Harvest symbols in Appendix A.

75:5

"eternal life"

See this title in Appendix A.

75:6

"William E. M'Lellin"

See Appendix B.

75:9

"Luke Johnson"

See Appendix B.

75:10, 27

"Comforter"

See Holy Ghost in Appendix A.

75:13-17, 30-36

For information on persons mentioned in this section, see Appendix B.

75:13

"Orson Hyde and. . . Samuel H. Smith"

"Soon after our return to Kirtland, I was sent on another mission in company with Brother Samuel H. Smith, a younger brother of the Prophet, who was a man slow of speech and unlearned, yet a man of good faith and extreme integrity. We journeyed early in the spring of 1832, eastward together, without 'purse or scrip,' going from house to house, teaching and preaching in families, and also in the public congregations of the people. Wherever we were received and entertained, we left our blessing; and wherever we were rejected, we washed our feet in private against those who rejected us, and bore testimony of it unto our Father in heaven, and went on our way rejoicing, according to the commandment." (Orson Hyde, MS 26:774-75.)

75:17

"Burr Riggs"

"The name appears in the minutes of the proceedings of the High Council at Kirtland, February 13th, 1833, on which occasion he was charged with neglect of duty, and especially with failure to magnify his calling as a High Priest. He admitted the charge and expressed a desire to repent, but this he evidently failed to do, for he was severed from the Church on the 26th of the same month. In all probability, his neglect of duty began by failure to perform the mission to which he was called, or by neglecting his duties as a missionary. Faithful missionaries are generally faithful members of the Priesthood and of the Church." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 436.)

75:20

"shake off the dust of your feet as a testimony"

See Feet in Appendix A.

"The message and commission to these brethren is . . . of the greatest interest, in many respects similar to the commission the Savior gave his disciples when he sent them forth in their ministry throughout the land of Palestine. Whenever they entered a house and were received, they were to leave their blessing. From such houses as would not receive them and their message, they were to depart speedily shaking off the dust of their feet as a testimony against them. They were to remember also that one important duty which they were to fulfill and that was to be sure and bear testimony in every instance. If they performed their labors sincerely, humbly and diligently bearing witness of the restoration then it would be more tolerable for the heathen in the day of judgment, than for that house which rejected the message. If no warning had been left, however, then the judgment would be pronounced against the servant who was expected to deliver it. (D&C 4.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:276.)

75:22

"it shall be more tolerable for the heathen"

"This statement that it would be more tolerable for the heathen should be considered. If the heathen are to be judged without law and assigned to the terrestrial kingdom (D&C 45:54; 76:72), then the chances for those who rejected the message would imply that they may find themselves in a lower kingdom, when the judgment comes. The elders who delivered the message were also to be the judges in the day of judgment against those who rejected their testimony. Missionaries of the Church should realize this fact. They are sent to warn the world and when they faithfully do their duty they will stand as witnesses against those who reject them, but if they fail to perform their duty, then those unto whom the message should have been given, will stand up as accusers in their turn, and the unfaithful servants will be condemned. (D&C 43:19.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:276.)

75:24-28

the church should assist the families of those called to proclaim the gospel

"The brethren who were called to take these missionary journeys were quite generally poor men in temporal things. It was difficult for them to go out on the Lord's word and leave their families without support. Yet the call was essential, for the souls of men were at stake, and there were those waiting to hear the message who would be a strength to the church after they received the Gospel." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:47-48.)

75:29

"the idler shall not have place in the church, except he repent"

See Work in Appendix A.

"Frequently the Lord impressed upon these brethren who were sent out the need of diligence in the service. [Sec. 75:29, quoted.] This admonition did not apply solely to the work of the missionary, but to all the members of the Church in their labors, spiritually and temporally, for idleness, whether it is in temporal things or in spiritual things, is severely condemned by the Lord. There should be none among us idle who is physically and mentally fit to labor. [Sec. 42:42.] One of the greatest blessings the Lord placed upon man is that he should labor, for it is through our labor that we progress, and without progression there can come no salvation, either in this world or in the world to come." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:47-48.)

75:33

"Daniel Stanton"

"When a Stake of Zion was organized at Adam-ondi-Ahman, he was made a member of the High Council, June 28th, 1838." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 439.)

75:34

"Gideon Carter"

"He was killed in an encounter with a mob near Far West, in what is known as 'the Crooked River Battle,' Oct. 24th, 1838. At that time word had reached Far West that one Samuel Bogart, with a band of seventy-five marauders, was committing depredations. Judge Elias Higbee then ordered the military authorities to disperse the mob, and Captain David W. Patten and others volunteered for that expedition. With a company of about seventy-five men, Patten met the marauders at a point near Crooked River, and routed them completely. But in the melee David W. Patten, Gideon Carter, and Patrick O'Bannion were mortally wounded. Carter was left on the ground dead, but his body was afterwards recovered and buried." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 439.)
