Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 76

Background information on section 76

"Upon my return from Amherst [Ohio] conference, I resumed the translation of the Scriptures. From sundry revelations which had been received, it was apparent that many important points touching the salvation of man, had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled. It appeared self-evident from what truths were left, that if God rewarded every one according to the deeds done in the body the term 'Heaven,' as intended for the Saints' eternal home must include more kingdoms than one. Accordingly, on the 16th of February, 1832, while translating St. John's Gospel, myself and Elder Rigdon saw the following vision: [D&C 76.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:245.)

"Nothing could be more pleasing to the Saints upon the order of the kingdom of the Lord, than the light which burst upon the world through the foregoing vision [section 76]. Every law, every commandment, every promise, every truth, and every point touching the destiny of man, from Genesis to Revelation, where the purity of the scriptures remains unsullied by the folly of men, goes to show the perfection of the theory [of different degrees of glory in the future life] and witnesses the fact that that document is a transcript from the records of the eternal world. The sublimity of the ideas; the purity of the language; the scope for action; the continued duration for completion, in order that the heirs of salvation may confess the Lord and bow the knee; the rewards for faithfulness, and the punishments for sins, are so much beyond the narrow-mindedness of men, that every honest man is constrained to exclaim: 'It came from God.'" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:252-53.)

"I could explain a hundred fold more than I ever have of the glories of the kingdoms manifested to me in the vision, were I permitted, and were the people prepared to receive them." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:402.)

"Section 76 of the Doctrine and Covenants in its sublimity and clearness in relation to the eternal destiny of the human family, has not been surpassed. It should be treasured by all members of the Church as a priceless heritage. It should strengthen their faith and be to them an incentive to seek the exaltation promised to all who are just and true. So plain and simple are its teachings that none should stumble or misunderstand." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:279.)

76:1

"the Lord is God, and beside him there is no Savior"

See Jesus Christ in Appendix A.

76:4

"From eternity to eternity he is the same"

See Eternity to eternity in Appendix A.

76:7

"To them will I reveal all mysteries"

See Mysteries in Appendix A.

76:7-10

"to them will I reveal all mysteries. . . by my Spirit"

"When the time shall come that the Spirit of the living God shall be poured out upon all flesh, in a very few moments of time the Lord could unlock the mysteries and treasures of the earth, so that we could understand not only the geographical surface of the earth, but be able, by the power of vision, to behold every particle of it inside as well as outside, and also the law that governs its elementary portions, nearly all of which is now closed from our mortal vision. We can only go about so far with our natural sight; but there is a faculty in every man and woman which is now sleeping in a dormant state; and as soon as it is touched by the Spirit of the Lord, we shall be enabled to see a new world of things as it were, mysteries will be opened up, and we will perceive naturally as if they were written, and in this way we shall be able to learn very rapidly indeed. If we want a knowledge of this world or of ourselves, when our spirits were born, or if we desire to know things that took place before the foundations of the world were laid or the nucleus was formed, when the sons of God shouted for joy, if we desired to know these things it would only be necessary for the Spirit of the Lord to touch the vision of our minds and light up our understanding, and we could gaze upon things past for thousands of generations of worlds before the earth was made, and we could see the succession of worlds that have been and were in existence long before this earth was formed; we could see the ordeals through which they had passed, see them brought into existence and passing through their several changes and finally become glorified celestial mansions in the presence of God. By this same Spirit . . . we could look forward into the distant future and behold new worlds formed and redeemed, and not only this, but see and understand the laws by which they were made, and the object and end of all these creations, being touched by the finger of the Almighty and lighted up by the Holy Ghost." (Orson Pratt, JD 19:178.)

76:11

"being in the Spirit"

"When Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon saw that wonderful vision of the celestial, terrestrial, and telestial glories, they said concerning it: 'Being in the Spirit, on the sixteenth day of February, in the year of our Lord, 1832, by the power of the Spirit our eyes were opened,' etc. There is the key. It was because God was with them that they were able to see the Son of God and converse with him 'in the heavenly vision.' They had eyes—spiritual eyes; they were seers. But what could they see until the Spirit came upon them and gave them the use of the seeric gift? The machinery was there, but the power had to be turned on." (Orson F. Whitney, CR, June 1919, p. 48.)

76:15

"while we were doing the work of translation"

The translation referred to here is Joseph Smith's work on the Inspired Version of the Bible. See Appendix A.

76:22

"this is the testimony . . . which we give of him: That he lives!"

"Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon also saw him, and bore testimony that they saw Him, even as Stephen saw Him [Acts 7:54-56], clothed in glory, surrounded by those inhabiting the celestial kingdom of God. They also saw God seated on His throne and Jesus Christ at His right hand, 'And they heard the voice bearing record that He is the only begotten of the Father.' So far as the Latter-day Saints are concerned, we know these things are true. There is no doubt in our minds about it. Why? Because the Spirit of Truth, the Holy Ghost, has been received by us through our obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel, and He, true to His office, has testified to us of Jesus Christ, our Lord." (Hyrum M. Smith, CR, October 1907, pp. 34-35.)

76:23

"the Only Begotten of the Father"

See Only Begotten and Jesus Christ in Appendix A.

76:24

"the inhabitants . . . are begotten sons and daughters unto God"

See Godhead in Appendix A.

"He who made the worlds, . . . controls and governs and directs them, is actually our Father, not in some mystical sense, not in some mere theory, but we were begotten of Him. In the revelation contained in the 76th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants we are told that the inhabitants of the worlds are 'begotten sons and daughters unto God.' There may be more in that than we see at the first glance . . . that the great Eternal God is our Father and we are begotten of Him or unto Him and to Him we owe allegiance, to Him we owe obedience, because He is our Father and our God and our King. We should obey Him because of His parentage to us: we should obey Him because we are His children and He has the right to our obedience." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, April 1916, pp. 15-16.)

76:24

"by him . . . the worlds are and were created"

See Creator in Appendix A.

76:26

Lucifer (Satan; the devil) "was called Perdition"

See Satan in Appendix A.

"The name means 'Light-bearer' and indicates the exalted position of him who was so called, for a 'light-bearer' is a sun in the firmament. But when he was cast out, he was called Perdition. " (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 450.)

76:31-49

"those who know. . . and . . . deny. . . and defy"

See Perdition in Appendix A.

"Those who are finally lost are such as have had actual knowledge of the power of God; they have been made partakers thereof; they have not only heard of it or seen its manifestations in others, but they have received it themselves. Paul (Heb. 6:4) uses the expression, 'enlightened,' which is equivalent to 'baptized,' and is so understood by early Christian authors, because Christian baptism is followed by the reception of the Holy Ghost, who gives light and leads into all truth. He adds, 'and have tasted the heavenly gift and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost.' In other words, they have been regenerated by the gospel and received the blessings bestowed through the ordinances thereof; and then they have 'suffered themselves to be overcome.' They have denied the truth and have defied the power of God. They have become rebels, like Lucifer. Their status is that of apostasy. . . . They have denied the Holy Spirit, after having received it; they have denied the Only Begotten Son, and by that denial crucified Him, as it were. They have been the servants of Christ but are now enlisted in the service of Lucifer, as were those who crucified the Lord; they belong in the same class.

" 'The "sons of perdition" are those who have received the gospel, those to whom the Father has revealed the Son; those who know something concerning the plan of salvation; those who have had keys placed in their hands by which they could unlock the mysteries of eternity; those who received power sufficient to overcome all things, and who, instead of using it for their own salvation, and in the interest of the salvation of others, prostituted that power and turned away from that which they knew to be true, denying the Son of God and putting Him to open shame. . . . They are governed by Satan; becoming servants to him whom they list to obey, they become the sons of perdition, doomed to suffer the wrath of God reserved for the Devil and his angels,' (Charles W. Penrose, JD 24:93)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 452.)

76:37

"the second death "

See Death in Appendix A.

"The end of the lost is also called the 'second death.' The first is spiritual death. When Adam was expelled from the Garden of Eden, 'he became spiritually dead, which was the first death.' But spiritual death is also the last, 'which shall be pronounced upon the wicked when I shall say: Depart, ye cursed' (Sec. 29:41). All but sons of perdition will be redeemed from Satan's power and will find some place outside of his domain. The inhabitants of this earth will be assigned to the telestial, the terrestrial or the celestial kingdom according to the law which they have kept while in mortality. Redemption does not mean exaltation, but to be released from Satan's chains. These sons of perdition have willed to go with the prince of darkness. They have reached a stage where they cannot repent, for repentance is a gift of God, and they have placed themselves beyond its influence and power." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 454.)

76: 38-39, 43

"saves all . . . except those sons of perdition"

"In many minds there has been a great misapprehension on the question of the resurrection. Some have had the idea, and have taught it, that the sons of perdition will not be resurrected at all. They base this idea, and draw this conclusion, from the 38th and 39th paragraphs of section 76 of the book of Doctrine and Covenants, . . .

"A careful reading of these verses, however, and especially of the preceding paragraphs, will show that the Lord does not, in this language, exclude even the sons of perdition from the resurrection. It is plain that the intention is to refer to them explicitly as the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power: 'for all the rest shall be brought forth by the resurrection of the dead, through the triumph and the glory of the Lamb.' This excluded class are the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power, and 'the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord after the sufferings of his wrath.'

"This is by no means to say that they are to have no resurrection. Jesus our Lord and Savior died for all, and all will be resurrected—good and bad, white and black, people of every race, whether sinners or not; and no matter how great their sins may be, the resurrection of their bodies is sure. Jesus has died for them, and they all will be redeemed from the grave through the atonement which He had made." (George Q. Cannon, JI, February 1900, p. 123.)

76:39

"the Lamb, who was slain . . . before the worlds were made"

See Lamb of God and Pre-earthly existence in Appendix A.

76:44

"everlasting. . . endless. .. eternal punishment"

See material for 19:6-12.

76:50

"resurrection of the just"

See Resurrection in Appendix A.

"This is also called the first resurrection, but the truth is here taught that only those who are just will have part in it. To be just is to be upright and sincere in one's actions and dealings with others. It is to be like Christ, who suffered, the just for the unjust (1 Pet. 3:18). To be just is also to be justified. That is to say, one who is just is, by God Himself, declared to be as he ought to be. Such are they who have part in the first resurrection." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 459.)

76:51-70, 92

Vision of the celestial glory

See Celestial and Degrees of glory in Appendix A.

76:57

"order of Enoch"

See Enoch and United Order in Appendix A.

76:67

"church of Enoch, and of the Firstborn"

See Church of the Firstborn in Appendix A.

76:68

"whose names are written in heaven"

See Book of Life in Appendix A.

76:71-80, 91

Vision of the terrestrial world

See Terrestrial and Degrees of glory in Appendix A.

76:79

"they who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus"

"This is a gospel of individual work. I wish our Latter-day Saints could become more valiant. As I read the seventy-sixth section of the Doctrine and Covenants, the great vision given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, I remember that the Lord says to that terrestrial degree of glory may go those who are not valiant in the testimony, which means that many of us who have received baptism by proper authority, many who have received other ordinances, even temple blessings, will not reach the celestial kingdom of glory unless we live the commandments and are valiant. What is being valiant? . . . There are many people in this Church today who think they live, but they are dead to the spiritual things. And I believe even many who are making the pretenses of being active are also spiritually dead. Their service is much of the letter and less of the spirit." (Spencer W. Kimball, CR, April 1951, pp. 104-5.)

76:81-90, 98-112

Vision of the telestial world

See Telestial and Degrees of glory in Appendix A.

76:94

"church of the Firstborn"

See same title in Appendix A.

76:95

"equal in power. . . might. . . dominion"

See material for 78:5-7.

"Those who dwell in the presence of God are faithful members of the Church of the Firstborn. They are equal. In the celestial world all the ransomed are equal in authority, in strength, in opportunities, and in possessions. Is it any wonder, then, that our Lord instituted the United Order, with equality, in the Church, as a school in which to obtain some understanding of, and training for, a place in celestial glory? Can anyone, after a life of selfishness, fill a position in a kingdom where all are equal?" (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 468.)

76:105

"vengeance of eternal fire"

See Everlasting fire in Appendix A, and the material for 19:6-12.

76:107

"I. . . have trodden the wine-press alone"

See Wine-press in Appendix A.

76:109

"as innumerable as the stars"

"There are millions and millions of kingdoms that the people have no conception of. . . . There are myriads of people pertaining to this earth who will come up and receive a glory according to their capacity." (Brigham Young, JD 6:347.)

76:110

"all shall bow the knee"

See Knee in Appendix A.

"The time is to come, so we read, when every knee will bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Lord, the Christ, to the glory of God the Father. [Phil. 2:9-11.] What a splendid prospect to have in view! What a grand goal to reach, to aid in bringing about redemption of the human family. Before that time can come, those that are wicked and corrupt and evil-minded, and who will not be obedient will have to reap the consequences of their own acts. . . . But the time is to come, away in the distant future, when the inhabitants of the earth, all who have dwelt upon it, with the exception of a few who are unredeemable, will be brought to bow the knee willingly; not by compulsion, not by coercion, not by constraint, but willingly bow the knee to King Immanuel and worship God, the true God, the Father, in Christ's holy name, and be willing, perfectly willing, to render obedience to his commandments. Of course, the condition in which they will dwell will be consequent upon their doings when they were in the flesh. They cannot all be in the same class; that is impossible." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, October 1913, p. 19.)

76:112

"where God and Christ dwell they cannot come"

"There are some people who have supposed that if we are quickened telestial bodies that eventually, throughout the ages of eternity, we will continue to progress until we will find our place in the celestial kingdom, but the scriptures and revelations of God have said that those who are quickened telestial bodies cannot come where God and Christ dwell, worlds without end." (George Albert Smith, CR, October 1945, p. 172.)

76:115

"not lawful for man to utter"

The term not lawful suggests they have been commanded by the Lord to say no more concerning that particular thing.

"Paul ascended into the third heaven, and he could understand the three principal rounds of Jacob's ladder—the telestial, the terrestrial, and the celestial glories or kingdoms, where Paul saw and heard things which were not lawful for him to utter. I could explain a hundred-fold more than I ever have of the glories of the kingdoms manifested to me in the vision, were I permitted, and were the people prepared to receive them. The Lord deals with this people as a tender parent with a child, communicating light and intelligence and knowledge of his sayings as they can bear it." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:402.)

76:116

"they are only to be seen and understood by the power of the Holy Spirit"

"Could we read and comprehend all that has been written from the days of Adam, on the relation of man to God and angels in a future state, we should know very little about it. Reading the experience of others, or the revelation given to them, can never give us a comprehensive view of our condition and true relation to God. Knowledge of these things can only be obtained by experience through the ordinances of God set forth for that purpose. Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that has ever been written on the subject." (Joseph Smith, HC 6:50.)
