Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 77

Background information on section 77

"After the return of the Prophet from Amhurst, he [Joseph Smith] resumed his translation of the Scriptures. About the first of March, while engaged in this work, questions arose in regard to the meaning of some of the figurative and symbolic writings of John in the book of Revelation. There are many things therein which the brethren did not understand, therefore the Prophet inquired of the Lord and received answer to his questions." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:291.)

"This Revelation is not a complete interpretation of the book. It is a key. A key is a very small part of the house. It unlocks the door through which an entrance may be gained, but after the key has been turned, the searcher for treasure must find it for himself. It is like entering a museum in which the students must find out for themselves what they desire to know. The sources of information are there." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 278.)

77:1

" What is the sea of glass?"

See Earth in Appendix A.

"While at dinner, I remarked to my family and friends present, that when the earth was sanctified and became like a sea of glass, it would be one great urim and thummim, and the Saints could look in it and see as they are seen." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:279.)

"This Earth will become a celestial body—be like a sea of glass, or like a Urim and Thummim; and when you wish to know anything, you can look in this Earth and see all the eternities of God. We shall make our homes here, and go on our missions as we do now." (Brigham Young, JD 8:200.)

"St. John, in this chapter of the Revelation, is taken up to heaven, where thrones were placed. There was the central Throne, and seated upon it One 'who was to look like a jasper and a sardine store.' There were twenty-four thrones occupied by Elders in white raiment. There were seven lamps burning symbolizing the 'seven spirits of God,' and there was a 'sea of glass like unto crystal.' In the Temple of Solomon there was an immense basin called 'a molten sea' (1 Kings 7:23). In the Temple in heaven, of which the temples on Earth are feeble representations, there is a glassy sea, calm, transparent, and solid, and here we are informed that this 'sea' is 'the Earth in its sanctified, immortal, and eternal state.' The 'sea' connected with the temples of God is a baptismal font. It represents the Earth. All who desire access to the Church of Jesus Christ must come through the baptismal font, and be buried with Christ." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 472.)

77:2-4

"What are. . . the four beasts?"

"The spirit of man is in the form of man, and the spirits of all creatures are in the likeness of their bodies. This was plainly taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

"By His almighty power He organized the earth, and all that it contains, from spirit and element, which exist co-eternally with Himself. He formed every plant that grows, and every animal that breathes, each after its own kind, spiritually and temporally—'that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal, and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual.'" (First Presidency, IE, January 1909, 13:75-81.)

"From this revelation (Sec. 77) we discover that every creature has a spirit, and that it existed in the spirit before it was on the earth; the spirit of every creature is in the form of its temporal, or mortal, body. Since this is true, and all forms of life partook of the effects of Adam's fall, therefore they are entitled to the resurrection and shall live again. 'And not one hair, neither mote, shall be lost, for it is the workmanship of mine hand,' said the Lord. (D&C 29:25.) Likewise the earth, which is a living body, must die, 'in like manner' as to all other mortal things, and then receive the resurrection. (Isa. 51:6.) The fact that the spirit of every animal, every fish, every fowl of the air, is in the likeness of its body, and that also it was created in the spirit in the beginning, is a contradiction of these unscientific theories which man has inflicted upon a fallen world." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:298.)

"The Revelator saw 'four beasts' or rather 'four living creatures,' 'in the midst of the throne, and round about it.' They were, possibly, supporting it, as the Cherubim in Ez. 1:4-22. Here we have an explanation of these living creatures. They represent the happiness enjoyed in that part of heaven which is called the Paradise of God, by men, by the larger animals, and by creeping things and fowls of the air. For the things on Earth are but a counterpart of things in heaven." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 472.)

77:3

"Are the four beasts limited to individual beasts, or do they represent classes or orders?"

"We are to understand that there will be beasts of various kinds, after the resurrection, in each of the kingdoms, telestial, terrestrial and celestial. It would be a very strange thing for any of the kingdoms to be devoid of animal and plant life. These kingdoms will be very beautiful in their immortal state. Even the telestial will surpass the comprehension of mortal man. They are the creations of the Almighty and therefore they will be perfect in their own sphere, for the Lord creates no imperfections and it is his purpose, according to the divine plan, to make all of his creatures as happy as it is possible for them to be under the conditions of their immortal states." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:298-99.)

"I suppose John saw beings there of a thousand forms, that had been saved from ten thousand times ten thousand earths like this,—strange beasts of which we have no conception: all might be seen in heaven. The grand secret was to show John what there was in heaven. John learned that God glorified Himself by saving all that His hands had made, whether beasts, fowls, fishes or men; and He will glorify Himself with them.

"Says one, 'I cannot believe in the salvation of beasts.' Any man who would tell you that this could not be, would tell you that the revelations are not true. John heard the words of the beasts giving glory to God, and understood them. God who made the beasts could understand every language spoken by them. The four beasts were four of the most noble animals that had filled the measure of their creation, and had been saved from other worlds, because they were perfect; they were like angels in their sphere. We are not told where they came from, and I do not know; but they were seen and heard by John praising and glorifying God." (Joseph Smith, HC 5:343-44.)

"He [God] made the tadpole and the ape, the lion and the elephant; but He did not make them in His own image, nor endow them with Godlike reason and intelligence. Nevertheless, the whole animal creation will be perfected and perpetuated in the Hereafter, each class in its 'distinct order or sphere,' and will enjoy 'eternal felicity.' That fact has been made plain in this dispensation." (First Presidency, IE, January 1909, 13:81.)

77:4

" What are we to understand by the eyes and wings, which the beasts had?"

"These beasts here represented are of course symbolical; so likewise is the description of their eyes and wings. The Lord has promised those who obtain the exaltation that they shall possess great wisdom, and knowledge and power shall be given unto them. The righteous in the kingdom of God, shall be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ as sons and daughters of God, and the fulness of his kingdom will be given to them. We also learn from this revelation and the word of the Lord in other revelations that in the eternities the animals and all living creatures shall be given knowledge, and enjoy happiness, each in its own sphere, in 'their eternal felicity.' These creatures will not then be the dumb animals that we suppose them to be while in this mortal life.

"The Prophet Joseph Smith said: 'I make this broad declaration, that whenever God gives a vision of an image, or beast, or figure of any kind, he always holds himself responsible to give a revelation or interpretation of the meaning thereof, otherwise we are not responsible or accountable for our belief in it. Don't be afraid of being damned for not knowing the meaning of a vision or figure, if God has not given a revelation or interpretation of the subject.' " (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:68-69.)

77:5

"What are we to understand by the. . . elders. . . who belonged to the seven churches?"

"It will be recalled that the forepart of John's Revelation contains a charge to the seven churches, or branches of the Church, in Asia Minor. [Rev. 1-3.] We may judge from what is written that these seven branches were all that were considered worthy of a standing in the Church at that time, indicating that the apostasy had at that day become extensive, and each of these branches received a deserved rebuke. The seven candlesticks and the seven stars also have reference to these seven branches of the Church and the seven angels spoken of had to do with these churches, or branches." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:69.)

77:6

"What are we to understand by the book which John saw?"

"By the seven thousand years of temporal existence is meant the time of the earth's duration from the fall of Adam to the end of time, which will come after the Millennium and 'a little season' which will follow. [D&C 29:22-23; 88:111.] The earth and all on it were in a spiritual condition before the fall, for mortality had not come bringing temporal conditions. We are now living in the second period of the earth's history, which is referred to as being a telestial condition. In other words, a condition where wickedness and all the vicissitudes of mortality endure." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:64.)

77:7

"What are we to understand by the seven seals?"

"The number seven denotes completeness. The plans of God are hidden completely, until they are revealed by Himself. So these seven seals signify the seven thousand years of temporal existence.

"Some ancient books consisted of parchment rolled round a piece of wood. This book contained seven skins, rolled upon one another. When the first seal was broken, the first skin was unrolled, and was found to contain a hieroglyphic painting. . . . Each skin contained some drawing. Ancient books of the East were often beautifully illustrated in this manner." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 474.)

77:8

" What are we to understand by the four angels?"

"These angels seem to fit the description of the angels spoken of in the parable of the wheat and the tares (Matt. 13:24-43 and D&C 86:17), who pled with the Lord that they might go forth to reap down the field. They were told to let the wheat and the tares grow together to the time of the end of the harvest, which is the end of the world. (Matt. 13:38-39)

"These angels have been given power over the four parts of the earth and they have the power of committing the everlasting Gospel to the peoples of the earth. The fulness of the Gospel was not restored by any one messenger sent from the presence of the Lord. All the ancient prophets who held keys and came and restored them, had a hand in this great work of restoration. There are, we learn from this revelation, four angels unto whom the power has been given, to shut up the heavens, to open them and with power unto life and also death and destruction. These are now at work in the earth on their sacred mission." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:70-71.)

77:9

"What are we to understand by the angel ascending from the east?"

See Elias in Appendix A.

"The restoration of the Gospel did not come through just one messenger, but there are several who came and bestowed their keys of authority and power. The name Elias, is a title. This we have been taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith. (Teachings, p. 335.) It is not possible, therefore, since so many ancient prophets had a hand in the restoration, that in speaking of the Elias who was to come and restore all things, do we not have a composite picture of several Eliases, rather than one single individual? The angel with the seal directs the four angels holding the destiny of the world in their hands, not to hurt the earth until the servants of the Lord have been sealed. This could not be accomplished until the Gospel was restored and proclaimed to the nations of the earth." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:71.)

77:10

"What time are the things. . . to be accomplished?"

See D&C 88:92-116 for more detail concerning this time.

"In the period preceding the millennium, these things are to be accomplished. The seals of the seven periods of time cannot be opened by any other than the Son of God—'the Lamb slain from the foundation of the earth.' He alone has the power to open this book and reveal its secrets concerning the history of the earth by each thousand years, since time began." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:302.)

77:11

"What are we to understand by sealing the one hundred and forty-four thousand?"

"It is not only necessary that you should be baptized for your dead, but you will have to go through all the ordinances for them, the same as you have gone through to save yourselves. There will be 144,000 saviors on Mount Zion, and with them an innumerable host that no man can number." (Joseph Smith, HC 6:365.)

"The ten tribes will have to come forth and come to this land, to be crowned with glory in the midst of Zion by the hands of the servants of God, even the Children of Ephraim; and twelve thousand High Priests will be elected from each of these ten tribes, as well as from the scattered tribes, and sealed in their foreheads, and will be ordained and receive power to gather out of all nations, kindreds, tongues and people as many as will come unto the general assemblage of the Church of the first-born. Will not that be a great work? Imagine one hundred and forty-four thousand High Priests going forth among the nations, and gathering out as many as will come to the Church of the first-born. All that will be done, probably, in the morning of the seventh thousand years. The work is of great magnitude, Latter-day Saints, and we are living almost upon the eve of it." (Orson Pratt, JD 16:325-26.)

"This certainly is a great honor to be one of the 144 thousand who are especially called by the power of 'the angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth,' to bring souls unto Christ. John the Apostle had the great desire to bring souls to Christ. [Sec. 7.] The three Nephite Disciples likewise sought this great honor and it was granted to them. [3 Nephi 28.] It is one of the noblest desires that a man can have. It will be a wonderful blessing to those who are called in this great group." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:71-72.)

77:12

"What are we to understand by the sounding of the trumpets?"

"In this instruction the Lord sets days against thousand years, as days, in speaking of the creation and the continuance of the earth during its mortal existence. At the close of the sixth thousand years and at the opening of the seventh, since the fall, the earth and all that remain upon its face will be changed from the telestial condition of wickedness to the terrestrial condition of peace and order. This is the day when the earth 'will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory,' as declared in the Tenth Article of Faith.

We are now in the great day of restoration of all things, and the renewal of the earth is the bringing of it back to a comparable condition to that which existed before the fall." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:293.)

"The symbolism of the Sabbath, and the symbolism of other days as well, is plainly indicated in the writings of Joseph Smith. In one place he says—or the Lord says through him: 'All things have their likeness, and are made to bear record of me.' (Moses 6:63.) We need not be surprised, therefore, to find among the Prophet's teachings this—I quote now from his Key to the Apocalypse: [Sec. 77:6, 12, quoted.]

"The 'days' here referred to were not ordinary days of twenty-four hours each, based upon earth's diurnal revolutions. He who 'made the world' before placing man upon it, had not then appointed unto Adam his reckoning. (Abr. 5:13.) They were not man's days, but God's days, each having a duration of a thousand years. . . .

"According to received chronology—admittedly imperfect, yet approximately correct—four thousand years, or four of the seven great days given to this planet as the period of its 'temporal existence,' had passed before Christ was crucified; while nearly two thousand years have gone by since. Consequently, Earth's long week is now drawing to a close, and we stand at the present moment in the Saturday Evening of Time, at or near the end of the sixth day of human history. Is it not a time for thought, a season for solemn meditation? Morning will break upon the millennium, the thousand years of peace, the Sabbath of the World!" (Orson F. Whitney, SNT, pp. 10-12.)

77:13

"When are the things to be accomplished, which are written in the 9th chapter of Revelation?"

"These terrible events pictured in the ninth chapter of Revelation are now being fulfilled. Part of this we have witnessed, the rest will shortly come to pass. This is, and will be, in the nature of the cleansing process to prepare the earth and its inhabitants, those who will be fortunate enough to remain, for the coming of our Savior when he shall commence his reign for a thousand years upon the earth. The reading of this chapter with the knowledge that the time of its fulfillment is at hand, should cause all men some thoughtful sober thinking." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:72.)

77:14

"What are we to understand by the little book which was eaten by John?"

"John as an Elias with power of restoration is yet to come. The little book is symbolical of his great mission in preparing Israel for its return in these last days. At the conference of the Church held in June 1831, the Prophet Joseph Smith said 'that John the Revelator was then among the ten tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:72.)

"This angel had a 'little book' open, and he cried out his message with a loud voice, declaring solemnly that there would be 'time no longer,'—no more delay—but that when the seventh angel begins to sound, the mystery of God—God's plan of salvation—will be completed. This is a vision of the restoration of the Church through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph, who came as a messenger from God and declared that the Church was to be restored, preparatory to the second coming of Christ. The coming forth of the 'little book' was the beginning of a new prophetic era, for John was told (Rev. 10:11): 'Thou must prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings.' The establishment of the Church in our day is foretold in this chapter of the Revelation as clearly as the birth of Christ is predicted in Isaiah 9:6, 7." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 477.)

77:15

"What is to be understood by the two witnesses, in the eleventh chapter of Revelation?"

Parley P. Pratt discusses this question very thoroughly in his booklet, A Voice of Warning.

"John, in his 11th chapter of Revelation, gives us many more particulars concerning this same event [the appearance of Jesus Christ to the Jews]. He informs us that, after the city and temple are rebuilt by the Jews, the Gentiles will tread it under foot forty and two months, during which time there will be two Prophets continually prophesying and working mighty miracles. And it seems that the Gentile army shall be hindered from utterly destroying and overthrowing the city, while these two Prophets continue. But, after a struggle of three years and a half, they at length succeed in destroying these two Prophets, and then overrunning much of the city, they send gifts to each other because of the death of the two Prophets, and in the meantime will now allow their dead bodies to be put in graves, but suffer them to lie in the streets of Jerusalem three days and a half, during which the armies of the Gentiles, consisting of many kindreds, tongues and nations, passing through the city, plundering the Jews, see their dead bodies lying in the street. But after three days and a half, on a sudden, the spirit of life from God enters them, and they will arise and stand upon their feet, and great fear will fall upon them that see them. And then they shall hear a voice from heaven saying, 'Come up hither,' and they will ascend up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beholding them. And having described all these things, then comes the shaking, spoken of by Ezekiel [Ezek. 38:18-20], and the rending of the Mount of Olives, spoken of by Zechariah. [Zech. 14:4-5.] John says, 'The same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand.' [Rev. 11:13.] And then one of the next scenes that follows is the sound of voices saying, 'The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign forever and ever.' [Rev. 11:15.]" (Parley P. Pratt, VW, pp. 40-42.)
