Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 81

Background information on section 81

See first part of background information for section 78.

81:1-7

Frederick G. Williams called as a counselor in the First Presidency

See First Presidency in Appendix A. For biographical information on Frederick G. Williams, see material following his name in Appendix B.

"In March, 1832, the Lord revealed that the First Presidency of the Church should be organized. He called by revelation Elder Frederick G. Williams to be a counselor in that body of Priesthood with Sidney Rigdon as the other counselor to Joseph Smith. The Lord said to him: [D&C 81:1-2, quoted.]

"From the time when this presidency was organized these four men were to hold these keys, for it was revealed that this authority is vested in the First Presidency of the Church. The President of the Church holds the supreme authority. They are to aid him, to sit in counsel with him and advise, but he it is, who holds the right to decision and the right of revelation for the Priesthood and for the Church. It was not until March 18, 1833, that the First Presidency was organized, although Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams had been acting in the capacity of counselors to the Prophet Joseph Smith for several months, or shortly after the call of Frederick G. Williams by revelation in March 1832." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:80.)

81:2

"the keys of the kingdom "

See Keys of priesthood in Appendix A.

"These same keys of the kingdom were held by Peter, James, and John, who served as the First Presidency of the Church in the dispensation of the Meridian of Time. Peter held the presiding power. [Matt. 16:13-19 quoted.] However, to Peter was the power of the keys of the kingdom given, and he, associated with the other members of the twelve, was to exercise them, he holding the presiding and directing power." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:81.)

81:3

Pray "always, vocally and in thy heart, in public and in private"

See Prayer in Appendix A.

81:6

"eternal life"

See same title in Appendix A.

81:7

"Alpha and Omega"

See same title in Appendix A.
