Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 82

Background information on section 82

"On the 27th, I called a general council of the Church [Jackson county, Missouri], and was acknowledged as the President of the High Priesthood, according to a previous ordination at a conference of High Priests, Elders and members, held at Amherst, Ohio, on the 25th of January, 1832. The right hand of fellowship was given to me by the Bishop, Edward Partridge, in behalf of the Church. The scene was solemn, impressive and delightful. During the intermission, a difficulty or hardness which had existed between Bishop Partridge and Elder [Sidney] Rigdon, was amicably settled, and when we came together in the afternoon, all hearts seemed to rejoice and I received the following: [Section 82 follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:267.)

"The first of April 1832 the Prophet Joseph Smith with Newel K. Whitney and Jesse Gause, left for Missouri to fulfill the provisions of the revelation given in March (Sec. 78) in relation to the regulation and establishment of the storehouse for the benefit of the poor, and the consecration of properties in that land. . . .

"This revelation is one showing the 'order of Enoch' as exercised in the Church in Enoch's day." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:318-19.)

82:2

Those in Zion are expected to "refrain from sin"

"Repeatedly the Lord had warned the members of the Church, and especially those who had moved, or intended to move, to Zion, that his laws as given to Enoch, and as he expected them to be obeyed, were very exacting. He was starting them out with a perfect law—the law of consecration—and had notified them that on this basis only could Zion be built. There was to be no compromise with sin, and perfect unity, unselfish devotion, humility and obedience were the principles required of them, if they were to receive the blessings. Notwithstanding all the counsel that had been given by revelation, there was some deviation from these sacred principles. Some jealousies and selfishness were manifest. It was a difficult task for some to forsake living, as the Lord has said on a previous occasion, 'after the manner of men,' that is worldly men, those who had not received the truth. While the Lord was asking them to consecrate their properties, yet he was offering them far more in return than they were able to give." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:319.)

82:3-4

"unto whom much is given much is required"

"Jesus made it plain (Matt. 25:14-39) that each will be required to give an accounting only for the talents or gifts he has received: 'for unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required.' (See Luke 12:48.) No man can say that he has received nothing. Even though it be but one talent, he will be expected to develop that talent so that when his Lord comes, he will be able to return it with profit. . . . Can you imagine any greater justification for 'weeping and gnashing of teeth,' than to learn from your Lord, when called to give an accounting for your life here upon the earth, that while you had been faithful in your spirit existence and had kept your first estate, you had failed in your second estate, and that when you were put to the test to see if you would do all things whatsoever the Lord your God had commanded you, that you had failed? Remember, the Lord said of such: 'Cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness.' " (LeGrand Richards, MWW, pp. 259-60.)

82:4

"inasmuch as ye keep not my sayings . . . ye become transgressors"

"So it is; it always has been, and it always will be so: when light comes, if the people reject that light, it will condemn them, and will add to their sorrow and affliction." (Brigham Young, JD 6:288.)

82:5

"darkness reigneth"

See Darkness in Appendix A.

" 'Darkness' here, as in John 1:5, means the condition of the world outside divine revelation. It refers to both spiritual and moral error. Revelation from God gives light, but when divine revelation is rejected, the adversary spreads his dominion among the children of men." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 490.)

82:6

"none doeth good . . . all have gone out of the way"

"Once again there comes the warning:[D&C 82:5-6, quoted.] There are few sins more worthy of condemnation and more contemptible in the sight of our heavenly Father, than the sin of self-righteousness. He has repeatedly said that he requires of us 'a broken heart and a contrite spirit.' [D&C 20:37; 59:8.] There are individuals who, in their own opinions of themselves, never sin. The missionaries find the hardest class of people with whom to deal in the preaching of the Gospel, is that class who base their faith on belief only, and claim to be already 'saved.' Here the Lord informs us that all have sinned. This reminds us of the words of the Lord to the person who came to the Master and said: 'Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?' The Lord answered: 'Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, God.' [Matt. 19:16-17.] In the matter of perfection, this is true; man is imperfect and does transgress, therefore we all need humility, a contrite spirit, and a willingness to receive counsel and if need be correction." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:86-87.)

82:7

"unto that soul who sinneth shall the former sins return"

"It is present salvation and the present influence of the Holy Ghost that we need every day to keep us on saving ground. When an individual refuses to comply with the further requirements of heaven, then the sins he had formerly committed return upon his head [Ezek. 3:20]; his former righteousness departs from him, and is not accounted to him for righteousness: but if he had continued in righteousness and obedience to the requirements of heaven, he is saved all the time through baptism, the laying on of hands, and obeying the commandments of the Lord and all that is required of him by the heavens—the living oracles." (Brigham Young, JD 8:124.)

"Whatever the past may have been in our individual lives, it is gone. The future lies ahead, and we must face it with resolution. There is always a point from which we can begin. Even though we may have been faithful in the past, if we turn away, that faithfulness will profit us nothing. 'No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.' [Luke 9:62.]" (Howard W. Hunter, CR, April 1961, p. 18.)

82:10

"I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise"

"'Mormonism' has taught me that God holds Himself accountable to law even as He expects us to do. He has set us the example in obedience to law. I know that to say this would have been heresy a few decades ago. But we have the divine word for it: [Sec. 82:10, quoted.] He operates by law and not by arbitrariness or caprice." (James E. Talmage, CR, April 1930, p. 96.)

"In his mercy and love for mankind, the Lord offers many covenants that will, if obeyed, bring them exaltation. Many, if not all, of these covenants are absolutely required of those who receive them. When the covenants are made that will make us sons and daughters of God, and bestow upon us the fulness of the Father's kingdom, we cannot ignore them; we cannot treat them with contempt, but we must be obedient to them in every detail, else how are we worthy of the blessings? It seems very strange that there are those who think that notwithstanding their unfaithfulness and rejection of these covenants, it is possible for them to receive them by proxy after they are dead, when they treated them with contempt and rejected them when they were living. We should be deeply impressed with this saying and realize that we are not entitled to the blessings and that the Lord is not bound to give them when we have rejected them." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:320.)

82:11-13

For an explanation of the unusual names and titles, see background information for section 78.

82:14

"Zion must increase . . .; her borders must be enlarged; her stakes must be strengthened"

"Zion, as used here, undoubtedly had reference to the Church. At that time there was but a small body of Church members just beginning to emerge as an organization, after having experienced harsh treatment from enemies outside the Church, who had then been directed to gather together in Jackson County, Missouri, which the Lord had designated as the 'land of Zion.' As though to impress upon these early struggling members their destiny in the world, the Lord in another revelation told them this: 'Therefore, verily, thus saith the Lord, let Zion rejoice, for this is Zion—THE PURE IN HEART; therefore, let Zion rejoice, while all the wicked shall mourn.' (D&C 97:21.)

"To be worthy of such a sacred designation as Zion, the Church must think of itself as a bride adorned for her husband, as John the Revelator recorded when he saw in vision the Holy City where the righteous dwelled, adorned as a bride for the Lamb of God as her husband. Here is portrayed the relationship the Lord desires in his people in order to be acceptable to our Lord and Master even as a wife would adorn herself in beautiful garments for her husband." (Harold B. Lee, Ensign, July 1973, p. 3.)

"These units [stakes] so organized are gathered together . . . for a defense against the enemies of the Lord's work, both the seen and the unseen. The apostle Paul said with reference to these enemies about which we should be concerned:

"'For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.' (Eph. 6:12.)

"These organizations were to be as . . . a 'refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth.' (D&C 115:6.). . .

"I believe there has never been a time since the creation that the Lord has left the dominion of the devil to destroy his work without his power being manifest in the midst of the righteous to save the works of righteousness from being completely overthrown. . . . Today we are witnessing the demonstration of the Lord's hand even in the midst of his saints, the members of the Church. Never in this dispensation, and perhaps never before in any single period, has there been such a feeling of urgency among the members of this church as today. Her boundaries are being enlarged, her stakes are being strengthened." (Harold B. Lee, Ensign, July 1973, p. 4)

82:15-24

The order of Enoch

See Enoch and United Order in Appendix A.

82:17

"you are to be equal"

See material for 78:5-7.

82:18

"church of the living God"

See Church and Living God in Appendix A.

82:19

"Every man seeking the interest of his neighbor"

"It is verily true that before we can enter into the celestial kingdom we will have to learn how to live in unity with the love of our fellows at heart, desiring their good as well as our own, and not preferring ourselves before them. Here the Lord gave to the Church the plan and the opportunity to prepare themselves by obedience to celestial law. They failed, and the privilege to practice this law of consecration had to be postponed because we were not able to esteem our neighbor as ourselves." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:322.)

82:21

"the soul that sins against this covenant"

"The breaking of any covenant that our Father in heaven makes with us, is a dreadful thing. We make a covenant in the waters of baptism. Many have broken it, and hence lose the promised blessings. All through our lives we are called to enter into covenants and many members of the Church seemingly fail to realize the seriousness of a violation or to understand that punishment must inevitably follow. Solemn covenants are taken by members of the Church in the Temples. These covenants are to prepare us for an exaltation. Yet there are many who receive them who utterly fail to heed them, but presumably, they think the Lord has a short memory, or that he is so extremely merciful that he will break his promises and the punishment mentioned for the violation will not be inflicted. In this manner many deceive themselves." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:322-23.)

82:21

"buffetings of Satan"

See Satan in Appendix A.

82:22

"make unto yourselves friends with the mammon of unrighteousness"

"The commandment of the Lord that the Saints should make themselves 'friends with the mammon of unrighteousness,' seems to be a hard saying when not properly understood. It is not intended that in making friends of the 'mammon of unrighteousness' that the brethren were to partake with them in their sins; to receive them to their bosoms, intermarry with them and otherwise come down to their level. They were to so live that peace with their enemies might be assured. They were to treat them kindly, be friendly with them as far as correct and virtuous principles would permit, but never to swear with them or drink or carouse with them. If they could allay prejudice and show a willingness to trade with and show a kindly spirit, it might help to turn them away from their bitterness. Judgment was to be left with the Lord." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:89.)
