Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 83

Background information on section 83

"On the 27th [April 1832] we transacted considerable business for the salvation of the Saints, who were settling among a ferocious set of mobbers, like lambs among wolves. It was my endeavor to so organize the Church, that the brethren might eventually be independent of every incumbrance beneath the celestial kingdom, by bonds and covenants of mutual friendship, and mutual love.

"On the 28th and 29th, I visited the brethren above Big Blue river, in Kaw township [Missouri], a few miles west of Independence, and received a welcome only known by brethren and sisters united as one in the same faith, and by the same baptism, and supported by the same Lord. The Colesville branch, in particular, rejoiced as the ancient Saints did with Paul. ['It should be remembered that those Colesville Saints were among the first to receive the Gospel under the teachings of the Prophet, and hence his heart was naturally tender towards them, and this visit was doubtless especially delightful both to the Saints and to the Prophet.'] It is good to rejoice with the people of God. On the 30th I returned to Independence, and again sat in council with the brethren, and received the following: [Section 83, quoted.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:269.)

83:1-6

"Laws of the Church concerning widows and orphans"

"Here is one of the great purposes for which the law of tithing is instituted in the Church. It is intended that the widows shall be looked after when they are in need, and that the fatherless and the orphans shall be provided for from the funds of the Church; that they shall be clothed and fed, and shall have opportunity for education, the same as other children who have parents to look after them. When a child is fatherless and motherless the Church becomes the parent of that child, and it is obligatory upon the Church to take care of it, and to see that it has opportunities equal with the other children in the Church. This is a great responsibility. Have we ever seen the day since the Church was organized when we could carry out the purpose of the Lord fully and to our heart's content? We have not, because we have never had the means to do it with. But if men will obey the laws of God so that there shall be abundance in the storehouse of the Lord, we will have wherewith to feed and clothe the poor and the orphan and to look after those who are in need to the Church." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, October 1899, pp. 39-40.)
