Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 84

Background information on section 84

"As soon as I could arrange my affairs, I recommenced the translation of the Scriptures, and thus I spent most of the summer. In July, we received the first number of 'The Evening and Morning Star,' which was a joyous treat to the Saints. Delightful indeed, was it to contemplate that the little band of brethren had become so large, and grown so strong, in so short a time as to be able to issue a paper of their own, which contained not only some of the revelations, but other information also,—which would gratify and enlighten the humble inquirer after truth. . . .

"The Elders during the month of September began to return from their missions to the Eastern States, and present the histories of their several stewardships in the Lord's vineyard; and while together in these seasons of joy, I inquired of the Lord, and received on the 22nd and 23rd of September, the following revelation on Priesthood: [Section 84, follows.]" (Joseph Smith, HC 1:273.)

84:2-3

Location of the New Jerusalem

See New Jerusalem in Appendix A.

84:4

"which temple shall be reared in this generation"

See Generation in Appendix A.

"This statement has been a stumbling block to some and there have been various interpretations of the meaning of a generation. It is held by some that a generation is one hundred years; by others that it is one hundred and twenty years; by others that a generation as expressed in this and other scriptures has reference to a period of time which is indefinite. The Savior said: 'An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign.' This did not have reference to a period of years, but to a period of wickedness. A generation may mean the time of this present dispensation. Moreover, the statement is qualified in this revelation in the above quotation." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:337.)

"We understand that certain things predicted through the Prophet Joseph Smith are to take place before this generation shall pass away, and the Lord will see to it that the generation in which those things were predicted will not all pass away until all shall be fulfilled, but there is no fixed period for a generation, no set time in the revelations of God, no year or date given when these things shall take place, and it is folly for anybody to put a date to it." (Charles W. Penrose, CR, April 1918, p. 20.)

84:5

"an house shall be built"

"There [New Jerusalem] . . . we expect to build a temple different from all other temples in some respects. It will be built much larger, . . . than this Tabernacle . . . according to the revelation God gave to us forty years ago in regard to that temple. But you may ask in what form will it be built? Will it be built in one large room, like this Tabernacle? No; there will be 24 different compartments in the temple that will be built in Jackson County. The names of these compartments were given to us some 45 or 46 years ago; the names we still have, and when we build these 24 rooms, in a circular form and arched over the centre, we shall give the names to all these different compartments just as the Lord specified through Joseph Smith. . . . Perhaps you may ask for what purpose these 24 compartments are built. I answer not to assemble the outside world in, nor to assemble the Saints all in one place, but these buildings will be built with a special view to the different orders, or in other words the different quorums or councils of the two Priesthoods that God has ordained on the earth. That is the object of having 24 rooms so that each of these different quorums, whether they be High Priests or Seventies, or Elders, or Bishops, or lesser Priesthood, or Teachers or Deacons, or Patriarchs, or Apostles, or High Councils, or whatever may be the duties that are assigned to them, they will have rooms in the temple of the Most High God, adapted, set apart, constructed, and dedicated for this special purpose. . . . But will there be any other buildings excepting those 24 rooms that are all joined together in a circular form and arched over the center—are there any other rooms that will be built—detached from the temple? Yes. There will be tabernacles, there will be meeting houses for the assembling of the people on the Sabbath day." (Orson Pratt, JD 25:24-25.)

84:5

"a cloud shall rest upon it"

"The Lord manifested Himself in ancient Israel in a cloud, shaped as a pillar, which became luminous at night. It guided the people on the journey to Canaan. It stood at the entrance to the Sanctuary, and in it God spoke to Moses. It rested on the Sanctuary and filled it, when that sacred tent was set up. It was the visible sign of God's guiding and protecting care over His people." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 497 )

84:6

"under the hand of. . . Jethro"

"The descent of this authority, or divine power, from Adam to Moses is here given in the Lord's own words to Joseph Smith. Moses received it from Jethro, a priest of the house of Midian. The Midianites were descendants of Abraham, through the children of Keturah, wife of Abraham, therefore the Midianites, who were neighbors to the Israelites in Palestine, were related to the Israelites, and were Hebrews. As descendants of Abraham they were entitled through their faithfulness to his blessings (see Abr. 2:9-11), and in the days of Moses and preceding them, in Midian the Priesthood was found." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:338.)

"Among the scholars who are uninspired, there is doubt as to who Jethro was. In Exodus 3:1, he is called the father-in-law of Moses, but these scholars say the name may mean any male relative by marriage. In Exodus 2:18, Reuel, or Raguel, appears as the name of the father-in-law of Moses. Then it is maintained that the transaction related of Jethro in Exodus 18:12-27, is told of Hobab in Numbers 10:29. These may have been names given to Jethro by different scribes, or in different countries. We know, however, by the information given in this revelation that Jethro was the father-in-law of Moses and that Moses received the Priesthood from him. This has been a mystery to some, who have thought that only the children of Israel were blessed with the authority of Priesthood. We know that the Midianites were descendants of Abraham who had sons by his wife Keturah. . . . Evidently among the 'gifts' which Abraham gave his other sons was the authority of the Priesthood. We know that the 'Midianites' held it." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 500.)

84:16

"by the hand of. . . Adam"

"The Lord conferred the Holy Priesthood upon Adam and said unto him: 'Now this same Priesthood which was in the beginning, shall be in the end of the world also.' (Moses 6:7)." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:337-38.)

"The Priesthood was first given to Adam; he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the creation, before the world was formed, as in Genesis 1:26-28. He had dominion given him over every living creature. He is Michael, the archangel, spoken of in the Scriptures. Then to Noah who is Gabriel; he stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God to this office, and was the father of all living in his day, and to him was given the dominion. These men held keys first on earth, and then in heaven.

"The Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years. The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the gospel is sent. When they are revealed from heaven, it is by Adam's authority." (Joseph Smith, HC 3:385-86.)

84:18, 26-30

"The lesser Aaronic Priesthood"

See Aaronic Priesthood in Appendix A.

84:18-25, 29

The greater or Melchizedek Priesthood

See Melchizedek Priesthood in Appendix A.

84:19

"this greater priesthood . . . holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom"

See Mysteries in Appendix A.

"Thus, we see, that it is impossible for men to obtain the knowledge of the mysteries of the kingdom or the knowledge of God, without the authority of the Priesthood. Secular learning, the study of the sciences, arts and history, will not reveal these vital truths to man. It is the Holy Priesthood that unlocks the door to heaven and reveals to man the mysteries of the Kingdom of God. It is this Divine Authority which makes known the knowledge of God! Is there any wonder that the world today is groping in gross darkness concerning God and the things of his kingdom? We should also remember that these great truths are not made known even to members of the Church unless they place their lives in harmony with the law on which these blessings are predicated. (D&C 130:20-21.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:338.)

84:19

"this greater priesthood . . . holdeth the key . . . of the knowledge of God"

"The Lord—speaking of the priesthood, and the power of the priesthood, and the ordinances of the Church which we received through the priesthood—had this to say: [D&C 84:19, quoted.]

"So if there is no priesthood, there is no knowledge of God. And that is why the world is in darkness today, because they have no priesthood. They have lost the knowledge of God. And so they have been teaching all manner of tradition, all manner of false doctrine, all manner of man-made philosophy in relation to God and the principles of truth pertaining to the salvation of men. . . .

"When we read things of this nature, it ought to make every man among us who holds the priesthood rejoice to think that we have the great authority by which we may know God. Not only the men holding the priesthood know that great truth, but because of that priesthood and the ordinances thereof, every member of the Church, men and women alike, may know God." (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 3:142-43.)

84:20

"the power of godliness"

"What power, then, what mysterious power is it that had led and guided them [Latter-day Saints] and that still leads and guides them and holds them together as they are held? Let me tell you what it is. I will read from the book of Doctrine and Covenants, Section 84: [vs. 19-21, quoted.]

"That is what holds these people together—the power of the priesthood. And in the administration of it we have seen and do see the power of godliness; not a form of godliness, mind you, but the power of godliness. Paul said that in the latter days men would be 'having a form of godliness but denying the power thereof' [2 Tim. 3:5]; but what I refer to is the power of godliness. . . . In all the leadership of the priesthood you see that same power of godliness. . . . It is the power of godliness, of godly lives. It is the power of godly men and godly women, through the ordinances of the priesthood made manifest; and everyone shares in it." (Charles W. Nibley, CR, April 1927, pp. 26-27.)

84:24

"into his rest . . . the fulness of his glory"

"What is meant by that rest? It means fulness of everything; to enjoy a fulness of love, a fulness of light, a fulness of intelligence, a fulness of power; to sit down with Christ upon His throne, as He has overcome and sits upon the throne of the Father—the promise that was given unto the Israel of God—the promise that was given to the sons of the Most High." (George Teasdale, CR, April 1899, p. 32.)

84:25

The Lord "took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also"

"The Lord offered to Israel in the days of Moses the fulness of the Gospel with the Higher Priesthood and its keys, intending to give unto them the blessings of exaltation and make of them a royal Priesthood. When Moses went up into the sacred Mount Horeb and received the writings which the Lord made with his own finger, he received the fulness of the Gospel with its ordinances and covenants, but when Moses returned after his absence of forty days and found the Israelites reveling in idolatry, he broke the tablets. Later the Lord gave unto him other tablets but changed some of the commandments, and took away the Higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, and gave to the people the carnal law." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:104.)

84:31

"the sons of Aaron shall offer an acceptable offering"

See material for D&C 13.

84:31-34

"sons of Moses . . . and Aaron"

"Who are the sons of Aaron and Levi today? They are, by virtue of the blessings of the Almighty, those who are ordained by those who hold the authority to officiate in the offices of the priesthood. It is written that those so ordained become the sons of Moses and of Aaron." (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 3:93.)

" 'Sons of Moses,' end 'sons of Aaron' do not refer to their literal descendants only, for all who are faithful and obtain these Priesthoods, and magnify their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit and become the 'sons' of Moses and of Aaron, and the seed of Abraham, as well as the Church and Kingdom, and the elect of God (v. 34). Paul expresses this thought as follows, 'Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham.' (Gal. 3:7)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 504.)

84:33

"faithful . . . are sanctified . . . unto the renewing of their bodies"

"When the Temple [in New Jerusalem] is built the sons of the two Priesthoods, that is, those who are ordained to the Priesthood of Melchizedek, that Priesthood which is after the order of the Son of God, with all its appendages; and those who have been ordained to the Priesthood of Aaron with all its appendages, the former called the sons of Moses, the latter the sons of Aaron, will enter into that Temple . . . and all of them who are pure in heart will behold the face of the Lord . . . for he will suddenly come to his Temple. . . . In doing this, he will purify not only the minds of the Priesthood in that Temple, but he will purify their bodies until they shall be quickened, renewed and strengthened, and they will be partially changed, not to immortality, but changed in part that they can be filled with the power of God, and they can stand in the presence of Jesus, and behold his face in the midst of that Temple.

"This will prepare them for further ministrations among the nations of the earth, it will prepare them to go forth in the days of tribulation and vengeance upon the nations of the wicked, when God will smite them with pestilence, plague and earthquake, such as former generations never knew. [D&C 29:14-21; 45:28-42; Rev. 9.]. . .

"When they are prepared, when they have received a renewal of their bodies in the Lord's Temple, and have been filled with the Holy Ghost and purified as gold and silver in a furnace of fire, then they will be prepared to stand before the nations of the earth and preach glad tidings of salvation in the midst of judgments that are to come like a whirlwind upon the wicked." (Orson Pratt, JD 15:365-66.)

84:33

"magnifying their calling"

"Sometimes we speak loosely of magnifying our priesthood, but what the revelations speak of is magnifying our callings in the priesthood, as elders, seventies, high priests, patriarchs, and apostles." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, October 1970, p. 91.)

"The Prophet Joseph was often asked, 'Brother Joseph, what do you mean by magnifying a calling?'

"Joseph replied: 'What does it mean to magnify a calling? It means to build it up in dignity and importance, to make it honorable and commendable in the eyes of all men, to enlarge and strengthen it, to let the light of heaven shine through it to the view of other men. And how does one magnify a calling? Simply by performing the service that pertains to it.' " (Thomas S. Monson, British Area CR, August 1971, p. 145.)

"In the words 'magnifying their calling,' far more seems to be implied than the mere attending of priesthood meetings, administering to the sacrament and the sick, and serving in Church work. Faithfulness to warrant the reception of the priesthood is a condition that perhaps all men do not meet. And the magnifying of their calling seems to imply a totalness which few, if any, men reach in mortality. Perfection of body and spirit seems to be included here." (Spencer W. Kimball, MF, p. 123.)

84:38

"he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom "

"The Latter-day Saints are promised, if they are faithful, that they shall receive the fullness, as Jesus received it; and Jesus received it as the Father received it. In the words of Paul, they become heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. [See Romans 8:16-17.] There is nothing that the Savior has attained unto that God's faithful children are not promised. They are promised the same blessings, the same power, the same authority, the same gifts, the same graces. I know that we are apt to think that heaven is a sort of spiritual place. It is spiritual; but God our Eternal Father is a being of power. He controls the earth and the inhabitants thereof; He controls the elements of the earth; and we are promised that we shall be sharers with Him. He will give us an equal interest in all this power and authority. . . .

"The promise is that all things that He hath shall be given unto us. [See D&C 84:38.] We will be His heirs; we will be (if I may use the term without irreverence) co-partners with Him in all this power and authority. I do not know whether all the Latter-day Saints grasp this idea. It is important that we should." (George Q. Cannon, CR, April 1899, p. 65.)

84:39-42

"the oath and covenant which belongeth to the priesthood "

See Oath and covenant of the priesthood in Appendix A.

"President [Joseph Fielding] Smith frequently says in prayer and in counsel that he prays for and hopes that we will be true and faithful to every covenant and responsibility that rests upon us. That the obligations of 'the oath and covenant which belongeth to the priesthood' rest upon each of us there is no doubt, because the Lord says that 'all those who receive the priesthood, receive this oath and covenant of my Father, which he cannot break, neither can it be moved.' (D&C 84:40.)

"So, we have entered into a covenant with the Lord in which he has promised us eternal life, if we keep our part of the covenant, which is, to magnify our callings in the priesthood.

"The revelation says that the Lord cannot break his part of the oath and covenant. But we can break our part of it, and many priesthood bearers do so. Of them the revelation says:

" 'But whoso breaketh this covenant after he hath received it, and altogether turneth therefrom, shall not have forgiveness of sins in this world nor in the world to comet' (vs. 41.)

"Now, I do not think this means that all who fail to magnify their callings in the priesthood will have committed the unpardonable sin, but I do think that priesthood bearers who have entered into the covenants that we enter into—in the waters of baptism, in connection with the law of tithing, the Word of Wisdom, and the many other covenants we make—and then refuse to live up to these covenants will stand in jeopardy of losing the promise of eternal life." (Marion G. Romney, Ensign, July 1972, p. 99.)

84:44-47

"the word of the Lord is truth. . . light. . . Spirit. . . "

See Truth, Light, and Holy Ghost in Appendix A.

84:51

"whoso cometh not unto me is under the bondage of sin"

See Sin and Darkness in Appendix A.

84:57

"repent and remember. . . the Book of Mormon"

"Now, we have not been using the Book of Mormon as we should. Our homes are not as strong unless we are using it to bring our children to Christ. Our families may be corrupted by worldly trends and teachings unless we know how to use the book to expose and combat the falsehoods in socialism, organic evolution, rationalism, humanism, etc. Our missionaries are not as effective unless they are 'hissing forth' with it. Social, ethical, cultural, or educational converts will not survive under the heat of the day unless their taproots go down to the fulness of the gospel which the Book of Mormon contains. Our Church classes are not as spirit-filled unless we hold it up as a standard. And our nation will continue to degenerate unless we read and heed the words of the God of this land, Jesus Christ, and quit building up and upholding the secret combinations which the Book of Mormon tells us proved the downfall of both previous American civilizations.

"Some of the early missionaries, on returning home, were reproved by the Lord in section 84 of the Doctrine and Covenants because they had treated lightly the Book of Mormon. As a result, their minds had been darkened. The Lord said that this kind of treatment of the Book of Mormon brought the whole Church under condemnation, even all of the children of Zion. And then the Lord said, 'And they shall remain under this condemnation until they repent and remember the new covenant, even the Book of Mormon. (See D&C 84:54-57.) Are we still under that condemnation?" (Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, May 1975, p. 65.)

84:62

"unto whatsoever place ye cannot go ye shall send"

See Missionary service in Appendix A.

84:63

"you are mine apostles"

See Apostles in Appendix A.

"An apostle, the dictionary states, is 'one of the twelve chosen by Christ to proclaim His gospel; also a Christian missionary who first evangelizes a certain nation; any zealous advocate of a doctrine or cause.' . . .

"The term apostle is recognized in the Church in the sense in which it is defined in the dictionary. Men have been called apostles who have been sent forth with the gospel message when they have not been ordained to that particular office.

"This revelation was given two years and four months before the first men were ordained to the special calling as apostles in the Church, but as they were commissioned to go forth proclaiming the gospel as witnesses for Christ, he designated them as his apostles." (Joseph Fielding Smith, IE, April 1935, p. 208.)

84:64-73

"these signs shall follow them that believe"

See Signs and Miracles in Appendix A.

"These miraculous 'signs' follow belief now, the same as in days of old. I have seen devils cast out by the power of the Priesthood. I have seen and heard manifested the gift of tongues and the interpretation of tongues. I have seen the sick healed with a touch, and have been healed myself by the laying on of hands, accompanied by the prayer and power of faith." (Orson F. Whitney, CR, April 1930, pp. 134-35.)

84:64-73

Gifts of the Spirit

See Gifts of the Spirit in Appendix A.

"For many centuries men had been without the guidance of the Holy Ghost because there was none to lay hands on them to bestow that gift, and therefore false doctrines and traditions had found place among the nations.

"The gifts of the Spirit . . . are given to the faithful for their edification and for the edification of the Church. To one is given one gift, and to another, another gift. Some have the gift of healing, others of prophecy and vision, others to work miracles according to their faith. . . .

"These gifts and blessings are only for those who have faith and believe the Gospel. They are not for the world. Should the Lord bestow on an elder one of these great gifts and should he boast of his power, then the gift would be taken from him, for they are not for the world. 'But a commandment I gave unto them,' said the Lord to the elders, 'they shall not boast themselves of these things, neither speak them before the world; for these things are given unto you for your profit and for salvation.' (V. 73.)" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:342-43.)

84:71

"poison shall not hurt them"

"The Prophet Joseph relates the following, which may serve as an illustration:

"'While at this place [Greenville, Indiana, where he stayed with Newel K. Whitney during May, 1832, the latter suffering from a fractured leg] I frequently walked out in the woods, where I saw several fresh graves; and one day, when I rose from the dinner table, I walked directly to the door and commenced vomiting most profusely. I raised large quantities of blood and poisonous matter, and so great were the muscular contortions of my system, that my jaw, in a few moments, was dislocated. This I succeeded in replacing with my own hands, and made my way to Brother Whitney (who was on the bed), as speedily as possible; he laid his hands on me and administered to me in the name of the Lord, and I was healed in an instant. . . . Thanks be to my heavenly Father for his interference in my behalf at this critical moment, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.' (HC 1:271.)

"A. Clarke observes that there is no record or tradition indicating that any of the Apostles of our Lord ever suffered death by poison, while Mohammed came to his end by that means, as did, it may be added, Socrates. The promise of immunity from poison is, therefore, very remarkable." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, pp. 515.)

84:72

"poison of a serpent shall not have power to harm them"

"Paul, on one occasion, shook a venomous snake from his hand, and was not injured by it (Acts 28:3-6). No less remarkable is an incident from the famous march of Zion's Camp. The members of that organization often encountered reptiles on the prairie. One day Solomon Humphrey laid himself down for a little rest, being weary. When he awoke, he saw a rattlesnake coiled up not more than a few inches from his head. Some proposed to kill it, but Brother Humphrey said, 'Let it alone; we have had a good nap together.' It was on this occasion that the Prophet Joseph instructed the brethren not to kill serpents, or any other animals, unless absolutely necessary. 'Men,' said he, 'must first become harmless themselves, before they can expect the brute creation to be so' (Andrew Jenson, Hist. Rec., p. 835)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 515.)

84:73

Do not boast of the signs that follow belief "neither speak them before the world"

"When a man comes in the name of the Lord healing the sick and performing mighty works, he will not come with the blare of trumpets, nor will he advertise his performance." (Joseph Fielding Smith, IE, December 1955, 58:894-95.)

84:76

"they are to be upbraided"

"The word upbraid seems to be used here in the same sense as 'reprove' in John 16:8. There it means 'convict.' It is the office of the Holy Spirit to convict the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment, in order to bring men and women to repentance. If those who are sent to the world with the gospel message are filled with the Holy Spirit, the result will be the conviction of sinners, and conviction will be followed by either condemnation or salvation—salvation, if the gospel is accepted; condemnation, if it is rejected." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 516.)

84:78, 86

"let no man . . . take purse or scrip"

See Purse or scrip in Appendix A.

"We want the families of those who are on missions to be supplied with the necessaries and comforts of life, and we do not want the Elders to beg from the poor that are scattered among the nations. We who first went did not have this done for us, but the circumstances are different now." (Heber C. Kimball, JD 10:168-69.)

84:80

"they shall not go hungry"

"Thousands of missionaries have put this promise to the test and the Lord has kept his promise to all those who have been faithful in their calling. Surely if the Father notices when a sparrow falls, he will not forsake any who in faithful obedience to his will seek his aid. That there have been those who have gone forth and have been weary in body and mind, and who have gone hungry, there is no doubt, for there are missionaries who have not given all their heart to the Lord and they have idled away valuable time when it was needful for them to proclaim the truth." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:344.)

84:80, 116

"a hair of his head shall not fall"

See material for 9:14.

84:85

"treasure up in your minds continually the words of life"

"This advice to the members of the Church as well as to its missionaries, that they store up useful knowledge so that they will always be prepared, has, too frequently, been neglected. Every member of the Church should have a thorough knowledge of the Gospel. Such a knowledge is a protection against deception and false doctrine. Because this foundation in truth is not laid; because of lack of study of Gospel principles, many are brought into captivity to the powers of darkness. They have not been able to distinguish between truth and error. . . .

"If we would follow this advice it would not be necessary to prepare discourses beforehand, for our faith would cause us to rely on the promise of the Lord." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:344-45.)

84:87

"reprove the world"

"'Reprove,' as stated (v. 76) is to 'convict.' God's messengers, as it were, are lawyers before the bar of God. It is their duty to 'convict' the world of sin, and to warn all men of the 'judgment which is to come.' They are not sent out to entertain the world with philosophical lectures, or ethical discourses, or flowery oratory, or amusing anecdotes. Their one duty is to secure conviction and, if possible, repentance and salvation." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 518.)

84:92-96

"cleanse your feet, even with water . . . and bear testimony"

See Feet in Appendix A.

For information on the topic of casting off the dust of your feet, read the materials listed after 24:15.

84:98-102

"sing this new song"

"The new song which they shall sing at this great day will be concerning the redemption of Zion and the restoration of Israel. Even now there are those who have set to music these beautiful words (vs. 99-102), but we may believe that no music has yet been produced that will compare with the music for this song when Zion is redeemed." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:346.)

84:103

Gifts to missionaries might be sent to their families

"The Lord gave commandment that the families of those who go forth should be cared for. The missionaries were at liberty, if they received means beyond their needs, to send it to their families and for the printing of revelations and the establishment of Zion. They were told to take their old coat or suit, or whatever it might be, and give to the poor when some benevolent person supplied them with that which was new." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:110.)

84:110

"the body hath need of every member"

"The Apostle Paul . . . in his beautiful figure compared the Church of Christ to the body of a man. (1 Cor. 12:13-31.) I have asked myself, what is the greatest cause for the difference between the Church of Christ and the churches that have been established by men, for there are many forms of religions, some patterning closely after the one founded by our Lord and Master Jesus Christ. And I have thought, is it not because these different bodies have not the Spirit? . . . I thought to myself what a comparison there was between the true Church of God, with the Priesthood and Spirit to enliven it, and the dead forms of religion, as they have been instituted by man. We might carry this comparison a little farther, and take the skeleton of this body, the organization of the Church of Christ, animated by the Spirit and Priesthood of God, and in connection with this skeleton we have the sinews, the helps in government, the muscles, the nerve system and the circulation of the blood from the heart into all parts of the body. And just as it is impossible for a human body to exist without the spirit, so is it impossible for the Church of Christ to exist without the Priesthood of the Son of God. Just as it is impossible for a body to be complete without the brain, the heart and the other organs of the system so would it be impossible for the Church of Christ to exist in perfection without the Presidency, the Apostles, the Seventies, the High Priests, the Elders, the Priests, Teachers and Deacons. All of them have their special work to perform, just as the organs of the human system have their particular part to do. I compared the circulation of the blood in the body to the active Priesthood, which goes about the whole body of the Church imparting life and vigor and setting in order all of the parts that may be out of place. Whenever a member becomes injured, the blood assists in building it up. So with the workings of the Priesthood of the Son of God, in the great body which Christ has established." (Abraham O. Woodruff, CR, April 1900, pp. 37-38.)

84:114-15

Cities of New York, Albany, and Boston to be warned specifically

"When we become ripe in iniquity, then the Lord will come. . . . The Lord threatened destruction to great cities if they in their iniquity rejected his truth. This destruction evidently is to come when their cup is full. Desolation awaited them and the hour of their judgment would come." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:110.)

84:117

"desolation of abomination in the last days"

See Second coming in Appendix A.

"The Lord is not going to wait for us to get righteous. When he gets ready to come, he is going to come—when the cup of iniquity is full—and if we are not righteous then, it will be just too bad for us, for we will be classed among the ungodly, and we will be as stubble, to be swept off the face of the earth, for the Lord says wickedness shall not stand.

"Do not think the Lord delays his coming, for he will come at the appointed time, not the time which I have heard some preach when the earth becomes righteous enough to receive him. . . . Christ will come in the day of wickedness, when the earth is ripe in iniquity and prepared for the cleansing, and as the cleanser and purifier he will come, and all the wicked will be as stubble and will be consumed." (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 3:3.)
