Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 85

Background information on section 85

"On the 27th day of November, 1832, the Prophet wrote [Kirtland, Ohio] to Elder William W. Phelps who was in Independence, Missouri, in charge of the printing and with authority to assist the bishop in matters concerning the establishing of their inheritances and expressed to him in words of tender fellowship, his love and confidence. Matters pertaining to the establishing and building up of Zion weighed heavily on the mind of the Prophet Joseph Smith. His anxiety was very great because of the strictness of the commandments the Lord had given, and because of the grave responsibilities which had been placed upon his brethren to see that the covenants pertaining to consecration were faithfully kept. Especially was he concerned over the duties and responsibilities of the bishop in Zion, for they were very great. It was the duty of the bishop, assisted by his brethren, to see that justice was done, as the Lord had pointed out in the revelations, in the matter of deciding and alloting inheritances in Zion. This history reveals that there were some things that had not been attended to in the Spirit and according to the instructions which had been declared essential in the revelations. These matters caused the Prophet some anxiety and therefore he wrote to Brother Phelps stating that there were some things that were 'Lying with great weight' on his mind. By the Spirit of prophecy he uttered this prayer, as though it were a prayer in the heart of William Phelps.

"'My God, great and mighty art Thou, therefore, show unto Thy servant what shall become to all those who are essaying to come up unto Zion, in order to keep the commandments of God, and yet receive not their inheritance by consecration, by order or deed from the Bishop, the man that God has appointed in a legal way, agreeably to the law given to organize and regulate the Church, and all the affairs of the same.

"Then the Prophet adds: 'Brother William, in the love of God, having the most implicit confidence in you as a man of God, having obtained this confidence by a vision of heaven, therefore, I will proceed to unfold to you some of the feelings of my heart, and to answer the questions.' Then what follows by the inspiration of the Spirit of the Lord has been accepted by the Church as a revelation. [Section 85.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:111-12.)

85:1

"It is the duty of the . . . clerk . . . to keep a history, and a . . . record"

See Records in Appendix A.

85:6

"the still small voice"

"When the 'still small voice' of the Lord speaks to men it is overwhelming. We have the story of Elijah, who withstood the great wind when the Lord passed by, that rent the mountains, likewise the earthquake which shook the earth, and then fire, but the Lord was not in the fire and then the Lord spoke by the 'still small voice.' Then Elijah wrapped his face in his mantle, for the fear of the Lord came upon him. [1 Kings 19:9-14.] When the Lord comes he will speak, and the rocks will be rent, the mountains will be laid low and the valleys exalted and men will try to hide themselves from his presence. They will not be able to stand the piercing of the 'still small voice,' unless the Spirit of the Lord is upon them. [Sec. 133:40-51.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:51-52.)

"The Lord gives to many of us the still, small voice of revelation. [Sec. 85:6.] It comes as vividly and strongly as though it were with a great sound. It comes to each man, according to his needs and faithfulness, for guidance in matters that pertain to his own life. For the Church as a whole it comes to those who have been ordained to speak for the Church as a whole." (Heber J. Grant, CR, April 1945, p. 9.)

85:7

"one mighty and strong"

The First Presidency of the Church in 1907 (Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, and Anthon H. Lund) published a thorough statement on the "one mighty and strong," which was published in the Improvement Era, October 1907, pp. 929-43. Following is a small portion:

Now, as to the "one mighty and strong," who shall be sent of God, to "set in order the house of God, and to arrange by lot the inheritance of the Saints." Who is he? What position will he hold in the Church? In what manner will he come to his calling? We draw attention first of all to the fact that his whole letter to William W. Phelps, as well as the part afterwards accepted as the word of the Lord, related to the affairs of the Church in Zion, Independence, Jackson county, Missouri. And inasmuch as through his repentance and sacrifices and suffering, Bishop Edward Partridge undoubtedly obtained a mitigation of the threatened judgment against him of falling "by the shaft of death, like as a tree that is smitten by the vivid shaft of lightning," so the occasion for sending another to fill his station—"one mighty and strong to set in order the house of God, and to arrange by lot the inheritances of the Saints"—may also be considered as having passed away and the whole incident of the prophecy closed. . . .

If, however, there are those who will still insist that the prophecy concerning the coming of "one mighty and strong" is still to be regarded as relating to the future, let the Latter-day Saints know that he will be a future bishop of the Church who will be with the Saints in Zion, Jackson County, Missouri, when the Lord shall establish them in that land; and he will be so blessed with the spirit and power of his calling that he will be able to set in order the house of God, pertaining to the department of the work under his jurisdiction; and in righteousness and justice will "arrange by lot the inheritances of the Saints." He will hold the same high and exalted station that Edward Partridge held; for the latter was called to do just this kind of work—that is, to set in order the house of God as pertaining to settling the Saints upon their inheritances.

85:8

Do not "steady the ark of God"

See 1 Chronicles 13:9-12 for the story in the Old Testament pertaining to steadying the ark of God.

85:12

"it shall be done unto them . . . as recorded" in Ezra 2:61-62

"I will read now a few verses from Section 85 of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, commencing at the 9th verse: [to v. 12, quoted.] I am going to turn now to Ezra (chapter 2) and see what is said there. We read: [Ezra 2:61-63 quoted.]

"This is the position the people will be in when they come to claim an inheritance in Zion, if their names are not found recorded in the book of the law of God. And I want to tell you that this refers directly to the law of tithing. . . .

"Some people may not care very much whether their names are recorded or not, but this comes from ignorance of the consequences. If their names are not recorded they will not only be cut off from the assistance which they would be entitled to from the Church if they needed it, but they will be cut off from the ordinances of the house of God; they will be cut asunder from their dead and from their fathers who have been faithful, or from those who shall come after them who shall be faithful, and they will be appointed their portion with the unbelievers, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth. It means that you will be cut off from your fathers and mothers, from your husbands, your wives, your children, and that you shall have no portion or lot or inheritance in the kingdom of God, both in time and in eternity. It has a very serious and far reaching effect." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, October 1899, p. 42.)

"Look back to the time when Israel returned to Jerusalem from their captivity. How were they enabled to set in order the congregation, the singers, the priests in their courses, and the Levites? It was given to them by genealogy. The Lord had promised to Levi that the service of the Temple and the Sanctuary should belong to his tribe, his family, and especially that the Priesthood should go to the descendants of Aaron. [Num. 3:5-13.] But when they returned from their captivity in Babylon and wanted to be reinstated in their places to officiate at the altar and to eat of the holy bread, the records were searched and those whose names were not found were put away from the Priesthood as polluted, until a Priest should rise up having the Urim and Thummim, who could declare their genealogy, their right and title to this Holy Priesthood." (Franklin D. Richards, MS 57:644.)
