Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 86

Background information on section 86

"In this revelation the Lord has given a more complete interpretation than he gave to his apostles as recorded by Matthew. The reason for this may be accounted for in the fact that it is to be in these last days that the harvest is gathered and the tares are to be burned. In Matthew's account the Lord declares that he is the sower of the good seed, and in the Doctrine and Covenants it is stated that the apostles were the sowers of the seed. There is no contradiction here. Christ is the author of our salvation and he it was who instructed the apostles, and under him they were sent to preach the Gospel unto all the world, or to sow the seed, and as the seed is his and it is sown under his command, he states but the fact in this revelation and also in the parable." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:353.)

86:1-11

An explanation of the parable concerning the wheat and the tares

See Tares and Parables in Appendix A.

"I want to ask this congregation a question: When I have the vision of the night opened continually before my eyes, and can see the mighty judgments that are about to be poured out upon the world, when I know these things are true and are at the door of Jew and Gentile; while I know I am holding this position before God and this world, can I withhold my voice from lifting up a warning to this people and to the nations of the earth? I may never meet with this people again; I cannot tell how that may be, but while I live and see these things continually before my eyes I shall raise my warning voice. . . .

"God has held the angels of destruction for many years, lest they should reap down the wheat with the tares. But I want to tell you now, that those angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people, and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth waiting to pour out judgments. And from this very day they shall be poured out. Calamities and troubles are increasing in the earth, and there is a meaning to these things." (Wilford Woodruff, Young Women's Journal, August 1894, 5:512-13.)

"In July (15th), 1894, President Woodruff repeated this prophecy [v. 5, above] and again declared that the angels had been sent forth to reap down the earth, while speaking at the Weber Stake Conference in Ogden, and again, October 4, 1896 at the general conference of the Church in Salt Lake City. On divers other occasions he also warned the Saints and told them that the gathering of the tares had commenced." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:120.)

86:3

"Babylon "

See Babylon in Appendix A.

86:3

"drink of her cup"

See material for 35:11 and 101:11.

86:3

"Satan "

See Satan in Appendix A.

86:8-11

Priesthood members "are lawful heirs, according to the flesh"

"It is in harmony with this promise to Abraham [Abr. 2:9-11] the Lord declared to these Elders of the Church that the Priesthood had continued through the lineage of their fathers, 'for ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh, and have been hid from the world with Christ in God.' Moreover that this Priesthood must remain through them and their lineage until the restoration of all things. This saying does not mean that the Priesthood has come down from olden times by lineage from generation to generation, for there was a great apostasy intervening between the days of their fathers who held the Priesthood and these elders unto whom this revelation was given. But since they were of the House of Israel, and therefore descendants of Abraham, they were lawful heirs to the Priesthood according to the covenant made with Abraham, and the Priesthood which they held and came down to them from them of old who held it. Then, again, we discover in Section 84, verses 32-34, that all who are true to the Priesthood and the Church become the sons of Aaron and Moses and the seed of Abraham, and the Church and the kingdom, and the elect of God. All souls coming into the Church become the seed of Abraham according to the promise, and there is a literal change which comes over them by which they are grafted into the House of Israel even if they are not literally of his lineage. Speaking of this change the Prophet Joseph Smith has said:

"'The . . . Holy Ghost has no other effect than pure intelligence. It is more powerful in expanding the mind, enlightening the understanding, and storing the intellect with present knowledge, of man who is of the literal seed of Abraham, than one that is a Gentile, though it may not have half as much visible effect upon the body; for as the Holy Ghost upon one of the literal seed of Abraham, it is calm and serene; and his whole soul and body are only exercised by the spirit of intelligence; while the effect of the Holy Ghost upon a Gentile, is to purge out old blood, and make him actually of the seed of Abraham.' [HC 3:380.]" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:356-57.)
