Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 88

Background information on section 88

"The 'Olive Leaf' is the name given by the Prophet to the wonderful revelation known as Sec. 88, in the Doctrine and Covenants. There are few, if any, revelations given to the Church—and to the world if the world will receive them—greater than this 'Olive Leaf, plucked from the Tree of Paradise.' In this letter to W. W. Phelps, one of the presiding brethren in Missouri, the Prophet raises a warning voice based upon the word of the Lord as revealed in the revelation and correspondence from Missouri.

Kirtland, January 14, 1833

"Brother William W. Phelps:

"I send you the 'olive leaf', which we have plucked from the Tree of Paradise, the Lord's message of peace to us; for though our brethren in Zion indulge in feelings towards us, which are not according to the requirements of the new covenant, yet, we have the satisfaction of knowing that the Lord approves of us, and has accepted us, and established His name in Kirtland for the salvation of the nations; for the Lord will have a place whence His word will go forth, in these last days, in purity; for if Zion will not purify herself, so as to be approved of in all things, in His sight, He will seek another people; for His work will go on until Israel is gathered, and they who will not hear His voice, must expect to feel His wrath. Let me say unto you, seek to purify yourselves, and also the inhabitants of Zion, lest the Lord's anger be kindled to fierceness." (Joseph Fielding Smith, TPJS, p. 18.)

88:2

"Lord of Sabaoth"

See Sabaoth in Appendix A.

88:2

"book of the names of the sanctified"

See Book of Life in Appendix A.

"We are not going to be saved in the kingdom of God just because our names are on the records of the Church. It will require more than that. We will have to have our names written in the Lamb's Book of Life, and if they are written in the Lamb's Book of Life then it is an evidence we have kept the commandments. Every soul who will not keep those commandments shall have his name blotted out of that book." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CR, September 1950, p. 10.)

88:3

"another Comforter. . . the Holy Spirit of Promise"

See Holy Ghost in Appendix A.

"The Holy Spirit of Promise is not the Second Comforter; the Holy Spirit of Promise is the Holy Ghost who places the stamp of approval upon every ordinance that is done righteously and when covenants are broken he removes the seal." (Joseph Fielding Smith, DS 1:55.)

88:4

"eternal life"

See Eternal life in Appendix A.

88:5

"Church of the Firstborn"

See same title in Appendix A.

88:7-13

"light of Christ"

See Light in Appendix A.

88:15

"the spirit and the body are the soul of man"

"It is peculiar to the theology of the Latter-day Saints that we regard the body as an essential part of the soul. Read your dictionaries, the lexicons, and encyclopedias, and you will find that nowhere, outside of the Church of Jesus Christ, is the solemn and eternal truth taught that the soul of man is the body and the spirit combined. It is quite the rule to regard the soul as that incorporeal part of man, that immortal part which existed before the body was framed and which shall continue to exist after that body has gone to decay; nevertheless, that is not the soul; that is only a part of the soul; that is the spirit-man, the form in which every individual of us, and every individual human being, existed before called to take tabernacle in the flesh. It has been declared in the solemn word of revelation, that the spirit and the body constitute the soul of man; and, therefore, we should look upon this body as something that shall endure in the resurrected state, beyond the grave, something to be kept pure and holy." (James E. Talmage, CR, October 1913, p. 117.)

"We do not look upon death as the end of our individual existence. [D&C 59:2; Alma 40:11-14.] On the contrary, knowing Him [Jesus] to be our prototype, we have the assurance that death is only temporary, and that there will come a time after death when we shall again receive these same bodies which we possess here upon the earth, and that the union of spirit and body shall never be dissolved. [D&C 93:33-34; Alma 11:45; 12:16-18.] The bodies we shall receive will be immortal, and the spirit and body reunited will constitute a living soul." (Anthon H. Lund, CR, April 1904, p 7)

88:16

"the resurrection from the dead is the redemption of the soul "

See Resurrection in Appendix A.

88:18

"sanctifed from all unrighteousness"

See Sanctify in Appendix A.

88:19

"it [the earth] shall be crowned with glory"

See Earth in Appendix A.

88:22

"Celestial kingdom. . . glory"

See Celestial in Appendix A.

88:25-26

"the earth abideth the law of a celestial kingdom"

See Earth and Celestial in Appendix A.

88:28

"natural body"

See Natural in Appendix A.

88:32

"they who remain shall also be quickened"

See Perdition in Appendix A.

"A superficial reading of Sec. 76:38-39 might give the impression that the sons of perdition are not to be resurrected, but here it is expressly stated that they, too, will be quickened, and then return to 'their own place.' They were not willing to receive a degree of glory, by keeping the law pertaining to either of the glories; wherefore they were to remain under the dominion of him whom they had chosen to serve." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 545.)

88:34-47

"All kingdoms have a law given"

See Law in Appendix A.

"Every law God has given us is of such a nature that, by keeping it, we are preserved, perfected and sanctified. If we keep the Word of Wisdom, our bodies will be kept pure. If we observe the law of tithing, we shall learn to be unselfish and honest. If we pray, we shall hold communion with the Holy Spirit. If we try to do our duty in everything, we shall come, day by day, nearer to perfection.

"On the other hand, those who refuse to be governed by law and are a law unto themselves cannot be sanctified. They are outside the pale of mercy and justice and judgment, as well as law, and must remain 'filthy still' (v. 35). It is only when we try to obey God's laws that we have claim upon His mercy. Justice will take into account, in the judgment, every honest effort to do the will of God." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 546.)

88:45

"the earth rolls upon her wings"

See Earth in Appendix A.

88:49

"The light shineth in darkness"

See Light in Appendix A.

88:51-61

An explanation of the parable concerning the man, his field, and his laborers

"Do we not expect that the Lord will, by and by, come and visit us and stay a little while, about a thousand years. [Sec. 43:29-30.] Yes, and then we shall be made glad with the joy of the countenance of our Lord. He will be among us, and will be our King, and he will reign as a King of Kings and Lord of Lords. He will have a throne in Zion, and another in the Temple of Jerusalem, and he will have with him the twelve disciples who were with him during his ministry at Jerusalem; and all the people of this globe who are counted worthy to be called Zion, the pure in heart, will be made glad by the countenance of their Lord for a thousand years, during which the earth will rest. Then what? He withdraws. What for? To fulfill other purposes; for he has other worlds or creations and other sons and daughters, perhaps just as good as those dwelling on this planet, and they, as well as we, will be visited, and they will be made glad with the countenance of their Lord. Thus he will go, in the time and in the season thereof, from Kingdom or from world to world, causing the pure in heart, the Zion that is taken from these creations, to rejoice in his presence. [Moses 7:64.]

"But there is another thing I want you to understand. This will not be kept up to all eternity, it is merely a preparation for something still greater. And what is that? By and by, when each of these creations has fulfilled the measure and bounds set and the times given for its continuance in a temporal state, it and its inhabitants who are worthy will be made celestial and glorified together. Then, from that time henceforth and forever, there will be no intervening veil between God and his people who are sanctified and glorified, and he will not be under the necessity of withdrawing from one to go and visit another, because they will all be in his presence." (Orson Pratt, JD 17:331-32.)

88:63

"Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you"

See Prayer in Appendix A.

"We learn in another revelation that was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1832, something concerning the character of our Heavenly Father. In that revelation He says to His Church through the Prophet: [D&C 88:63-65, quoted.]

"Mark, how clear-cut are these words. There is no doubt, no dubiety. It does not say if and peradventure you call upon the Lord, He may be gone on a long journey and you cannot reach Him; or He is very busy; His attention is now attracted to the nations of the earth; probably He is busily engaged . . . and He cannot give you any attention, therefore you might as well cease praying. No. This revelation does not give forth any such ideas. . . . And yet—think of it! He says to you and to me: He says to this poor man and to this poor woman: He says to this rich man and to this rich woman: 'Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you.' Yes, that poor widow down there, to whom nobody is paying attention, and who has very little influence,—to her the Lord says: 'Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you.' 'My ear will be opened to hear your prayer and to answer it.'" (Rudger Clawson, CR, April 1904, pp. 43-44.)

88:65

"ask "

See Prayer in Appendix A.

88:68

"become single to God"

"The meaning of 'sanctification' is explained in the words that follow, 'That your minds become single to God.' Our Lord had regard only to the glory of the Father, when He undertook the salvation of man. To follow in His footsteps and to be able to say at all times, truthfully, 'Thine be the honor,' is to be sanctified; that is to be a Saint." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 552.)

88:69

"cast away your idle thoughts"

See Thoughts in Appendix A.

88:70

"call a solemn assembly"

See Solemn assembly in Appendix A.

88:73

"I will hasten my work"

"There is an urgency in [the Lord's] work. Time is getting short. This sense of urgency in promoting the Lord's kingdom in these last days does not arise out of panic, but out of a desire to move swiftly and surely to establish and strengthen his kingdom among all people who are seeking the light and truth of the gospel, which is God's plan of life for all his children. God will hasten his work by opening the heavens and sending heavenly messengers to his prophets to warn his children to prepare themselves to receive their Lord at his second coming. The Christ has emphasized, 'It is the eleventh hour, and the last time that I shall call laborers into my vineyard.' (D&C 33:3.)" (Delbert L. Stapley, Ensign, November 1975, p. 49.)

88:76

"prayer and fasting"

See Fasting and Prayer in Appendix A.

"These are indispensable in the preparation for the ministry. Our Lord teaches us that there are evil spirits that cannot be overcome except by those whose spiritual life and faith are made strong by self-denial and communion with God. It is, therefore, of the utmost importance that the servants of the Lord should fast and pray. Through the fasting and prayer of the servants of the Lord, the mouth of Alma was opened, and his limbs strengthened (Mosiah 27:22-3). Through fasting and prayer the Nephites 'did wax stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ' (Hel. 3:35)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 555.)

88:80

Things in which to be instructed

"Theology is not the only subject in which the Elders should be interested. They should study:

"Things both in heaven—Astronomy.

"And in the earth—Everything pertaining to the cultivation of the soil.

"And under the earth—Mineralogy, geology, etc.

"Things which have been—History, in all its branches.

"Things which must shortly come to pass—Prophecies.

"Things which are at home and abroad—Domestic and foreign politics.

"Wars—perplexities—judgment—The signs of the times by which the observer may know that the day of the Lord is at hand.

"A knowledge of countries and kingdoms—physical and political geography, languages, etc.

"These studies, the Lord considers necessary. [Sec. 88:80.] God does not require all His servants to become doctors, or professors, or even profound students of these subjects, but He expects them to know enough of these things to be able to magnify their callings as His ambassadors to the world." (John A. Widtsoe, Priesthood and Church Government, pp. 55-56.)

88:81

"testify and warn"

See Missionary service in Appendix A.

"Now this gives us two premises. On the one hand we are obligated and required to know the doctrines of the Church. We are to treasure up the words of eternal life. We are to reason as intelligently as we are able. We are to use every faculty and capacity with which we are endowed to proclaim the message of salvation and to make it intelligent to ourselves and to our Father's other children. But after we have done that, and also in the process of doing it, we are obligated to bear testimony—to let the world know and our associate members of the Church know—that in our hearts, by the revelation of the Holy Spirit to our souls, we know of the truth and divinity of the work and of the doctrines that we teach." (Bruce R. McConkie, Ensign, July 1973, p. 28.)

88:87-95

Signs of the second coming of Christ

See Second coming in Appendix A.

88:92

"the Bridegroom cometh"

See Bridegroom in Appendix A.

88:93

"there shall appear a great sign in heaven"

"Immediately after the testimony of these messengers a great sign will appear in heaven, which, like the sun, will be seen all round the world. Our Lord calls it the 'Sign of the Son of Man' (Matt. 24-30). What this sign is has not been revealed, but there will be no uncertainty about it, when it appears. In 1843 one Mr. Redding, of Ogle county, Ill., claimed to have seen the sign. The Prophet Joseph then wrote to the Times and Seasons:

"'Notwithstanding Mr. Redding may have seen a wonderful appearance in the clouds one morning about sunrise [which is not very uncommon in the winter season], he has not seen the sign of the Son of Man, as foretold by Jesus; neither has any man, nor will any man, until after the sun shall have been darkened and the moon bathed in blood; for the Lord hath not shown me any such sign; and as the Prophet saith, so it must be—"Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets" (Amos 3:7). Therefore, hear this, O Earth! The Lord will not come to reign over the righteous, in this world, in 1843, nor until everything for the Bridegroom is ready' (HC 5:291)

"It may be gathered from this that when the sign appears, God will make its meaning known to the Prophet, Seer and Revelator who at that time may be at the head of the Church, and through him to His people and the world in general." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 560.)

"After the angels have sounded this in the ears of all living [D&C 88:92] we are informed that there will be a great sign in the heavens. It is not to be limited so that some few only of the human family can see it; but it is said, 'all people shall see it together!' At least, it is to be like our sun seen over one entire side of the globe, and then passing immediately round to the other, or else it will encircle the whole earth at the same time. But the bridegroom does not come then. These are only the preceding events to let the Latter-day Saints and the pure in heart know that these are the times that they may trim up their lamps and prepare for the triumphant appearing of their Lord." (Orson Pratt, JD 8:50.)

88:94

"drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication"

See material for 35:11.

88:94

"she is the tares of the earth"

See Tares in Appendix A.

88:94-98

"another angel shall sound his trump"

"Here begins a series of world events, each signalized by the sounding of a trump by an angel—a divine messenger. There is some analogy between this vision and that recorded in Revelation 8:7—9:21, although they do not appear to cover the same events.

"When the first angel sounds his trump, the doom upon the apostate church is pronounced. 'She is ready to be burned.' Then there is silence in heaven for half an hour. The heavenly hosts are waiting, awestruck, for the execution of this judgment.

"'Whether the half hour here spoken of is according to our reckoning—thirty minutes, or whether it be according to the reckoning of the Lord, we do not know. . . . During the period of silence all things are perfectly still; no angels flying during that half hour; no trumpets sounding; no noise in the heaven above; but immediately after this great silence the curtain of heaven shall be unfolded as a scroll is unfolded. . . . The face of the Lord will be unveiled, and those who are alive will be quickened, and they will be caught up; and the Saints who are in their graves will come forth and be caught up, together with those who are quickened, and they will be taken into the heavens into the midst of those celestial beings who will make their appearance at that time. These are the ones who are the first fruits at the time of His coming' (Orson Pratt, JD 16:328)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 560.)

88:95-116

The order of the resurrection and judgment

See Resurrection and Judgment in Appendix A.

88:98

"they who shall descend with him first"

See Second coming and Millennium in Appendix A.

88:104

"every ear. . . knee. . . tongue"

See Knee in Appendix A.

88:106

"trodden the wine-press alone"

See Wine-press in Appendix A.

88:110

"there shall be time no longer"

See Time in Appendix A.

88:110

"Satan shall be bound "

See Satan in Appendix A.

88:113

"Michael and his armies"

See Adam in Appendix A.

88:118

"seek ye out of the best books"

"Never become narrowly educated, but broadly so, feeding all sides of yourselves, reading and becoming acquainted with good books, with great minds and great men of the past; becoming acquainted with scripture and reading scripture itself: Do not be satisfied to read books about scripture or books about books, but to the prime and primary sources go. You do not catch much of the spirit of Shakespeare merely by reading commentaries on Shakespeare, and so it is in large measure with scripture. Keep balanced in your lives and starve no side of yourselves." (Richard L. Evans, CR, April 1961, p. 75.)

"You know that your children will read. They will read books and they will read magazines and newspapers. Cultivate within them a taste for the best. While they are very young, read to them the great stories which have become immortal because of the virtues they teach. Expose them to good books. Let there be a corner somewhere in your house, be it ever so small, where they will see at least a few books of the kind upon which great minds have been nourished.

"Let there be good magazines about the house, those which are produced by the Church and by others, which will stimulate their thoughts to ennobling concepts. Let them read a good family newspaper that they may know what is going on in the world without being exposed to the debasing advertising and writing so widely found." (Gordon B. Hinckley, CR, October 1975, pp. 57-58.)

88:118

"seek learning, even by study and also by faith"

"One might well ask: How does one get 'learning by faith'? One prophet explains the process: First, one must arouse his faculties and experiment on the words of the Lord and desire to believe. Let this desire work in you until ye believe in a manner that you can give place even to a portion of the word of the Lord; then, like a planted seed, it must be cultivated and not resist the Spirit of the Lord, which is that which lighteneth everyone born into the world; you can then begin to feel within yourselves that it must be good, for it enlarges your soul and enlightens your understanding and, like the fruit of the tree in Lehi's vision, it becomes delicious to the taste. (See Alma 32.) . . .

"Let no one think that 'learning by faith' contemplates an easy or lazy way to gain knowledge and ripen it into wisdom.

"From heavenly instructions and added to which are the experiences of almost anyone who has sought diligently for heavenly guidance, one may readily understand that learning by faith requires the bending of the whole soul through worthy living to become attuned to the Holy Spirit of the Lord, the calling up from the depths of one's own mental searching, and the linking of our own efforts to receive the true witness of the Spirit." (Harold B. Lee, Ensign, June 1971, p. 10.)

88:124

"cease to find fault one with another"

"Now, when anyone offends us . . . let us remember the example given us, let us not take offense at every little thing that may appear offensive to us, for in the great majority of cases, when we investigate the matter, we find that no intentional offense was meant, but only thoughtlessness was the cause. Often, we do not try to examine it; we take it as an affront, and forget the advice given us that if we have ought against our brother, we should go to him and make it right. [D&C 64:6-11; Matt. 5:23-24.]" (Anthon H. Lund, CR, April 1912, p. 13.)

88:124

"retire to thy bed early . . . arise early"

"The blessings of food, sleep, and social enjoyment are ordained of God for His glory and our benefit, and it is for us to learn to use them and not abuse them, that his kingdom may advance on the earth, and we advance in it." (Brigham Young, JD 6:149.)

88:126

"Pray always, that ye may not faint"

"There is one admonition of our Savior that all the Saints of God should observe, but which I fear, we do not as we should, and that is, to pray always and faint not. I fear, as a people, we do not pray enough in faith. We should call upon the Lord in mighty prayer, and make all our wants known unto Him. For if He does not protect and deliver us, and save us, no other power will. Therefore our trust is entirely in Him. Therefore, our prayers should ascend into the ears of our Heavenly Father day and night." (Wilford Woodruff, MS, October 26, 1886, 48:5-6.)

88:127-141

"the school of the prophets"

"There were two schools conducted in Kirtland. One was a school of the Elders where they carried out some of the provisions of this revelation (Sec. 88) in seeking knowledge of countries and kingdoms and languages, all such information as may be gained in the regular daily school. . . .

"The other was the 'School of the Prophets,' and a very good description of this school and its purpose is given in this section of the Doctrine and Covenants (Sec. 88:117 to the end of the section). In a letter written by the Prophet Joseph to William W. Phelps in Zion, January 14, 1833, the following appears: 'You will see that the Lord commanded us, in Kirtland, to build a house of God, and establish a school for the prophets, this is the word of the Lord to us, and we must, yea, the Lord helping us, we will obey: as on conditions of our obedience he has promised us great things; yea, even a visit from the heavens to honor us with His own presence.' . . .

"The Prophet further writes: 'This winter (1832-3) was spent in translating the scriptures; in the School of the Prophets; and sitting in conferences. I had many glorious seasons of refreshing.' (HC 1:332.) This School of the Prophets and the schools where the ordinary branches were taught continued in Kirtland until the exodus from that place. It was for this school that the lectures on faith were prepared and which were delivered to the Elders. . . .

"The object for which this school was organized is plainly stated in the revelation. None could join except he was clean from the blood of this generation. The only way he could be clean was to he obedient to the covenants of the Gospel and labor in behalf of his fellows for the salvation of their souls. Thus the preaching of the Gospel was a requirement made of those who desired to join this school. The School of the Prophets continued in Utah for several years under the administration of President Brigham Young, but after that time it was discontinued." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:136-37.)

"The School of the Prophets was organized, according to the instructions in this Revelation, during the month of February, 1833, and was continued throughout the winter. At this time the Elders and the Saints had many manifestations of the presence of the Spirit of the Lord. The Prophet spoke to a Conference, held in January, that year, in a foreign tongue, and others followed. Says Brigham Young:

"'The members of that school were but few at first, and the Prophet commenced to teach them in doctrine to prepare them to go out into the world to preach the gospel unto all people, and gather the select from the four quarters of the Earth, as the prophets anciently have spoken. While this instruction prepared the Elders to administer in word and doctrine, it did not supply the teachings necessary to govern their private, or temporal lives; it did not say whether they should be merchants, farmers, mechanics, or moneychangers. The Prophet began to instruct them how to live, that they might be better prepared to perform the great work they were called to accomplish.'

"A School of the Prophets was also established in Zion. The Lord approved of this institution, although contention had arisen in it (see Sec. 95:10; 97:3), which called forth severe rebuke. A school of Elders—an extension of the School of the Prophets—was held in the early days of Utah, with President Brigham Young at its head. This was, practically, a theological department of the University of Utah, while that seat of learning was in its infancy." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 567.)

88:139-141

The ordinance of the washing of the feet

See Washing of feet in Appendix A.
