Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 89

Background information on section 89

"The only comment made by the Prophet Joseph Smith, February 27, 1833, when the revelation on the Word of Wisdom was received, is: 'I received the following revelation.' In those early days of the Church men had not been trained when they came into the Church that their bodies were tabernacles which should be kept sanctified and cleansed physically and morally, as well as spiritually. The use of liquor, tobacco and stimulants of various kinds, was very common. Tea and coffee were looked upon as foods, and the same to some extent was the attitude towards alcoholic beverages." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:382-83.)

"I think I am as well acquainted with the circumstances which led to the giving of the Word of Wisdom as any man in the Church, although I was not present at the time to witness them. The first school of the prophets was held in a small room situated over the Prophet Joseph's kitchen, in a house which belonged to Bishop Whitney, and which was attached to his store, which store probably might be about fifteen feet square. In the rear of this building was a kitchen, probably ten by fourteen feet, containing rooms and pantries. Over this kitchen was situated the room in which the Prophet received revelations and in which he instructed his brethren. The brethren came to that place for hundreds of miles to attend school in a little room probably no larger than eleven by fourteen. When they assembled together in this room after breakfast, the first they did was to light their pipes, and, while smoking, talk about the great things of the kingdom, and spit all over the room, and as soon as the pipe was out of their mouths a large chew of tobacco would then be taken. Often when the Prophet entered the room to give the school instructions he would find himself in a cloud of tobacco smoke. This, and the complaints of his wife at having to clean so filthy a floor, made the Prophet think upon the matter, and he inquired of the Lord relating to the conduct of the Elders in using tobacco, and the revelation known as the Word of Wisdom was the result of his inquiry." (Brigham Young, JD 12:158.)

"On the 27th day of February, 1833, [at Kirtland, Ohio] the Prophet received the revelation known as the Word of Wisdom, warning the people to abstain from impurities and grossness in their food and drink, and promising them rich blessings of physical strength and protection from the power of the adversary as a reward for their obedience. . . . Its delivery to Joseph marks another step in the divine plan for man's eventual elevation to divine acceptability." (George Q. Cannon, LJS, pp. 129-30)

89:2

"not by commandment or constraint, but by revelation"

"The reason undoubtedly why the Word of Wisdom was given—as not by 'commandment or restraint' was that at that time, at least, if it had been given as a commandment it would have brought every man, addicted to the use of these noxious things, under condemnation; so the Lord was merciful and gave them a chance to overcome, before He brought them under the law. Later on, it was announced from this stand, by President Brigham Young [JD 12:118] that the Word of Wisdom was a revelation and a command of the Lord." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, October 1913, p. 14.)

"It is expressly stated that it is given 'not by commandment or constraint,' but as a Word of Wisdom—a word dictated by wisdom. It is a commandment that may be compared to that issued by the General Council at Jerusalem to the Gentiles, concerning the abstinence from meats offered to idols, from blood, from things strangled, and from fornication, of which the Apostles wrote, 'From which if ye keep yourselves, ye shall do well' (Acts 15:29)." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 571.)

"The High Council of the Church over which the Prophet Joseph Smith presided declared in 1834 by unanimous vote after a full and free discussion on the subject, that, 'No official member of this Church is worthy to hold office after having the Word of Wisdom properly taught him; and he, the official member, neglecting to comply with or obey it.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, ECH, p. 169.)

"The Word of Wisdom revelation was given on February 27, 1833, but its acceptance by many in the Church was gradual. On September 9, 1851, some eighteen years after the revelation was given, President Brigham Young proposed in a general conference that all Saints discontinue the use of tea, coffee, tobacco, and whiskey. The motion carried unanimously, and the principle known as the Word of Wisdom was accepted as a binding commandment for all members. ('General Minutes of Conference,' Millennial Star 14:35 [Feb. 1, 1852].) But the Saints were slow to remember their covenants. Repeated admonitions from the prophets to observe the Word of Wisdom met with varying degrees of obedience. As late as the October conference of 1942, the First Presidency (Heber J. Grant, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and David O. McKay) urged the Saints to 'quit trifling with this law and so to live it that we may claim its promises.'" (First Presidency, IE 45:687, November 1942.)

"The Lord gave in a sacred revelation in 1833 what we have more recently learned through research: 'Hot drinks are not for the body.' This is tea and coffee. 'Tobacco is not for the body . . . and is not good for man. . . . Wine or strong drink . . . is not good, neither meet in the sight of your Father.' (See D&C 89:5-9.) The Lord knew when these things were discovered that constant smoking could lead to cancer; that constant drinking could lead to many accidents and diseases. It is now a command to all his members, and as we see some members using these prohibited things, we wonder how they reconcile such activities with the statement of the Lord Jesus Christ when he said: 'And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?' (Luke 6:46.) We sincerely hope the members of the Church will give heed." (Spencer W. Kimball, Ensign, May 1975, p. 6.)

89:2

"the temporal salvation of all saints"

"Many parents, in so simple a thing as keeping the Word of Wisdom, excuse themselves sometimes on the basis of social exigency, sometimes on the basis of business exigency. There is only one basis for it and that is either a lack of belief or moral cowardice. No parent would deliberately subject his child to physical suffering. Any parent who would do that we would say is cruel, and yet it is just as much an act of cruelty and ultimately more damaging, to impale the child on the horns of a dilemma of conflicting loyalties. He cannot be fully loyal to a Church which teaches one doctrine and fully loyal to parents who decline to observe that doctrine. That conflict will be resolved either by the destruction of one or other or both of those loyalties." (Joseph F. Smith, CR, April 1944, p. 78.)

89:4

"In consequence of evils and designs which do and will exist"

"We, today, have before us abundant evidence of the evils and designs of wicked men. It is seen in the advertising of tobacco, tea, coffee, liquors and beers and wines. It is also seen in the advertising of prepared foods. So bad did this condition become some decades ago that the National Government had to take the matter in hand and Congress passed laws to control the evils which had arisen. These pure food laws have been very beneficial but even now there are ways by which the laws are evaded." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:384.)

"The revelation [Section 89], a warning against 'evils and designs' of 'conspiring men,' which may interfere with full human health, is prophetic. Throughout the ages the lust for gold has tempted men to place adulterated or dangerous foods upon the market. While pure food and drug laws now protect the people more than in the past, these 'evils and designs,' through excessive and misleading advertising, continue to appear in new and deceptive forms." (John A. Widtsoe, ER 3:154.)

"One of the most significant statements in the Doctrine and Covenants, one which carries with it evidence of the inspiration of the Prophet Joseph Smith, is found in the 89th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants: [D&C 89:4, quoted.]

"The purport of that impressed me in the twenties and the thirties of this century. I just ask you . . . to recall the methods employed by certain tobacco interests to induce women to smoke cigarettes.

"You remember how insidiously they launched their plan. First, by saying that it would reduce weight. They had a slogan: 'Take a cigarette instead of a sweet.'

"Later, some of us who like the theatre, noticed that they would have a young lady light the gentleman's cigarette. Following this a woman's hand would be shown on billboards lighting or taking a cigarette. A year or two passed and soon they were brazen enough to show the lady on the screen or on the billboard smoking the cigarette. . . .

"Now, it is common to see beautiful young ladies depicted on billboards, and in the popular journals advertising certain brands of cigarettes. . . .

"The radio has become one of the most successful means of advertising cigarettes. Attractive programs are presented, not for the purpose of entertaining the youth, but for the purpose of enticing and encouraging them to reach for a cigarette.

"Parents meekly submit to this and later deplore the fact when their children are hopeless cigarette addicts." (David O. McKay, CR, September 1949, pp. 185-86.)

89:5

"Strong drink . . . is not good"

"Over the earth, and it seems particularly in America, the demon drink is in control. Drunken with strong drink, men have lost their reason; their counsel has been destroyed; their judgment and vision are fled; they reel forward to destruction.

"Drink brings cruelty into the home; it walks arm in arm with poverty; its companions are disease and plague; it puts chastity to flight; and it knows neither honesty nor fair dealing; it is a total stranger to truth; it drowns conscience; it is the bodyguard of evil; it curses all who touch it.

"Drink has brought more woe and misery, broken more hearts, wrecked more homes, committed more crimes, filled more coffins, than all the wars the world has suffered. . . .

"But so great is the curse of drink that we should not be held guiltless did we not call upon all offending Saints to forsake it and banish it from their lives forever. . . .

"For more than half a century President [Heber J.] Grant has on every appropriate occasion admonished the Saints touching their obligation to keep the Word of Wisdom. He has told them what it means to them in matters of health, quoting the words of the Lord thereon. He has pointed out that treasures of knowledge, even hidden knowledge, would come to those who lived the law. He has, over and over again, shown what it would mean financially to every member who would keep the law, what it would mean financially to our people and what it would mean in ending human woe, misery, sorrow, disease, crime, and death. But his admonitions have not found a resting place in all our hearts.

"We the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, now solemnly renew all these counsels, we repeat all these admonitions, so we reinvoke obedience to God's law of health given us by God himself." (Message of the First Presidency, Oct. 3, 1943.)

89:6

"pure wine of the grape of the vine"

"The use of 'pure wine' in the Sacrament is permitted. But what is 'pure wine' if not the pure juice of the grape, before it has been adulterated by the process of fermentation? No fewer than thirteen Hebrew and Greek terms are rendered in our Bible by the word 'wine.' There is the pure grape juice, and a kind of grape syrup, the thickness of which made it necessary to mingle water with it previously to drinking (Prov. 9:2, 5). There was a wine made strong and inebriating by the addition of drugs, such as myrrh, mandragora, and opiates (Prov. 23:30; Isa. 5:22). Of the pure wine which was diluted with water, or milk, Wisdom invites her friends to drink freely (Prov. 9:2, 5). There was also 'wine on the lees,' which is supposed to have been 'preserves' or 'jellies' (Isa. 25:6). The 'pure wine' is not an intoxicating, but a harmless liquid." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 572.)

89:8

"tobacco . . . is not good for man"

"Tobacco is a nauseous, stinking, abominable thing, and I am surprised that any human being should think of using it. For an Elder especially to eat or smoke it is a disgrace—he is not fit for the office; he ought first to learn to keep the word of wisdom and then to teach others. God will not prosper the man who uses it." (Joseph Smith, Times and Seasons 3:799-801.)

"God has spoken to us by his latter-day prophets. He has given us modern-day revelation, declaring that tobacco is not good for man. That is the word and the will of the Lord to Latter-day Saints. Whenever we turn our back upon that principle, to that extent we turn our backs upon the Lord. . . .

"If you adopt the cigaret habit, it will, in large measure determine the kind of life you are going to live, the kind of friends you will have, the kind of person you are going to marry, even the kind of children you may have. Have you ever really considered what cigarets mean to a Latter-day Saint? You who smoke now, do not make the mistake of supposing that the Church is against you, because it is not. It only desires your welfare, and it hopes and prays for the day when you will declare your independence from the slavery of nicotine. And you who do not smoke, before you take that first cigaret ask yourself, 'Will it help me or hurt me?'" (Mark E. Petersen, CR, April 1948, pp. 152-56.)

89:9

"hot drinks are not for the body or belly"

"Again, hot drinks are not for the body or belly. There are many who wonder what this can mean, whether it refers to tea or coffee, or not. I say it does refer to tea and coffee." (Joseph Smith, Times and Seasons 3:799-801.)

"'Hot drinks' means tea and coffee, as those two beverages were the only ones in common use among the members of the Church, and drunk at a high temperature, at the time when the Revelation was given. The reason why those beverages were condemned was because they contained a habit-forming drug, rather than because of the temperature at which they were swallowed; although liquids taken into the stomach at too high a temperature, frequently and in large quantities, would be hurtful. But the chief objection to tea and coffee is the drug they contain. It follows logically that any other beverage which contains a hurtful drug or element, is open to the same objection, regardless of the temperature at which it is taken." (Smith and Sjodahl, DCC, p. 573.)

"The Word of Wisdom does not mention tea and coffee, but does speak of hot drinks. Patriarch Hyrum Smith delivered an address to the Saints in Nauvoo, in 1842, in which he declared that hot drinks include tea and coffee, and this interpretation was accepted by the Church. However, all hot drinks, whether they are stimulants or not, are harmful to the body. This discourse, which was published in the Times and Seasons, Vol. 3:799-801, and in the Era, Vol. 4, should be read by all, for the timely instruction it contains." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:385.)

89:11

"every fruit in the season thereof"

"The phrase 'in the season thereof,' referring to fruits and vegetables, has raised much speculation. It indicates simply the superior value of fresh foods as demonstrated by modern science, but does not necessarily prohibit the use of fruits or vegetables out of season if preserved by proper methods." (John A. Widtsoe, ER 3:157.)

"Some have stumbled over the meaning of the expression 'in the season thereof,' and have argued that grains and fruits should only be used in the season of their growth and when they have ripened. This is not the intent, but any grain or fruit is out of season no matter what part of the year it may be, if it is unfit for use. The apple under the tree bruised and decaying is out of season while the good fruit is waiting to be plucked from the tree." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:385.)

89:11

"with prudence and thanksgiving"

"The Lord has given us all good herbs, fruits and grains. These are to be the main foods of men, beast, and fowls. But we should not overlook the fact that they are to be used with 'prudence and thanksgiving.' In another revelation (Sec. 59) we are told they are not to be used 'to excess, neither by extortion.' The difficulty with most of the human family, is eating too much, and failing to heed his counsel. There would be less disease and mankind would live longer if all would also heed the counsel of the Lord concerning the use of wholesome foods." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:385.)

89:12-13

The Lord has ordained the use of flesh "to be used sparingly"

"The Word of Wisdom is not a system of vegetarianism. Clearly, meat is permitted. Naturally, that includes animal products, less subject than meat to putrefactive and other disturbances, such as eggs, milk, and cheese. These products cannot be excluded simply because they are not mentioned specifically. By that token most of our foodstuffs could not be eaten.

"That man can live without meat is well known, and he may live well if his knowledge is such as to enable him to choose adequate vegetable protein. And, all have the right if they so choose to live without meat." (John A. Widtsoe, ER 3:155-57 )

89:18-20

"all saints who remember to keep and do these sayings"

"Among . . . questions received we find such as this: 'Why does not the Lord give us further revelation to cover the many other stimulants and drinks and the proper foods for the body?' The answer is because such revelation is unnecessary. The Word of Wisdom is a basic law. It points the way and gives us ample instruction in regard to both food and drink, good for the body and also detrimental. If we sincerely follow what is written with the aid of the Spirit of the Lord, we need no further counsel. . . .

"Thus by keeping the commandments we are promised inspiration and the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord through which we will know what is good and what is bad for the body, without the Lord presenting us with a detailed list separating the good things from the bad that we may be protected. We will learn by this faithful observance that the promises of the Lord are fulfilled." (Joseph Fielding Smith, IE, February 1956, 59:78-79.)

89:18

"walking in obedience to the commandments"

"When we first heard the revelation upon the Word of Wisdom many of us thought it consisted merely in our drinking tea and coffee, but it is not only using tea and coffee and our tobacco and whisky, but it is every other evil which is calculated to contaminate this people. The Word of Wisdom implies to cease from adultery, to cease from all manner of excesses, and from all kinds of wickedness and abomination that are common amongst this generation—it is, strictly speaking, keeping the commandments of God, and living by every word that proceedeth from His mouth." (Ezra T. Benson, JD 2:358.)

89:19

"shall find . . . great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures"

"No man who breaks the Word of Wisdom can gain the same amount of knowledge and intelligence in this world as the man who obeys that law. I don't care who he is or where he comes from, his mind will not be as clear, and he cannot advance as far and as rapidly and retain his power as much as he would if he obeyed the Word of Wisdom." (Heber J. Grant, CR, April 1925, p. 10.)

"Our spiritual senses are more delicately balanced than any of our physical senses. Like a fine radio receiver with a sensitive tuning mechanism, they can easily be thrown off channel or even jammed by corrosive influences introduced into our minds and bodies.

"You, my young friends, can be sensitive to inspiration and spiritual guidance. To do this you need the wisdom and treasures of knowledge—they constitute a spiritual confirmation, your testimony of the truth. To have this witness fulfils the promise of the Lord. To be denied it is the penalty." (Boyd K. Packer, CR, April 1963, p. 108.)

"Knowledge is not merely the equations of algebra, the theorems of geometry, or the miracles of space. It is hidden treasures of knowledge. . . .

"Knowledge is that power which raises one into new and higher worlds and elevates him into new spiritual realms.

"The treasures of both secular and spiritual knowledge are hidden ones—but hidden from those who do not properly search and strive to find them. The knowledge of the spiritual will not come to an individual without effort any more than will the secular knowledge or college degrees. Spiritual knowledge gives the power to live eternally and to rise and overcome and develop and finally to create.

"Hidden knowledge is not unfindable. It is available to all who really search. Christ said,'. . . seek and ye shall find. . . . ' (Matt. 7:7.) Spiritual knowledge is not available merely for the asking; even prayers are not enough. It takes persistence and dedication of one's life. The knowledge of things in secular life are of time and are limited; the knowledge of the infinite truths are of time and eternity. . . .

"The Christ said: 'He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself unto him.' (John 14:21.) . . .

"And the Prophet Joseph Smith explained: 'And this means that the coming of the Father and the Son to a person is a reality—a personal appearance—and not merely dwelling in his heart.' (D&C 130:3 [paraphrased].)

"This personal witness, then, is the ultimate treasure." (Spencer W. Kimball, CR, October 1968, p. 129.)

89:21

"I, the Lord, give unto them a promise"

"A statement of the blessings that will follow the observance of the rules laid down in the Word of Wisdom: [D&C 89:18-21, quoted.] That is, the reward for keeping the Word of Wisdom is four-fold. 1. Self-control is developed. That is implied in verse 3 of the revelation which states that the Word of Wisdom is 'adapted to the capacity of the weak and the weakest of all saints, who are or can be called saints.' 2. Strength of body, including resistance to contagion, is a result of wise living. 3. Clearness of mind is the gift of those whose bodies are in healthy condition. 4. Spiritual power comes to all who conquer their appetites, live normally and look upward to God." (John A. Widtsoe, PC, pp. 39-40.)

"Every commandment of God is spiritual in nature. There are no carnal commandments. We have learned this from modern revelation. [Section 29:34-35.] While the commandments have effect upon the body and temporal things they are all in essence spiritual. The Word of Wisdom is spiritual. It is true that it enjoins the use of deleterious substances and makes provision for the health of the body. But the largest measure of good derived from its observance is in increased faith and the development of more spiritual power and wisdom. Likewise, the most regrettable and damaging effects of its infractions are spiritual, also. Injury to the body may be comparatively trivial to the damage to the soul in the destruction of faith and the retardation of spiritual growth. So I say, every commandment involves a spiritual principle." (Stephen L Richards, CR, April 1949, p. 141.)

89:21

"the destroying angel shall pass by them"

"From this promise in the Word of Wisdom and other scriptures, it appears that there are destroying angels who have a work to do among the peoples of the earth in this last dispensation. [Sec. 86:4-7.] The Lord told the Prophet Joseph Smith that because all flesh was corrupted before him, and the powers of darkness prevailed upon the earth, these angels were 'waiting the great command to reap down the earth, to gather the tares that they may be burned.' (Sec. 38:11-12.) That was in 1831. In 1894, President Woodruff said: 'God has held the angels of destruction for many years lest they should reap down the wheat with the tares. But I want to tell you now, those angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth waiting to pour out the judgments. And from this very day they shall be poured out. Calamities and troubles are increasing in the earth, and there is a meaning to these things.' (IE 17:1165.)

"Now . . . in view of this revealed knowledge and understanding which the Lord has given concerning what is transpiring about us, is it not a glorious thing to have the assurance that if we will clothe ourselves with bodies purified through observance of the Word of Wisdom, these destroying angels will pass us by, as they did the children of Israel, and not slay us? Well, this is one of the blessings to follow observance of the Word of Wisdom." (Marion G. Romney, CR, October 1952, pp. 32-33.)

"This does not say and this does not mean, that to keep the Word of Wisdom is to insure us against death, for death is in the eternal plan, co-equal with birth. This is the eternal decree. [1 Cor. 15:22; 2 Nephi 9:6.] But it does mean that the destroying angel, he who comes to punish the unrighteous for their sins, as he in olden time afflicted the corrupt Egyptians in their wickedness [Ex. 12:23, , shall pass by the Saints, 'who are walking in obedience to the commandments,' and who 'remember to keep and do these sayings.' These promises do mean that all those who qualify themselves to enjoy them will be permitted so to live out their lives that they may gain the full experiences and get the full knowledge which they need in order to progress to the highest exaltation in eternity, all these will live until their work is finished and God calls them back to their eternal home, as a reward." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., CR, October 1940, pp. 17-18 )
