Daniel H. Ludlow, Companion to Your Study of the Doctrine and Covenants, vol. 1 ( 1978)

Section 90

Background information on section 90

"No explanation is given why this revelation was received, but it is one containing information of the greatest importance and may have come through the prayers of the brethren as indicated in this divine message. It begins by saying that the sins of the Prophet are forgiven according to his petition, for 'thy prayers and the prayers of thy brethren have come up unto my ears.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:387.)

90:1-9

The keys of the Church are with the President and his counselors

See Keys of priesthood in Appendix A.

"When Joseph received the keys of the Priesthood, he alone on the earth held them; that is, he was the first, he stood at the head. It was promised that he should not lose them or be removed out of his place, so long as he was faithful. . . .

"If any man in that position should become unfaithful, God would remove him out of his place. I testify in the name of Israel's God that He will not suffer the head of the Church, him whom He has chosen to stand at the head, to transgress His laws and apostatize; the moment he should take a course that would in time lead to it, God would take him away. Why? Because to suffer a wicked man to occupy that position, would be to allow, as it were, the fountain to become corrupted, which is something He will never permit. And why will He not suffer it? Because it is not the work of Joseph Smith. . . . It is not the work of man but of God Almighty, and it is His business to see that the men who occupy this position are men after His own heart, men that will receive instructions from Him, and that will carry out the same according to the counsels of His will." (Joseph F. Smith, JD 24:192.)

"He [Joseph Smith] holds the keys of the kingdom of God on earth, and will hold them until the coming of the Son of Man, whether in this world or in the world to come. . . . The last speech that Joseph Smith ever made to the Quorum of the Apostles was in a building in Nauvoo, and it was such a speech as I never heard from mortal man before or since. He was clothed upon with the Spirit and power of God. His face was clear as amber. The room was filled as with consuming fire. He stood three hours upon his feet. Said he: 'You Apostles of the Lamb of God have been chosen to carry out the purposes of the Lord on the earth.' " (Wilford Woodruff, CHMR 2:151-52.)

90:4

"oracles. . . unto the church"

"The interpretation of the term 'oracles' as used in this revelation is given in the dictionary to be 'an infallible authority.' For the perpetuity of the Church that provision must be made for a successor to the president who holds the keys, when he shall pass away. The word of the Lord was fulfilled wherein he said that through Joseph Smith the oracles should be given to the Church, and by command of the Lord the Prophet, in Nauvoo a few months before his death, called the apostles together and said to them that the Lord had commanded him to confer upon them all the keys and authorities which he had had conferred upon him, so that the work could be 'rolled off' of his shoulders onto theirs. He thereupon conferred upon them this divine governing power, but this governing power could not be exercised by any one of the twelve while the Prophet was living. Upon his death the right to preside and set in order and to hold the keys of authority in the Priesthood and in the Church, rightfully belonged to President Brigham Young and by authority of the ordination he had received under the hands of Joseph Smith and by being sustained by his brethren and the Church, he was vested with the supreme power." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:388-89.)

90:6-11

"Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams . . . are accounted as equal with thee"

At this particular time, these two brethren were serving as counselors to Joseph Smith in the First Presidency. For biographical information on these brethren, see Appendix B.

"It is also recorded in this revelation [Section 90] that the sins of Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams are forgiven them, and they were to hold the keys of the kingdom with the Prophet in the First Presidency of the church, and in the school of the prophets. This school had been organized according to the Lord's instruction. These two men were told that through this divine call to the presidency they were to perfect themselves for their ministry for the salvation of Zion." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:390.)

"Joseph Smith was given two Counselors, the three forming the first Presidency of the Church. (March 18, 1833.) This was preceded on March 8, 1833, by a revelation declaring that 'Through you [Joseph Smith] shall the oracles be given to another, even unto the Church.' The pre-eminence of the President of the Church was maintained. . . . The Counselors do not possess the power of the President and cannot act in Church matters without direction and consent of the President.

"All this defined clearly the position and authority of the President of the Church." (John A. Widtsoe, JS, p. 303.)

"Elder Rigdon expressed a desire that himself and Brother Frederick G. Williams should be ordained to the offices to which they had been called, viz., those of the Presidents of the High Priesthood, and to be equal in holding the keys of the kingdom with Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., according to the revelation given on the 8th of March, 1833. Accordingly I laid my hands on Brothers Sidney and Frederick, and ordained them to take part with me in holding the keys of the last dispensation and to assist in the Presidency of the High Priesthood, as my Counselors; after which I exhorted the brethren to faithfulness and diligence in the keeping the commandments of God, and gave much instruction for the benefit of the Saints, with a promise that the pure in heart should see a heavenly vision; and after remaining a short time in secret prayer, the promise was verified; for many present had the eyes of their understanding opened by the Spirit of God, so as to behold many things." (Joseph Smith, HC 1:334.)

90:8-9

"unto the Gentiles first, and then. . . unto the Jews"

See material for 29:30.

"The Gospel was . . . taken first to the Jews in the Meridian Dispensation, and when the Jews rejected it, then it was taken to the Gentiles. [Acts 11:18; 13:46.] The Lord promised that the first should be last and last first in the final dispensation. Therefore the Gospel was revealed and declared to the Gentiles in this dispensation and then it must go to the Jews." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:390.)

90:11

"Every man shall hear the fulness of the gospel in his own tongue"

"It is the plan from the foundation of the earth that every soul shall have the opportunity of hearing the Gospel. The only way that this can be accomplished is by granting to the dead who died without this privilege the right to hear it in the spirit world. Therefore we are taught the doctrine of salvation for the dead. In order that the Gospel might be declared among the nations and kindreds and tongues, the Lord commanded that the elders should study languages and with all good books be prepared to carry the message so that people could hear it in their own tongue. This was one great opportunity presented in the school of the prophets. It is a remarkable fact that the elders of the Church going forth to foreign lands have had the gift of tongues by which they have learned to speak these foreign tongues within very brief periods of time. Not only is this the case, but there are many instances of record where the missionaries in conversation and when preaching have been understood by others in their native language. These cases have been similar with the gift of tongues as it was made manifest on the day of Pentecost, when Peter and the apostles stood up and spoke to the assembled people from all countries who had come to Jerusalem to the celebration of Pentecost. Elders who have labored in foreign fields who have relied upon the Spirit of the Lord and have been diligent in their labors can testify from all parts of the Church that through the help of the Spirit they were able to speak the languages of the people among whom they were appointed to labor, and this beyond their natural powers." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:390.)

90:11

"the Comforter"

See Holy Ghost in Appendix A.

90:18

"set in order your houses"

"Now . . . are you living so that you can go to the Lord with reasonable confidence that he will hear you? Can you go and ask him to heal your little ones? or yourselves? or your wife? If you can, when the time comes you will be happy and you will go to the Lord in faith, and the prayer of faith availeth much." (J. Reuben Clark, Jr., CR, October 1942, p. 84.)

90:25

An explanation of "Let your families be small . . . as pertaining to those who do not belong to your families"

Both the Prophet Joseph Smith and his father had provided food and lodging for many visitors and members of the Church as they came to meet the Smith family. Here the Lord cautions them to be wise in these things so that "those things that are provided for you . . . be not taken from you and given to those that are not worthy." (D&C 90:26.)

90:28-31

Instructions pertaining to Sister Vienna Jaques

"Vienna Jaques, a woman who had been kind to the Prophet and had cared for his wants when in need and had helped the elders, was now by revelation to be helped with means so that she could gather with the Saints in Zion." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 2:152.)

"A conference of high priests assembled April 30, 1833, in the schoolroom in Kirtland and took steps to raise means to pay the rent for the house where their meetings had been held during the past season. John P. Green was appointed to take charge of a branch of the Church in Parkman County. It was also decided that Sister Vienna Jaques should not proceed immediately on her way to Zion, but wait until William Hobart and others were ready, as it would be a matter of safety." (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:403-4.)

90:30

"meet in mine eyes"

See Meet in Appendix A.

90:32

"say unto your brethren in Zion "

"From the time that Zion had been designated and many of the members of the Church had gone there to make permanent homes, it became necessary that they have an organization and a presidency was appointed. The Lord seeing the danger of a presidency in this place growing in authority to think that they were supreme in that place, the Lord declared that word should be sent to Zion and the elders presiding there that the Prophet was to say to them 'in love greeting, that I have called you also to preside over Zion in mine own due time.'" (Joseph Fielding Smith, CHMR 1:391.)

90:35

"I am not well pleased with William E. McLellin, neither . . . Sidney Gilbert"

For biographical information on these brethren, see Appendix B.

90:36-37

"I. . . will chasten [Zion] until she overcomes"

"I rejoice to know that, while some of us may falter and hesitate, this people shall not be rejected. The Lord said to Daniel that the work should not go to another people [Dan. 2:44]; and the Lord has indicated that in a revelation given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. You find it in the closing two verses of the ninetieth section of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants: [D&C 90:36-37, quoted.]

"That kind of promise entails the necessity of chastisement, when we need to be chastened and corrected and brought to a condition of repentance. I recognize that the Lord cannot fulfil his work nor accomplish his purposes without our willing obedience. He will not use this people unless we are willing to be used; but he has means of correcting, he has means of chastisement, which he will apply from time to time, and the only thing that impedes our progress today is our own lack of willingness to follow the counsel of those whom God has appointed to lead this people because of the imagination of our hearts that we are wiser than they are." (Melvin J. Ballard, CR, October 1921.)
