Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Way to Peace

THE UNITED STATES is engulfed in an unfortunate war. Many say it is a war which cannot be won because of the diversified factors involved.

We call upon our enemies to halt the war, we offer concessions, we ask other nations to intercede, all to no avail.

There is no doubt about America's desire for peace. In every home there is a hope that the war may end. The ever-mounting loss of our young men is being felt nationwide.

The enemy has no apparent desire for peace, and our national leaders see no hope for an immediate end to hostilities. Some prognosticators say the war could last from 10 to 20 years. We as citizens might well remember that there is a sure way to peace, but we have stayed away from it to a large extent.

We are so absorbed in our personal—and too often selfish—pursuits and so swayed by our own "wisdom" that we have forgotten what God has said about this country and its wars. We have forgotten the promises He has made which would bring us both victory and peace, if we would but accept Him at His word.

As we cry for peace and seek the intercession of others, we also forget some of our biblical lessons about war.

In the days of Hezekiah, king of Israel, Isaiah prophesied that the Lord would not permit the Assyrians to take Jerusalem although they were besieging it with a large army. He said, "I will defend the city to save it"; and the scripture relates, "It came to pass that night that the angel of God went out and smote in the camp of the Assyrians 185,000."

Do we believe it? It was a miracle. But it happened. God is not only a God of peace, he is also a God of war when the cause is just.

In the days of Elisha, as the Syrians warred against Israel, the prophet by inspiration told the king how to array his armies and when to strike, and they were successful. At one time an entire army was taken captive. At another time, the enemy was smitten with blindness although in their worldly might they had completely surrounded the city.

That is the kind of power God will provide when his faithful believers are in a war to defend the right.

The Lord told the Prophet Joseph Smith that when his people are in jeopardy "I, the Lord, would fight their battles, and their children's battles, and their children's children's, until they had avenged themselves on all their enemies, to the third and fourth generation."

The Book of Mormon teaches (Alma 48) that if the people will serve God he will warn them when to prepare for defense and will help to fight their battles and actually deliver their enemies into their hands and give them victory.

The Book of Mormon also teaches that America is a choice land specially blessed of our Father in heaven, and that as such, He will protect it from all other nations if we will but serve Him.

We should take seriously what the prophet said:

"Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ." (Ether 2.)

What more could we hope for? Divine protection against all other nations under heaven is something which cannot be bought. It can be had only if we earn it, and to earn it we must acknowledge and serve the God of this land.

If we really want peace, are we willing to seek it in this way? Or would we prefer to trust in armed might and fight for it at the cost of thousands of lives? Even then it might be as unstable as the so-called peace we have in Korea.

During the Revolutionary War Americans learned a lesson which we should never forget. It was clearly demonstrated then that God would fulfill his word pertaining to America.

Repeatedly George Washington proclaimed his belief that our victory in that war came "by divine interposition," to use his own words.

Do we no longer remember his orders at Yorktown? Writing to his troops after the surrender of Cornwallis, he said:

"Divine service is to be performed tomorrow in the several brigades and divisions. The commander-in-chief earnestly recommends that the troops not on duty should universally attend with that seriousness of deportment and gratitude of heart which the recognition of such reiterated and astonishing interposition of Providence demands of us."

And in addressing Congress on April 30, 1789, Washington said:

"No people can be bound to acknowledge and adore the Invisible Hand which conducts the affairs of men more than the people of the United States. Every step by which they have advanced to the character of an independent nation seems to have been distinguished by some token of Providential agency." Don't we believe these things?

Lincoln virtually prayed us into victory during the Civil War. He set special days of prayer and supplication; he called his nation to repentance, and when victory came he designated days of thanksgiving to God.

It will be remembered that following the Battle of Gettysburg Lincoln visited General Sickle, who had been wounded in that battle. The general asked if the president had not been anxious about the outcome of the engagement.

"No," Lincoln replied, "I was not. Some of my cabinet and many others in Washington were, but I had no fears."

The general then asked the president what had given him this unusual assurance, to which Lincoln replied:

"Well, I will tell you how it was. In the pinch of your campaign up there, when everybody seemed panic-stricken and nobody could tell what was going to happen, oppressed by the gravity of affairs, I went to my room one day and locked the door and got down on my knees before Almighty God and prayed to Him mightily for victory at Gettysburg.

"I told Him that our cause was His cause, but that we could not stand another Fredericksburg or Chancellorsville.

"Then and there I made a solemn vow to Almighty God that if He would stand by our boys at Gettysburg I would stand by Him. And He did stand by you boys at Gettysburg, and I will stand by Him.

"After that, and I don't know how it was, but soon a sweet comfort crept into my soul. The feeling came that God had taken the whole business into His hands, and that things would go right at Gettysburg. That is why I had no fears about you." (Lincoln, Man of God, by Hill.)

But Washington warned in his first inaugural address:

"We ought to be persuaded that the propitious smiles of heaven can never be expected on a nation that disregards the eternal rules of order and right which heaven itself has ordained."

If we in this nation will now repent and serve Him, and keep His laws, He will fight our battles of today, just as He did in the days of Washington and Lincoln.

America is a Christian nation. Does she believe enough in the Almighty to bring down blessings of this kind upon her armies and navies today?

Or are we so in love with our national wealth and so engrossed in the treasures it affords that we have forgotten what God can and will do if we but subject ourselves to Him?

The Almighty does live, and He is a power to be reckoned with.

Whether we choose to align ourselves with Him or not, He is there. He is all powerful, and He is ready to fight for a righteous America. He has promised that no foreign nation shall overcome us if we will but serve Him. But it cannot be a lip service!

This present war need not go on for 10 or 20 years. Our boys need not continue to die in the steaming jungles of Vietnam as they have done already by the thousands. We may have a speedy victory if we but make ourselves eligible for divine help.

The Communists are anti-Christ. America reputedly is Christian. If we are truly on the side of Christ, and since the Communists are opposed to both ourselves and the Lord, will not the Lord help us?

But we must prove ourselves by our works. It is the sacrifice of a faithful people which brings down the blessings of heaven.
