Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Peace in Our Time?

WHY NOT RESOLVE to obtain peace this year?

It is not the kind of resolution which can be worked out at a conference table alone, although that is necessary. It is a resolution to be made in the heart of every human being, in which we shall decide that every one of us will be willing to treat everyone else as a human being, a brother in very deed.

Why not resolve to love our neighbors as ourselves? Why not so conduct ourselves that our neighbors will learn to love us?

Love does beget love, as truly as hate begets hate.

Love can conquer all. Kindness is the best panacea for our ills this world has ever known. Forgiveness is so godlike that if we are willing to exercise it we will acquire a divine characteristic which will lead the way to complete understanding. It will be as effective among us as individuals as between nations.

But that true love of mankind requires divine direction or we might err still further through our mortal weakness and thus defeat our purpose.

But such direction has been provided. It is available to all.

What is it? The Gospel of Peace which is the Gospel of Christ.

Overnight we could have peace if we were to truly live that Gospel.

"But," one will say, "most of the world is not even Christian. How can we expect them to follow a Christian plan?"

Our answer is that all nations, Christian or otherwise have their own religions, all of which teach love of fellowmen. And furthermore, if we but set the example, it will reach the hearts of others not of our faith. Love is contagious. Regardless of race or color, all understand the universal language of kindness.

But America must take the first step. That will mean a great readjustment in our own lives. More than a third of our people are not nominal Christians, nor are they adherents to any faith. But be that as it may, they still can be influenced. But we who profess Christ must begin with ourselves.

The Christians must become TRUE Christians. They must not praise Christ with their lips, boast of their godliness, and yet live in a manner contrary to His teachings. That is hypocrisy.

If there is one thing above another that God expects of us it is sincerity.

Can we be sincere Christians if we do not serve Him and keep His commandments? Can we influence other nations to love us as they do themselves if our own lives are hypocritical, if our acts belie our professions?

America must go through a period of complete repentance. It will indeed be a major adjustment, and in many instances a complete reversal of our daily lives.

But it is the way to peace, and the ONLY way to peace. There is no other way. The wages of sin is death, and we are now rapidly learning that lesson although we refuse, in our stubbornness, to admit it.

Peace can be obtained THIS YEAR if we determine to bring it about.

In Lincoln's day the president of the United States called upon every citizen to bow himself before "the offended power" and confess both individual and national sins. He called upon them to sincerely fast and pray for forgiveness. He asked them to learn of God and serve Him.

Will today's Americans do as well?

It is admitted that in Lincoln's day, although many fasted and many prayed, it was not a universal movement. Many failed to respond to the president.

In our day the need is at least as great as in the time of Lincoln. The nation is not at war with itself—openly. But it is at war with itself beneath the surface. This war has broken out openly in scores of cities which were burned and pillaged by our own citizens. Our streets are unsafe our college grounds even now are battle grounds in many cities. And in addition we are engaged in an Oriental conflict which could break into World War III at any moment.

If we Americans will but show enough basic character to recognize and admit our own faults, and bow before Almighty God, learn of His true Gospel, not the creeds of men, and then live that Gospel, PEACE COULD COME IN OUR TIME. It could come this very year!

But if we refuse to accept His teachings and follow His ways, peace will be taken from the earth, not to be found again until the Prince of Peace shall come, when He will destroy wickedness by divine power, which seems to be the only way mankind is willing that it be done.
