Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Toward God or Ruin?

THE FOUNDERS OF our nation were wise men. Faced with the sternest realities of life, they were compelled to look facts squarely in the face and act accordingly. Theirs were life and death choices. They could not indulge in trivial sentimentalities.

Out of such experience these founding fathers were convinced that America cannot alienate herself from divine principles of righteousness and survive.

George Washington, our first president, was a leader in this thought. He so expressed himself repeatedly. He knew that freedom came to America by act of God, and he knew equally well that freedom would remain here only as the citizens serve God.

Said he at one time:

"We ought to be persuaded that the propitious smiles of heaven can never be expected on a nation that disregards the eternal rules of order and right which heaven itself has ordained."

Franklin spoke out even more pointedly, demanding not only faith but works as well. He denounced the tendency to put empty creeds before virtue, and reminded his fellow Americans that when we stand before the judgment bar of God "our recommendation will not be that we said, Lord, Lord, but that we did good to our fellowmen." Thoughtful leaders of American life from Washington's day to ours have repeatedly said that to survive, America must turn to God in an earnest and sincere way. Lincoln made this almost a theme song.

Albert W. Palmer wrote in the Christian Century:

"Godlessness is the greatest peril of the present hour. I mean by godlessness just what the word in its barest outline means. To be godless is to be without God, to have God subtracted from you.

"To be without God is to have a world view in which there is no unifying power and no central intelligence. It is to have no moral code beyond the passing whim or temporary expediency; to live a life within which there glows no larger hope, and beneath which lies no undergirding purpose.

"It is a fundamental weakness of our age that too many people have no sense of accountability to anything beyond themselves. For them there is no Great Spirit."

Dr. Harold Lynn Hough, former president of North-western University, said:

"Only twice in history has there been such a moral bankruptcy as there is today. The other periods occurred at the end of the Italian Renaissance and at the end of the Roman Empire." And then he added:

"The cause of this condition is that we moderns have lost our capacity for spiritual fellowship."

The United States News spoke editorially on this subject and said:

"A spiritual revival would awaken America and purify her whole national life. It is not, however, to be obtained by mere expression of purpose.

"It requires action throughout our waking hours. Not until each and every one of us feels the impact of spiritual achievement, not until the eagerness to serve God is stronger than the eagerness to serve ourselves, not until we are ready to make sacrifices of time and money and power and pride for the sake of others who need our help and guidance, will we begin to understand the elemental transformation which is requisite to the spiritual rebirth of the nation."

When General Douglas MacArthur made his V-J Day address in Tokyo Bay, he said:

"We have had our last chance. If we do not now devise some greater and more equitable system, Armageddon will be at our door. The problem basically is theological and involves a spiritual recrudescence and improvement of human character that will synchronize with our almost matchless advance in science, art, literature and all material and cultural developments of the past 2,000 years.

"It must be of the spirit if we are to save the flesh."

General Omar N. Bradley, one of the heroes of World War II, said this:

"With the monstrous weapons man already has humanity is in danger of being trapped in this world by its moral adolescence. Our knowledge of science has clearly outstripped our capacity to control it.

"We have too many men of science: too few men of God. We have grasped the mystery of the atom and rejected the Sermon on the Mount. Man is stumbling blindly through a spiritual darkness while toying with the precarious secrets of life and death.

"The world has achieved brilliance without wisdom, power without conscience. Ours is a world of nuclear giants and ethical infants. We know more about war than we know about peace, more about killing than we know about living."

Warnings such as these have come repeatedly to Americans over the years. There has been no particular response. Still nearly half the nation belongs to no Church at all: depth of faith is not too evident among many of the others.

If America is to survive as a great nation, it must repent of its selfishness and avarice, and return to the simple truths of Christ. He can save us in this life as well as in the next. Without Him there is no salvation, either here or there.
