Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

For God And Country

ABRAHAM LINCOLN BELIEVED that the destiny of the United States is closely and intimately related to its faith in God.

He was convinced that America will be saved in any emergency if we will but serve the Almighty. But he was equally convinced that if we as a nation do not serve God, we will drift into ruin.

Said Lincoln at one time:

"My faith is greater than yours. I not only believe that Providence is not unmindful of the struggle in which this nation is engaged, that if we do not do right God will let us go our own way to ruin; and that if we do right He will lead us safely out of this wilderness, crown our arms with victory and restore our dissevered Union, as you have expressed your belief; but I also believe He will compel us to do right in order that He may do these things, not so much because we desire them, as that they accord with His plans in dealing with this nation, in the midst of which He means to establish justice.

"I think that He means that we shall do more than we have yet done in the furtherance of His plans and He will open the way for our doing it.

"I have felt His hand upon me in great trials and submitted to His guidance, and I trust that as He shall further open the way I will be ready to walk therein, relying on His help and trusting in His goodness and wisdom."

This he said in reply to a discussion with Senator James F. Wilson of Iowa.

We find ourselves in very much the same situation as did Lincoln. He was in the midst of a war in which for a long period he seemed to see no end.

For his answer, he turned to God and urged the nation to do likewise. He was sincere and humble. He acknowledged the power of Heaven in the affairs of the United States. Selfish interests in no way motivated him. He believed America has a divine destiny.

He sought only for the best interests of the country, and knew that God would help America overcome its problems if the people were only sincere.

At another time he spoke of the prayers of good Christian people seeking an end to the Civil War. He commented:

"God is on our side, and so is the Bible, and so are the churches and Christian societies and organizations—all of them, so far as I know, almost without exception.

"It makes me stronger and more confident to know that all the Christians in the loyal states are praying for our success and that all their influences are working to the same end.

"Thousands of them are fighting for us, and no one will say that an officer or a private is less brave because he is a praying soldier.

"At first, when we had such long spells of bad luck, I used to lose heart some times. Now I seem to know that Providence has protected and will protect us against any fatal defeat.

"ALL WE HAVE TO DO IS TO TRUST THE ALMIGHTY AND KEEP ON OBEYING HIS ORDERS AND EXECUTING HIS WILL." (Chittenden, pp. 448-50.)

Lincoln put his finger on the problem that confronts us today, and upon the answer to that problem.

America needs to turn to God in our present crisis, but not in any superficial manner. Deep faith, deep conviction are what Americans need, plus a determination to do as Lincoln said: "Keep on obeying His orders and executing His will."

No one can say that a nation torn with internal strife as we are now, with ever-increasing waves of atheism, and with the drunkenness, immorality and rebellions that we endure, has reached that point.

America must repent and turn to God, for unless we do, as Lincoln said, "God will let us go our own way to ruin."

Many centuries before Lincoln, an early American prophet said essentially the same thing:

"Behold, this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore he that doth possess it shall serve God or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of God." (Ether 2:10.)

Have we the courage to heed the warning before it is too late?
