Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Divine Way

WHAT ARE SOME of God's rules for ending war, poverty, riots and crime?

We have tried man's ways and will continue to try them without success. But God has a plan. It is through obedience to the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. And what are some of these requirements?

One of the greatest of all is the Law of the Sabbath. Moses taught that keeping the Sabbath is one of the signs by which the true believers may be identified. (Ex. 31.) Great promises have been made to all who observe this law.

But how many people now humbly worship Him on His holy day? How many use that day for pleasure and business instead?

Moses also said that recognition of a sacred Sabbath signifies the perpetual covenant existing between the Lord and His true followers. But if the sign of the covenant disappears, does the covenant itself cease to exist? Can we afford to be deprived of this covenant? Can we count the cost of such a loss?

Another of the great laws laid down by the Almighty is that pertaining to morals.

When will mankind recognize the fact that sex sin is next to murder in God's category of crime? As this world makes sex a plaything, it defies the Creator who made it and who fortified its sanctity by divine rules of conduct.

Can those who flout this law, openly or in secret, expect anything but retribution in the form of disease, destruction, and despair?

The Almighty strongly denounced the use of alcoholic beverages and enslaving stimulants. Can a generation which is willing to sell its birthright for liquor and drugs hope for blessings from the God whose word they reject?

He also requires honesty, compassion, purity and good character on the part of his followers.

Can liars, cheats, false witnesses, those who run swiftly to mischief, and those who spread discord claim the mercy of a just God? Can the dishonest? Can the unclean?

Can anything but the whirlwind come to those who deny mercy to their fellowmen, who rob widows and orphans, who are without natural affection, heady, haughty, high-minded, lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, blasphemers, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good?

Can those who refuse to do unto others as they would be done by expect the smiles of heaven? If we love not our fellowmen, as Jesus taught, then in all candor how can we profess any genuine love for God?

Can those who pray in hypocrisy, whose consciences are seared as with a hot iron, who despise true charity and mock its sacred ordinances, escape the condemnation of an indignant Deity whose Spirit will not always strive with man?

Every Christian should know that God does not walk in devious paths, nor does He condone perfidy in man. All should know too that the only path of safety is the straight and narrow way and that no one can walk therein without humbling himself before the offended Power, acknowledging his guilt and praying for clemency as he readjusts his life.

Latter-day Saints should know by this time that all saints who keep and do His sayings, walking in obedience to the commandments, shall receive health in their navels and marrow to their bones and shall find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures, and shall find peace to their souls.

But they should also have learned by this time the truth of the Lord's words in which He said, ..... when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise.

On the other hand, they should know that in following their leader who is their prophet and president, they can walk even through the valley of the shadow of death and fear no evil. The Almighty will lead them into green pastures and with both His staff and His rod will protect them. He will prepare a table for them even in the presence of their enemies, and goodness and mercy shall follow them all the days of their lives.

Latter-day Saints are but a small segment of the world's population, but obedience to the Lord must begin somewhere. Every Latter-day Saint, therefore, should dedicate himself to keeping the commandments of God and follow the leadership of the President of the Church. Thereby they, at least, like the leaven in the lump, will be making a good contribution to peace.
