Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

We Can Have Peace

Do HUMAN BEINGS really want peace?

We are beset on every hand with conflicts of many kinds. And all of these conflicts are of our own making.

We make our own wars, our own riots, strikes and lock-outs, and we sow our own seeds of family strife. We drink ourselves into alcoholism and drive ourselves into insanity and death with illicit drugs. At the same time we invite a tidal wave of social disease by our own immoral practices. We are the creators of our own miseries.

But if we would, we could avoid them all, so easily and so simply. It could be done this very day, and thus we could change the world from a state bordering on despair, to one of happiness—if we only would.

Every person on earth really yearns for peace. The starving would like more food, the homeless seek shelter. Those who mourn the loss of loved ones on the battle field pine for comfort to their souls, and indulge in what seems to be a forlorn hope that carnage may cease and that swords may be beaten into plowshares.

All profess to want peace, but how few will take the steps to obtain it!

Basically, wars, crime, and sin in general, are the products of selfishness. As long as this condition persists, conflicts will continue in the world.

But there is a cure for it—a way to end it forever. It is found in the Gospel of Christ.

If we loved our neighbors as ourselves we would begin to wipe out selfishness. If we were to do unto others as we would be done by, we would uproot the greed, the avarice, the stubbornness and the dictatorial tendencies that break up homes induce divorce, spawn crime and foster immorality.

If we were to "turn the other cheek" as offenses come, if we were to reconcile all our differences before we approach the altar of God as the Savior said, if we refrained from anger and gossip, from unwise judgments and from considering other people as fools, we would lay a foundation of mutual understanding even with our enemies.

If we would forgive as we seek forgiveness for ourselves, if we would be merciful and kind and long-suffering, patient and helpful a new day would dawn for us all and we would begin to learn what the angels meant as they sang on that first Christmas night.

Good will? What does it mean? Can it be something superficial—just on the surface? Can it exist without sincerity, humility, and purity of motives?

There is no place for hypocrisy in good will. There is room only for the Golden Rule.

And if we do not live that law we never can have good will nor peace on earth nor love among our fellowmen.

Christ offers us the good and abundant life. It would be a life so good that all the ills of the present day would disappear.

That life would be so abundant that everyone would enjoy the riches of the earth, yes all the things that make for comfort and prosperous living.

And this may be achieved simply by overcoming self and following the pathway of the Babe of Bethlehem.

It was no idle song the angels sang that night. It was full of meaning and had great significance. It was God's offer to the world and to all mankind of

Peace on earth Good will to men.
