Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Peace That Is Not Here

THERE IS CONFLICT in the place where Christ was born. Shots have broken the stillness of the air about Bethlehem. Battlements are nearby. Armed patrols keep down the threat of rioting. There is no peace where the Prince of Peace was born.

But neither is there real peace anywhere else. War in Vietnam goes on. The entire Far East is caught up in a series of confrontations in which thousands die, many of them innocent bystanders. There is a constant struggle for power and dominion.

In our country what do we have? On the surface there are many peaceful pursuits. Children play unharmed, in schools they are taught their lessons; people attend church services, and go to their daily employment. For the most part there is apparent peace in our land.

But under the surface there are stresses and strains which could result in an insurrection. There are threats of war as those who foment riots and arson talk of "getting guns" and taking by force whatever their whims dictate.

There is widespread labor strife. Long and costly strikes sap the vitality of industry, even interfering with delivery of supplies to our armies in Vietnam. Political campaigns become sources of costly conflict, dividing large factions against others, not in clean competition, but in bitterness and hate which, if allowed to increase, could threaten the safety of the nation.

There is also a dreadful rise in crime which gives anything but peace to the populace at large, and costs the nations billions of dollars every year, not to mention the lives and human suffering which are involved.

Where is peace? Do we really want it? And if we do, how much are we willing to give for it? Can it be purchased with money or favors? Can it be compared to commodities in the market place?

Can it even be found in parliaments or congresses or conventions or synods?

Where is peace, and how may we obtain it? All right-thinking people desire it, but few seem to be willing or know how to take the necessary steps to acquire it.

Where is peace? It is to be found only with the Prince of Peace. He has given us the formula by which all mankind may become a true brotherhood, and through which all of man's antagonism toward one another may be erased.

There was deep meaning in the first Christmas song of the angels: "Peace on earth, good will to men." That is what Christ can bring. It is what He came to bring. It is what He holds out to everyone.

Peace, holy peace. Peace of mind, peace in the soul. The peace which passeth all understanding!

Some feel that it is something to be obtained only in heaven, not to be enjoyed on this side of eternity. But that is not the Lord's plan. He intends that we shall have peace here and now. He gave us the formula by which we may obtain it. The formula is effective. It never fails. The failure is in our own refusal to use it.

And what is that formula? It is the simple Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, which teaches mankind to be true brethren and sisters, to love our neighbors as ourselves, to go the extra mile, to turn the other cheek, to forgive—even seventy times seven—to do unto others as we would be done by, to seek reconciliation wherein we have offended others, to avoid judging others, that we ourselves may not be judged; to be kind, patient, long-suffering, charitable, temperate, humble and God-like.

This is the formula. If we were to follow it, wars would end, there would be no rioting, pillaging, or assaults. Crime would disappear completely.

Every man would be a friend to his neighbor, every woman would be an angel of mercy. Children would grow up in an atmosphere of righteousness. No one would set them bad examples, none would teach them to sin.

Governments would be run honestly, nations would not learn war any more.

Wracked as we are with man-made strife and suffering, is it not time now to turn to God? Have we not adequately proven to ourselves what life must be when we reject the divine plan?

Are we to remain so blind and so stubborn that we will refuse to acknowledge our mistakes and humbly turn to the only source of true joy and happiness?

Need we "save face" in the midst of the morass in which we have placed ourselves? Shall we not be willing to repent now and humble ourselves before the Almighty, turn to Him and accept His unfailing way to peace?

Christ is the Prince of Peace. It is His formula of which we speak. It is His gospel, so long neglected. It is here for us all—freely given.

"Come unto me," He says, "all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light."
