Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Our Debt To "Honest Abe"

AMERICA'S GREAT MEN have left us an invaluable heritage.

Greatness does not appear frequently—that is, the greatness which leaves an indelible righteous stamp upon the world—but when it does it invariably points to the divine destiny which God has provided for mankind.

Abraham Lincoln was of that stature.

Lincoln was one of the great men of all time, of all nations. Around the world he is quoted. Around the world he is honored. Everywhere he is recognized as a specially endowed figure whose influence still spreads a light of hope in a benighted world.

What did Lincoln give to us—and what do we and mankind in general owe Lincoln?

In the first place Lincoln was a man of God. He had a simple, childlike faith, such as that spoken of by the Savior.

When he cried out in prayer, it was with an undoubting trust. He knew God was a living presence; he knew the Almighty was his Father who had raised him up for a special mission. All of this he attested to. None did he ever deny.

"He prayed as if everything depended upon God: he worked as if everything depended upon himself," as John Wesley Hill expressed it when he also said:

"He seemed to be of the same fibre with the prophets of Holy Writ, combining the kingly and priestly functions essential to the service of his nation and time."

At one time Lincoln wrote:

"That the Almighty does make use of human agencies and directly intervenes in human affairs is one of the plainest statements in the Bible. I have had so many evidences of his direction, so many instances when I have been controlled by some power other than my own will, that I cannot doubt that this power comes from above. I am satisfied that when the Almighty wants me to do, or not to do, a particular thing, He finds a way of letting me know it."

Lincoln—as a citizen of the world—set us an example of childlike faith in God, utterly and completely at variance with the so-called "intellectual" criticism of God and the Bible so rampant in the world today.

Lincoln knew that our country's safety depends upon our obedience to God—he said it in so many words—and also that when we abandon the Almighty our country is lost, and we are lost with it.

What do we owe Lincoln? We owe it to him and to our country—and to our God—to cherish the kind of faith he held so dear, and to be as willing as he to bow to the will of an overruling providence.

Lincoln was honest. For us of today, "honest" is part of his name. There was only one "honest Abe" in the world, and whenever that expression is used, we think only of Lincoln.

How could Lincoln be the spiritual giant that he was without this quality of honesty? He left us a heritage of honest principles. If we now build on that honesty, we shall continue to be great as a nation. But if we relinquish it, we shall slip into the abyss of destruction.

What do we owe Lincoln? We owe him our willingness to preserve the type of integrity which he willed to this nation. It was through it he saved our country. It is only through it that we of today can save our land.

Integrity in public office

Integrity in the home --

Integrity in the individual heart --

These are the bequests left us by Lincoln.

Our performance in integrity is a debt we owe to Lincoln and to all mankind.

Sum up all of his accomplishments—the preservation of the nation, freeing the slaves, his kindness and mercy to the unfortunate, his compassion for his soldiers, his statesmanship at the head of government and all will be seen as but products of his two outstanding characteristics: his spirituality and his uncompromising honesty.

We owe it to Lincoln, we owe it to our nation, to each other and to ourselves, to enthrone those same attributes within our souls and thus perpetuate the depth of character without which we can never survive as a nation, nor be happy as individuals.
