Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Our Debt To Washington

AS OUR NATION was saved through the divine strength and inspiration which came to Abraham Lincoln, so it was founded in the first place by the aid of heaven and the deep spiritual nature of George Washington.

Anyone reading the colonial history of the United States must know that our country was established by the direct intervention of heaven. They must know too that men like Washington, Franklin, Adams and Hancock depended upon the Almighty, and that when Jefferson wrote into the Declaration of Independence the words, "With a firm reliance on the protection of Divine Providence," he expressed the faith of the entire thirteen colonies.

When Washington fought, he did so with trust in God. He did not take up arms, nor the command of his soldiers, until he had gone to the Almighty in earnest prayer.

There was hardly a battle fought that was not preceded by appeals to Deity. There was never a victory won but was followed by an acknowledgment of divine aid.

This heaven-sent assistance was a great reality to Washington. He knew the weakness of his armies, their handicaps, their poor equipment and the strength of the well-trained Redcoats who faced him. And when victory came—almost as a gift—Washington was the first to acknowledge it.

America should ever remember his statement after the battle of Yorktown:

"Divine service is to be performed tomorrow in the several brigades and divisions. The commander-in-chief earnestly recommends that the troops not on duty should universally attend with that seriousness of deportment and gratitude of heart which the recognition of such reiterated and astonishing interposition of providence demands of us."

This is characteristic of his repeated statements on the subject. God was the moving factor in his life. Washington knew of the divine existence. He knew too that the Almighty had fought for the colonists, giving them liberty.

Students of the Book of Mormon are well aware of the extent to which Deity did take part in that war. The vision of the first Nephi clearly predicted that God would win the war for the colonists, and the words of the Savior are so clear that none can misunderstand:

"It is wisdom in the Father that they [the Gentiles in America] should be established in this land and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father, that these things might come forth from them unto a remnant of your seed, that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O house of Israel." (3 Ne. 21:4.)

The hand of oppression had to be removed from America. The people who lived here must be set up as a free people. IT WAS DONE BY ACT OF THE FATHER. But a human agent was required as in all other things. Washington was an agent of heaven in bringing about His work. He realized it and knew that God was fighting his battles for him. So in humility and gratitude he thanked heaven repeatedly for it.

Why was America set up as a free nation? In the words of the Savior, "that these things [meaning the Gospel as recorded in the Book of Mormon] might come forth from them [the Gentiles in America who set up the nation] unto a remnant of your seed [the descendants of Lehi] that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which he hath covenanted with his people, O house of Israel."

Thus we see Washington in his true perspective.

As a man of God he was raised up to be the agent through whom the battles of freedom would be fought, and whom God would assist in obtaining the victory.

He was an agent, too, in assisting to set up the new government after the war, and was the first president of this free land.

What do we owe Washington?

We owe it to him to perpetuate what he began, a free nation, under God, to remain free that "these things" (the divine message of the Restored Gospel) might go abroad in fulfillment of the divine covenant.

In the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith: "Brethren, shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward, and not backward. Courage, brethren, and on, on to victory!"
