Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Perilous Times Shall Come

MANY PROPHECIES RELATE to the last days. One of the most descriptive of them all is Paul's prediction to Timothy when he said:

"In the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves . . . lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God. Having a form of godliness but denying the power thereof." (2 Tim. 3:1-2, 4-5.)

It goes without saying that there are millions of good people in the world, Christians and non-Christians alike, who devotedly serve their God as far as their knowledge will permit. They possess much of the "milk of human kindness" and could hardly be included within the scope of Paul's prediction.

But obviously he envisioned enough of the world's population to whom his description does apply to characterize a significant portion of this generation.

Examine his words. He makes three points, and since he describes conditions related to the times in which we live, we should be keenly aware of what he says.

He wrote of our generation:

1—Men shall be lovers of their own selves.

2—They shall be lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God.

3—They shall have a form of godliness but deny the power thereof.

Consider each for a moment.

What does it mean to be "lovers of our selves"? In short it simply means to be selfish—self-centered and self-seeking.

And what does all this selfishness lead to? All the evils of life: crime, immorality, divorce, unkindness, dishonesty, avarice, pleasure-seeking, war—in fact the whole list of offenses involved in man's inhumanity to man.

Selfishness is one of the main reasons why some love pleasure more than God, and why they are content with a form of godliness while denying the power thereof.

It is what makes people want to "have their cake and eat it too," to use a much worn but descriptive expression. They want to "straddle the fence." They endeavor to serve two contrary masters at the same time, hoping in their selfishness to get gain from both.

They seek to palliate their religious consciences with a form of godliness and still enjoy the worldly things. This is why their hearts are far from the Lord since they are more interested in self-aggrandizement than anything else.

They deny the power of godliness because it is the antithesis of selfishness. It teaches men to do unto others as they would be done by, to love their neighbors as themselves, to be "Good Samaritans," to go the extra mile, to give their coat and their cloak as well, to be peacemakers, merciful, just, kind and forgiving.

Commenting on the fact that selfishness now costs America nearly thirty billion dollars a year in crime alone, J. Edgar Hoover, the great head of the FBI, recently said:

"What a grim and unhappy commentary on the moral climate of this great nation! The moral strength of our country has decreased alarmingly.

"We must return to the teachings of God if we are to cure this sickness. These shocking statistics, together with the public's apparent indifference to them, are indicative of the false morality we are tolerating today.

"It is a false code which is based on the worship of things of man's own creation. It is as imperfect and feeble as man himself.

"However captivating to the senses, this type of moral climate cannot give the support nor the strength which is so vital to our national survival.

"This breakdown in our moral standards can only render us impotent as a people and as a nation."

Speaking of the selfishness which breaks up homes, President David O. McKay once said:

"A married woman who refuses to assume the responsibility of motherhood, or who, having children, neglects them for pleasure or social prestige, is recreant to the highest calling and privilege of womanhood.

"The father, who, because of business or political responsibilities, fails to share with his wife the responsibilities of rearing his sons and daughters, is untrue to his marital obligations, is a negative element in what might and should be a joyous home atmosphere, and is a possible contributor to discord and delinquency."

When we become lovers of our own selves we undermine the very foundations on which we stand. We build in ourselves a false sense of security.
