Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Rumors—And Gossip

"LET HIM WHO is without sin first cast a stone at her."

When the Savior spoke those words he put all mankind on notice that none is perfect, not one.

But he also taught that we have no right to expose the weaknesses of another by maliciously pointing a finger of scorn and denunciation.

Who can judge his fellowman?

Who is so fair, so fully informed, and knows so well the depths of the heart as to see the intent and purpose of another's acts?

Who can sit in the scorner's seat?

And who can say like the Pharisee: "I thank thee that I am not as other men..."

The fact of the matter is that none is so righteous that he can regard himself as better than his fellows.

It is verily true that "there is so much good in the worst of us and so much bad in the best of us that it ill-behooves any of us to talk about the rest of us."

Then why do we so talk?

Most of the gossip that is bandied about is made up in large measure of untruths or half-truths. Most of it is repeated with some degree of malice or self-righteousness.

When the Lord has talked about gossip He usually has associated it with a "lying tongue."

This He did in Proverbs, sixth chapter, as He said:

"These six things doth the Lord hate: yea, seven are an abomination unto him:

"A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,

"An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief,

"A false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren."

Most gossip is at least secondhand. Most gossips have no firsthand information. They are usually rumor-mongers, and as such some become character assassins. Who has the right to blacken the name of anyone?

A lying tongue—wicked imaginations—running to mischief—false witness—speaking lies—sowing discord—all of these the Lord condemns as abominations.

And who can be saved in His Holy Presence if he persistently does any of these things?

Where is there place in heaven for character assassins?

Where in holy places is there room for those who speak lies and whose feet are swift in running to mischief?

Who can partake worthily of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper while devising wicked imaginations against his neighbor?

Who can pray with sincerity to a God who denounces the constant practice of bearing false witness?

Who can build spirituality while dealing in what God hates?

And who is worthy of the name of Latter-day Saint, who is not willing to help his brother, rather than to start a whispering campaign against him?

It is interesting that in this quotation from Proverbs the Lord includes the evils of gossiping in the same passage in which He speaks of those who shed innocent blood!

There have been times when men have sacrificed their blood to preserve their good name.

If we are true followers of Christ, what will our attitude be toward our brothers and sisters?

Will it not be one of kindness and forgiveness, of protecting the unfortunate, of defending those who are wronged?

Who, if not the Latter-day Saints, should be good Samaritans?

And as such, is it not as important to bind up the wounds in a good name attacked by gossip, as to bind up the physical wounds of one attacked by thieves?

Is there a worse thief than one who steals another's good name?

It is difficult to be a true follower of Christ and forget what he said in the Sermon on the Mount:

"Judge not, that ye be not judged.

"For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.

"And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?"

Gossip, to say the least, is hardly Christ-like.

1969 ﻿
