Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Smut's Part In Crime

THE FACT THAT smut is the leading cause of the sky-rocketing crime wave in America is strongly set forth by J. Edgar Hoover, head of the FBI.

Writing in "FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin," and reprinted in the U.S. News and World Report, Mr. Hoover says in part:

"The publication and sale of obscene material is BIG business in America today. Degenerate sex pictures and pornographic literature, covertly peddled and sold in most cities and communities, net greedy smut merchants millions of dollars annually.

"It is impossible to estimate the amount of harm to impressionable teenagers and to assess the volume of sex crimes attributable to pornography, but its influence is extensive.

"Sexual violence is increasing at an alarming pace. Many parents are deeply concerned about conditions which involve young boys and girls in sex parties and illicit relations.

"While there is no official yardstick with which to measure accurately the reasons for increases in any criminal violation, we must face reality.

"Pornography, in all its forms, is one major cause of sex crimes, sexual aberrations and perversions.

"Is our society becoming so wicked that we are turning from virtue and integrity to immorality and degradation? Are we becoming morally bankrupt and letting our principles of conduct and decency deteriorate? Are we forsaking the simple teachings of right over wrong and good over bad?

"Let us look about us. In the publishing, theatrical and entertainment fields, are the good, enlightening and educational qualities of their products being over-shadowed by too much emphasis on obscenity, vulgarity, incest and homosexuality?

"Many people believe this to be true. But the legitimate productions of these media are rather mild when compared with the `hard core' pornography flooding the country in the forms of film, `playing' cards, `comic' books, paperbacks and pictures.

"Such filth in the hands of young people and curious adolescents docs untold damage and leads to disastrous consequences.

"Police officials who have discussed this critical problem with me unequivocally state that lewd and obscene material plays a motivating role in sexual violence."

As is pointed out by this great advocate of law and order, "Pornography in all its forms, is one major cause of sex crimes."

We have pornographic films, pornographic advertising, pornographic magazines, books and posters, and shops which specialize in these things. Public newsstands are full of it.

Styles, both of men and women, have become largely pornographic. Tight, revealing clothing is as disgusting on men as it is on women. Shorter and shorter skirts are pornographic in the extreme.

All have their effect in boosting the sex crime now engulfing our nation and the world. And these are given further impetus by the demoralizing effect of liquor, now so freely and easily made available.

In some of the best residential areas of our cities, people are frightened to walk alone at night and particularly are girls and women not safe. Why? Who are the attackers? The sex deviates!

And why are there so many sex deviates?

Because perversion is made POPULAR by what we read and see and buy.

Every right-thinking parent wants his child to grow up in purity.

Then why do parents fail to take steps to further protect them?

It is all well and good for parents to talk and protest among themselves. BUT TO PROTECT OUR YOUTH WILL REQUIRE MORE THAN TALK.

We must use the available laws to fight pornography.

If laws are not adequate, then we must move to the legislature and demand sterner laws.

If courts do not cooperate in curbing this evil, then let us elect new judges.

If stores insist on selling smut, let the right-thinking populace wait upon the operators and demand a change. It is business they're working for, and they should know that decent people are still in the majority. The sad thing is that we are not as vocal as we should be.

Churches, schools, PTA organizations, all wholesome groups should band together to fight this menace.

If there ever was an ecumenical movement that deserves widespread support, it is the battle for decency. Surely all right-thinking people can unite on this point and FIGHT SMUT.

1969 ﻿
