Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

New Rules On Movies

THE MOTION PICTURE Association of America announces that it has a deep "concern for children."

This concern is seen in recent rulings by this organization to classify movies so that little children will be kept from vicious and licentious types if their parents will watch for the designations being provided by the manufacturers.

For some time there has been a wide demand that the United States government put an official brand on bad movies and indicate which pictures are safe for children.

The movie association did not relish such a step by the government, and so now has made its own listings as follows:

The letter "G" will indicate that a movie is fit to be seen by "general audiences."

The letter "M" will indicate movies which may be seen safely by mature audiences only.

The letter "R" will indicate showings for "restricted audiences," and the letter "X" will be the brand by which all may know that a picture is for adult audiences only.

One of the many difficult things about this listing is that children of 1 6 and over are rated as adults.

That means that 16-year-olds—just in the bloom of emerging sex emotions—will be allowed to see filthy sex films which will excite them to all sorts of deviations, from silent acts in the rear seats of automobiles or in motel rooms to open attacks on women and girls on the dark streets of almost every city in this land.

On this point it is of more than ordinary interest to note that a recent Gallup poll shows that 35 per cent of the white population and 40 per cent of the black population of America are afraid to venture out on the streets of their own home towns at night.

Fifty per cent of all the women in America are shown to be frightened to go out alone at night, in their own neighborhoods.

Most of these night attacks on women are sex attacks. They are made by perverts who even kill for sex gratification. And now the movies are producing "adult only" films to which they admit 16-year-old boys and girls, thus stimulating the very passions which can make perverts of them.

It is noted from the listing made by the Motion Picture Association that three out of the four classifications are intended to exclude children. Do they not see that so far as decent families are concerned, this action will keep families or unaccompanied children away from three-fourths or more of the films? Haven't children and families in the past been the best customers of movie houses?

Instead of stressing the "concern" these movie people have over children not seeing the filthy pictures, they should begin to make clean pictures which will be enjoyed by entire families—on a regular basis.

Why must the movie industry aid and abet the sex revolution which has swept this and other countries, and brought with it an epidemic of venereal diseases?

Motion pictures are among the strongest and best teaching tools known to education today. But why should they be debauched?

The volume of mail which comes to the editor's office protesting sex education in the schools is growing tremendously. Sex education in the schools also includes movies, some showing the most intimate of sex acts. They seldom provide the atmosphere of virtue in which the teaching of this delicate subject should be accomplished.

Now the commercial movie industry joins the schools in displaying sex in a manner which can only add to the promiscuities of the present day and to the revulsion felt by every decent parent.

Isn't it time for all right-thinking people to do something about the matter—both as to sex education in school and the additional "sex education" provided on the commercial screens?

1969 ﻿
