Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

In But Not of the World

CHRISTIANITY IN EUROPE has all the symptoms of a dying religion, and Europe is showing the results in shocking respect.

More people drink and smoke there than ever before.

There are more disrupted marriages than ever before.

Fewer people attend church services than ever before.

There are more illegitimate children than ever before.

There is more promiscuity than ever before.

And there is more social disease than ever before.

Sane people, looking at the facts, can hardly understand how Europe would give up the uplifting and elevating life of a true Christian for the filth of the present day. Truly one may ask, "What will a man give in exchange for his soul?"

Two recent reports from Europe point up the ravages of sex looseness which exists there.

The British Council of Churches, after a two-year study on "sex and morality," refused recently to condemn pre-marital relationships.

Sweden, after ten years of frank sex education in schools, is now beginning to count the cost in terms of greatly increased venereal disease, more illegitimate births, and a realization that 80 per cent of their young people indulge in illicit relationships.

In Britain it is understandable that churchmen of various denominations would now take the position indicated, for many of them, even from the pulpit, have long since let down the bars on Christian morality. High government officials have done likewise. Homosexuality and prostitution even of 16-year-olds are legalized. With this attitude on the part of their leaders, can the people be expected to live clean moral lives?

In Sweden sex looseness has become the way of life. After ten years of teaching sex in school the Swedes now find that such instruction has greatly increased promiscuity, boosted venereal disease beyond anything they are willing to admit, and brought into the world thousands of illegitimate children. Most high school students there regard premarital relations as both natural and acceptable, an attitude stimulated by sex education in the public schools.

The public instruction on sex now given there includes lessons on how to use contraceptives. Youngsters are taught about abortion and sterilization also.

Sex instruction begins in the first grade, and continues through high school, intimate details being openly discussed in mixed classes. Contraceptives are available in vending machines, and everyone is invited to use them.

The Swedes thought that the use of these devices would protect them from venereal disease but they are now shocked into a realization that there is no such protection, and that the incidence of the disease is sky-rocketing in proportion to the increasing immorality of the country. Education does not influence the V.D. rate, which increases with exposure.

America has its share of this sort of thing, as do all other countries. The let-down in morals is not confined to Britain or Sweden. It is world-wide.

But as immorality is world-wide, So also is the decline in obedience to the Gospel of Christ. They go hand in hand.

Christ teaches righteousness and chastity. Because the world no longer desires the clean life, it begins to reject Christianity. So in the hearts of the masses of many countries, Christianity dies. When people no longer uphold Christian ideals, they are no longer Christian. In America both spirituality and morality are probably higher than in any other part of the world. For this we are thankful.

The scriptures indicate that in the latter days there will be a vast separation of the righteous from the wicked. That day will come. But in the meantime, the righteous must live among the wicked, in the world literally, yet they must never partake of her sins so that they will not receive of the plagues of V.D. and other diseases.

At least one group of people in the world is committed to a preservation of true Christianity—the Latter-day Saints.

The Gospel has been restored to them, and with it the scriptural law of virtue. Chastity is as much a part of the restoration of the Gospel as baptism or the resurrection. Without it there is no Christianity.

Latter-day Saints are under covenant to be true to the name of Christ. That requires devotion to His laws and commandments, among the most important of which is chastity.

Latter-day Saints must ever remember that it is better to die protecting virtue than to live an unclean life. Virtue is more important than life.

We are to emulate the example of Christ and become like Him. That is impossible without virtue.

In this Church young and old alike must preserve modesty as a safeguard to morality, and cling to Christ-like virtue as fundamental to our faith. This allows for no extreme styles inviting immorality, no petting, and no unchastity in the slightest degree.

Latter-day Saints must be clean, for they bear the vessels of the Lord.

1969 ﻿
