Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Black, White, Or Gray?

PRESIDENT GEORGE ALBERT SMITH taught us to "stay on the Lord's side of the line."

Which line? That which is drawn between good and evil, between obedience and its opposite.

But is this a sharp line of cleavage, or is it indistinct, providing a "gray area" in which we may cross partly over, and still keep one foot on the Lord's side?

Does it allow us in this way to serve two contrary masters in an effort to get gain from both?

With the Lord there are no "gray areas." We are for Him or we are not. He asks us to serve Him with ALL our hearts, might and minds, and no one can give his all and still hold something back.

But many nevertheless try to create "gray areas" to justify their compromises. This they do in many ways.

Some drive a "bargain" to its legal limits, ignoring fairness in the transaction. Mercy and regard for the rights of others are not always considered a part of business.

But can business be divorced from Christian principles? Where is there greater need for the Golden Rule, for fairness, honesty and justice?

And what of our other standards? Is there a "gray area," for example, in our attitude toward the Word of Wisdom? How far can we go toward the ways of the world and still claim to keep the law?

Suppose a man has many dealings with those not of our faith. How strict should he be with himself?

If he entertains in his home, should he provide them with all they are accustomed to in theirs?

If they are drinking people, should the Latter-day Saint host serve liquor to avoid depriving them of their accustomed "pleasures"?

Should he have cigarettes available in convenient places when they visit in his home?

Does he feel that these things are essential to good relationships with his non-member associates? Can true friendship be bought with a cocktail?

Other questions arise also:

Should a Latter-day Saint allow smoking in his home in any case, even by his invited guests?

Should he allow drinking in his home on the part of anyone?

Should he ever have liquor or tobacco in his possession, in or out of the home?

Many members of the Church hold high positions in places of state and national prominence, and in business and educational circles. They are known as Latter-day Saints by their friends who also know the position of the Church on these matters.

Hundreds of such Latter-day Saints testify that their non-member friends EXPECT them to maintain Church standards and would be disappointed if they did not do so.

No guest would give affront to his host by smoking or drinking in his home when knowing the attitude of the family on the subject.

The average guest actually loses some respect for a host who lowers the bars for the sake of expediency. Let not the host deceive himself on this point. The guests know quite well that serving liquor and tobacco is an expediency to gain some personal advantage with them, and that it is a compromise of standards on the part of the LDS host.

It is not enough for the host himself to abstain from smoking or drinking. His home—his hospitality—must reflect his personal standards, and every guest will respect him for it.

And what of the moral law? Does God allow any gray areas" there? Can we be just a little unchaste and still please Him who said He cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance?

Is it not the same with filthy books and magazines? Their presence in our homes gives support to the adversary.

It is so in all we do. We must serve God with our whole heart, remembering that He allows for no "gray areas" where we may compromise with sin.

1969 ﻿
