Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

What Great Men Say

MAN CANNOT LIVE happily without God. There is only one way to happiness in this life, and that is through acceptance of God's teachings.

All great men—the deep thinkers—of the world agree on this point. God is so important in the lives of the truly great that Voltaire once said that if there were no God we would have to invent one.

The great need of the world today is an acceptance of the Almighty, with a willingness to serve Him. Without Him, our crises will continue to grow, our misunderstandings will increase, nation will continue to oppose nation, individuals will never cease to harbor hate and selfishness.

General Douglas MacArthur said a significant thing in his V-J Day address in Tokyo. As he surveyed the results of World War II, he said:

"We have had our last chance. If we do not now devise some greater and more equitable system, Armageddon will be at our door. The problem basically is theological, and involves a spiritual recrudescence and improvement of human character that will synchronize with our almost matchless advance in science, art, literature and all material and cultural developments of the past 2,000 years. It must be of the spirit if we are to save the flesh."

It is remarkable that others of our national leaders have expressed this identical thought in terms just as unmistakable.

Daniel Webster in 1852 said:

"If we and our posterity shall be true to the Christian religion, if we and they shall live always in the fear of God and shall respect his commandments, if we and they shall maintain just moral sentiments and such conscientious convictions of duty as shall control the heart and life, we may have the highest hopes of the future fortunes of our country, and we may be sure of one thing: our country will go on prospering.

"But if we and our posterity reject religious instruction and authority, violate the rules of eternal justice, trifle with the injunctions of morality and recklessly destroy the political Constitution which holds us together, no one can tell how sudden a catastrophe may overwhelm us, that shall bury all our glory in profound obscurity."

And J. Edgar Hoover, our great head of the FBI, said:

"What we need in America today is a return to the God of our Fathers and a most vigorous defense against the minions of godlessness and atheism."

Many other quotations might be given from many other leaders. They would all say essentially the same thing: America needs to return to God.

The riots, strikes, anarchy, arson, thievery, attacks upon the person, murders, rapes, neglect of parents, and the waywardness of youth all attest to our departure from a true worship of the Almighty.

No one who really believes in Christ would offend his neighbor.

No one who worships God with a sincere heart would rise up against law and order, and pillage, burn and steal.

No one who is converted to the Gospel of Christ would be guilty of crime, assault or immorality.

The widespread lawlessness which has marked our land, and which is seen in nearly every other land, is but evidence of the apostasy from or the disregard for the basic spiritual qualities which should mark a true civilization.

As Woodrow Wilson so effectively said in his day:

"The sum of the whole matter is this—that our civilization cannot survive materially unless it be redeemed spiritually. It can only be saved by becoming permeated with the Spirit of Christ and being made free and happy by practices which spring out of that Spirit."
