Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Keeping Our Standards

TWO YOUNG LADIES, one in high school and the other a freshman in college, wrote to President McKay a short time ago pledging their support to the standards of the Church.

Many such letters are written indicating the conversion of the youth of the Church to the righteous principles taught in the Gospel.

But this letter, signed by the two girls, was so touching, that the editors of the Church News published it in part. Said the letter:

"We're writing concerning an article we read in Time magazine which spoke of our Church lowering its standards to meet the demands of a changing society.

"We feel that our opinions represent the true members of the Church when we say we don't want the standards to be altered to conform with the `Great Society.' The standards we realize are strict, but we are more than willing to abide by them, because they were commanded by God, not men.

"They cannot be altered by anyone except God. We know it is right to obey God's commandments. Obeying the commandments sets us apart from a world of unbelievers, showing that we are on God's side.

"Obedience makes us individual beings because we do not conform to the whims of the crowd. Obedience makes us happy. And lastly, the standards of the Church and obedience to them gives fulfillment and strength we know the world cannot supply.

"We are anxiously awaiting the time when we can enter the temple and receive our blessings and become one with those fortunate ones who have already partaken of them, the people we so greatly admire.

"When we see these people living the standards and striving to live righteously, we are determined to reach our goal—temple marriage.

"The Word of Wisdom is another point of controversy, but is a standard well worth living. Our bodies are our temples and we believe in keeping them clean and holy and pure.

"We refute any suggestion of change in God's marvelous laws for our benefit. We insist that the standards are not too difficult to be lived.

"We accept the responsibility of the straight and narrow way which will lead us to celestial glory.

"We acknowledge this challenge and extend it to the youth of our generation and those who follow.

"The way will never be easy, but we will never alter our course.

"You surely receive countless letters such as this one, but we wanted you, our Beloved Prophet and Leader, to know of our support. With ever increasing love and faith we terminate this letter."

(Signed by the two girls.)

Shall the youth of Zion falter?

Not while they retain this spirit. And the spirit of these two girls is reflected in the hundreds of thousands of other faithful youth who love the standards of the Church, and glory in observing them.

Those who suppose that the Church will change its fundamental doctrines to meet the exigencies of the times do not understand the Latter-day Saints.

A people who have been willing to give up homes, employment, and even loved ones, to preserve their faith, will not yield to the pressures of the day.

The youth of today are just as deeply converted as were those of the 1840s. Anyone attending a youth testimony meeting will discover this. Anyone living month in and month out with groups of full-time missionaries would discover this great fact very quickly.

The youth of Zion are faithful, and whereas there are some who drift away, much to our regret, the great masses continue to sing: "Shall the Youth of Zion Falter?" and reply with a positive "No!"

1969 ﻿
