Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

A Teenage World

ON ALL SIDES we hear adults deploring the activities of teenagers. They blame youth for the increase in crime, for our widespread immorality, and call them a rebellious generation. But can they do so rightly?

It is admitted that arrests of youths under 18 for serious offenses have increased 54 per cent in seven years, and 19 per cent for children from 10 to 17.

But arrests of persons under 18 made up only 23 per cent of the total police arrests in 1966. And even though this figure seems high—and is much too high, we all admit—we may be reassured to know that only 5 per cent of the total youth population of the country came before the courts for serious criminal acts.

Compare that 5 per cent with the millions of youths who are useful citizens, active church workers, Boy Scouts and participants in a host of other wholesome activities.

The fact is that 95 per cent of our young people do not get involved in serious trouble. Then why should the finger of blame be pointed so persistently at teenagers as a class?

Teenagers live in a world made by adults, and their standards reflect those of their elders. They can hardly be blamed for the sin in the world, for most of it is not of their making.

The adults, not the youth, set the pattern of major crime in America—77 per cent of it.

It is the adults who publish pornographic books and magazines, not the youth.

The sensual and debasing movies are not the work of teenagers either, nor is the production, nor the acting, nor the distribution.

Can the youth be blamed for unwholesome radio and TV programs, or the suggestive Broadway plays that tour the nation?

Are they responsible for the shutting down of empty churches, or the denial of Christ by clergymen who claim that God is dead?

Who operate the houses of ill fame? Not the teenagers.

Who "rig" the elections, make the election "payoffs" and bribe receptive police officers? Not the teenagers.

And who are they who devise sports briberies, and persuade youngsters on the team to throw a game for a certain consideration?

Who defraud the governments in their tax returns? Who are the embezzlers, the bank robbers and the payroll snatchers?

What age group diverts government funds to personal use? Who robs the mails? Who are convicted of price fixing?

Who foment strikes and riots? Who are the anarchists and arsonists?

Who are the heaviest drinkers and consume most of the alcoholic beverages? Who bring liquor into the home for family consumption? Who spend their incomes at the gambling tables? Who fight the effort to protect the public from tobacco cancer and other smoking-induced ills? Who form the tobacco lobby in Washington?

Who are responsible for our record divorce rate, our abandoned families and the worst delinquency examples?

None of this can be laid at the door of our teenagers.

But on the other hand, who are the best church-goers in America? The teenagers.

Who are setting new and unheard of records in scholarship? The teenagers.

Who are filling most missions for our Church? And who are fighting the battles in Vietnam?

Before we lay too much stress on the downward trend of 5 per cent of the teenagers, let us pay some heed to the adults who lead them astray.

Most teens are good, honorable, forthright young people. In our Church it is the teenagers who make the best activity records. The teen attendance at sacrament meeting, for example, virtually doubles that of adults in many of our stakes.

It is the teen group that bears some of the most moving testimonies in fast meetings. It is our teenagers who carry an MIA program that has become the admiration of skilled observers the world over.

Our teens have one of the best behavior records to be found in any of the colleges anywhere.

The beatnik is absent from BYU and Ricks, nor are they enrolled among thousands of young people in seminary and institute classes.

Would adults leave their beds at 5 and 6 a.m., as many of our seminary students do, to attend weekday religious education classes five days a week?

The rising generation will be a great one if the adults do not spoil it. Given a fair opportunity, it will surpass the fondest hopes of its predecessors.

The great statesmen of tomorrow will come from the present generation of teenagers as will the greatest scientists and educators.

And in the Church, the prophets of the years to come are already in training in our priesthood and auxiliary organizations as the teenagers of today.

1969 ﻿
