Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

"Familiar With Her Face..."

THERE IS A philosophical truth which needs constant re-emphasis:

"Vice is a monster of so frightful mien As to be hated needs but to be seen, Yet seen too oft—familiar with her face -- We first endure, then pity, then embrace." —Alexander Pope

This is called to mind particularly as we read in current news dispatches suggestions in a recent Federal Government report, that the way to conquer alcoholism is to drink more liquor.

But just as astonishing is the further report that the National Council of Churches endorses the recommendation.

Some of the suggestions made by Uncle Sam's "experts" on alcoholism are:

Lower the drinking age to 18.

Permit colleges to serve alcoholic beverages in school cafeterias.

Publish advertisements showing alcohol being consumed by the entire family, including children.

Make liquor available to young people in church socials.

And increase drinking in the home and elsewhere as a means of replacing bars.

It is reported that it cost the American taxpayers a million dollars for this committee to produce these suggestions!!!

In another report a comparison was made between the use of liquor and tobacco with some claiming that alcohol is not as harmful as tobacco, and therefore should be made more a part of modern social graces.

However, medical officials show that alcohol is quite as injurious to health as is smoking, to say nothing of its moral hazards.

One of the most common and dangerous effects of drinking is contraction of cirrhosis of the liver, from which many people die each year. It is true that tobacco contributes to this disease, but not as much as liquor.

Alcohol is now found to be closely related to tuberculosis. Recent evidence has suggested that there may be a closer association with alcoholic consumption than with cigarette smoking in cases of this disease.

Cancer is the great plague of tobacco users, but it is also becoming one of the lethal enemies of alcohol users. Strangely enough, it is said that cancer of the mouth is on the rise among liquor drinkers. Although the facts are not fully known as to the cause, it is noted that there is a definite relationship between liquor and tobacco in causing this particular disease.

Mental disturbances are many among liquor drinkers. So are ulcers of the digestive tract, in some cases developing into cancer. Diseases of the nervous system are related to both liquor and tobacco.

We might go on. The fact is that both alcohol and tobacco are very dangerous to health.

But why do Uncle Sam's "experts" say that the cure for the ills of drinking is to drink more? Why don't they also say that the cure for health hazards in tobacco is to smoke more? The logic would apply equally well.

To bring more liquor into the home means more family drinking. Most young people who drink and smoke admit they started both habits in the home. Who can tell which of our youth will become alcoholics?

To bring liquor into religious gatherings is to defy the Providence who, throughout the Bible, condemns drunkenness.

To make drinking more general will add immeasurably to the death toll on highways, where it is being proven day by day that drinking causes more traffic fatalities than does any other one thing.

Vice really is a monster of hideous mien. Drinking, with all its ills—from broken homes to death from cancer—is just as hideous.

Can drinkers be so enamored of their liquor that they ignore these proven results?

Are they so "familiar with her face" that they suppose death and illness, divorce and debt—so intimately associated with drinking—are but a part of our way of life to be accepted without further investigation?

How much more beneficially could we have spent that million dollars in proper education against this vice, than to give it our complete approval and acceptance!

1969 ﻿
