Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Spokane's Tobacco Experiment

FOR SIX YEARS the city schools of Spokane have carried on an experiment with tobacco.

Elementary and high school students during that period have been given the facts about the dangers involved in smoking. A sampling of high school seniors recently showed that only 14 per cent smoke at least one cigarette a day, compared to 29 per cent when the experiment began.

Of 205 seniors sampled this year, only six said they would advise a younger brother or sister to smoke, and one of them admitted "Yes, cuz I hate her."

Ninety-six per cent of the students who took the course offered in Spokane schools ended up with a negative attitude toward smoking. Some of their comments were:

"Smoking is for the birds."

"It's like selling your soul. Nothing is gained, all is lost."

"A girl who smokes looks like a tramp."

But one of the striking comments came in regard to adults—parents, public officials and school teachers in particular: "I'm sick and tired of adults worrying about teenagers smoking when they do it themselves.

This spring the Surgeon General of the United States announced that a million Americans a year are giving up smoking, but that in the first four months of this year 18,000 Americans died of lung cancer.

A nationwide survey recently asked smokers in every state the question: Do you want your children to smoke?

Eighty per cent replied stoutly with a positive "No!"

But even though thinking this way, millions of parents continue the habit. The report indicated that when smoking is a part of the normal, acceptable family practice, it becomes a natural part of growing up for a child to begin smoking at an early age.

About half the nation's teenagers are regular smokers by the time they are 18. The American Cancer Society points out that at this rate a million of the children now in school in the United States will die of lung cancer before they are 70, and many times that number will die of or be disabled by coronary heart disease, emphysema and circulatory diseases.

It is estimated that every day in this country about 4,000 children try their first cigarette.

The U.S. Surgeon General says that each year in America smoking causes:

Between 125,000 and 300,000 premature deaths.

300,000 coronary attacks.

2,000,000 cases of chronic bronchitis or emphysema.

2,000,000 cases of sinusitis.

1,000,000 cases of peptic ulcers.

Commenting on the attitude of parents, Dr. Harold S. Diehl, deputy executive vice president of the American Cancer Society in charge of research and medical affairs, says:

"Parents can help their youngsters avoid the cigarette habit before they are trapped by it. First, teach your children all the facts about the dangers of smoking. Second, set a good example for them. The opportunity is yours. You can protect your health and help your children act intelligently to protect theirs."

Serious as are the health factors in smoking, for Latter-day Saints there is an ever greater hazard. It is the loss of spirituality.

For us it is more than a health measure to avoid the use of tobacco—it is a matter of obedience to the Lord.

God has commanded the Latter-day Saints to avoid tobacco. It is His will and His word to us.

Whenever we resist the Lord, we lose a certain degree of spirituality.

But when we both resist Him, and at the same time fill our bodies with uncleanness, we place a double handicap upon ourselves. The Spirit of God will not dwell in unclean tabernacles.

Both obedience and cleanliness are requisite to our salvation.

1969 ﻿
