Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

"No Thank You, I Don't—"

TAKING A STAND becomes increasingly important to the Latter-day Saints.

But it must be a firm stand—for the right! In some instances it must even be a fighting stand where one must abandon old associates and find new ones having tastes and standards like our own. And there shill are many of them thank heaven!

Conditions are reaching a point where we must stand by our convictions and our religious teachings as a matter of self-defense if for no other reason. It is becoming almost a necessity for survival in health and peace.

Note a few cases in point.

Take the use of alcohol as an example. So-called social drinking is fast becoming almost universal. The liquor manufacturers have set an immediate goal to make at least three-fourths of the population consumers of their product.

In some circles we are not `one of the crowd" if we don't drink. So what do we do surrender or find a different crowd?

Consider smoking. Must we smoke as the price of popularity? Or is it better to drop the smoking crowd?

Will smoking ultimately help you or hurt you? What does liquor do—for you or to you?

And morals, what of them? Is the so-called thrill worth the devastating price it exacts?

We have many boys in Vietnam. They have to take a stand also.

Clayton Fritchey's "State of Affairs" syndicated column says there are 4,000 "bar-fly" girls in Saigon alone and that at night a decent man must actually elbow his way through the gauntlet of sex solicitors, pornographers, night club outriders, and their ilk.

He says that venereal disease is the number one ailment of U.S. troops in Vietnam and that statistics of a year ago revealed that nearly one in every five servicemen contracted V.D.

Think of the effect on the individual soldiers! Think of the possible spread of the disease when those men return home!

The price is more than any nation can afford.

Our LDS fighting men in the war zone are taking their stand against this plague. They have organized themselves into scores of religious groups where spirituality is the key to purity. They are taking their stand both for cleanliness and for God. Can we do less?

And think of the liquor and tobacco toll here among us!

How do liquor and tobacco affect us?

Every doctor knows they destroy health and every promiscuous person knows they abet unchastity.

But they destroy spirituality too, and spirituality is our strongest defense against these plagues.

To surrender to worldliness is to invite disaster for ourselves and heartbreak for our families.

We often speak of the pestilences to come as part of the latter-day tribulations. But the diseases which come are those we bring upon ourselves.

The V.D. pestilence is already a vast world-wide problem. Nothing yet has stopped it. It is spreading like a subtle but deadly ground fire which no amount of wonder drugs can halt.

One doctor writes: "The medical profession, confronted with this sexual revolution, can only wash its hands and call itself an innocent bystander of our times."

The plague of alcoholism is but another self-induced pestilence of our times and with it the entire gamut of diseases related to it.

And likewise tobacco. It, too, is now found to be related to fatal diseases ranging all the way from heart trouble to cancer and showing itself increasingly in heart trouble, which is our number one killer. How much of this is self-induced?

Can we blame God for these modern pestilences as we bring them upon ourselves by our own foolhardy indulgence?

The scriptures say that the saints will be spared in these days of tribulation, but they will be saved only as they refuse to partake of the indulgences which create these plagues.

It is truly a matter of survival—physical, mental and spiritual.

If we would be free of them, we can follow but one path and that is the straight and narrow way which God defines.

1969 ﻿
