Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

"This Will Kill You"

THE NATIONAL TUBERCULOSIS Society is passing out posters showing a cigarette-smoking woman. The caption under it says:

"My dear, this'll kill you."

It is part of a new national drive against the use of tobacco. The momentum is growing so fast that the cigarette manufacturers are more worried than they have been since the Surgeon General's report on the dangers of smoking.

As the Wall Street Journal explains:

"To hear the tobacco companies tell it, everyone is out to get them. `Tobacco critics are at work across the land,' says Joseph H. Cullman III, president of Phillip Morris Inc. Says Edwin J. Finch, president of Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp.: `The tobacco industry is under attack by powerful enemies.' Adds Michael Harris, president of Ligget & Myers Tobacco Co., `Anti-tobacco activity continues to threaten us.

"`We are all part of a beleaguered force that is being attacked on one hand by tobacco-and-health charges and countercharges and on the other hand by anti-tobacco zealots,' says Fred S. Royster of Henderson, N. C., managing director of the Bright Belt Warehouse Association and president of the Tobacco Tax Council, a trade group.

"Things could be worse. In 1964, the year of the report to the Surgeon General linking cigarette smoking with health hazards, cigarette shipments fell 2.4 per cent; in 1965 they rose 2.8 per cent; in the first 10 months of 1966, they rose 2.5 per cent. Domestic consumption in 1966 was a record, the Agriculture Department estimates, though per-capita use was below the record of 1963.

"What's more, the U. S. tobacco industry, whose annual sales are more than $5 billion, spends $300 million a year to advertise. Its opponents have a total cash budget of less than $3 million a year.

"Why, then, is the tobacco Goliath so concerned about the anti-tobacco David?

"There already are indications, in fact, that more of the nation's young people are scorning cigarettes. Only 7 per cent of this year's freshman class at Princeton University said they smoke cigarettes, the lowest percentage since the school started keeping track in 1948. At Kelvyn Park High School in Chicago, more than 1,000 students have voluntarily pledged either to quit or never to start smoking.

"Evidence of the anti-smoking campaign is everywhere. In Maine, 30 large billboards in major cities carry a blunt message from the state's health department: `Cigarette smoking is bad for your health.' On the Merritt Parkway in Connecticut signs on the median ask, `Are you dying for a smoke?' Some 800 radio stations now run free anti-cigarette messages provided by the Government.

"The Federal Government has allotted $2.8 million this fiscal year for the Public Health Service to use in anti-smoking campaigns. Of this, $200,000 is being used in the Syracuse and San Diego areas for `community laboratories' aimed at changing attitudes toward smoking."

The UPI recently reported:

"The California Medical Association has asked all physicians to quit smoking and urged the doctors to advise their patients against cigarette smoking.

"`Surveys of physicians indicated that the majority accept the scientific evidence as a guide for personal behavior, and as a basis for giving advice to patients,' the council said. `Physicians have stopped or changed their smoking habits more than any other group.'"

The American Medical Association's AMA News reported:

"Smoking Warning: The National Advisory Cancer Council blamed cigarette smoking for an `enormous man-made epidemic of lung cancer.' It is estimated that 42,000 men and 8,000 women will have died during 1966 from lung cancer.

In England smoking has developed into a hot issue in Parliament. Health Minister Kenneth Robinson is planning curbs on smoking in all public places. He told the House of Commons that the lung cancer "epidemic" is now out of control. Nearly 200 British people die of lung cancer every day.

In the past the public has been slow to accept scientific findings about tobacco. But it is now being aroused, and every day more and more see that they may be "dying for a cigarette.

We Do Not Stand Alone!

MANY PEOPLE ARE ashamed of their religion, and many compromise their beliefs because they are afraid of the criticism of the world.

There are some Latter-day Saints in this category, particularly with respect to the Word of Wisdom.

Some actually feel that we are peculiar and alone in our position on liquor, tobacco, and tea and coffee. How mistaken they are!

The New York Times recently reported a convention of the Seventh Day Adventists. This denomination has a total membership of 1,600,000, of whom 380,000 are in the United States.

This group has not always been known as Seventh Day Adventists. It was formed prior to 1844 as an organization awaiting the second coming of Christ, which they expected on October 22 of that year.

When the expectation failed to materialize, a reorganization took place and in 1863 the presently known denomination took form.

One of the outstanding doctrines of this denomination, which does much good in the field of health, particularly with its hospitals and widely taught doctrines on foods, is its position on tea, coffee, liquor and tobacco, all of which are banned.

The Adventists regard the human body as the temple of the Holy Spirit and place great emphasis upon the relationship between the spiritual and one's menial and physical health.

It sponsors courses for non-Adventists who want to give up smoking and drinking and is currently concluding a 16-week weight-reducing course.

Its present plans call for 10,000 five-day anti-smoking courses in 50 countries in the next four years, and the launching of a similar effort to combat alcoholism.

It is of interest to note that the corn flake king, John Harvey Kellogg, a surgeon and dietician, became superintendent of that church's sanitarium at Battle Creek, Michigan, in the 1870s and invented more than one hundred nut and cereal products, to promote health.

But not only are the Adventists teaching abstinence from these harmful things, other churches are doing so also.

The Christian Science religion is strongly opposed to stimulants and narcotics, and has made a significant contribution to general education regarding the harmful effects of tobacco and liquor in particular.

Other smaller denominations are taking a similar position. So are many of the clergy in the larger denominations, although there is no semblance of a universal doctrine on these points among them.

How much more influential would they be if all denominations were to fight alcohol and tobacco, exposing them for what they are!

Some of their leaders say that tobacco and alcohol may be harmful physically but they do not affect one's religion. The fact is that the Spirit of God does not dwell in unholy tabernacles, and without that Spirit there is little spirituality.

How much good influence can a Scout leader exert if he reeks of tobacco, or if his breath is befouled by the tell-tale stench of stale liquor?

How influential is a tippling clergyman? Or one who smokes or swears?

Can they make friends and influence people for good?

If they are the leaders of boys, will they not lead them into alcoholism, a little at a time, or into spiritual decline, as well as causing the health hazard that tobacco produces?

Latter-day Saints can well take heart from the fact that they are no longer alone in their fight against these evils. Other denominations are now following our lead. Science is moving in our direction. Educators interested in this cause are increasing in number. Abstaining doctors now are counted by the thousands.

We are NOT alone.

But adding these "reinforcements" will not assure victory. With us, it is a matter of conversion. Every member of the Church would do well to exert his full efforts to keep and teach the Word of Wisdom. It is not a fad, nor a man-made doctrine. It is REVELATION!

1969 ﻿
