Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Dog Experiment

ONE OF THE most interesting research studies made recently was that conducted by Dr. Oscar Auerbach, pathologist at the East Orange, N.J., Veterans Administration Hospital, pertaining to dogs and cigarettes.

As reported in a recent issue of Time magazine Dr. Auerbach taught some beagles how to smoke. Beagles were chosen because their lung structure somewhat resembles that of human beings.

The doctor opened the throats of ten dogs with a tracheotomy, and after healing, connected them to a smoking machine. They were allowed to begin their experiment very gradually, but later worked up to 12 cigarettes a day which in the doctor's opinion was equivalent to heavy smoking in a human being.

At first the cigarettes made the dogs sick, as they do humans starting the habit, but later the animals seemed to develop a taste for tobacco.

As reported in Time, the first dog died on the 24th day of the experiment. A second died 205 days afterward, and three more died within 14 months.

Post-mortems were performed on all of the dogs that died, and in each instance "massive damage" was reported in their lungs. The lung tissue in the last two dogs to die was so completely destroyed that according to Time magazine the doctors had difficulty telling just what had happened.

In the other dogs the results resembled emphysema in man. It was explained that the experiment was not carried on long enough to tell whether or not any cancer would develop.

One part of the experiment, Time explains, was to perform tracheotomies on other beagles which were not subjected to the smoking machines. These non-smoking dogs were also examined after the same length of time, and were found to have perfectly healthy lungs.

Dr. Joseph G. Molner, writing a nationally syndicated health column carried in the Deseret News, explained that he has quit smoking because of the many health hazards in tobacco. Said he:

"In my case, I knew, as a physician, how much damage smoking can do. It doesn't take many cigarettes to establish the habit, and 20 or 30 or 40 years of smoking can do a lot of harm.

"We have very convincing statistics about the great increase in lung cancer among middle-aged people who have smoked for years, but that isn't necessarily the reason that is most impressive to physicians who know what ELSE smoking can do.

"Statistics are building up to show how much more heart trouble afflicts habitual smokers. Bronchiectasis, asthma, emphysema and other breathing difficulties are common and in time dangerous.

"I know one famous physician who gave up tobacco because he needed to get more sleep. Until he quit cigarettes he rarely slept a night through without waking up coughing.

"An even more famous surgeon who used to burn up four packs a day stopped because the nicotine was playing hob with the circulation in his legs, and a surgeon can't work unless his legs are steady for hours at a time."

Experiments will continue in this field. And with each new experiment will come further evidence of the divine inspiration which came to the Prophet Joseph Smith as revealed in the Word of Wisdom.

The Word of Wisdom is not only a guide to health. It is becoming much more than that. It is developing into one of the greatest of all testimonials that Joseph Smith was indeed a prophet of God, and that his work bears the stamp of both authenticity and divinity.

No uninspired man, more than a century ago, could have written into the Word of Wisdom what we read there today. No uninspired man could know that a century after Joseph Smith was in his grave, evidence would rise through scientific research to testify in unmistakable terms that "tobacco is not for the body, neither for the belly, and is not good for man."

But the same inspiration also said that neither strong nor hot drinks were good either, and as research upholds the inspiration of Joseph Smith in regard to tobacco, so it does likewise with respect to liquor, tea and coffee. The Word of Wisdom is TRUE.

1969 ﻿
