Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Should Children Drink?

IF HIGHLY TRAINED doctors of medicine and psychiatry advocate liquor drinking by children as young as four years of age, will you believe them?

In the February, 1969, issue of Today's Health, published by the American Medical Association, there appears a panel discussion by three eminent scholars, two of them psychiatrists and one an internist, all of them experts in the field of narcotics and alcohol.

The subject of the discussion was: "Should children be taught to drink?"

Incredible as it is that such a subject would even be considered for discussion in a respected medical journal, it is more unbelievable that these highly schooled experts would agree among themselves that children should be "introduced" to alcohol at an early age, probably as young as four.

All three experts were opposed to alcoholism and appeared earnestly to seek a way to abolish it, but none even suggested abstention.

They regarded alcohol as an essential part of modern life, such as automobiles, for example, and felt that people—even youngsters—should learn to handle their alcohol as they learn to handle their cars.

To the question: "Should children be taught about drinking?" one of the psychiatrists answered: "Yes, if they intend to be drinkers during their lives." He went on:

"All our teaching about alcohol is fear-oriented, full of horror stories about the evils of drink. If we are ever going to prevent alcoholism as an emotional illness, we need to develop healthy attitudes in people, starting when they are young."

The doctors admitted that alcoholism is bad, and that most alcoholics had alcoholic parents; that most drinkers started drinking in their homes by the time they were 14, and that they learned to drink from their parents.

Their main criticism was that when parents drink they do not do it "as a ritual," making something "sacramental" out of it, adding that if the parents would drink "culturally" in the home and teach their little ones to do likewise, there would be fewer alcoholics.

One of them recommended that this "ritual" with the children begin at about four years of age with diluted wine, which could be given less and less dilution as the children grow up. If drinking was "ritualistic," with ceremony and "culture" at the dinner table, extremes would be avoided and thus there would be fewer drunkards, it was said.

It all seems so unbelievable! But there was one thing they said which was easily understood, and that was an admission by the psychiatrist for the New York State Narcotics Commission:

"I also want to say that it ought to be clear that we are speaking largely from hypothesis. This is an educated guess, a calculated reasoning by people in the field. But it's far from scientifically proved or really firm."

Thank heaven for that admission!

Of course it is not scientific! Of course it is purely guesswork! But why do men of this standing in scientific circles advise parents to teach their children to drink—if only they do it culturally and with "ritual"—when they admit there is no scientific basis for such advice?

They may talk about not liking the horror stories accompanying reports on drinking, but those horror stories cannot be brushed aside.

It is still a fact that of every 50 cars approaching you on the highway, one is being driven by a person who is drunk—not just drinking, but drunk.

It is still a fact, as pointed out by U.S. News and World Report, that drunken drivers took 25,000 lives last year alone, and that there were 800,000 crashes due to alcohol in the nation last year.

It is also a fact that highway slaughter takes more lives and causes more injuries than all our wars. Up to 1961 in America 1,375,000 persons were killed on highways, compared to 1,125,000 killed in all the wars in which we have ever been involved. These same wars listed 1,275,000 wounded, compared with 48,000,000 injured on the highways.

In Westchester County, New York, over an eight-year period, 49 per cent of all drivers in fatal single-car accidents were drunk, and an additional 24 per cent had been drinking but not adjudged as drunk. In Montana 48 per cent of all drivers killed in auto accidents were drunk. In Buffalo a check showed that 55 per cent of all accidents involved liquor.

Shouldn't we have horror stories about liquor?

When will we accept God's word? Alcohol is not good for man!

1969 ﻿
