Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Should Children Drink?—No. 2

REFERENCE HAS BEEN made to the theory propounded recently by three scholars that the way to eradicate alcoholism, which is now such a curse to mankind, is to teach children how to "handle their liquor" so that they will not carry drinking to an extreme when they grow up.

The fallacy of such a proposal of course is obvious.

But should children drink? The fact is that many of them do, shocking though it is.

Most drinking children acquire the habit in their own homes, being given liquor by their parents. Some observers actually have seen beer-drinking mothers help year-old babies sip from their mugs.

Drinking parents naturally and generally have drinking children. Most alcoholics have alcoholic parents. But most abstainers have abstaining children, and, strange as it may seem to the scholars, there are no alcoholics among them.

If the nation wants to know how to combat and eradicate alcoholism, it may find a simple answer in: "Don't drink."

Abstention can cure the alcohol plague of America. Abstention would protect the morals of youth, and cut down the automobile accidents by nearly 50 per cent. Abstention would save more than 25,000 lives on highways every year, and reduce automobile injuries by almost a half million.

If this or any other country is serious about abolishing alcoholism, they should consider abstention instead of suggesting that we teach youngsters how to drink "culturally" in the vain hope that it will protect them from over-indulgence.

Liquor and tobacco are recognized by medical authorities as disease-inducing commodities. The government has warned against both, but has hesitated to take serious statutory steps against them because both represent "big business."

Certain members of Congress are to be congratulated on their efforts to join the courageous FCC in a recommendation that tobacco advertising be banned from TV and radio. It has taken a long time—and many lives—to bring our lawmakers to this point. It is estimated that 50,000 people in the nation die of lung cancer alone each year.

But 25,000 died last year on our highways in 800,000 liquor-caused accidents.

If we are willing to take legal measures to reduce deaths from tobacco-induced cancer, why not take similar steps to halt liquor-induced deaths and injuries?

Much as the liquor proponents hate the word "prohibition," it is not unreasonable to suppose that some important restrictive measures will be taken in the future with respect both to liquor and tobacco.

After all, life must be regarded as worth more than business, and if any business is operating at the expense of thousands of lives each year, it should be dealt with.

We make a great deal of the water and air pollution problems and are quite willing to legislate against them. But do they take more lives in proportion than do liquor-induced accidents and lung cancer?

Death-dealing commodities and practices should be placed in their proper perspective and dealt with accordingly.

How grateful the Latter-day Saints should be that more than a century ago the Lord gave to them sound guidance on the matter of narcotics and stimulants.

As a word of wisdom, adapted to the capacity of the weakest among us, He said:

"Inasmuch as any man drinketh wine or strong drink among you, behold it is not good." How plain is that statement!

"And, again, strong drinks are not for the belly." Can anyone misunderstand that language?

"And again, tobacco is not for the body, neither for the belly, and is not good for man." Research has proven this so completely that it is a wonder that anyone any longer uses the weed.

"And again, hot drinks are not for the body or belly." It is interesting that the new research which has concentrated so much on widely used stimulants now brands tea and coffee as enemies to health.

We are presumably a Christian nation. A Christian nation should believe in Christ.

The merciful God, who is interested in sparing His children from the ills of narcotic influences, has given us sound advice to abstain. Do we have the faith and good judgment to obey Him?

1969 ﻿
