Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Get Really "Turned On"

SHAKESPEARE WROTE ABOUT "a rose by any other name." He knew that names are important, but not conclusive in identification.

People talk today about things that "turn you on." It may be an exciting type of music, or certain kinds of companionship, or even substances that take you on a "trip." Speaking in today's parlance they all "turn you on."

The immediate question that arises is: Turn you on to what?

Companionships can "turn you on," it is true, into either safe paths or dangerous ones, into a good life or its opposite. They become junction points having both right turns and wrong ones. It is admitted that they "turn you on," always toward your next step in life. But what kind of a step will it be?

Consider music of various kinds. Some will "turn you on" by stimulating you to exalting moments. The great classics do that. Oratorios, such as "The Messiah" by Handel, can lift one into ecstacies. Martial music can bolster our courage, and patriotic songs heighten our regard for our country. Symphonies and operas thrill us.

But, on the other hand, there is sensual music. It also "turns you on," but to degradation and filth. It stirs baser instincts and, when combined with suggestive bodily motions, can "turn you on" to adulterous relationships.

One of today's greatest "turner on-ers," as the youngsters put it, is the use of drugs. And what do they do, help you or hurt you?

They can send you insane! This they have done to thousands of young Americans.

In one state mental hospital, admissions of individuals for emotional problems resulting from the use of drugs has gone up in a ratio of one to 47 in a two-year period. Another large hospital reports that within a year there has been an increase of 400 per cent in the number of youngsters aged 18 to 20 admitted with serious mental problems resulting from the use of drugs.

Presumptions on the part of some young people, sometimes encouraged by certain ones who claim some medical knowledge, that marijuana is no more harmful than tobacco, are proving to be completely false.

Marijuana like tobacco is habit-forming, but it is also destructive of mental health, and can destroy the entire future of young people who indulge.

The more powerful drugs, beyond any question, are causing mental problems of such seriousness that some of the patients may never recover.

In one typical community, as reported by the Associated Press recently, where 3,000 babies are born annually, one in every five will require mental health service because of the stimulants taken by the mothers, and at least 240 of those 3,000 will become patients in mental hospitals. All because their mothers wanted something to "turn them on."

Is this the kind of "turning on" that Latter-day Saints want?

What is the principal objective of our lives, and how shall we plan for it? Is it a noble aim to drug one's self into a stupor, thus becoming irresponsible, weak, a prey to every predatory person?

Is a "trip" taken mentally by use of a drug so desirable that one would risk his sanity for the rest of his life to "enjoy" it? Is there anything desirable in hallucination anyway? Or is it the clear cool mind that assures success and true happiness?

And what can give us this clarity of mind?

Clean living. Good health. Spirituality, and freedom from stimulants of all kinds, including alcohol.

Inspiration from heaven is available to every one of us under proper conditions. The constant guidance of the Holy Spirit is promised to us if we live as we know we should.

Which is to be preferred—divine inspiration or hallucinations?

Which encourages success in school or at work—inspiration or a drug-induced stupor?

Which will help to preserve chastity—divine guidance or addiction to demoralizing narcotics?

Which will give us proper standing in the world—a clear mind or a clouded one?

So what is it that really "turns us on"? Only one thing: The Spirit of God, which comes to all who sincerely live the Gospel, and every faithful believer in Christ is entitled to its ministrations.

1969 ﻿
