Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Handicap In Court

MUCH IS SAID these days about the diseases which follow in the wake of both smoking and drinking.

Recently Listen magazine, in an editorial by Francis A. Soper, its editor, pointed out the handicaps that face drinkers when they have accidents and have to go to court.

Mr. Soper wrote:

"No batter in the game of baseball would wish to step up to the plate with a strike automatically called against him before he starts.

"Yet that is comparable to what happens when a person takes a case involving his own use of alcohol into court and expects a jury to decide that case.

"It is generally assumed that evidence of consumption of alcohol by a party to a lawsuit will react to his disadvantage.

"The extent to which this is true is graphically illustrated in a series of reports drawn up by the Jury Verdict Research, Inc., of Cleveland, Ohio, for reference by insurance companies.

"In these reports it was found that when the plaintiff in a personal-injury case is alleged to have been drinking at the time of the occurrence it reduces his chances of winning his case by 44.5 per cent, a reduction of almost one half.

"The reductions from normal recovery rates within various liability situations were shown to be as follows: pedestrians struck by vehicles, 43 per cent; driver vs. driver cases, 52 per cent; drivers colliding with objects, 38 per cent; carrier accidents, 31 per cent; passenger cases, 66 per cent; occupier liability, 13 per cent; work injuries, 7 per cent.

"The allegation that the plaintiff had been drinking reduces the award he would otherwise expect to receive by an average of 25 per cent.

"If the plaintiff in a personal-injury case claims, with some substantiation, that the defendant had been drinking prior to the accident, it increases the plaintiff's chances of winning his case by 27 per cent, and reduces the defendant's chances of winning by 43 per cent.

"In other words, it can be said that either plaintiff or defendant, who is claimed to have been more or less under the influence of intoxicants at the time of an accident, stands a much smaller chance of winning his case than if no such allegation had been made.

"When both plaintiff and defendant in a personal-injury suit are claimed to have been drinking, it reduces the plaintiff's rate of recovery by 15 per cent. Conversely, the defendant wins 24 per cent more of these cases than those in which alcohol is not an issue.

"It is evident, then, that anyone involved with alcohol has much less chance in court to win verdicts and awards favorable to himself. A jury which finds alcohol to be an ingredient in any case is loathe to overlook its significance and immediately chalks up one strike against the batter!

"Why would anyone want to go up to bat with a strike already against him?"

In previous articles Mr. Soper has pointed out, as have many others, that not only do drinkers handicap themselves in court, but in every other way.

Drinking handicaps one in business, despite the custom of drinking cocktails as part of the process of "warming up" a business deal.

It handicaps a person in school.

It handicaps him in the home. Many divorces follow in the bitter wake of alcohol.

It corrupts morals, and lowers the bars of resistance to such a point that many indulgences occur that never would happen were the persons involved sober.

It boosts crime tremendously.

Is there one good thing that can be said about drinking?

It is one of the major threats to our happy existence today.

The drinker certainly "goes to bat" with at least one—and often two—strikes against him.

1969 ﻿
