Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Year's Understatement

FROM WILLIAMSTOWN, MASSACHUSETTS, comes a letter enclosing an editorial from the North Adams Transcript, entitled "Smoking is Dangerous."

Because of the interest in its subject matter, we reproduce below, with full credit to the Transcript, its editorial:

"Caution. Cigarette Smoking May Be Hazardous To Your Health."

This warning, contained in the tiniest of type on every cigarette package, may turn out to be the understatement of the century.

Actually, the warning was never strong enough. The government decreed that it must be printed on every package only after cigarette manufacturers had managed to defeat demands that much more positive and stringent warnings be included not only on every pack of cigarettes but in every advertisement for them.

And the case for a stronger warning—even for banning cigarettes entirely as a poisonous health hazard—was contained in the 1964 report of the U.S. Surgeon General on smoking.

Now comes a supplement to that report which strengthens and extends the original findings.

Among other things, the new report strongly indicates that smoking can cause many more ailments—many of them often fatal ailments—than cancer, the big villain of the original government report.

For example, take the new report's conclusions on heart disease. Between the ages of 45 and 54, it was found, male smokers of 10 or more cigarettes a day are three times more likely to die and female smokers twice as likely as persons who never smoked regularly. One of the reasons for this, the researchers found, is that nicotine increases the heart rate and output, resulting in an increased demand for oxygen by the heart muscle. At the same time the carbon monoxide in cigarette smoke, competing with oxygen for passage through the blood stream, causes a decrease in the oxygen available to the heart at a time when the heart's need for it is increased. Furthermore, smoking speeds up the formation of blood clots, which may result in coronary thrombosis.

In short, the report concludes, the evidence "strongly suggests that cigarette smoking can cause death from coronary heart disease."

When it is realized that heart disease is an even bigger killer than lung cancer, the real significance of this finding becomes obvious.

As for lung cancer itself, the new report states that an eight-and-a-half year follow-up study of 290,000 veterans showed that persons aged 55 to 64 who smoked two packs a day were 34 times more likely to die of lung cancer than were non-smokers. The report also states that smokers are four to five times more apt to die from cancer of the esophagus and three to 19 times more apt to incur cancer of the larynx than non-smokers.

In addition, a national health survey found that the incidence of peptic ulcers was almost 100 per cent greater among male smokers and over 50 per cent greater among female smokers than among non-smokers.

The report also cited an association between smoking and such diseases as stroke, aortic aneurism, emphysema, and cancer of the mouth, pharynx and bladder.

Obviously, if lung cancer, with its high death rate, did not already present enough hazard to justify the strongest possible efforts to discourage the use of cigarettes, these other diseases would.

It is too much to hope that warnings on packages and in advertisements will alone prevent people from smoking cigarettes—particularly people who are already "hooked" by the habit.

But warnings and greater education in the hazards of smoking may deter some young people from smoking so much that they get the habit.

And certainly, there is evidence enough now to justify rewriting the cigarette warning to read not that smoking "may be hazardous," but to state the truth in simple language:

"Warning: Cigarette Smoking Is Dangerous To Your Health and May Cause Death From Cancer Or Other Diseases."

1969 ﻿
