Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Most Adults Don't Drink

A BRAND RATING Index, recently published in a medical journal, indicates that 5.9 per cent of the 117,000,000 adults in the United States drink 47.8 per cent of the hard liquor consumed in this country.

Twenty per cent of the adult population are reported to be total abstainers, with another 10 per cent drinking so infrequently that they can be classed as abstainers.

The report indicated another 30 per cent, totaling 35,000,000 people, spend less than $5 per year for liquor.

So about 60 per cent of the adult population adds very little to the liquor traffic.

But among the other 40 per cent there is a great deal of drinking, and at a high cost.

The report noted that most money "per drink" was spent by business executives, who averaged $2.90 per day for liquor, with the top figure reaching $7 per day, since this group uses the most costly brands.

Statistics indicate that most teenagers who drink learn to do so in their own homes, and that parents not only set them the example, but actually provide the liquor for them.

This trend is creating consternation among the organizations now fighting alcoholism, who see in it a rapidly growing threat to the younger generation who are turning more and more to think mistakenly that liquor is the door to social acceptance.

But the fact that 60 per cent of the population is virtually free from the use of liquor is most encouraging.

As many are now turning away from the use of tobacco for health reasons, so a good many are beginning to turn from liquor for the same reason.

However, the liquor interests are invading certain groups heretofore thought to be fairly safe from their allurements.

At a recent convocation of Methodists, a relaxing of the church tenets against the use of alcohol was attempted, but was battled vigorously by those who sought to hold the line which had made Methodists famous in their fight against drink.

A survey had shown that 61 per cent of Methodists above 15 years of age use liquor at some time. Advocates of relaxing the stand of that church against its use argued that "the policy of abstinence is producing hypocrisy and a loss of integrity in the corporate life of the church and in the lives of many ministers and laymen.

It had been recommended that the church do away with a pledge long held sacred among Methodists requiring clergymen to be complete abstainers, and that whether a layman drinks or not be left to the discretion of the individual.

These recommendations were fought vigorously and vehemently.

So far as Latter-day Saints are concerned, they can take but one position. If they believe in the revelations of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith, they must be abstainers, and must do all within their power to teach their children to follow this example.

They must take a position against any movement which would relax the curbs on liquor, and must support public officials in enforcing the law.

To make liquor more readily available is to add to the number of alcoholics. Who can tell which of us will become an alcoholic? Whose home will be wrecked? Whose virtue will be lost?

The liquor question is a moral one. Liquor at no time has added to virtue, stability or good character. Always it has had the opposite effect.

This is not to say that everyone who uses it is a weak character, for that would be an unjust statement.

But it is true that liquor is an evil which is weakening the nation as a whole, adding to the crime rate, leading many into acts which they would never commit if they were sober, and which constantly tends to break down home life and family ties.

For us there can be only one position—control liquor and fight its demoralizing effects, even as we would fight any other evil.

1969 ﻿
