Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Tobacco War Goes On

IT MAY TAKE another generation to wipe out smoking and its evils.

Our present generation forms the battle force which we hope will bring forth the necessary victory for the next one.

But the battle goes on, and furiously. Tobacco manufacturers of course are fighting to the death to protect their business, and we may expect them to continue to do so.

And yet, stronger forces in greater numbers are constantly arising to expose the tobacco habit for what it is—a deadly enemy of mankind.

In Albany, N. Y., Health Commissioner Hollis S. Ingraham of that state has called for a renewed "war" on cigarettes and asks that smoking be outlawed in all schools and public buildings in the state of New York. He classes smoking as "an epidemic of disease unique to the Twentieth Century."

"I can state unequivocally," he said, "that the cigarette is an agent of disease—cancer, heart and respiratory illness."

He called upon the state of New York to institute intensive instruction in all schools pertaining to the hazards of smoking, and urged the enlistment of all parent-teacher organizations in an anti-smoking crusade.

With financial assistance from the U.S. Public Health Service, the National Congress of Parents and Teachers has begun a campaign which they hope will develop "the first smokeless generation since man started putting shredded tobacco leaves into tubes of paper."

Over two and a half million families in 21 states joined the movement. According to H. Carl Smith, national project director, the program is moving forward with "unbelievable momentum." It will be taken into all 50 states within a year.

One of the sad comments arising out of this movement is that "emulation of adult behavior accounts for most of the smoking among children and youth."

Recently the magazine Business Week reported the first World Conference on Smoking and Health held in New York City, attended by 511 public health experts from all over the United States and 33 other countries.

All were reported to be eagerly seeking the latest reports linking tobacco to disease. All were anxious to launch crusades for "citizen action against cigarette smoking."

Dr. William H. Stewart, U.S. Surgeon General, recently issued a report entitled "The Health Consequences of Smoking" which is a companion to the 1964 report of the same federal office entitled "Smoking and Health."

The Surgeon General says "there is no longer any point of controversy among reasonable men" on the subject of tobacco and health.

Dr. Daniel Horn of the Public Health Service says that the cigarette habit "has suddenly turned into a monster, and we are hooked, both as individuals and as society."

Last September Business Week published several pages of suggestions under the heading "So You Want to Quit Smoking," together with a report on Senator Robert Kennedy's attack upon the habit.

Other nations continue their work on the smoking evil also. Only recently the Italian government, which obtains 10 per cent of its annual revenue from the state tobacco monopoly, announced a nationwide campaign against smoking, as published in a recent issue of the A.M.A. News for the American Medical Association.

In England tobacco provides the government nearly three billion dollars in tax revenues every year, but even that country is taking further steps to curb smoking. To date it has done more officially than the United States in that direction.

No longer are there any doubts about the lethal effects of tobacco on health. The problem now is the smoking public.

The question arises: Why do people continue to smoke when the facts are so revealing and frightening?

And the answer? It may require a new generation to conquer the habit. The present one seems to prefer to run the risk, hoping that "it won't ever happen to me."

1969 ﻿
