Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

What Does God Think?

IN ALL THE debate over a new morality, use of intoxicating beverages, violence and crime, has anyone stopped to ask seriously what God thinks about these things? And would we accept His word if it were made known?

The tendency is to make up our minds on a basis of our own selfish purposes. As an editorial in a recent issue of Parents' magazine sadly said, "We are no longer willing to make arbitrary rules about what is good or bad, or right or wrong in behavior . . . we develop our styles of life according to individual judgment and decision. . . . The `thou shalt not' approach does not convince the new generation."

Man is not all-sufficient. He does not know everything. He is not—even in this enlightened age—capable of making decisions on all things for the simple reason that, enlightened as he may be on some points, his mind is still darkened by both ignorance and prejudice on many others. Indeed, in spite of all our present knowledge, we still "see through a glass darkly," a glass made darker by our own selfishness and wilfulness.

When we say that we no longer can obey the "thou shalt nots" we in effect say we cannot accept Him who laid down those restrictions in the greatest code of law ever devised.

Setting aside the Author of the "thou shalt nots" of the Ten Commandments is to assume also that our human knowledge and judgment are superior to His. How modest we mortals are!!!

We are reminded of a comment on this subject made by Albert Einstein before his death. Writing in "The World as I See It," this mastermind said: "The harmony of natural law reveals an Intelligence of such superiority that compared with it, all the scientific thinking and acting of human beings is an utterly insignificant reflection."

And the magazine editor implies that we have outgrown all that!!!

People who believe in God should be glad to accept His word on faith. God does not explain all He knows to finite human beings. Neither do the great scientists, for that matter. Don't we accept on faith the word of atomic researchers, of space men, and experts in any line? Then shall we not take on faith what God says about behavior?

The new morality is actually an invitation to free love. Editors, educators, lawmakers, and even some clergymen may approve and advocate it, but does that make it right? What does God say about sex freedom? What about His "thou shalt not" on this subject? Are we to set it aside because some supposedly "all-knowing" psychologist does so?

The same may be said about violence. In America we seem to condone violence until it strikes some great personality like Mr. Kennedy. But what does God say about violence—about murder? Are we to set that aside just because God—and not some magazine editor—said it?

There has been raging in Utah a controversy over liquor by the drink, and its value in attracting more business to the state. Has anyone ever thought to ask what God thinks about liquor and follow it? Is not a vote in favor of liquor a vote against His Word of Wisdom?

The fact of the matter is that man is not omniscient. Shocking as it may seem to some, he does not have all the wisdom. And a further sad fact is that the more man puts his trust in himself, the further he drifts from the God whom he professes to worship.

Generally man's judgment on behavior is based on his own likes and dislikes more than on what is basically right or wrong. Selfishness is at the heart of most behavioral problems.

Man so often resembles his own little children who won't eat this or that because they don't happen to like it, or who won't leave the water tap or the kitchen stove alone because they want them for playthings.

What parent would admit that a child's unwise whims should become the controlling factor in making important decisions?

Just as parents lay down rules of conduct for their little ones without entering into long and detailed explanations, so God has given us His "thou shalt nots" without necessarily giving chapter and verse as to His reasons.

Isn't it enough to know that He invites us to become like Him and that His laws are but guideposts to help us on our way? We can and must accept them on faith if for no other reason than just that God said so!

1969 ﻿
