Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

A Letter And A Message

THE FOLLOWING LETTER was recently received by the Church editor:

"I had an experience a few nights ago which I feel I should mention to you.

"We had spent the evening at the cabin of some friends in upper Ogden Canyon, and as we drove home we found it necessary to telephone back to our friends at their cabin.

"Accordingly we spent a half hour or so looking for a telephone. While I was making the call, an attractive young girl approached my wife sitting in our car in the parking lot, and asked if we would give her a ride to Ogden.

"It developed that she had been offended and frightened by her boy friend at a picnic ground lower down in the canyon. She left his car and walked alone up the dark canyon looking for a telephone to call some friends to come for her.

"Being unsuccessful, and becoming more and more afraid, in desperation she approached a total stranger, my wife, for help.

"In the course of her conversation she had said that she was afraid to call her parents as they would `die' if they knew she was in this situation.

"She said, `We are awfully religious; I don't suppose you are LDS, are you?'

"When my wife told her that I was a bishop, she exclaimed in relief: `Oh, I did come to the right car, didn't I?'

"Two or three things impressed us about this experience:

"First, the long-shot coincidence of a bishop stopping at a public telephone booth around midnight in upper Ogden Canyon, and finding there a lovely LDS girl seeking help.

"Second, and more to the point, I was impressed by the fact that she was afraid to call her parents.

"Here was a girl of obvious courage, having dared to leave the car of her boy friend and walk up the dark canyon and approach a stranger for help, but yet without the courage to let her parents know of her danger and her need.

"It reminded me of how a friend some years ago told me that he had taken his daughters to one side and told them: `Any time you need my help, wherever you are or under whatever conditions, all you need to do is call and I will come to you.'

"I have told my own daughter this, and the result has been that I have done a good deal of taxiing her and her friends around, but I have enjoyed every minute of it.

"I wonder if an effective editorial might be written urging parents to let their children know they love them and that they are ready to help under any conditions, and urging children to confide in their parents, and call on them whenever they may need help.

"Also, of course, young people should be cautioned to avoid getting into such situations in the first place."

This letter, telling of this experience firsthand, was far more effective than mere editorial comment. For this reason the letter is published.

Many young people are frightened of their parents, even though those parents may be good people, pious and religious like the parents of this girl.

But some parents are too stern. They fail to use the spirit of love and understanding in helping to shape the lives of their young people.

Iron rule does not make for trust and confidence. It can only develop fear in the minds of young people. And when a boy or girl is in difficulty, it is only natural for them to avoid the tongue-lashing they feel will almost certainly come from an overly stern parent, and for this reason they attempt to escape the best they can without letting the parents know of their problems.

Proper understanding and mutual love and trust between parents and children are vital to good family relationships. When parents fail to build this confidence in the minds of their children, they fail in a matter which far transcends the importance of an appearance of angelic piety.

1969 ﻿
