Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

A Bastion of Salvation

"CRIMINALS ARE MADE—not born."

This was the declaration of J. Edgar Hoover, the great head of the FBI, in an address given in Chicago before a large convention of women.

"The blame for crime," he went on, "must be placed where it rightly belongs—upon the adult." Then he continued:

"A new sense of responsibility must be born in the home if we are to reverse the rising trend of youth toward lawlessness. Reasonable discipline, administered with consistency, is essential in developing a stable individual.

"This situation, in the final analysis, is not the failure of youth but the failure of adults. The fact remains that out of every 100 boys and girls in the 10-to-17 age group, 97 live law-abiding lives. There is nothing basically wrong with the youth of the land. Youth needs only to be guided along the proper path. A youth's intelligence must be anchored in morality to give him the ability to determine right from wrong, good from bad, and the true from the false. Given discipline, young people will learn self-discipline; given training, they will learn to live useful lives. The three out of each 100 who annually break the law have wandered into a morass of disbelief—where they have no faith, no belief in a Supreme Being, no respect for the rights of others, no belief in the dignity of man, and finally, no belief in themselves.

"There must be training for parenthood as well as a fixing of responsibility for the failure of parenthood. Too many parents allow their children to run free with no check on what they do, where or with whom they go. The result is a juvenile jungle.

"Too many homes breed juvenile delinquents through parental neglect. Too many children are left to shift for themselves—hungry, helpless, loveless.

"When parents are not sufficiently interested to know where their children are and what they are doing, the risk for their future is grave. It is the parents who should be brought before the bar of justice to account for their stewardship when their children go astray. The parents are responsible to a great extent for the sins of their children. The parents should be held morally, legally, and financially responsible.

"I have studied the case histories of thousands of criminals. In almost every case, the failure to develop character is directly attributable to lack of proper influence and guidance in the home. Unfortunately, the home no longer provides the inspiration for right living. The American home must become again a center of learning how to live, as well as a center of living.

"Modern society is geared to a fast tempo; there are great demands on the parents to provide the material necessities for their children. Too often, the primary need for sympathetic and spiritual guidance is neglected and the child is deprived of the very element which is most essential to stabilize him emotionally and to aid him in his growth toward maturity. As a result of this thoughtless neglect, society suffers.

"What is needed is to restore the home to its proper place where the lessons of the Golden Rule are translated into daily living, where the members of the family counsel and aid each other, and where each has a share in the responsibilities of home life.

"What is needed is a return to the home where parents are companions of their children as well as the providers of the necessities of life, where parents share their leisure time with their children, and where children are taught the spiritual and civic responsibilities of manhood and womanhood. A child above all else needs the firm moral backing of a conscientious mother and father and the love, understanding, and security that a good Christian home affords.

"What is needed above all is to practice the living faith of our fathers in our daily lives and a dedication to making the Kingdom of God a reality on `earth as it is in Heaven.'

"The neglect in the training of so many of our nation's youth, their lack of spiritual nourishment, their ignorance of the great truths of the Bible, and the tragic void of God and prayer in their lives weaken our homes and our nation's welfare."

1969 ﻿
