Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Good Morals At Home

THE LORD EXPECTS his people to be pure in heart. That expectation includes every phase of our lives our business and professional activities, our recreation and our most intimate relationships in the home.

No unclean thing can enter the kingdom of heaven the Lord has said and purity certainly must be considered a part of divinity.

The Lord taught us to love Him "with all thy mind" as well as with heart and might.

But can we love Him with all our mind unless our mind is pure?

And can we have a pure mind if we allow the evils of the world to remain in our thoughts, so that we dwell upon them?

Purity of thought is basic to purity of action. The thought gives birth to the act.

The relationship between husband and wife must always be one of purity. Commanded as we are to "multiply and replenish the earth," we are expected by the Lord to participate with Him righteously in one of the great creative acts by which He perpetuates life on earth.

The leaders of the Church have always taught that wives and mothers are the daughters of God, and should be so treated. They should not be subjected to perversion in any form.

Fathers and husbands are holders of the Holy Priesthood, and should carry with them a constant spirit of righteousness and purity, so that in their most intimate lives there will be no lust, no filth, and no imposition of uncleanness upon their wives.

Marriage is no license for uncleanness. There is no more justification for perversion after marriage than before marriage.

If we are to become "perfect as our Father in heaven is perfect," most assuredly we must build purity into our hearts and minds. As bearers of the vessels of the Lord, we must be clean.

President McKay at one time said:

"Man is endowed with appetites and passions for the preservation of his life and the perpetuation of his kind.

"These, when held under proper subjection, contribute to his happiness and comfort, but when used for mere gratification, lead to misery and moral degradation."

Again he said in referring to the divine quality of love:

"God has instituted marriage and the family as the proper condition of expressing in our lives this divine virtue. But sometimes men and women with low ideals and weakened wills permit their passions, like unbridled steeds, to dash aside judgment and self-restraint and to cause them to commit sin that may sear their conscience and leave in their hearts an everlasting regret.

"In this day when modesty is thrust into the background, and chastity is considered an outmoded virtue, I appeal to you to keep your souls unmarred and unsullied from this sin, the consequence of which will smite and haunt you intimately until your conscience is seared and your character sordid.

"Remember, too, the significance of the Savior's words saying that if any shall commit adultery even in his or her heart, he shall not have the Spirit but shall deny the faith, and shall fear.

"Resist evil and the tempter will flee from you.

"If you keep your character above reproach, no matter what others may think, or what charges they may make, you can hold your head erect, keep your heart light, and face the world undauntedly because you, yourself, and your God know that you have kept your soul untarnished."

And then President McKay adds:

"If marriage and home building be based upon physical attraction alone, love will sooner or later become famished and home life will be a heavy, disheartening existence.

Womanhood is divine. For any man to disgrace that womanhood is to debase himself. And for any husband to debase his wife is a beastly act in which there is anything but manhood.

1969 ﻿
