Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Termites In the Home

AS ONE OF our greatest advocates of good home life, President David O. McKay has said:

"If, upon examination, one finds that termites are undermining the foundations of his house, he should lose no time in having experts make a thorough examination and exterminate the destructive insects. He should have the weakened materials removed and the foundations strengthened, and if necessary rebuilt.

"But more important than the building of the house is the rebuilding and purifying of our homes. ...

"There are destructive termites in homes as well as houses. Some of these are backbiting, evil speaking, fault-finding on the part of either parents or children.

"Slander is poison to the soul. Slanderers are like flies that pass over a man's good parts to light only on his sores.

"In the ideal home there is no slanderous gossip about school teachers, about public officials or Church leaders.

"I am more grateful now as the years have come and gone, to my father who said: `No faultfinding about your teacher or anybody else.'

"Quarreling and profanity also are evils that lower the standards of the ideal home. I cannot imagine a father or mother profaning in the presence of children or ever letting profane words pass their lips.

"Another deterrent to happiness in the home is the refusal to bear the full responsibility of motherhood and fatherhood. Members of the Church who are healthy and normal should not be guilty of restricting the number of children in the home, especially when such action is prompted by a desire for a good time or for personal gain or to keep up with the neighbors, or by a false impression that one or two children in a family can be better educated. These are excuses which members of the Church should not harbor, for they are unjustified.

"The question of size of families, I know, brings up many problems—the question of woman's career, the false cry of quality not quantity, which one writer rightly says should read `extinction not preservation,' or the matter-of-fact question of daily living and getting on in the world.

"With the high ideal of marriage as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, members of the Church should have but one goal, and that is to keep in mind the fact that marriage, the foundation of society, is ordained of God, for the building of permanent homes in which children may be properly reared and taught the principles of the Gospel.

"All members of the Church should set their homes in order so that they may enjoy the true happiness of harmonious family life."

At another time, President McKay said:

"The low view of marriage that is gaining momentum throughout the world threatens civilization itself, and is contrary to the mind and will of God.

"To all really true men and women, children are their most precious possessions, and man's most important obligation and duty is the making of a home and the proper rearing of children.

"Marriage is a divine ordinance. It should not be entered into lightly nor terminated at pleasure.

"A clean body and uncontaminated blood are pre-requisites to an ideal marriage. The domestic relations precede and in our present existence are worth more than all other social ties.

"They give the first throb to the heart and unseal the deep foundations of its love. Its responsibilities, joys, sorrows, smiles, tears, hopes and solicitudes form the chief interests of human life."

Often President McKay has discussed the basic necessity of integrity.

"There is nothing in life so admirable as true manhood. There is nothing so sacred as true womanhood," he has said.

These foundations of a good home should never be eroded away. Like termites in a house, careless habits can soon weaken both manhood and womanhood, and when these are gone the meaning and purpose of home life are gone also.

And what is it that preserves manhood and womanhood and keeps the home intact?

It is the source of all strength of character—allegiance to God and his teachings.

If we live the Gospel of Jesus Christ in the home we preserve every quality of soul which holds marriages intact and builds these characteristics into the souls of the children.

The Gospel alone can provide the building stones of which a great home may be erected.

1969 ﻿
