Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Home Is First

MOST THOUGHTFUL PEOPLE were shocked at a recent police report on the relationship of the home to juvenile crime.

For years it has been supposed that teenage delinquency was mostly a result of broken homes. It seemed true for a long time, but it is not always the case.

The survey made by police officers revealed the astonishing fact that most juvenile crime reported in that study came from homes that were not broken. Furthermore they were listed as religious homes, and homes in which the mother did not go out to work.

This shattered many previous concepts about young people.

As reported in this newspaper: "The average first offense delinquent comes from a home with both parents, attends church, and has a non-working mother."

Sixty per cent of all delinquents included in this study came from so-called united homes, while only 28 per cent had divorced parents, and a mere six per cent had widowed mothers.

Of those studied as first offenders, 55 per cent were rated as being "active" in religion. Only one per cent reported having no religious affiliation.

What is the lesson for Church workers in this study?

Obviously it is that although young people may live in "religious" homes, they are not necessarily converted to their religion, and there is insufficient parental control over children to develop the kind of character traits which would persuade them to avoid crime.

Combined with parental neglect, even in "good" homes, there is of course the influence of crime on television, in movies, in magazines and newspapers, and a permissiveness both in school and at home which destroys proper restraints.

The false philosophy so widespread these days that it is wrong to correct or punish a child must likewise carry its share of the blame for criminality. Solomon is right, "Spare the rod and spoil the child.

The home life of each family deserves sincere study. Parents should ask themselves what they fail to do in properly rearing their children. They should keep in mind always the classic statement of President McKay: "No other success can compensate for failure in the home."

A great many parents are too busy for the good of their children. Some are too busy in Church work, some in business, some in social life. The fact is that many parents are taken out of the home so much that their children do not receive the attention and guidance they deserve.

Another study recently asked 100,000 children what they want most from their parents. As reported by Walt M. Lochman of Radio Station KMBZ in Kansas City, they listed the following do's and don'ts for parents:

The Church is placing tremendous emphasis on the home at the present time, encouraging all members to develop better family life. It is most timely.

With the inroads of evil among all peoples, mothers and fathers must learn that the home is our greatest defense against crime and delinquency. But good homes mean more than an adequate income and comfortable surroundings, plenty to eat and a car to ride in.

Good homes must rate high in companionship between children and parents, in having a well-ordered household, with love between parents and between children and parents. They must build righteous loyalties, good character a willingness to work, a spirit of humility and an absence of unjust pride, and they must teach a deep and abiding faith in God.

But like everything worthwhile, they require constant labor. Neither good homes nor strong families are achieved by wishful thinking or by remote control.

1969 ﻿
