Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

A Deep Source of Comfort

THOUGHTFUL AMERICANS ARE alarmed over the "state of the nation" at the present time. Many conditions add to their fears.

In spite of reports of victories in Vietnam, the overall situation in Asia becomes more gloomy by the day. Hopes of peace are indeed fleeting, to say the least.

At home the constant recurrence of riots strikes fear to the hearts of peaceful citizens, making them wonder to what extent anarchy will continue to be permitted and how far it will go toward supplanting law and order.

The constant and shocking rise in crime is most disturbing, particularly so as courts become more lenient and enforcement measures weaken.

Labor strife becomes ever more vexing. It shows in stark relief how industrial strikes could completely cripple the nation and how, under some circumstances, they could even become tools in the hands of ruthless leaders of Communist-infiltrated organizations to leave us helpless in an enemy takeover.

Some of our substantial citizens actually fear for the future of our nation, and with good cause.

But there is comfort in the prophecies of the scriptures pertaining to this land.

In the first place, America is a nation of divinely appointed destiny, and that destiny has not yet been fulfilled. It is not a political destiny as most people think. It is a destiny closely related to the work of the Restored Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ.

The Savior told the ancient Nephites about modern America, and explained to them that we—as a nation of "Gentiles"—would be raised up as a free people by the act of the Father for a particular purpose. That purpose was for the propagation of the Restored Gospel.

The work of the Church is far from finished. In fact, it is hardly getting a good start. Most of the growth of the Church is yet in the future. It will therefore require the continued protecting power of the "Gentile nation" set up to provide the necessary free agency, free press, freedom of worship and assembly, not to mention the international influence which will protect American missionaries in their worldwide proselyting effort.

But there is still another important prophecy which is vital to us.

Readers of the Book of Mormon are familiar with it:

"And he had sworn in his wrath unto the brother of Jared, that whoso should possess this land of promise, from that time forth and forever, should serve him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off.

"And this cometh unto you, O ye Gentiles, that ye may know the decrees of God—that ye may repent, and not continue in your iniquities until the fulness come, that ye may not bring down the fulness of the wrath of God upon you as the inhabitants of the land have hitherto done.

"Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, IF THEY WILL BUT SERVE THE GOD OF THE LAND, WHO IS JESUS CHRIST."

Recent statistics are most encouraging and comforting to all who believe in that prophecy.

There are more professed Christians in the United States today than ever before in history. The increase in Christian church membership is rising faster than at any previous time.

In 1935, for example, only 41 per cent of the total United States population was enrolled in Christian denominations. In 1945 the percentage had jumped to 50, and the religious census of 1965 revealed that the percentage had gone up to 64.4. Furthermore the Gallup survey of a few months ago showed that 45 per cent of the entire adult population of America attends religious services every Sunday. More than 90 per cent of the population say they believe there is a God.

A recent report of the U. S. News and World Report indicates that only 31 per cent of all members of Christian denominations in America NEVER go to church. The remaining 69 per cent attends more or less regularly.

Another most encouraging factor is that the United States is the most productive missionary field in the world for the Latter-day Saints. More people join the Church in America than anywhere else, and more baptisms per missionary are recorded in the United States than anywhere.

In spite of war and riots, crime and widespread irresponsibility, the faith of Christ is increasing in America. What a contrast to other countries where church attendance as shown in a national survey is down to 10 per cent in some nations, and as low as 5 per cent in others!

The safety of America lies in acceptance of Jesus Christ. Preaching and living the Gospel is the surest defense of this nation. Enemies may rage, both within and without, but if the majority of Americans will continue to accept Christ and serve him to the best of their knowledge, he will protect them and preserve our nation.
