Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Tendency Towards Extremes

WHEN THE LORD taught that we should be temperate in all things, He gave us invaluable words of wisdom. There is a tendency on the part of nearly everyone to go to extremes in one way or another, so that often we lose the true perspective of life.

Extremes appear in almost every phase of our daily affairs. Some of us are extremists in health, others in religion; some take their occupations to the point where they shut out the rest of the world as they devote themselves almost exclusively to making money.

Some are extremists in child care, others in neglect of children; some carry what they call patriotism to unwise ends, while others defy genuine patriotism and undermine the body politic.

And so it goes. If only we could control ourselves that we might be "temperate in all things," we would live happier lives and give far more enjoyment to our associates.

Extremism is a costly thing. Take the mother for example who over-indulges her child. If the youngster is a daughter, the poor girl may never be allowed to live her own life. She may be "mothered" far beyond anything that is good for her, so that she never learns self-reliance and never makes a decision of her own.

If he is a son, the mother may so indulge him that he turns against parenthood in general, and women in particular. In one instance this sort of rebellion drove a son into a homosexual life in sheer defiance of all he had learned as he grew up.

And then there are fathers who drive their sons into delinquency and violence by constant nagging. A youngster may be left in a state of bewilderment because everything he does is called wrong and therefore he never learns what is right.

Well-meaning parents can make nervous wrecks of their own children by failing to control their tempers. They never find the important balance which only is obtained through "being temperate in all things."

Religious extremists at times drive their children into apostasy as youngsters are literally surfeited with a spiritual diet which, although tolerated at first, becomes repugnant with "over-doses" from unwise parents.

Political extremists sow seeds of hate and discord. Extremism among them can hardly be less dangerous on one hand than on the other. Both can lead to dictatorships.

Health faddists generally make themselves and other people uncomfortable. Instead of becoming the examples of good living they suppose themselves to be, at times they create quite the opposite effect.

Word of Wisdom extremists are much the same, never learning that there are other principles in the Gospel besides the fact that wheat is the staff of life. Do they never remember that what comes out of the mouth is far more important than what goes into it?

Style is another place where extremism occurs very frequently, often reaching the ridiculous.

Surely there must be a place for both modesty and good taste in manners and appearance.

It has been said that nothing is as uncommon as common sense. This certainly applies to the matter of extremism.

The Lord gave us good minds, and expects us to use them. He tells us that the glory of God is intelligence. He asks us to serve Him with all our minds.

One would suppose from this that He expects us to use our mentality to preserve a good balance of thought and action, and avoid the extremes which never fail to develop unhappiness and misery.

"Being temperate in all things" is good advice from Him who is most intelligent of all, and who has always placed justice and kindness, meekness and patience among the highest virtues.

1969 ﻿
