Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

See No Evil—Think No Evil

IN THE UNITED States we have come to the point where seductive pictures, movies, books, magazines and all other pornographic items are in increasing demand.

In the name of freedom we have protected pornography in some of the courts, and have reached a point where honest citizens almost fear to expose crime because at times even our officials appear to protect it.

Pornography has reached Japan also. And as is true in America, immodest styles have made their impact upon Japanese morals.

This has been dramatically demonstrated in the recent moves in Japan to ape American and European styles in women's dress.

The New York Times recently reported that as hemlines have gone up in Japan, so has the ratio of sex crimes.

Only a small percentage of the women in Japan have come to wear hemlines above the knee, but even so sex crimes have doubled since the new styles came into vogue, according to reports of the Tokyo Metropolitan Police.

The police issued a report entitled "Miniskirts and Sex Crimes" which indicated that Tokyo's 2,627 sex crimes during the first nine months of 1967 doubled the number of similar offenses in the same period in 1966.

The police blamed the miniskirts.

The impact of pornographic styles, literature and films in America must be counted in similar terms. When has there been such a jump in sex crime as we now have in America? When has there been such delinquency on the part of both juveniles and their parents?

From as nearby as Boise, Idaho, we received a United Press report quoting the Ada County sheriff as saying, "Never before has there been such a breakdown in morals." He is asking for more money to run his office.

One of the most distressing reports on the breakdown of morals in America came in an Associated Press dispatch from New York reporting the attitude of 90 Episcopal priests, who held a day-long symposium, reaching the conclusion that homosexual activities are not immoral, and should not be condemned as such.

Thinking people are fast coming to the conclusion that there definitely is a world movement centered on wiping out morals.

When public officials seem to condone immorality, when courts refuse to handle obvious cases of guilt, when clergymen advocate a "new morality" which in truth is free love, and when styles go steadily deeper into the mire of exhibitionism, it should shock us into realizing that decent people must take steps to halt this malignant development.

There is an old advertising maxim which says: "Out of sight, out of mind." The reverse is also true. When we constantly portray the indecent and the unclean, we must expect a harvest in kind.

As hate begets hate and love begets love, so filth begets filth.

With all our present emphasis upon sex, now come the schools to add to the problem by introducing sex education in their classes.

It is true that many educators say that such instruction will reduce sex sin, but that is a fallacy. The sin nevertheless is on the increase, and frightfully so.

Parents must take a strong position to protect the morals of their children, but they must begin with themselves.

If all adults stayed away from "adults only" movies, there would be no such films to tempt children.

If all adults would voice their disgust with mini-skirts which make exhibitionists out of so many of our girls and women, they could change this fashion.

If all adults would stop smoking and drinking, we would soon have a new generation which would not indulge in either vice.

If parents would but establish the kind of homes which nurture good character and cleanliness, most of our public problems would disappear.

1969 ﻿
