Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

How Late Is Too Late?

WHAT TIME IS a good time to get home from a date?

Who should decide?

What is a reasonable rule?

Many an unpleasant hour has been experienced in many a home because of a lack of understanding on these points.

Where is the path of wisdom in this matter, both from the standpoint of the youth and of patient parents who usually remain awake until everyone is in?

There is always a reasonable middle ground in these matters, and every Latter-day Saint, whether parent or youth, should earnestly strive to reach it for the best good of all.

Probably we should note in the first place that the hour of coming home should be and must be considered as a part of our over-all moral standard.

No one will question that our reputation, our character, our good name, and our standing before God are all related to it.

Too late can be tragic. Too early can cause hard feelings. How may we reach the happy middle ground?

Since parents and children are both concerned, both should have a voice in reaching the decision. The Church has always advised family council meetings as well as home evenings, when family matters may be discussed plainly and frankly, but in a spirit of love and cooperation.

There is no place for dictatorship in these family council meetings, any more than there is room for rebellion. But the final decision must rest with the parents.

One of the important things to be discussed is the age at which young people should begin to date.

For years the Church has advised against twosome dating at less than 16 years of age. Rather it has been urged that younger people go in groups, with proper chaperonage.

It is true that the "ways of the world" are at variance with that concept, but that does not make it wrong. The world has its standards, the Church sets up its own.

The world does not concern itself with morals in the same way in which the Church does, and is now accepting far lower standards than the Lord has ever been willing for His people to have. So we cannot follow the dictates of the world.

Then in our family council meeting, we should seek for the advice of the Lord and His Church. Since Latter-day Saints are believers and therefore obedient, we should do that which the Lord suggests.

He says: "Be ye temperate in all things." That means no extremes, either in demanding that we come in too early or that we remain out too late. He also said: "Retire to thy bed early," as will be remembered.

Too late or too early depends of course upon the age of the youngsters concerned. Certainly the early teenagers should be willing to recognize the curfew set up by law, which is 10 p.m. Since it is the law, let us observe it.

For older teenagers, what is reasonable?

The Church has set a good example to its members by closing its social activities by midnight, with the one exception of New Year's Eve, when special arrangements are made.

It is well known that many youngsters stay out past midnight, but is it a good idea? Is it even a good idea for older people?

Considering the next day's demands of both school and employment, is midnight too early? And then there is Saturday. This is the big night out for most worldly people. What about the Saints?

Sabbath Day observance is involved here. The Sabbath is still the Sabbath, even in the wee hours of the early morning. Should we not observe it? And is partying the thing to do on the Sabbath? Again midnight seems to be a good time to go home.

Critics call us prudish when we keep sensible hours; but they likewise use that epithet for those who won't smoke or drink, or neck or pet. Should their disparaging remarks be either persuasive or controlling?

The fact is that late hours are often directly related to moral problems of a serious nature.

Since Latter-day Saints are expected to protect their virtue, they should be willing to adopt habits which will assist them in doing so. Late hours can and often do break down moral restraints, which is always tragic.

If both parents and children will remember their Church standards, and if they will be reasonable with each other, they can easily reach an understanding on late hours which will meet the needs of all concerned.

1969 ﻿
