Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Youngsters Ask Adult Aid

RHODE ISLAND STATE College was recently host to student delegates from 47 schools in that state at a "stop smoking" conference.

The young people held seminar classes with medical men, political leaders and newspaper and radio personalities in which they studied the results of smoking tobacco.

They made their own deductions too, the chief of which was:

"IF TEENAGERS ARE GOING TO STOP SMOKING, ADULTS MUST STOP TOO. IF SMOKING IS TO BE BANNED FOR STUDENTS IN SCHOOL, IT MUST BE BANNED FOR TEACHERS."

They admitted they are influenced by parents and other adults. They showed concern for the health of their parents. They said that no smoking education program for them will be effective until parents are reeducated too.

The students heard Dr. Ronald G. Vincent of the Roswell Park Memorial Institute in Buffalo, N.Y., talk of the facts that indicate cigarette smoking has accounted for epidemics of lung cancer, emphysema and heart ailments. They heard Representative John A. Fogarty outline the public health services' concern and plans for anti-smoking promotion.

The students discussed the facts with local doctors in small groups. The theme of the conference was "Too Tough to Care." Its aim was to give delegates facts and let them exchange ideas which they might use in their schools for programs that would lead to reduced smoking among youths.

The delegates made some suggestions but they also indicated some feeling of hopelessness. Most were not smokers.

More than one said, "How can we know what it will take to convince young people to stop smoking? What we have seen and heard today is frightening, but we were convinced before we came that smoking is bad."

The Providence (R.I.) Evening Bulletin devoted a full page to the convention.

In addition to pictures and news stories it reproduced a number of headlines carried previously in the same paper on news articles pertaining to smoking. Among these headlines were:

"Gov't. Warns Again of Smoking Dangers"

"Smoking Seen Cause of Fatal Fire"

"Epidemic Blamed on Cigarettes"

"R. I. Study Says Smoking Linked to Emphysema"

"One Type of Lung Cancer Linked Only to Cigarettes"

"Studies Say Smoking Rate Drops With Age"

"Doctor Finds Some Filters Don't Work"

"Analysis of Deaths Again Puts Finger on Cigarettes"

The appeal of the youngsters is a potent one. Parents must lead the way.

Adults set the pattern in the home.

Adults shape the thinking and the habits of their children.

Adults determine the social standards.

And adults write the laws.

If parents are determined to disregard the warnings, what chance do the children have?

The irresponsibility of smoking and drinking parents who give encouragement to their children to indulge in these habits is beyond understanding.

It is well recognized that most drinking teenagers admit that they had their first drink in their own homes.

Quoted in Listen magazine Dr. George Maddox, professor of medical sociology at Duke University, says that most drinking teenagers have their first drinks when between 12 and 14 years of age, and almost invariably in the home as their parents drink.

He said further that in a society where so many adults drink, the youngsters grow up thinking that the use of alcohol is a process of growing up. The same may be said about tobacco.

He added: "About one in four may become somewhat gay during a given month, and one in ten gets drunk. Most have confirmed their drinking patterns by the time they are 18 years of age."

1969 ﻿
