Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Greatest Force

"WHEN GOD WANTS a great work done in the world, or a great wrong righted, he goes about it in a very unusual way," wrote E. T. Sullivan.

"He doesn't stir up his earthquakes or send forth his thunderbolts.

"Instead he has a helpless baby born, perhaps in a simple home and of some obscure mother.

"And then God puts the idea into the mother's heart and she puts it into the baby's mind. And then God waits.

"The greatest forces in the world are not the earthquakes and the thunderbolts. The greatest forces in the world are babies."

And greater than the babies are the mothers who give them life and mold their thoughts and set their highest ideals. The hand that rocks the cradle is truly the hand that rules the world.

"Motherhood is the greatest potential influence either for good or ill in human life," said President David O. McKay.

"The mother's image is the first that stamps itself on the unwritten page of the young child's mind. It is her caress that first wakens a sense of security; her kiss, the first realization of affection; her sympathy and tenderness, the first assurance that there is love in the world."

President McKay also said: "The sweetness as well as the greatness of motherhood lies in the overcoming of self-love by Mother for her children. By nature the true mother is self-sacrificing. She is ever giving something of her life to make another either happier or better. Dying and giving—giving and dying—the two great elements that make the truly heroic—these are the Christlike virtues that make motherhood sublime.

"The beginning of motherhood is but the entrance into the valley of the shadow in order to bring life to another. Herein is manifest love supreme; for `Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends.' (John 15:13.) That some women enter into this realm impelled by less lofty motives or uninspired by any self-sacrificing thought, there can be no doubt; but this fact cannot rob the truly heroic soul of the honor due her any more than the recreant soldier forced to the conflict can deprive of undying fame the hero who gloriously offers his life for his country.

"Motherhood is the one thing in all the world which most truly exemplifies the God-given virtues of creating and sacrificing. Though it carries the woman close to the brink of death, motherhood also leads her into the very realm of life and makes her co-partner with the Creator in bestowing upon eternal spirits, mortal life. Artists may make new visions real; poets express thoughts never known before or dress old ones in a more becoming garb; engineers may transform deserts into bounteous fields and fill them with prosperous towns and thriving villages; scientists may discover new elements and by various combinations thereof create means contributive either to progress or destruction—all these are in a measure revealers of unknown things; but the mother who, in compliance with eternal law, brings into the world an immortal spirit occupies first rank in the realm of creation.

"Motherhood is just another name for sacrifice. From the moment the wee, helpless babe is laid on the pillow beside her, Mother daily, hourly, gives of her life to her loved one. It has been aptly said that babes draw strength at first from her bosom but always from her heart. All through the years of babyhood, childhood, and youth, aye, even after her girls themselves become mothers and her sons, fathers, she tenderly, lovingly sacrifices for them her time, her comfort, her pleasures, her needed rest and recreation, and, if necessary, health and life itself! No language can express the power and beauty and heroism of a mother's love.

"For all this consecrated devotion, she asks nothing in return. If her love is reciprocated, she is content; but if not, and her wayward child with poisoned feelings turns heedlessly from her, she still loves on, giving in yearning and solicitude far more than the recreant deserves. No, she asks nothing in return; nothing for the roses she has transplanted from her own cheeks to those of her darling; nothing for the hours of vigilance during days and nights of sickness; nothing for the thousand self-denials and sacrifices that had to be made that the children in their `teens' might receive proper schooling and `appear well' with their comrades; nothing for the heartaches caused by thoughtless word or act of wayward youth.

"No, for all this and a thousand other things incident to motherhood, Mother asks nothing; but she deserves much. For kindness she deserves kindness; for tenderness, she should be given tenderness; for self-sacrifice, a little self-denial on the part of the children; for love, she should in return have love.

"In the most agonizing moment of His life, Christ thought of His mother. In this as in all other things, the Savior of men has given us an example. As Mother gave us our life `at the peril of her own,' so we should be pleased, no matter what our desires, our condition, or our pains, to give such of our time, our thought, our words, our means, as may be necessary to Mother's contentment and peace.

"To each Mother's son or daughter, we would say: You need no suggestions on how to make your mother happy on Mother's Day as on every day of the year. If you order a white carnation to be given her she will be pleased; if you tell her in a letter of your appreciation and love, she will shed tears of happiness; but if you keep the spotless character and purity of soul she has given you, she will rejoice as the most blessed of mothers."

1969 ﻿
