Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Temple Marriage For Salvation

WHEN THE GOSPEL was restored, it was brought back to earth in its fulness. It provided the saving ordinances as well as divine principles of salvation.

In restoring the Gospel, the Lord set up a Church which was new to the modern world. It borrowed nothing from any other church, but was distinctly different in that in its entirety it was literally brought back from heaven.

It provided the way of life, and those who accepted it were expected to live according to its program.

The Lord introduced His own saving ordinances and restored divine authority to perform them, thus making them valid.

For example. He provided that baptism could be performed in only one way. It had to be by immersion as a symbol of the death and resurrection of the Savior. But even immersion alone was not enough. It was meaningless without the divine authority to make it acceptable to heaven.

As the Lord established His own mode of baptism, so He introduced His own mode of marriage. It is generally spoken of as temple marriage.

Temple marriage is an ordinance of the Gospel, a saving ordinance without which we cannot obtain exaltation in the kingdom of God.

It is as much a saving ordinance as baptism or the laying on of hands. We can no more set it aside than we can turn away from baptism or the Sabbath.

It is a law of God which all hoping to receive His highest blessings must obey.

Latter-day Saints of course recognize civil marriage, for no marriage is a marriage unless it complies with the laws of the land.

Temple marriage is "civil" too in the sense that it is legal and fully recognized by the law of the land.

But it is far more than a civil marriage. It is a marriage for eternity as well, allowing a man and wife and children to perpetuate their family living into the eternities.

But it is even more than that. It is the means of obtaining still further blessings and endowments without which we cannot be exalted.

Some who postpone temple sealings until they learn whether their civil marriage is to be successful, forget that the temple marriage includes more than the marriage itself and that they forfeit these additional blessings so essential to exaltation if they marry out of the temple.

A Justice of the Peace cannot provide God's mode of marriage because his authority is limited to the law of the land.

Bishops and stake presidents cannot provide it either, for their marriages also are limited to the law of the land. Their marriages, of course, are under the influence and atmosphere of the Church, which is always desirable, but not even these Church officers can perform a temple marriage. They do not have that authority.

Only a certain few men on earth are given the sealing power to bind on earth and in heaven, and they alone can perform temple marriages.

It was so in the early Christian Church. It is the same today.

Temple marriage is related to a fulness of the Priesthood of which President Joseph Fielding Smith once said: "There is no exaltation in the Kingdom of God without a fulness of the Priesthood. The Prophet Joseph Smith has said: `If a man get a fulness of the Priesthood of God he has to get it by keeping all the commandments of God and obeying all the ordinances of the House of the Lord.'

"Every man who is faithful and will receive these ordinances and blessings obtains a fulness of the Priesthood. The Lord has made it possible for every man in this Church through his obedience to receive the fulness of the Priesthood through the ordinances of the Temple of the Lord. They cannot be obtained anywhere else."

Women cannot receive their higher blessings anywhere else either, for those blessings are conferred upon men and women jointly as they kneel at the marriage altar. All of course is conditioned upon faithfulness.

We read in D&C 131 of the Doctrine and Covenants: "In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees; and in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]; and if he does not, he cannot obtain it."

It is the same for women as for men. The man is not without the woman, neither is the woman without the man in the Lord.

1969 ﻿
