Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

"Gun Shy" About Movies

A MOTION PICTURE editor recently carried a startling story saying that a certain very filthy film drew five times the patronage of a so-called "family picture," and then added: "Are wholesome films wanted?"

He said: "If `Young Americans' were a poorly produced film, there would be a reason for its failure at the box office. But it is well made from every angle. It tells, in a fascinating way, how the first Young Americans singing group was organized, and then follows them on a fun-filled tour of the U.S."

After further lamenting the poor patronage for this film, and explaining that it ran in a local theater only for one week, he asked: "Where are the movie-goers who say they want wholesome pictures?"

This editor's report should be regarded as a warning to movie producers, rather than as a commentary on the public taste.

It is admittedly regrettable that large numbers of people are so depraved in their tastes that they patronize filth wherever it is found. But it is quite as sad that producers of smut are willing to make their living out of corrupting public morals.

The movie makers completely "miss the boat" when they suppose that the public does not like clean, family-type films. Are their memories so short that already they have forgotten what "Sound of Music" did for them? It packed the theaters in record runs, and made millions for the producers. And likewise "To Sir, With Love," one of the best pictures in years.

The problem is not that the public does not want good films. The real difficulty is that the decent segment of society (and thank heaven they are still in the majority) no longer trusts either the movie makers or their advertising, and are afraid to expose their children to the filth so often and so unexpectedly placed before their eyes under the guise of innocence.

It may seem strange for a newspaper writer to say that certain kinds of advertising cannot be trusted, but a great many people are now beginning to feel that way.

Read any movie ad, and try to tell what the picture is like!

When people do not come to their theaters, the movie industry itself is to blame, as are also the advertising men.

Advertising writers seem to have the idea that they must put sex into every ad they write. This goes not only for movies, but for almost everything else from automobile tires to kitchen stoves.

Clean people are sick and tired of it. Therefore they distrust these ads, and turn away from them.

When parents see a display of sex in a movie advertisement they immediately suppose that the picture is another portrayal of perversion, and refrain from taking their children to see it. This they do entirely as a means of self-protection, not that they wouldn't like to take their youngsters to a good movie. They are becoming scared of the movies!

Good pictures have been poorly billed in their advertising, and this will account largely for the failure of such films to receive public support.

But so many bad pictures have been given an innocent look, that parents have become very hesitant about taking their children to see any of them.

When movies like "Sound of Music" and "To Sir, With Love" make such good money, shouldn't the movie makers be willing to make even more money by producing more pictures of the same caliber? Wasn't that a lesson to them? What other picture has had the length of run enjoyed by "Sound"?

Can "Hell's Chosen Few," or "Sex and the Single Girl" or "Touched by Temptation" or "Have Figure, Will Travel" or "Planet of the Apes" or any others of their ilk even begin to compare with it?

Even "Gone With the Wind" had to be given a sex slant in the ads!

The public wants clean movies all right, but it is sated with misrepresentations of what is good and what Is not.

If honest-to-goodness clean family pictures of a high quality were made and properly advertised they would enjoy good business.

But when filth is peddled as extensively as it now is, sensible parents just naturally become "gun-shy" of ALL films, and as a means of protecting their families from the corrupting influence found in so many theaters, they stay away in droves.

Let the movie industry "come clean" with the public and the public will respond. The psychology that to be popular, a thing must be filthy, is about as wrong as our guesses on how to fight the war in Vietnam.

The majority of our population is still clean, and they want to remain that way and rear their children in a wholesome atmosphere.

1969 ﻿
