Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Joseph, the Seer of God

IN A FEW days we will reach the anniversary of the birth of Joseph Smith, the seer of latter days.

In complete fulfillment of the prediction of Moroni to Joseph, the name of the latter-day prophet has indeed been heard for good or ill the world around.

But now there is greater honor ascribed to him than previously. With the growing strength of the Church and the increased understanding of the true mission of Joseph Smith, more and more people recognize him for what he truly was—a prophet of God.

Time has been on the side of the Prophet Joseph. As the years have gone by, and new knowledge has been made available through scholarly research, and as men have become sated with medieval views so unsuited to the age in which we now live, a new day has dawned for the world.

In a little more than a century, mankind has come to recognize a fact for which Joseph Smith was persecuted most. He said there has been a departure from original Christianity.

No one in possession of the facts any longer believes that the Gospel as given by the Savior when he was in mortality has existed in its purity down through the ages.

No well-informed person now thinks that the Church organization as established by the Savior in mortality has survived the centuries.

Everyone who knows the facts recognizes and acknowledges now that there has been a tremendous change in the views, doctrines and organization of Christian churches as the years have rolled on.

And they recognize the need of returning to Christ's basic doctrines!

Hence the ecumenical councils which have been held; hence the public statements of high church officials that religions long since considered infallible and unchangeable, now must be altered to more nearly resemble the teachings of the Bible.

It was most significant that one of the world's great religious leaders, associated with a church whose claims to infallibility have persisted over the centuries, now announces that his church must be brought back to Christ and the Bible.

Critics of Joseph Smith argued a hundred years ago that Mormonism could not be true because it refuted some of the basic tenets of Christian faith. Today these tenets are being revised to teach the very things which Joseph taught.

Ancient documents, such as the Dead Sea Scrolls and others recently found by archaeologists, are opening the Bible to a new understanding, compelling scholars within certain churches to insist on readjustments, since the old views are no longer tenable.

There is even talk in some churches about a restoration of true Gospel principles, and one large denomination is talking in terms of seeking new revelation, a thing for which Joseph was roundly condemned by persecutors who finally accomplished his death.

Joseph Smith taught true Christian doctrine on a comprehensive scale, touching many subjects, including principles of astronomy and other sciences, although he was neither an astronomer nor a scientist.

And yet much of the latest scientific research gives endorsement to what he taught a hundred years ago.

Who in Joseph's day knew about space? Joseph did, and his writings harmonize with scientific teachings of today.

Who knew about the evils of tobacco in Joseph's day? But science knows now.

Who even spoke of other worlds being inhabited? Joseph did in his day. Only now are some scientific men interested in this subject. Our Venus-probes and Mars-probes are but part of a program to find this truth. And flying saucers? Joseph didn't talk about them, but men do today—thinking that other planets are sending expeditions to study the earth. And how could they do this if other orbs were not inhabited?

Joseph said other worlds are inhabited, and by the children of God!

His doctrines of salvation, our relationship to God, the fact of a divine creation, our personal destinies, bring increasing comfort to all who know them.

With each passing year, the stature of Joseph Smith increases. The perspective of time places an ever more convincing stamp of divinity upon his work.

He was the Prophet of God.

1969 ﻿
