Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Eccentric Or Right?

DURING ONE OF our wars we sang a popular song about an ineffective soldier who couldn't even march.

But there was a proud mother who saw only good in her son, and as the soldiers paraded by, she sang:

"And they're all out of step but Jim."

Sometimes this can be literally true. They can all "be out of step but Jim" in certain matters.

Recently an English newspaper, commenting upon a TV production telling of the "Mormon Invasion" of Great Britain, carried this comment among others:

"Eccentric they must certainly be accounted. They believe in the literal truth of the Old Testament."

It was a new way of putting it. Maybe believers in the Old Testament are eccentric in the eyes of those who relegate it to the realm of mythology.

And likewise those who believe in the New Testament, with the life and miracles of Christ including His death and resurrection, may also be classed as eccentrics by the same critics. And from their warped point of view, it probably is so.

Many today, particularly in Europe, seriously question the authenticity of the scriptures, not only of the Old Testament, which some regard as a fairy tale, but of the life and works of the Savior.

One of England's leading clerics, in an address before a group of divinity students at a British university, spoke of the miracles of Christ, and said: "They indeed were wonderful—if they ever happened."

With the clergy taking this attitude, and the populace willing to follow, it is no wonder that the Mormon elders are considered by some to be eccentric.

But are they?

It will be remembered that in Jesus' own day He was considered eccentric by the scribes and Pharisees, some of whom said He was a devil.

And John the Baptist was regarded as an eccentric. He ate locusts!

And Paul before Festus was told that much learning had made him mad. So he too was considered an eccentric.

George Washington was considered an eccentric by his loyalist enemies. Ben Franklin was thought by many to be eccentric. He played with a kite and a key and a flash of fire that came out of the sky!

And Alexander Bell. What a strange man, trying to make sound pass along a telephone wire! And Marconi? Only a fool could believe that sound could be transmitted by air, it was said.

When everyone thought the world was flat, how eccentric could a man be who taught that it was in reality round?

Eccentric?

Have those, who point the finger, ever thought that the "eccentric" might be right? Was Franklin wrong? Was Bell or Marconi? Was Paul mad? Was John the Baptist a misguided wayfarer, crying in the wilderness?

Jesus told the Prophet Joseph Smith not to join any of the churches, for they were all wrong. That put them all "out of step."

Joseph Smith was commissioned to organize the one and only true Church of Jesus Christ on earth in modern times. That made them all out of step but him!

The Mormon elders now teach in lands dominated by churches which existed in the day when Joseph went into the woods to pray. Their doctrines differ from the creeds of the existing churches. That makes the elders different, admittedly. Possibly that constitutes a definition of the eccentric.

But the elders have the truth. God spoke to Joseph Smith. The true Church is again upon the earth.

It had to be different from all other churches. It had to teach a doctrine which was strange in the midst of the popular man-made creeds of the world.

If this is being eccentric, then so be it.

And they are all "out of step but Jim."

1969 ﻿
