Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Hysteria Vs. Common Sense

RECENT MONTHS HAVE cast a shadow of gloom and despair over some parts of the United States as wholesale lawlessness has erupted into riots and mobbings.

It has reached a point in some cities where peace-loving people no longer feel safe on the streets, in public parks, or even on school grounds.

Some of the most regrettable blotches on the American scene have occurred among students at our public schools and colleges.

They have occurred in varying degrees. Some students persecute others for trivial personal reasons, and organize "cutting" acts which are cruel in the extreme.

Many students have felt, because of a growing sense of mistaken freedom, that they must be against something or everything and that the best way to express this attitude is to join riots or strikes or indulge in their own peculiar brand of "sanctions."

Student riots are among the most difficult of all for sober-minded people to understand. Students are presumably in school for learning and developing wisdom which will assist them in their future lives.

But when they cast common sense aside and participate in the hysteria of rioting, they throw to the winds all their acquired culture and all regard for the very system which provides the education they supposedly seek.

Ask many of these students why they participated in riots, and they frankly admit they do not know. "Everyone was doing it" is their most logical response. Is there any intelligence in that?

Too often it is to become part of the crowd, so they think. But frequently these so-called "crowds" are gangs led and inspired by foreign elements, trying to overthrow our government. Yet, many follow them, thoughtlessly and foolishly, much to their subsequent regret.

No one has the right to destroy another's property. No one has a right to assault another individual.

Resorting to violence is the way of the jungle, not the path of civilized and supposedly cultured persons.

Latter-day Saints must be ever law-abiding. Devoted members of the Church can never participate in any form of rioting or violence, gang fights, or resistance to law enforcement officers.

Latter-day Saints are committed to the principle of honoring, upholding and sustaining the law, and as such must forever shun unlawful acts.

It is as much a part of our religion to accept that principle as it is to believe in faith, repentance and baptism.

Lawlessness is opposed to the teachings of the Savior. It is stark disobedience. It is destructive and leads to anarchy and chaos.

Our religion teaches that the Constitution of the United States is an inspired document, guaranteeing freedom and protection to every person.

Therefore we must sustain that document, and the rights it gives us to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

Those rights provide for peaceful assembly, not riots and bloodshed.

They are to establish order and tranquillity in our communities, not gang fights leading to destruction of life, limb and property.

They provide due process of law to settle differences not taking the law into our own hands.

Our nation is built upon observance of law and order and our Church rests upon the same principle.

If, as Christians, we are able to accept the teachings of Christ, most certainly we must follow His example, do unto others as we would be done by, and uphold the righteous principles which guarantee our happiness.

Would Jesus be our Savior today if He had instigated riots and insurrection against Herod and Pilate?

Would we worship Him as we now do if He had been a rabble-rouser, inciting open rebellion?

Then can we say we follow Him if we resort to mob hysteria now and riot burn and kill?

Without consistency of conduct there is no true Christianity. Latter-day Saints must constantly and consistently obey the law.
