Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Guided By Prophets

WHEN PEOPLE ASK how we differ from other Christians, they are given various reasons.

But one stands out: We are guided by revelation through modern prophets.

Without modern revelation there would be no Mormonism. Without modern prophets we could hardly distinguish ourselves from other Christian groups.

This typical doctrine causes some criticism and at times ridicule on the part of those who no longer believe in current revelation since it has been lacking for so many centuries.

We are told that the heavens are sealed as brass over our heads and that there can be no more revelation.

This is indeed the line of demarkation. But it was mankind who sealed the heavens—not the Almighty. He is always ready to hear and bless His faithful people.

At no time has He sealed the heavens—but, rather, the iniquities of the people have done so. It was the case even in Isaiah's time, for he gave this explanation:

"Behold, the Lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear: But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you." (Isa. 59.)

When men supplanted revelation with their own wisdom, when they allowed worldly power to eliminate spiritual direction, of course God ceased speaking to them. Of course the heavens closed. But humans were the cause of it.

Has He not always promised to answer prayer? Has He not always spoken through prophets when the people listen? And has He not always said that He would do nothing "but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets"?

If He will not act except through His prophets, then prophets become basic officers in His Church. And revelation likewise becomes equally necessary, for how can prophets act unless God reveals Himself to them?

It is this vital principle which was lost to the world over the centuries, resulting in the spiritual darkness which has continued until recent times.

Why should people revile against prophecy? It would be their salvation if they would accept it.

Why do they revile against the prophets? Why have they done so through past ages?

They reviled anciently because they resented having their works of darkness exposed. Some do the same today. But others reject modern prophecy simply because they do not know what it is, never having lived in the presence of a living oracle.

But now come new prophets in the earth. They are inspired men, some of whom have seen God and talked with Him; others who constantly receive the dictation of His Holy Spirit.

In the Restored Church, this principle of prophecy exists as the outstanding evidence of its divinity. And in this Church, together with prophecy, are the other spiritual gifts known for so long in ancient times, but for such a lengthy period lost from among us.

The Lord is kind, and one of the chief manifestations of His goodness is His communication with mankind, which always comes through His prophets.

What better could the Almighty do for us than to speak to us, give us guidance, light and intelligence? What more could He do than to pour out His spirit upon all flesh as Joel said, and provide an enlightened age such as we now have?

What more could He do than to provide for us the raw materials for a great civilization and brightness of mind to develop them?

What more could He do than to give direction through inspired prophets who teach us how to become like Him?

As general conferences come and go, we note an increased outpouring of His spirit, an ever-growing inspiration to guide us into ways of success, so that we may enjoy the abundant life.

The entire Church pauses at conference time to listen to the men whom God has placed at the head of His Church, and we invite all mankind everywhere to do likewise.

"Come, listen to a prophet's voice, and hear the word of God."

1969 ﻿
