Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Prophet And President

THROUGHOUT THE CHURCH there is a rapidly increasing tendency to speak of President David O. McKay as "the Prophet." And rightly so.

In each age when the Lord has had a people on earth, He has guided them by revelation. Always that revelation has come through a living prophet. While urging the people to "search the scriptures" and profit by the advice He had given anciently, the Lord nevertheless gave current direction for the present day.

This is one of the outstanding elements of the restoration of the Gospel. The principle of prophecy has been restored. But it was not given merely that future events might be foretold, for such is hardly the whole field of prophecy. Probably more important than giving predictions is providing the day-by-day divine guidance which we need.

Conditions vary from time to time, making continuous guidance necessary. It was never the intent of the Lord to leave His people groping in the dark, but to give them light and direction to help them live successfully, and this He has given through His anointed servants.

Anciently Amos said appropriately: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets."

On the day the Church was organized, the Lord gave a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith reestablishing the official status of the Prophet for this day.

He decreed that the president of the Church should be His prophet, seer and revelator, as well as His inspired translator when such service was required.

The Lord at that time told the Church membership that if they would hearken to His prophet and follow his directions "as if from mine own mouth," they would be preserved and prospered in their lives.

President McKay is the Prophet for this day. He is the Lord's mouthpiece now. He gives us the divine guidance which the Lord has for us presently living.

With him are his counselors, also sustained as prophets, seers and revelators, and the Council of the Twelve. These men, in their apostolic callings, are entitled to the revelation of God for their respective assignments.

A visitor once asked what distinguished the Latter-day Saints from other Christians. The reply he received was: "Prophecy."

The stranger in our midst did not understand. Then it was explained to him that God in our day has restored all that was had anciently among the people.

Probably the outstanding characteristic of ancient Israel was that prophets ministered among them. This was true also of the early Christian Church. Christian prophets were placed in the Church by the Savior Himself even as prophets were given in Old Testament times.

When the visitor was told that "prophecy" was the mark of distinction, he was taught in effect that the Latter-day Saints are different because here and now they receive the guidance of the Almighty. To them the heavens are not sealed. Although they accept the Bible as the word of God, they don't believe it contains ALL of his revelations.

In modern times, people need heavenly guidance as much as did those who lived anciently. That guidance is not to come through those who "peep and mutter," nor by mysterious uncertain tactics traditionally handed down through the ages.

As Paul said, God does not work "in a corner." He is open and what He does is in harmony with scripture.

His way of communicating with His people was known to everyone anciently. All knew the prophet. Many consulted him, even on political matters. His word was accepted "as if from mine own mouth."

This gift He restored in modern times. The Church now is headed by prophets, with the President as the leader of them all. Today that man is President McKay.

He holds the powers which the angels bestowed upon the Prophet Joseph Smith. He has the same authority held by Peter, James and John; by John the Baptist, Moses, Elijah, Noah, and others who came as angels—even "divers other angels," as explained by Joseph Smith.

The presidents of the Church today are among the greatest of all the prophets. Who but they have held all the authorities and powers of all former times?

And at the head of this unique but vast organization is President McKay, our leader for today, our prophet, God's seer, our esteemed friend and co-laborer.

God strengthen him for his every duty!

1969 ﻿
