Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

"As If From Mine Own Mouth"

THE PRINCIPLE OF prophecy is vital to the religion of the Latter-day Saints. Without it they would have no religion.

The principle provides that at the head of the Church there shall be a prophet sustained by faithful people as the mouthpiece of God, and that in fact this prophet shall be a revealer of the divine will.

It is for him to point the way for the people of God. And it is for the people to follow him "in all patience and faith."

The scriptures from Genesis to Revelation bear this out. And they portray the results of obedience to or defiance of this principle.

Certainly "where there is no vision the people perish." But where there is vision—and wisdom to follow it—there is progress, peace and prosperity.

The people of Moses' day had both their prophet and their flesh-pots. It was easy for them to yearn for their former security and to rebel against their prophet when all did not go to please them.

But who had the greater vision, the vacillating people or the inspired prophet? Where was their true security, in their flesh-pots or in their divinely appointed leader?

In the days of King Ahab the people had their Jezebels and their state security. But they also had both Elijah and Elisha. In whom did they prosper?

Were the Corinthians better off following Paul or in going after the dissenters who splintered them into divisive groups?

Is it any different today?

Once again there are prophets on earth. Once again God has spoken, even as He did to Moses and Abraham. There are revelators on the earth again! Inspired direction by means of the visions of holy men is once again available to the people!

It started in our time with the Prophet Joseph Smith. On the day the Church was organized, the Lord revealed anew His ancient principle of directing His people by prophecy.

As He appointed Joseph Smith, He said: "Thou shalt be called a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of Jesus Christ, an elder of the church through the will of God the Father, and the grace of your Lord Jesus Christ, being inspired of the Holy Ghost." (D&C 21.)

This is the calling of the President of the Church. Joseph was the first President of this restored Church, and the keys and powers of his appointment were transmitted to each of his successors. They too are and have been seers, prophets, apostles, revelators, men of vision and inspired foresight.

To make certain that the people would fully understand the position to which He appointed their President, the Lord said in further explanation: "Wherefore, meaning the church, thou shalt give heed unto all his words and commandments which he shall give unto you as he receiveth them, walking in all holiness before me.

"For his word ye shall receive AS IF FROM MINE OWN MOUTH, in all patience and faith."

Can there be any misunderstanding that language? Can the people fail to know from this the great obligation they have to follow the inspired word of their President?

But the commandment is not without promise, and the promise is vital to the welfare of all the people as well as to each individual:

"For by doing these things the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name's glory."

The path of safety for the Saints always has been in following their President. We are divinely promised that the President will never lead the Church astray.

In this day of confusion, pressures, rebellion and sin, dare God's people ignore God's word?

1969 ﻿
