Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Counting Our Many Blessings

LATTER-DAY SAINTS HAVE much to be thankful for this year.

The Church is growing more rapidly than ever before. Membership world-wide will soon reach the three million mark. During the past approximately 12 years the population of the Church has doubled. In the last half century it has multiplied five times. In the life-time of President McKay it has multiplied twenty times!

The young people of the Church, contrary to the world-wide trend, for the most part are clean and virtuous, upholding the standards of the Church.

They do not riot, they do not resist their patriotic duties, and they do not resort to the "new morality" which now attracts the rest of the world. They regard virtue as more important than life.

Our young people love the Gospel. More of them now study it daily than ever before. Attendance at seminaries and institutes climbs spectacularly.

Student wards organized near many large universities are among the most active in the Church. Most of them average 75 per cent Sacrament meeting attendance. The great majority of the members of these wards are active. These young people, although they are earnestly engaged in their educational activities, nevertheless find time to serve the Lord.

Temple marriages are at a high point. Statistics on this subject are pleasing to bishops and stake presidents, for they show in no uncertain terms the faithfulness of the youth of Zion.

Auxiliaries are steadily improving their programs and increasing their effectiveness.

Sacrament meeting attendance world-wide is higher than ever before. Fast offerings reach a higher figure, and more people today are paying an honest tithing than ever before in the history of the Church.

The attitude of the world toward the Church is greatly improved, despite certain occasional outbreaks written by prejudiced or ill-informed individuals. The great publications of the nation continue to provide favorable publicity for the Church.

The Hill Cumorah pageant is now heralded as the greatest religious spectacle in America. It attracts audiences in excess of a hundred thousand every year, playing more nights and to more people than ever before.

General conference reaches all around the world. More radio stations and TV networks carry conference services than ever before, while short-wave carries the Gospel almost daily to remote parts of the earth.

The number of wards, stakes and missions continues to increase. People of high intellectual attainment are more and more being attracted to the Church, while the great middle class continues to provide the fibre which makes any organization great.

The programs of the Church reach into more areas of life than before. The Welfare Program is more extensive, more efficient each year.

The musical progress of the Church continues onward. The Tabernacle Choir sings before more groups in conventions and other important functions than ever, and the radio still carries it as one of the greatest continuing programs of all time.

Home life is being emphasized as never before. Home evenings become a part of the regular habits of the Saints. Home teaching brings more people into activity. Fellowship programs attract new converts and hold their interest.

The leadership of the Church, under the inspired direction of living prophets of God, point an unerring course to the future, where joy, happiness and security may be found by faithful Saints regardless of world conditions.

While the worldly doubt more and more, the faith of the Latter-day Saints increases. The testimony of Jesus is the most outstanding characteristic of the Church.

Latter-day Saints testify to all mankind that indeed God does live, for their prophets have seen Him; that Jesus is the Christ, and that He has inaugurated a modern ministry; that the Latter-day Saints are the servants of God, for He has given them His restored Gospel.

For all of God's choice blessings, the Latter-day Saints express their humble gratitude to a most gracious and kind Heavenly Father.

1969 ﻿
