Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Way To the Truth

MOST PEOPLE ARE good people. Most believe in God, and most have an earnest desire to serve Him.

Although the headlines tell of the wicked, who by their violence win the most publicity, the vast majority of people are good.

In their desire to serve God, often they frankly admit they do not know how to do so. They are confused by the many diversified opinions about religion. There are many denominations, all claiming to be right.

How can the honest observer know which Church is right, and which will provide for him the assurance of salvation if he obeys?

The scripture leaves many marks of identification by which the average person may know how to recognize the true Church.

One of the unexpected marks of identification is the name by which the members of the Church were known anciently. They were not at first called Christians, neither were they Protestants or Catholics. They were called Saints, as is shown in various parts of holy writ. This name was applied to the entire Church membership, not to the few.

The Church was marked by current revelation which came to holy prophets ministering among the people. Most agree that there were prophets in Old Testament times, but few think of them as being part of the organization of the Christian Church.

But as Paul explains in Ephesians, Christ gave both apostles and prophets to be ministers in the Christian Church, to remain in it until we reach perfection. Where are the prophets and apostles of modern Christendom?

And where is the current revelation?

This is especially important so far as the Christian clergy is concerned, as well as being vital to the welfare of the people. Ministers for Christ are to be called of God as was Aaron (Heb. 5:4) and Aaron was called by current revelation to a living mortal prophet. If that is the pattern, we see more than ever that prophets are necessary to receive the revealed word of God appointing men to the ministry. Only in this way can men be "called of God as was Aaron."

This is one of the most important of all signs of the true Church.

But what is another? It is closely related both to prophets and revelation. It is the production of new scripture as additions to already existing scripture. It was in this way we obtained the Bible. Prophets received revelations; they recorded them, and the records became scriptures.

In all ages God speaks through His prophets. "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets," said Amos, If prophets are to be in the Christian Church, and are to receive revelation, it is only to be expected that they would record those revelations, which then would become scripture. In this way new and additional scripture is provided for the people.

Where is the Christian Church which provides new scripture, through new revelation to modern prophets?

Many other signs of the true Church might be mentioned. But these are sufficient to call attention to some of the basic characteristics.

Our souls are most precious. Each of us should be vitally interested in his own salvation.

When the Lord was on earth He clearly taught (Matt. 15) that we cannot be saved by the precepts of man.

Only God's word will save. Uninspired creeds may be the work of sincere men, it is true, but when those men no longer believe in revelation from God, saying that the Bible contains it all, how can they expect to deliver God's will?

Salvation is so important to us that we must learn which is God's way and distinguish it from man's precepts, remembering that there is but one Lord, one faith (or religion) and one baptism.

The Lord organized only one Church. Paul taught that Christ is not divided. Denominationalism is division. The denominations of today run into the hundreds. Which one is right?

1969 ﻿
