Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

"Indifferentism"—No.1

AS LONG AGO as the days of Peter and Paul, even back into Old Testament times, indifferent attitudes toward Gospel truths have been combated by advocates of revealed religion.

The "don't care" attitude which is so common today is nothing new. Neither is it confined to matters of religion. But always it is the enemy of him who possesses it.It spells retrogression and destruction.

Did any great man ever achieve preeminence by a "don't care" attitude? Did the "don't care" individual ever graduate from college with honors, or make the football team, or become President of the United States?

Those who care are those who achieve, and those who care obtain results.

Whereas the "don't care" attitude is fatal, spiritually speaking, for those who pay no heed to Gospel teachings, it is nearly as difficult for those within religious groups who don't care to which denomination they belong, or to which baptism they subscribe, or who say that it doesn't matter whether one belongs to any church at all, if he lives a moral and honest life.

One cannot be honest with himself by retaining these views.

With Christ, there is a stand to take, a line to follow, a dedication to accept.

It was He who taught that there is but one way, a single straight gate, one fold and one Shepherd. It was Paul who taught "one Lord, one faith, and one baptism," and who asked in all candor: "Is Christ divided?"

Comforting as it may seem to some to believe that any creed will do, it nevertheless is a false notion. It was not so with Christ.

The Savior made this plain as He spoke to the Pharisees of His day (Matt. 15) and clearly taught that uninspired precepts of men will not save, neither will old traditions nor long cherished dictums.

The new "Jerusalem Bible" translation makes this even more clear than does the King James version, and says:

"The worship they offer me is worthless; the doctrines they teach are only human regulations."

In the rendering given in Mark 7: 6-9 this version says: "This people honors me only with lip service while their hearts are far from me. The worship they offer me is worthless; the doctrines they teach are only human regulations. You put aside the commandment of God to cling to human traditions. And He said to them—How ingeniously you get around the commandment of God in order to preserve your own tradition ... You make God's word null and void for the sake of your tradition which you have handed down. And you do many other things like this."

The Authentic New Testament sustains the Jerusalem (Catholic) Bible. "It is useless for them to worship me while teaching as doctrine, injunctions of men."

The New English Bible says: "Their worship of me is in vain, for they teach as doctrines the commandments of men."

Every person has his free agency, and each one is entitled to worship in whatever way he choose&. But he must remember that some forms of worship, as indicated above by the Savior, cannot provide salvation.

Indifference to religion is deadly, both spiritually and morally, and largely has been responsible for the widespread immorality, crime and corruption which face us today.

But indifference to the kind of religion is equally misleading. If Christ is not divided, there can be no division over the necessity of baptism, for Christ commanded it. There can be no division as to the mode of baptism, because only immersion is a baptism. There can be no division as to authority, for only those called by current revelation through a living prophet are authorized servants of God. (Heb. 5:4.)

The world is endeavoring to heal the wounds of denominationalism through ecumenical movements. But only an acceptance of the principle of "one Lord, one faith (or religion) and one baptism" can bring it about.

And that Lord must be Jesus Christ. That faith must be His Gospel IN ITS PURITY, untrammeled by man-made innovations, and that baptism must be that with which the Savior himself set the example. There is only one way.

1969 ﻿
