Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

"Indifferentism"—No.2

THERE IS A frightening sentence in the seventy-sixth section of the Doctrine and Covenants. It is one which every professed follower of Christ should read and ponder.

This section tells of the varied degrees of glory in the world to come, and points out those who may be assigned to each.

In referring to the terrestrial glory it speaks of persons who have the testimony of Jesus, but who were not "valiant" in regard to it, and says:

"These are they who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus; wherefore, they obtain not the crown over the kingdom of our God." (v. 79.)

Membership in the Church alone, then, cannot guarantee celestial glory. Neither can a "testimony of Jesus" if we are not valiant in it.

The dictionary defines the word valiant in this way: "strong and intrepid; powerful and courageous; performed with valor; bravely conducted; heroic."

Apply those expressions to the quotation above referred to in D&C 76: 79 and ponder them.

The Lord has His own definitions of this teaching. To make His meaning very clear, He says:

"O ye, that embark in the service of God, see that ye serve him with all your heart, might, mind and strength, that ye may stand blameless before God at the last day." (D&C 4.)

And He adds:

"For behold, it is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant; wherefore he receiveth no reward.

"But he that doeth not anything until he is commanded, and receiveth a commandment with doubtful heart, and keepeth it with slothfulness, the same is damned." (D&C 58:26, 29.)

"Indifferentism," as it has been called, can rob us of our happiness here and our salvation in the world to come.

We cannot be indifferent toward the Lord and hope to receive His blessings. What parent here on earth extends himself to shower gifts upon a child who is indifferent and disobedient, and who pays no heed to the teachings of that parent?

We forget that the Gospel is a plan whereby we learn to become like God. To do so we must not only KNOW His teachings, but we must likewise DO them. But not only are we to do them, we must do them "anxiously," to use His own expression; we must do so enthusiastically, and with our whole heart, might, mind and strength.

This is what builds in us those divine attributes which make us like Him.

"Don't care" attitudes will never make us either great or successful in anything. What is as great or desirable as to see the fulfillment of the commandment: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect"?

Such a goal requires the greatest of application and devotion. Indifferent performance can never bring it about. A "don't care" attitude will lead us in the opposite direction.

It is true that the Lord is merciful and kind, but He does not allow mercy to rob justice. It is no kindness to us to give us rewards for which we are not prepared.

The Gospel is for personal development. It is not merely a solace to our souls. The Church is His vehicle "for the perfecting of the Saints," as Paul described it, not a social institution to provide free entertainment.

Reaching heaven is strictly a matter of personal development, whereby we build into ourselves Christ-like traits of character. Being saved is not arriving at some station far off in space. It is becoming God-like in what we say and do and think.

That is the reason for God's requirement of consistency in our service to Him, for enthusiasm and "anxious" devotion. No one can be like God while being indifferent to the good things of life; no one can be considered God-like while shackled with a "don't care" attitude. Neither is it divine in any sense to give only half-hearted effort.

Ask any student if he won honors with mediocre efforts in school. Ask any general if his battles were won by "don't care" armies and indifferent officers.

Then can the greatest of all achievements—to become like God—be obtained through indifference or half-way measures?

We must be valiant in the testimony of Jesus.

1969 ﻿
