Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Problem of "Drop-Outs"

IN EVERY CHURCH there are both active and inactive members. It is likewise true of our own.

Whereas most of our people love the Gospel and make an earnest effort to live it, there are many who do not and drift into other interests, some far from being wholesome.

There are many reasons for "drop-outs" in the Church. Sometimes people are offended for one cause or another, and absent themselves from further activity.

Some are lured away by unwholesome companions at school, at work or on the playground, and because of their own weakness they fall into the habits of the crowd they follow.

At times home conditions force children into the inactive ranks. Uncooperative parents can do this, as do unbelieving fathers and mothers who do not make religion an important part of the home.

Children are likely to follow the examples of their parents, and when father and mother neglect Church attendance, children do likewise; and when parents drink or smoke, the children usually adopt the same habits.

Even some fairly active parents teach habits of absence from Church by going on vacation trips over weekends, treating the Sabbath like any other holiday.

But there is still another cause for drop-outs, and that lies within the Church itself.

When Church activity is poorly handled, that very inefficiency can so disgust many of those who attend that they lose their desire ever to return.

With each drop-out from the Church a problem is created in someone's home, and Church officers and teachers may be to blame.

Unpleasant as it is to contemplate, we ourselves can cause problems in the homes of our neighbors by our mediocre performance at Church.

One of the surest ways of helping a family to strengthen its youth is to eradicate the drop-outs in the Church.

The best way we can accomplish that is to do our Church work so well that interest in our classes will be so great that those who come will not want to stay away.

That is why the Lord asks us to do our work to the best of our ability, with all our heart, might, mind and strength.

How many classes have doubled and tripled in attendance merely by the efforts of a really competent teacher? And how many classes have seen the attendance diminish when a poor teacher has taken his place?

Some well-meaning Church workers literally drive young people away, unwittingly, it is admitted, by their lack of understanding of their responsibilities, lack of patience, lack of skill in doing their work, and lack of intelligent preparation for it.

If we by our personal failure should cause distaste for Church attendance in the mind of any person, we contribute to his spiritual delinquency, and cause a problem within his home for his parents and others who love him.

We have an inspired Church program. There is no other to compare with it. But it is no more effective than the manner in which it is used and adopted in our local congregations.

Our use of this inspired program is no better than our understanding of it and our devotion in implementing it.

Every Church worker can be a savior on Mount Zion if he or she has a mind to be.

Depending upon our personal attitude, we can save our people, or we can lose them by neglect and carelessness on our part.

Every Church worker can take a significant step toward eliminating the drop-out problem by following the injunction of the scripture:

"Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence.

"He that is slothful shall not be counted worthy to stand, and he that learns not his duty and shows himself not approved shall not be counted worthy to stand." (D&C 107:99-100.)

1969 ﻿
