Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

In Or Of the Church

IN ONE OF the revelations to the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord cautioned us saying: "Trifle not with sacred things."

This timely warning at first was given to some early members of the Church who did not fully understand the significance of the restoration of the Gospel.

But it is equally applicable to us.

Particularly are we not to trifle with the sacred name nor the divine work of Christ, as is done in insincere or hypocritical acts.

Many claim to hold membership in one church or another, but admit that they do little about it. One might say, "I am a Catholic but I am not a practicing Catholic," or another might say, "I am a Mormon but not a practicing Mormon," or likewise one might claim to be a Presbyterian but not practice the teachings of that church.

It never seems to occur to them that if they are not "practicing" Christians in the genuine sense, they are hardly Christians at all. The Savior taught that those who are not for Him are against Him. If we do not practice His teachings, can we say we are "for" Him?

What then is a Christian? Is he not one who practices the Lord's precepts in his daily life? Is he not one who earnestly strives to become Christ-like in his habits and attitudes and in his relationships with all mankind?

If a person is not a practicing Catholic, is he really a Catholic at all? If he is not a practicing "Mormon," can he in reality claim to be a genuine Latter-day Saint? Or a Presbyterian, if he ignores his creed?

This thought might be extended also to our national allegiance. If a citizen of this country is not a practicing American, is he worthy of the name? Compare the boy risking his life in Vietnam with one who has turned hippie, and ask which is the real American.

We often speak of apostasy from the Gospel. It appears in various forms, and is not found alone in those who leave one church to join another, or even among those who leave Christianity to adopt some non-Christian faith.

Every act of disobedience and rebellion against the Lord's precepts is an evidence of apostasy to that degree. To resist the Savior to any extent is apostasy on that point.

When we are baptized we take upon ourselves the name of Christ and covenant to serve Him and keep His commandments.

When we partake of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper we do likewise, and when we accept ordination to the priesthood we agree to live by His every word.

Can we then be true Christians if we fail to keep our covenants and follow Him? Is our failure to obey not an apostasy to the extent of our disobedience? Do we not step over the line into the Devil's territory, as expressed by President George Albert Smith, whenever we refuse to obey the Lord?

The true Christian will learn the truth about the Lord and His Church, and will willingly take His yoke upon him. No one can be a true Christian without learning His truth. We must have an intelligent faith, for no one can be saved in ignorance. God cannot be considered incomprehensible, otherwise how could we worship Him? Therefore we must learn the facts about Christ, and then adopt them. No substitute will do. He has but one way, one Church, one faith, one baptism, one plan of life.

Even though we already have found the right way, if we fail to keep the commandments we still jeopardize our salvation.

One may be IN the Church but not OF the Church, as truly as he may be in the world but not of the world.

Church membership alone will not save. If one is IN the Church he must also make himself OF the Church by his active participation in its program.

We trifle with sacred things if we profess devotion but resist our responsibilities, and except we repent, we may reap the whirlwind.

1969 ﻿
