Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Call For An Awakening

MODERN DENOMINATIONAL CHRISTIANITY must do two things:

Such were the comments of some leading clergymen as quoted recently by the Associated Press.

"Nominal Christianity has had it," was the stark assessment of present-day church life voiced by a leading Methodist theologian, the Reverend Dr. Albert Outler. Others have sounded similar views.

They call for firmer commitment to basic doctrine and its demands, and they challenge what they consider a rash of lax departures from it to appeal to passing, modern outlooks.

"The time may have come for theology to be more concerned with the truth of the Christian faith than with courting the elusive modern man," says the Reverend Dr. William Hordern, a United Church of Canada scholar.

There also is a growing conclusion that the churches are entering a period when their character and makeup will require tougher dedication to gospel teaching, in an atmosphere of much disbelief.

"In the new era—and it has started already—phony Christians will be recognized as phony," Roman Catholic Archbishop Robert E. Lucey of San Antonio told a recent gathering there.

In this connection, two tendencies, cited as widespread problems in recent church life, have drawn increasing fire from various religious leaders, said the Associated Press. They are:

Noting the flurry of assaults on classic Christian beliefs, the Reverend Dr. Eugene Carson Blake, general secretary of the World Council of Churches, told its central committee meeting in August on the island of Crete that the interdenominational body must stick to gospel standards, the Associated Press concluded.

A return to the true doctrines of Christ would be the salvation of Christianity and the world, for not only would mankind then worship Him in spirit and in truth, but they would put aside all hypocrisy and begin to love their neighbors as themselves.

But to return to true Christian doctrine would mean to abandon man-made doctrines, for man's uninspired ways and teachings are not God's.

Man-made creeds would have to go.

Denominationalism would of necessity come to an end, for Christ is not divided. We cannot be "some of Paul, some of Apollos, some of Peter, and some of Christ." True Christianity demands unity.

The rejection of current revelation and modern prophets would have to end also and everyone would of necessity look for new modern revelation, since God will do nothing "but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets."

How far will modern Christians go in a return to Christ? All the way?

Or will their hearts still yearn for their man-made traditions and their widespread free-thinking denominationalism, as the followers of Moses yearned for the flesh pots of Egypt?

Ancient Israel was kept out of the Promised Land for their failure to accept the whole plan of God.

1969 The Doctrine of ChristThe Doctrines of Men
