Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Honesty Is Basic

HONESTY IS ONE of the most important tenets of our religion, and one of the most difficult to live for most people.

Yet it is as fundamental to true Christianity as baptism, faith or repentance. It is the foundation of all character development.

As no man can see the kingdom of heaven without baptism, as explained by the Savior, neither can anyone see that sacred place without honesty.

Our Christian civilization is built upon integrity. Without it our way of life would collapse.

If we allow dishonesty to weave itself into the fabric of our lives, we invite moral suicide.

Dishonesty in the world is appalling, both in petty and major crime, and yet we claim to be a Christian nation.

Can we convince ourselves that we are Christian if Christian ideals are not practiced in our daily lives? No professed Christian can be a Christian indeed if he is not honest.

To profess belief in Christ and yet refuse to live His laws, is apostasy from Christ to the extent of our disobedience.

No one can separate the Christian life from the Christian religion and there can be no Christian life without honesty.

Faith without works is as dead in this regard as in any other. The Savior is strict in His requirement that we keep His commandments.

And yet He is most gracious in His kindly invitation to help us overcome our evil tendencies He said: "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls."

But can rest come to the insincere? Can they have peace of mind? They can if they change their ways and repent, but not otherwise.

Honesty is intimately and inseparably related to true charity.

Charity is the perfect love of Christ.

Can there be true charity, then, without honesty?

Is there any charity in a dishonest act?

Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels and have not honesty, I am become as sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal.

How is a man profited if by dishonorable means he shall gain the whole world, but lose his own soul?

What shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

It is unthinkable that anyone would hide under a cloak of piety while deceiving his fellowmen, yet it is done.

Paul once asked the Corinthians if Christ is divided.

Can He be divided on any matter of principle?

Does He deal in double standards?

Does He countenance devious practices?

Is there any duplicity in Him?

Then can duplicity exist in His followers?

What does He mean when He says:

Thou shalt not lie

Thou shalt not steal

Thou shalt not covet

Thou shalt not bear false witness?

Does He give us permission to tell little lies with the understanding that we will not tell big ones?

Does He allow us to steal a little here and a little there, providing we do not commit grand larceny?

The Book of Mormon speaks of the power of the devil in the latter days and tells of his persuasive efforts to cheat and deceive human beings.

The scripture says he will cause anger to rage in the hearts of some, but others "will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, [so] that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth all is well—and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell.

"And behold, others he flattereth away, and telleth them there is no hell; and he saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is none—and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance." (2 Nephi 28: 21-22.)

Lucifer also urges us to `eat, drink, and be merry," saying "it shall be well with us . . . Eat, drink, and be merry; nevertheless, fear God—he will justify in committing a little sin; yea, lie a little, take advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in all this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so be that we are guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of God." (2 Ne. 28:7-8.)

What a pity that many people actually believe that devilish doctrine!

With false teachings such as those Lucifer induces many to cross the line into his realm, persuading them that they can in fact serve two opposing masters and get gain from both.

But there is only one God, and only one way to be saved in His presence. That is by avoiding all forms of hypocrisy and by honestly and sincerely keeping His commandments.
