Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Our Changing World

CONDITIONS IN THE world are changing so rapidly that it is difficult to keep up with them.

It is said that the reservoir of available knowledge is doubling every nine or ten years, and with this new knowledge comes a flow of new discoveries, new devices and new horizons.

We send men to the moon and are thrilled with their exploits, looking forward expectantly to their further projects. We take pictures of the earth from outer space, and send television cameras to Mars and obtain pictures in return, publishing them in our daily newspapers.

We use computers to run our businesses, aid our schools and do our genealogical work. Our medical men have extended our longevity.

The "horse and buggy days" are not even known to most of our population, the average age of which is now down to about 27 years. Only a small segment of our population can remember when there were no radios.

And who, a generation ago, would have thought that a white shirt could be made from a piece of coal, or oil from shale rocks on the mountain side? And which of our grandparents could have guessed that the kerosene in their lamps which so dimly lighted their homes would ever be used to power the mighty jet airplanes of today? It is a fast-changing world indeed.

But there are some things which never change, and never will. There is a divine constancy in the world. There is the reminder that God never changes, nor do His laws, and that such basics as high morals and good character never can be altered by any of man's intellectual or physical advances.

All the computers and space ships we can possibly make will never alter the principle of honesty. No scientific marvel of this or any age can change the ugly face of unchastity.

We take pride in our space exploits, and justly so, but let us never forget that it was God who made space and that He and His angels have been space travelers for eternities.

We marvel at the intricacies of our computers in solving mathematical and other problems, but let us not forget that we know very little about the wonders of the universe which are so intricate that even Einstein felt that our knowledge is but a faint reflection of the infinity of God.

We are now only beginning to learn smatterings of what the Lord has done. He made the worlds and the laws which govern them. And He made them for a specific purpose—the advancement of mankind.

But knowing that all advancement is not found in the realm of the intellect, and to further the same purpose for which He made the universe, He laid down moral laws to aid man toward his ultimate destiny, that of becoming like our Father in heaven.

It takes more than scientific achievements, dazzling as they are, to make us God-like. Without goodness—in character, in Christ-like living, and in clean morals—it can never be.

Artificiality characterizes much of man's world today, together with a refusal to face certain basic facts. Hypocrisy is a crying evil.

It is possible that our scientific progress can fail through a breakdown in character. All of our vaunted intellectuality can fade and die in the ashes of moral corruption.

In the whirl of present-day change, we must keep our feet on the ground and maintain our proper balance. We must not build on the sand.

We must admit that artificiality, dishonesty and hypocrisy can destroy us, and that immorality is an affront to God. It is filth carried to the nth degree. It can decimate the race.

Irreligion has a deadly effect on individuals and nations. Atheism is suicidal. Permissiveness as we know it is self-destructive.

The Almighty said that in these latter days conditions would be as they were in the days of Noah, when to wipe out corruption, God spared only eight persons from the flood.

By their Babylonic sins many in the world are rejecting God today. They seem not to have the intelligence or the wisdom, even in this time of great achievements, to understand that the certain wage of sin is death.

The commands of God cannot be evaluated by a computer. The wisdom of man is still as foolishness to Him. Dare we defy or even ignore our Maker?
