Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

A Lesson From Russia

THE ASSOCIATED PRESS recently reported a survey on religion made in one of the large Russian cities—Kazan, with a population of 900,000.

This city is 200 miles from Moscow. Two years were required to make the study.

The survey was the first of its kind in fifty years in an area where every effort was made on the part of the Soviets to destroy religious faith.

Results of the survey were published in the official magazine of Soviet atheism, Nauka i Religiya. The magazine did not say why it published the results of the survey, but the Associated Press suggests that it was apparently done as a warning that religion still has a hold on a considerable portion of the population.

Four hundred students at the city's university and representatives of its medical institute were used to make the study which included a house-to-house canvass of thousands of homes.

Despite the hazards of revealing their faith, 21 per cent of those contacted admitted belief in some religion.

Only 3 per cent who admitted to a religious faith were under 30 years of age, stark evidence of the effect of the anti-religious campaign conducted by the government particularly among the youth in school.

Among some of the more interesting points developed in the survey were:

34 per cent of the believers belong to the working class.

42 per cent were men and women on old age pensions.

17 per cent were housewives.

The report indicated that "the educational level of believers is not high." This is in marked contrast to a recent Gallup survey of the same kind conducted in the United States. The Gallup survey showed that 45 per cent of all Americans go to church every week, and of them, the best educated are the best church goers.

In the United States, 48 per cent of the college students attended church; 44 per cent in high school attended, and 43 per cent of those in elementary schools went to church regularly.

One of the most important points brought out in the Russian survey was this, as quoted by the Associated Press:

"Having religious parents was described as the main reason for belief in religion among those surveyed. This was said to have been true in 80 per cent of the cases."

This is the great lesson to be gleaned from the Russian survey.

Let us keep in mind that the government there carried on a relentless campaign against religion. And let us keep in mind too that there are hazards in belonging to a church of any kind in Russia.

Yet in spite of these hazards and the impact of the anti-God drive of the Soviets, in 80 per cent of the cases where religious faith survived, it was among people whose parents had taught them, as children, to believe in God.

Then can anyone doubt the value of religious training in the home? Should any Latter-day Saint hesitate to hold regular family evenings, to have daily family prayer, to live the Gospel principles as a part of our daily lives?

No one can discount the value of such training. And everyone should have it.

Families which fail to hold family evenings regularly, as advised by the Presiding Brethren, deprive themselves of one of their greatest assets in good family living.

Families which fail to teach the Gospel to their children as a part of their daily routine, who fail to pray, to live the moral code and the Word of Wisdom, to honor the Sabbath Day, to uphold their Church leaders, to pay their financial obligations and otherwise establish a true Christian atmosphere in their homes, handicap themselves most seriously.

Those who rear their families in the faith will have joy both here and hereafter in the stalwart faith and high character of their loved ones.
