Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Peacemakers

MOST PEOPLE MIGHT well ask themselves how "Christian" they are.

The majority of Americans profess Christian belief, although actual church membership includes but a slight majority of the population. Yet most people in our country, even though they are not actively enrolled in any denomination, would say they believe in God and accept Christ as their Savior.

But what does it mean to accept Him as our Savior? Can it mean anything less than accepting His way of life and endeavoring to follow His pattern of living? Is this what it means to be Christian?

If this is so, just how "Christian" are we?

Our nation is rocked by stress of many kinds. In many cities large areas have been burned and pillaged by rioters, most of whom admit to a Christian belief.

Crime is increasing rapidly. Yet most criminals confess—even on death row—that they have a Christian belief, or at least what they think is a Christian belief.

Robberies, defalcations, immorality, killings, assaults are reaching frightening proportions, most of which are perpetrated by people who, deep in their hearts, admit to a form of Christian belief.

Even shoplifters, who are mostly women and children, attend Sunday School and other religious meetings. They profess to be Christians. But are they?

Are traffic offenders, who deliberately break the law if no officer is near, practicing their Christian religion as they do so? Most of them are supposed to be Christians.

In the depths of the despair which has come to so many as a result of the near-civil war which has swept some of our cities, and in recognition of the mounting rate of other criminality and sin, many are persuaded to ask themselves:

"Are we really a Christian nation?"

The Savior taught that we are known by our fruits, and that a good tree will not produce bad fruit, neither will a bad tree bring forth good fruit.

If our fruits are bad, can we claim to be real Christians?

The good "tree" of Christianity will never bring forth bad fruit. It cannot, for true Christianity comes from God; and God is GOOD. But if we as Christians bring forth bad fruit, then let us ask how really Christian we are.

Christianity teaches us to love our neighbors as ourselves. Is this practiced among our rioters and other destructive citizens?

Christianity teaches us the Golden Rule, saying: "All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them." Does that describe the intent of the enemy of law and order?

Christianity tells the worshipper that if he has aught against his brother, or vice versa, he should go to that individual, work out a reconciliation, and then offer his gift at the altar of God. How much of this doctrine rests deep in the heart of the average person?

Christianity says: "Judge not, that ye be not judged." How far removed are the actions of those who defame the names of good men for political purposes, for example, or of those who jump to conclusions based on unfair publications or whispering campaigns!

Christianity says: "Thou shalt not commit adultery," and yet the nation's immorality rate is shocking, and with it the incidence of the frightful diseases that arise only from that condition.

Christianity says: "Thou shalt not lie, thou shalt not steal, thou shalt not kill." It tells us that we should sustain government in establishing law and order, and it teaches mercy, kindness, forgiveness, patience and long-suffering.

It condemns duplicity, misrepresentation and devious methods. It rebukes hypocrisy in the sharpest terms.

But it blesses those who feed the poor, clothe the naked, visit the sick, the needy and those in prison. It honors honesty, purity, and simplicity. It opposes worldliness, but exalts righteousness.

In America we have millions of good people, devout Christians, God-fearing men and women who are indeed good neighbors, upright citizens, provident, merciful and kind.

They are the backbone of America. They do not make the headlines. They do not cause the riots nor the upsurge of criminality, nor are they afflicted with the diseases of filthiness.

They are the good citizens, the ones who practice Christian virtues. How thankful we should be for them! They make America great.

But those who bring shame upon our country, and yet profess belief in Christ's name, may well remember that unless we do the works of Christ, we can hardly profess to follow Him.

It is righteousness which exalteth a nation.
