Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

True Safety Only In Faith

IN THESE TROUBLED times, why do people turn away from God? Why do they reject the only power which can "make and preserve us a nation"?

Our nation was founded by God-fearing men, and it prospered under their influence. It can only continue to prosper by following the same pattern.

"New morality" and "new freedom" and "new security" can never save us. They will only demoralize us.

The "new morality" is no morality at all. It is virtual free love. Can it preserve our nation?

"New freedom" is disrespect for law, and for the rights of others. It is a type of individualism that is destructive of "freedom under law," which is the only kind of liberty that can live. When "new freedom" is found to be lawlessness, it is recognized for what it really is—anarchy.

So-called "new security" is equally dangerous, but in a different way. It places the load of responsibility always upon "the other fellow." It destroys individual initiative, and teaches the false premise that "the world owes me a living."

All three of these "new" ideologies are contrary to the principles of our founding fathers, and all three are opposed to the basic doctrines of Christ. God-fearing men would never subscribe to any of them. That is why our founding fathers, who relied upon the Almighty, refused to countenance them.

As Latter-day Saints in America we are both citizens of the kingdom of God and of the nation which He founded.

God raised up America, with a definite purpose in mind. And He raised up the founding fathers to write an inspired document which has served us well as our national Constitution. He has seen us through war after war when our liberties have been challenged. He literally both "made and preserved us a nation."

Many of our great leaders of the past have told us that our nation will never be conquered from without, but they have warned that it might easily disintegrate from within. They have said further that such disintegration would begin, if ever it should come, with our failure to recognize the Almighty as our Founder, and to serve Him and uphold His precepts.

Their warnings have been disregarded in many respects.

One-third of our population is not enrolled in any church. Yet it must be said to our credit that many not enrolled formally in denominations do attend services on Sundays to swell the total figure of church attendance in this land to 45 per cent.

Of the 55 per cent who do not attend, many live in violation of divine laws which have been handed down to us. But they are not alone. Some of the so-called pious are insincere. Many of them are ignorant of the true meaning of faith, and as a result fail to live up to His precepts.

The "new morality" is invading Christian ranks, even being advocated by some clergymen. But it is nothing less than adulterous, and is completely contrary to the teachings of Christ.

If America is to save itself, this is one of the points on which she must act, and now. America cannot survive in immorality. It must return to the chastity taught in the scriptures.

And neither can America survive in the "new freedom" which would promote anarchy and a breakdown of law and order. There can be no immunity from the law for anyone. Political expediency cannot justify it. Constitutional law was established "for the rights and protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles," the Lord declared.

When that divine principle is violated, we strike at the heart of the nation.

Another divine law says that we must earn our bread by the sweat of our face. There is no substitute for the law of work. When anyone endeavors to set up a system by which he or the masses may survive without effort, he builds upon the shifting sands, and his house will fall. No "united order" will succeed unless it is operated under the true inspiration of heaven. God's purposes are not to provide security only. They are to develop progress founded upon individual initiative which alone can bring the soul growth God requires of us.

The Almighty teaches productivity, work, effort, self-reliance, and says that if we fail to "bring forth much fruit" we shall lose our talents.

Our national survival can rest only upon faith in and obedience to God.

Manmade philosophies which break down morals, promote lawlessness, and plant the seeds of irresponsibility can only destroy.

A return to the Almighty and His divine principles is our only salvation.
