Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Sum of the Whole Matter

IN THIS DAY of pressure groups, lobbies, vested interests and over-selling of one ideology as against another, many people are left in a state of confusion.

The question of what to believe and which way to go becomes ever more important in their minds.

President David O. McKay, in his prophetic role, gave us a key to follow which is the path to safety. Said he:

"In these days of uncertainty and unrest, liberty-loving people's greatest responsibility and paramount duty is to preserve and proclaim the freedom of the individual, his relationship to Deity, and the necessity of obedience to the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Only thus will mankind find peace and happiness."

It is remembered that the Book of Mormon mentions difficult times in which every effort was made to find peace. Then it is recorded that only through the preaching of the word of God did peace come, for the preaching of the word was more powerful even than the sword.

Elder Harold B. Lee gave us a summation of this great principle also when he said at a recent conference:

"The conclusions we must reach are inescapable as we ponder these profound declarations --

"One who has an abiding conviction concerning God:

"Who has faith in his relationship to Deity:

"And the necessity of obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ:

"Who believes in and has a love for the Son of God, and

"Who has a feeling of certainty as to the immortality of the soul:

"Can successfully combat sin and unrighteousness IN ANY GUISE."

These principles sum up the entire matter of present-day conflicts and dangers.

If we would live the Gospel fully, we would be so fortified by it that we could and would resist sin and deceit, no matter in what guise they might appear.

We then would not be tempted by the worldly fashions of the day, because God has taught us modesty.

We would not be persuaded by alluring advertising of liquor and tobacco, because God has given us the Word of Wisdom.

We would not covet, for God has forbidden it.

We would not be weakened by the so-called "new morality" which is no morality at all, because God has taught us the law of chastity.

We would not be persuaded to join any rioting or other unlawful movement, because an article of our faith teaches us to honor and sustain the law.

We would not be lured into Communistic circles, because Communism is anti-Christ, and therefore opposed to all that the Lord teaches us.

We would not steal, nor lie, deceive, nor misrepresent, neither in business nor in gossip nor in any of our relationships with our fellowmen, because—"We believe in being honest true, chaste, benevolent... "

We would not take advantage of anyone for any reason, because we would live by the Golden Rule, doing to others as we would be done by.

We would not feel obliged to find expression for our talents in any oblique manner, because our allegiance to our Church affiliations would be complete, and we would give to them our time and our talents for the building of the kingdom of God.

We would never need to compromise our standards, expecting to gain advantage with people or organizations, because we would know that we cannot serve God and mammon at the same time.

So, as we study the Gospel, we may know that it provides a full and complete way of life, and that if we are "Gospel-centered" in our thinking and in our doing, all other things will fall into their logical places, easily brushed aside if we recognize them as being evil.

And thus fortified, as Elder Lee has said, the soul "can successfully combat sin and unrighteousness in any guise."

And as President McKay emphasized, "Only thus will mankind find peace and happiness."
