Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Keep Home Fires Burning

IN THE FIRST World War one of our favorite songs was the stimulating "Keep the Home Fires Burning."

That song carried a great message. Without the burning fires of home support, where would the boys receive encouragement as they fought a bitter enemy?

The strength of home ties added power to their arms, zest to their spirits and warmth to their hearts. Without these there would have been no victory.

Today we are in another conflict in which our boys fight and die for their country. Again the home fires must send out a glow which can reassure each fighting man that Dad and Mother, wife and children, brothers and sisters, uphold the traditions of true Americanism for which he fights.

But how are we to keep those home fires burning?

Is it done through pleasure seeking? Through moral breakdown? Through greed for more business and more profits? Through political chicanery?

What makes the home fires bright and attractive and good?

To have home fires, we must first have a home. Where is the "home fire" without a home, a good home?

Do our homes "pass musters" to use a military expression? What makes a home good?

President McKay gave us this definition: "A true home is one in which, if Christ should chance to enter, He would be pleased to linger and to rest."

In further definition he added: "Let us be more determined to make beautiful homes, to be kinder husbands, more thoughtful wives, more exemplary parents to our children, determined that in our homes we are going to have just a little taste of heaven here on this earth."

The strength of the nation depends upon the home. If the home fires are not bright and good, the nation languishes, and our fighting men on the front will languish too.

Good homes must rest upon a serious effort to live the Gospel of Christ. The Gospel provides every inducement to have good homes, and it gives the formula by which they may be good.

God is love. The home must be one of holy and sanctified love. God must be there, through the power of love.

Each member of the family must love the other as himself. Each must do to the other as he would be done by. Each must recognize the rights of the other, and abide by them.

Each must know that there can be no true love in wickedness. Each must learn too that when one sins, all are hurt, and no one has the right to hurt another.

The enemies of a good home are many.

Selfishness is the first. Out of selfishness come quarrels, misunderstandings, and often divorce. It promotes evil habits too. Is there a drinker, for example, who is not selfish in his attempt to gratify an unrighteous appetite? And is there a drinker who brings anything but unhappiness and even heartbreak upon a home? Does liquor weaken or strengthen family ties? "Fire water," as it is called, can hardly brighten the home fires or make them good.

Selfishness brings debt, and debt has broken up many a household. Can it brighten the home fires and strengthen the family?

Selfishness invites immorality too. Who submits to immorality except for selfish purposes and gratification?

Was there ever a crime which did not originate in selfishness? Was a character ever strengthened by it?

If selfishness is a prevailing factor in a home, can it be a great home? Can it keep burning the kind of fires which warm the heart, build family ties, strengthen a community and sustain a boy in a foxhole?

Obedience in the home is basic to obeying the law of the land. If the home is without order and righteous discipline, can we expect those who live there to respect the constitutional requirements of our government? Do riots keep the home fires burning? Does violence? Do self-opinionated groups which demand their "rights" regardless of the cost to others? Can communities or nations live in lawlessness and survive?

When all is said, good homes are founded upon faith in God whose Gospel teaches all the elements of good living and proper relationships. Only through the Gospel may we find true righteousness, and only righteousness "exalteth a nation."

To keep the home fires burning, we must keep alive our faith in Christ, and brighten the spark of divinity which is in each one of us.
