Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Day of Mourning

THREE ASSASSINATIONS OF national significance have shocked America and the world.

Following each of them, national days of mourning have been declared by the president of the United States. Flags were lowered to half-staff, special church services were held by most denominations, thousands wept as they passed by the biers of the fallen men, and the conditions which gave rise to such assassinations were soundly condemned.

But little if anything was done to correct the conditions of which these grievous crimes were but symptoms.

Mourning is indeed appropriate at times like these, both national and individual. But more than for the men who were ruthlessly cut down we should mourn over the conditions which gave rise to these outrages.

Our mourning should be so deep that it will force action of a significant nature. It is good to pass new laws to curb the unlawful use of guns, to place armed guards about political candidates and their families, and to make speeches of sympathy.

But guns, guards and speeches will not bring America back to its senses and to the equilibrium of law-abiding living which should characterize this great land.

America, like Europe, is suffering from a tragic deterioration of both individual and national character.

It seems that in both areas, right is sacrificed for what seems to be expedient. Pleasure has become more important than goodness. Security is sacrificed for ease of living. It is no longer esteemed smart to be honest, and virtue is looked upon as both old-fashioned and prudish.

The foundation of all good character is being abandoned in wholesale measure, which foundation is true religion, without which there can be no good character. And neither will stability and good character ever return without it.

What is the already obvious result of this ebbing of the tide of faith?

Immorality is increasing at a frightening rate, even on high school and college campuses. Crime rates are soaring. True family life is being abandoned. Millions of people now refuse to work, preferring to live lives of ease and corruption on public doles.

We coddle criminals and make law enforcement both difficult and unpopular. We foster extended use of alcoholic beverages.

In movies and TV we glamorize unchastity, crime and violence, giving our youth a form of education which can only reap the whirlwind.

What is the answer? More laws? More budget appropriations? More political speeches, more liberalizing of our statutes?

Neither money, speeches nor congressional acts will solve this problem. Only one thing will.

But will America accept it? There was a similar crisis in the past, and then the populace accepted the remedy. Will we be as wise as they were?

In the days of our Civil War, Lincoln knew the answer and clearly pointed it out.

"We have forgotten God," he declared to the nation. "We have grown in numbers, wealth and power as no other nation has ever grown, but we have forgotten the Gracious Hand which preserved us in peace and multiplied and enriched and strengthened us. We have vainly imagined in the deceitfulness of our hearts that all these blessings were produced by success. We have become too self-sufficient to feel the need of redeeming grace, too proud to pray to that God who made us."

Lincoln's indictment of conditions in his own time is startlingly applicable to our own.

How appropriate are the further words of his proclamation:

"It behooves us then, to humble ourselves before the offended Power, to confess our national sins, and pray for clemency and forgiveness."

Only a return to God can save America. But it must be sincere and genuine. It will require deep repentance on the part of all, and an unswerving obedience to His divine laws.
