Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Value of Discipline

THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION of Radio Broadcasters recently gave an award to Station WINA in Charlottesville, Virginia, for its editorial on the subject of discipline.

Among other things, this editorial said:

"Discipline is the very basis of civilization. Without a system of rules to live by and without law and order imposed by some group upon another, there would be no civilization.

"The root meaning of a word more nearly explains the whole context of ideas with which it is legitimately associated than the public's mistaken use of the same word.

"Coming from the Latin, `to discipline' means `to teach.' Discipline makes specific requirements of the individual; there is a system of punishments associated with discipline, and always the main objective is to preserve the interests and further the opportunity of the cooperative majority.

"This last is one part of discipline that many do not and will not recognize: that there is a counterpart to discipline—the ability to learn and to accept responsibility in a mature manner.

"Discipline produces these characteristics in a person when administered properly.

"Then why has there been such a fear of discipline—parents being concerned about disciplining their children—many young people rebelling against discipline as a threat to their freedom—mankind in general looking at discipline with a wary eye as a possible threat to liberty?

"Every normal person needs to have some sort of contest, some feelings of resistance, before he can make the best of his faculties.

"Whatever experience serves to give him the confidence that he can compete with other men helps to increase his solidarity with other men.

"The pendulum is swinging back to more discipline in each individual life. There is beginning to be an understanding that a good loving parent demands discipline. A good teacher demands discipline.

"And most important, the child or the student RESPECTS THE GOOD DISCIPLINARIAN a great deal more than the parent or teacher who does not demand anything of him."

Radio Station KDAL in Salina, Kansas, referred to the subject this way:

"Youngsters need to know they will be held responsible for their actions. They need to know they will never be able to escape from police records. Young people and adults should have this reminder before them, which was issued by an Illinois judge before sentencing two juveniles:

"`You young men have been convicted of a felony. I am not sending you to prison, but you should know the record of your conviction will stand as long as this courthouse stands.

"`If you are called as a witness in any court you will be asked if you have ever been convicted of a felony. You will have to answer yes. You may need a surety bond to cover a position of trust. Your record means you probably will be refused by most bonding companies. In a few years you will be 21. Others your age will be allowed to vote. You will be denied this privilege. I am granting you a parole. A parole is in no sense a pardon. Your conviction is now a matter of record. It will be with you to the end of your days.'"

Radio Station KSL commented in this way:

"Facts are facts. The next time the choice is yours whether or not to engage in some questionable activity, remember you are not just choosing for today. It's your entire future you are shaping."

It is good to hear such comments from important radio station commentators. It is good to know that the pendulum is swinging back to common sense in regard to discipline, punishment and youth development.

The Lord cannot be wrong. The Bible quotes Him repeatedly in favor of proper discipline. It teaches clearly that there are rules laid down for righteousness, and that to the breaking of each law a punishment is affixed. Wrongdoers will reap the results of their acts. We will be held accountable on judgment day for every deed committed in the flesh.

Each act makes a mark on our character. It also shapes our reputation.

Persons who say that it is wrong to discipline a child simply do not know the facts of life.

Parents who have been misled by this widespread but mistaken philosophy would do well to look into the scripture for some inspired advice, part of which is: "Spare the rod and spoil the child."
