Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

A Covenant Nation

FOR YEARS THE United States Senate was inspired by the prayers and public utterances of its chaplain, Dr. Peter Marshall. He has been forgotten by many of the present generation, and some now in Congress never knew this great man.

Peter Marshall was a scholar of deep perception. He knew the meaning of true Americanism, and constantly pointed the way to the ultimate goal of this nation. He spoke of the American Dream and held it constantly before his listeners.

"It is a dream," he said, "that has shone brightly at times and that has faded at other times."

In the book A Man Called Peter, compiled by his wife Catherine, he still teaches his excellent philosophy:

"World events," he says, "are forcing us, whether we realize it or not, to rediscover the meaning and the significance of the things that make America different from other nations, the hope of a world weary of war, heartsick and hungry.

"What is the American Dream? What is it that makes our country different?

"What is America? Where is our country going?

"Let no answer be lightly made. We cannot speak with truth or realism about the future unless we understand the past.

"What has America to give to the rest of the world? If only grain or money or clothing or armaments, then we have already lost the war and the peace ... and our own souls.

"Ours is a covenant nation the only surviving nation on earth that had its origins in the determination of the Founding Fathers to establish a settlement to the glory of God and the advancement of the Christian faith.

"That was what William Bradford and George Carver had in mind when beneath the swinging lantern in the cabin of the "Mayflower," they affixed their signatures to the solemn declaration which established the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

"They had come from the Old World and were seeking refuge in the new. They had come from tyranny and oppression, they had come from fear and coercion, they had come from famine and from difficulty, from wars and threats of wars. They sought a new life in a new land.

"Religious liberty to worship God according to the dictates of one's own conscience . . . and equal opportunity for all men. . . these were the twin pillars of the American Dream.

"Now a Covenant Nation is one that recognizes its dependence upon God and its responsibility toward God.

"This nation was so born. God was recognized as the source of human rights. The Declaration of Independence says so.

"A Covenant Nation is one which recognizes God. His purposes stand over and above the nation. The highest role the nation can play is to reflect God's righteousness in national policy.

"There have been periods in our history when the American Dream has faded and grown dim. Today there is real danger that the American Dream will become the Forgotten Dream.

"For freedom is not the right to do as one pleases, but the opportunity to please to do what is right.

"The Founding Fathers sought freedom.

.....Not from the law but freedom in law;

"not freedom from government, but freedom in government;

"not freedom from speech, but freedom in speech;

"not freedom from the press, but freedom in the press;

"not freedom from religion, but freedom in religion.

"We need to ponder these things today," concluded the great Marshall.
