Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Our Honored Dead

"GREATER LOVE HATH no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends."

So spoke the Savior as He is quoted in the fifteenth chapter of John. He uttered this great truth as He gave to His disciples one of His great injunctions:

"This is my commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you.

"And then He added: "Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you."

The Savior well understood the giving of one's life for his friends. He knew that before long He himself would do that very thing, and not only for his friends but for all mankind, because His atonement affects us all.

There are many in the world who give their lives for their friends, and the most numerous are our servicemen who so bravely face death to preserve the rights and freedoms of our people.

Letters from servicemen are often published in the papers, particularly if those letters were written by some who had a foreboding of death.

Those boys who die in battle, as far as we know do so willingly. Not that they want to die—quite the opposite. They want to live, to come back home, and to enjoy the blessings of peace and quiet and family life. They hope to go to school, and develop careers for the future.

But they face enemy fire, and die. In their supreme sacrifice they give up family and friends, careers and pleasures, and the only peace and quiet they obtain is found in a hero's grave.

Most of them die with a sense of resignation, which is a willingness to make the sacrifice, since to them it appears necessary and important.

And in giving their lives, they show their love for us, for their families, and for their flag.

We cannot blame God for war. We bring wars upon ourselves. Most of us hate war. But as citizens who follow our leaders, we are duty bound under the Constitution to respond to the call to arms when that call comes. For that reason, Latter-day Saints, as loyal citizens, defend their flag.

The Lord by revelation justifies His people in defending our Constitution, and if that defense requires the blood of some of our people, so be it. We of today or most of us, we hope, feel like Patrick Henry expressed himself: "Give me liberty or give me death."

Liberty is free agency, as we express it in our Church vocabulary, and free agency is God-given. It is vital to our progress. It is divine.

Our men who march to war and give their lives in the honorable defense of their country fit into the definition of the Lord's words. They have that greater love. They give their lives for their friends.

Families who lose their boys may take comfort in this great fact. They may know too that the Lord is a God of love, and that true love will not go without its reward.

We do not know all of God's plans. We are but finite souls, and much of the time we "see through a glass darkly," as Paul expressed it.

But God is infinite, as is also His love. So are His mercy and His grace.

As the author of love, will He not remember with compassion those who loved their friends and their country so well that they gave their lives to defend them?

Will there not be a martyr's reward for such as they? Will they not be given some added consideration when on Judgment Day He evaluates their lives and their deeds? Will there not be some special understanding, some extraordinary sympathy between Him, who made the supreme sacrifice on the cross, and those who made their ultimate sacrifice on the battlefield?

And should there not be hope in all our hearts that the sacrifices of war may be brought to an end by a repentant world willing to accept the true meaning of that sacrifice on Calvary?

He knew love. And He knew sacrifice. He is the Prince of Peace, and will give us peace if we will but follow Him.
