Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Where Is Good Character?

WHEN WE LATTER-DAY Saints refer to our Article of Faith which includes the statement, "We believe in being true," we must keep in mind a proper definition of loyalty.

With it also we must remember the vital necessity of standing by principle, refusing to vacillate with every wind of circumstance.

It is well for us to remember the examples of our Pioneer forefathers who laid their all upon the altar of God. Their religion meant so much to them that they left their homes, moved from place to place seeking freedom of religion, and even died for it as many did on the plains, at Haun's Mill, at Carthage or elsewhere as they were required to make a stand. Shall we do less?

We today are witnessing in the world a most tragic development. It is a wholesale breakdown of good character. It is seen in our highest and most respected bodies. Not even Congress is exempt. It is seen in the rioting of students, racist groups and others, mostly fanned by Communist agitators.

The refusal of many to assume responsibility is a frightening aspect of it. Thousands now refuse to work or support their families. Doles are preferable for them. Fraud is seen even in charities, one of the worst examples being women who actually go into the "business" of having illegitimate children as a means of increasing their government allotments.

The resurgence of crime, of course, is another evidence of the condition. Some community leaders ignore the need for better law enforcement. Individual citizens often refuse to come to the aid of persons attacked by desperadoes. Able-bodied boys sit idly by as their girl companions are seized and carried off by hoodlums to a fate worse then death.

Politics become more and more corrupt. Public servants under oath, "bite the hand that feeds them." Perjury is no longer shunned by some in the courts. Certain judges render decisions favoring criminals and hurting the public whom they are pledged to serve and protect.

Some clergymen have endorsed free love in the guise of the "new morality" which is no morality at all. Likewise have some educators and political leaders.

Demonstrators have waved Communist flags in our streets while denouncing the government. Our flag has been burned. If there is public resentment at these acts of treason, it is kept eloquently quiet.

What has become of our good character? Where is loyalty? Where is principle?

It is part of the religion of every Latter-day Saint to be "true" as the Articles of Faith say, true, honest and virtuous.

We must be true to every high principle, to good character, to the advancement of righteousness. We must be true to our loved ones and not besmirch their good names by our wrongful acts. We must be true to our flag and to our boys who fight and die in Vietnam.

Those who hold public trust must be true to the highest traditions of honesty and integrity. It is part of our religion so to do.

Those who teach must build character, never weaken it. Otherwise they are not true.

Employers must be true to their workers and make Christian ideals a part of their personal relations programs. Employees must be true to their employers, giving them honest production. They must be true to their families whose living they earn, and true to the Church in which they hold membership, never bringing any reflection upon it because of poor performance.

Boys and girls must likewise be true. They must learn the value of high principle and come to know that to vary from it can bring only disaster. They must be loyal to their parents, never feeling that father and mother are their enemies merely because of an occasional act of discipline.

Proper discipline is a part of our education, and is incident to the growing-up process. All must learn which way is right. All must learn to avoid pitfalls, and when we make mistakes we must be willing to make the necessary adjustments.

Parents are not our enemies because they chastise us. What they do in righteousness is in our own interest.

Parents, of course, must be true also, and honest with their children. They must ever be fair in their judgments and righteous in their discipline. This, too, is part of good character.

As individuals and as nations, we can never survive without good character. To suppose that we can sin with impunity or get gain by rebelling against just principles, is simply an unsound and dangerous presumption.

And what gives us our true sense of righteous values? It is the Gospel of Christ. It is His Church.

To keep our balance, let us keep close to the Church and accept the direction of the inspired men whom God has chosen to lead us.
