Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Rights of Non-Criminals

EVERY PERSON HAS the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

This includes the victims of criminals, as well as the criminals. It includes an assurance that our courts will be as fair to law-abiding citizens as they are to those who break the law. It provides that if any preferred treatment is to be given, it should favor the good citizens rather than the parasites on society.

This was the substance of the thinking of a group of women in Indianapolis who started an anti-crime crusade in that city which now has reached the proportions of a major movement.

Fifty thousand women there have now organized to fight crime, and part of their objective is to see that judges in the courts deal fairly with the victims of crime.

It started five years ago following the death of a 90-year-old woman killed by a 15-year-old boy who snatched her purse. But there had been numerous previous crimes of a similar nature. Especially purse-grabbings and sex assaults on women walking alone on the streets of the city.

A significant drop in crime has been the result.

The President's Crime Commission, referring to this movement, said:

"The most dramatic example in the country of a citizens' group that has addressed itself forcefully and successfully to the problems of crime and criminal justice is the Anti-Crime Crusade of Indianapolis."

These women give complete support to their local police, who in turn cooperate with the women. Their program includes:

Putting proper lighting on city streets.

Getting school drop-outs back into school.

Providing jobs for boys who need them.

Assisting boys released from penal institutions to adjust properly in society.

And setting up a system of "court watching."

The latter point was considered by the women as one of their most important tasks. At least two of their number sat in on every court case, and reported back to the entire group on the practices and decisions of the courts.

They decided that it is the right of the public to demand efficient, mannerly operation of the courts. And this they achieved.

But education in law observance was also given. With the cooperation of school and police officials, all students in the seventh and eighth grades were provided with special instruction on maintaining the law and the advantages of doing so.

More than 2,000 dropouts were put back in school without spending tax funds. The streets are now well lighted. Women and girls may walk safely at night. Even the debris around the city has been removed.

But it is brought more and more to the attention of the public that keeping youth in line is first a matter of keeping adults in line.

Statistics of the past several years have shown a sharp increase in the number of young people arrested for serious crimes—murder, robbery, forcible rape, burglary, aggravated assault, larceny of $50 or more and automobile theft.

Those under 18 years of age account for almost half the total arrests reported for these crimes.

In a concentrated effort to control this rash of youthful criminality, innumerable youth-serving groups have joined law enforcement movements.

These groups, often desperately in need of support, offer the community a good opportunity to combat crime, since youthful criminality is uniquely suited to prevention and correction.

However, these efforts in behalf of youth can only supplement—never replace—parental concern.

Broken homes, dissolute parents and a tragic absence of guidance typify the backgrounds of many youthful offenders.

The role of the parent is paramount. It is indeed difficult to imagine a more fundamental service to society than imbuing one's children with respect for law and order.
