Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Home Is the Answer

A STABILIZED HOME, in which religious instruction forms a major part, is the only real answer to juvenile delinquency.

This is the consensus of opinion of scholars who have made a serious study of the causes and prevention of delinquency.

These scholars say that parents and children alike must be taught how to live together as a family: their home must be "God-centered," and must be associated with a church which provides an uplifting, character-building program for the youth.

They list two kinds of homes: one which produces delinquency, and the other which seldom has youth problems.

The poor home in which delinquency thrives is described as one in which there is no genuine love between father and mother, nor between parents and children; no regular family routine in the home, no preparation, no planning; no fixed time for meals, no set time to come in at night, nor to do homework, nor to go to bed; no discipline nor rules of conduct; no group activity and little or no religion and moral training.

Such a home usually has in it parents who drink and who give their own children liquor at home; parents who quarrel, even in the presence of their children; who party and carouse, who are often untruthful, dishonest, careless about paying bills, give their children no training in financial matters, provide no companionship for children and have no respect for religious matters.

J. Edgar Hoover, our great head of the FBI, explained that juvenile delinquents seldom if ever come from homes in which:

"1—Parents try to understand their children and find time to cultivate their friendship and love.

"2—Parents of integrity face facts and live by the truth.

"3—Parents live within their means and give their children examples in thrift, security and stability.

"4—Parents are industrious and teach their children that most of life's good things come only from hard work.

"5—Parents have worthwhile goals in life and seek to have their children join them in their attainment.

"6—Parents have common sense, a capacity for friendship and a sense of humor.

"7—Parents live in harmony with each other and do not quarrel in the presence of their children.

"8—Parents have ideals and a compelling urge to serve rather than to be served.

"9—Parents are unswervingly loyal to their own children but can express righteous indignation and chastise them when necessary. (That old proverb `Spare the rod and spoil the child' is as valid today as it ever was.

"10—Parents' decisions are controlled, not by what their children desire but by what they need."

There is no doubt in the minds of scholars that for the most part delinquency or freedom from it is a result of home environment. The experts say that children are not born criminals, nor pampered parasites. They are made that way by the environment in which they live.

And children are not born as young ladies and gentlemen, honest, upright and clean, but are so as a result of their training.

This kind of philosophy makes more persuasive than ever the decree of the Lord in the 68th Section of the Doctrine & Covenants:

"And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents.

"For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized.

"And their children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when eight years old, and receive the laying on of the hands.

"And they shall also teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord."

Christianity's Virility

THE UNFORTUNATE AND misconceived "God is dead" controversy is itself now dead, to all intents and purposes. It came to its deserved and sudden end about as quickly as it had arisen. For this all thinking people will be grateful.

But a wider question is now raised, actually related to the first, and in fact responsible for it. That question pertains to the virility of what the world knows as Christianity today. It is not dead, but is it dying?

A few weeks ago Time magazine reported the visit of the Pope to South America, and incidental thereto, quoted figures on the low church attendance in the great southern continent. They were appalling.

When less than 10 per cent of the population of an entire continent makes any pretense of practicing their religion, one immediately wonders about the virility of their faith, regardless of denomination.

But South America is not alone in this. Europe is very similar. About the same percentage of western Europeans go to church as is true of our southern continent. In Great Britain, the average ranges nearer 15 per cent, but even that leaves 85 per cent of the entire population not attending religious services.

With shocking figures like these before us, is it not time to ask if Christianity as the world now knows it is a dying religion?

It should be remembered too, that many people go to church out of no deep inward conviction and practice their rituals without ever being "born again," as the Savior expressed it.

Of course there are many believers—devoutly so in thousands of cases—who, like Abraham Lincoln, do not attend church services because they cannot accept the creeds which are presented there.

No one knows how many people truly believe in Christ. No census has ever explored this field. With many believers who attend no church, and with many who go to church for only superficial reasons, and with the vast majority not attending religious services at all, with or without faith no one knows how many true believers there really are.

This is so not only in other lands but also in the United States. However, in this country, a Gallup poll does show 45 per cent of the people attending some religious meeting every week, which is most reassuring.

But how effective is the Christianity which most people know? It has not yet made them love their neighbors as themselves, it has not yet taught the masses to turn the other cheek, to forgive seventy times seven times, to love their enemies, or to live the Golden Rule. It has not yet taught all men to be honest chaste and truthful, or to live the Ten Commandments.

And if the kind of Christianity now known to mankind has not yet accomplished these basics, how effective is it?

The churches are in the worst turmoil they have ever known, at least since the Reformation. Even clergymen are denying their faith, leading others into agnosticism. Many in the ministry—both men and women—are deserting their posts, not by tens, but by hundreds and thousands.

Peter and Paul died for their faith, as did those thrown to the lions in the Roman arenas. Who has equal devotion today? Is it a different faith, that it no longer moves people deeply?

Divisions, conflicts and internal strife mark most large denominations today. Leaders are being repudiated. Secularism is more potent than faith.

It all points up one thing: that the "faith that was once delivered to the saints," as Jude expressed it, is not the faith which today is embraced by many, and which fails to hold adherents as did the ancient faith.

But God is wise. God is merciful. He knows that nearly 2,000 years without revelation could lead to no other condition. He would have given guidance if men had sought it, but revelation and prophecy were rejected, and the world drifted into dark ages which, religiously speaking, still persist.

Yet in His mercy, the Almighty has given mankind a new revelation of Himself, and has instituted a modern ministry to bring His true light into the world.

It is the Restored Gospel given through the Prophet Joseph Smith. Heavenly light is again on earth; true prophets minister again in the flesh and God speaks once more to men. This light, and it alone, can bring peace to our troubled world.
