Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

America's New Approach

THE INAUGURAL CEREMONIES of President Nixon sounded a distinctly spiritual tone.

Five prayers were offered by leading clergymen representing as many faiths. The Salt Lake Mormon Tabernacle Choir sang as though inspired. The Marine Band played "God Bless America," and the President's address pointed to a new horizon of spirituality.

It was all both satisfying and pleasing to thoughtful citizens. But the impressive prayer of the Reverend Billy Graham struck a note which deserves special consideration. He pointed to our need of national repentance as a prerequisite to obtaining divine help.

He was right. There can be no true spirituality without compliance with the laws of heaven. This all Americans must learn and accept.

It is frighteningly true that the blessings of God are predicated upon obedience to His law, and without that obedience, there can be no bestowal of His favor.

It is not enough merely to pray to the Lord, or to mention Him in our speeches, because neither prayer alone nor lip service will save anyone. The Lord is a God of works as well as of faith. Mere appeals for divine aid, urgent though they may seem to be, will not bring the desired results. Righteous works must accompany them.

It was once said that this nation cannot survive if it is "half slave and half free." But we can no more be halfway in our spirituality than we can be halfway about our freedom.

In Lincoln's day that great leader called his people to repentance and told them that they had forgotten God in the midst of their prosperity, that they had forgotten the gracious Hand that made them.

Such is nearly the case today. How many people now really put God first in their lives? How many Americans who listened in on the inaugural ceremonies are willing to set aside selfish interests to truly achieve peace on a basis of common brotherhood?

How many are willing to do unto others as they would be done by? How many will turn the other cheek or go the extra mile?

How many are strictly honest? How many soberly eschew liquor, drugs and other stimulants which destroy the ability to think clearly and which inflame tempers and cause tongues to babble meaninglessly?

How many in America are willing to observe the moral laws laid down by the God to whom they pray? Can prayers be meaningful and persuasive in heaven if they are uttered out of gluttony, dishonesty and lust?

Can a nation which pleads for divine help do so with any degree of effectiveness when it upholds a "new morality" which is no morality at all, and which opens the door to sex evils on a scale so wide that a plague of social disease descends upon us?

Billy Graham was right. If we are to expect divine aid in solving our problems, then as a nation we must turn quickly to the divine law and live it.

John the Baptist taught the wicked of his day, as they asked for divine guidance, to repent and bring forth fruits to prove that repentance had actually taken place.

James, in his straightforward epistle, taught that the "wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God," and added, "be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves."

Can anyone misunderstand him when he says also, "Faith without works is dead"?

With a new president, America has an opportunity now to open a new era. It can be one of righteousness and success; it can be a passive period with little change from the status quo; or it can become a morass of distress and failure brought about by the wickedness of the people. Now is the time of decision.

The Almighty indeed has called this a land of promise, but He has said that we who live here can receive His beneficence only as we serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ.

He will protect us from our enemies abroad—if we serve Him.

He will defeat our enemies from within—if we serve Him.

He will inspire our President—if he and if we in our prayers are sustained by righteous works.

And He will bless and guide our lawmakers—if they will put His divine purpose first in their lives.

Then indeed can "God bless America" become a reality—because she will deserve it.
