Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Washington And Franklin

GEORGE WASHINGTON is usually spoken of as the "father" of our country. But he was more than that. With the help of Benjamin Franklin, he literally preserved it from an early demise.

These two great men stood at the crossroads of this new republic as it was struggling for existence, threatened as it was with destruction by its own hand. Americans never can fully measure the debt of gratitude we owe to them.

Both felt within themselves that America was a land of destiny. Both acknowledged that the Almighty very largely had been instrumental in its creation as a nation. And both bowed in dismay as their shortsighted colleagues almost destroyed the inspired concept of freedom which we know today.

Their associates did not know the true meaning of political liberty. They had never heard of a "government of the people, by the people and for the people." Some of their thinking was still colored by royalist opinions.

Washington had repeated frequently his conviction that it was the Almighty who gave victory to the colonists. Knowing that the Divine Hand had thus set America free, it was revolting to him to see attempts made to neutralize all that had been done. With Franklin he opposed such tendencies throughout the convention, and finally prevailed.

Franklin was always his close ally. Together they had planned for the way of life we know today, and as Franklin saw the convention go week after week in fruitless debate, at times in bitter controversy, he began to wonder what form of government would finally evolve.

At one time he appealed to the convention to pray for guidance and for an end to all the controversy, but strangely enough he was rebuffed. Still his appeal has gone down in history as one of the great moments of the convention. In part he said:

"The small progress we have made after four or five weeks of close attendance and continual reasonings with each other, our sentiments differing on almost every question—producing almost as many noes as ayes, is, methinks, a melancholy proof of the imperfection of human understanding. ...

"In this situation of this Assembly, groping as it were in the dark to find political truth, and scarce able to distinguish it when presented to us, how has it happened, Sir, that we have not hitherto once thought of humbly appealing to the Father of lights to illuminate our understandings?"

He then spoke of the many answers to prayers during the war for independence, and continued:

"To that kind Providence we owe this happy opportunity of consulting in peace on the means of establishing our future national felicity. And have we now forgotten that powerful Friend?

"I have lived, Sir, a long time, and the longer I live the more convincing proofs I see of this truth: That God governs in the affairs of men. ...

"I firmly believe this," he continued, "and I also believe that without his concurring aid we shall succeed in this political building no better than the builders of Babel. We shall be divided by our little partial local interests; our projects will be confounded, and we ourselves shall become a reproach and a byword down to future ages. And what is worse, mankind may hereafter from this unfortunate instance despair of establishing governments by human wisdom and leave it to chance and war and conquest.

"I therefore beg leave to move that henceforth prayers imploring the assistance of heaven and its blessings on our deliberations, be held in this assembly every morning before we proceed to business, and that one or more of the clergy of this city be requested to officiate in that service."

His resolution set off a new round of debate, and was finally voted down. One of the main reasons given was that the new nation was without funds and could not pay the clergymen for this service. There was general embarrassment, but the motion failed.

When the time came to sign the new Constitution, all waited to see what Washington and Franklin would do. As they took the lead, discarded all thoughts of sectionalism, and signed the document, then and only then did the others follow.

Franklin himself regarded the creation of the Constitution as nothing short of a miracle in view of the nature of the debates. He saw in it the hand of the Almighty, despite the refusal of many of his colleagues even to join him in prayer.

It is a fact—God did raise up strong men to write the Constitution despite the antagonism of many of their colleagues. And this is all the more reason why we who live today should preserve it with equal diligence.
