Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Lincoln's Mother

LITTLE IS KNOWN of President Abraham Lincoln's mother. That she was an exceptionally good mother is fully accepted. That she reared a son who became one of the great men of all time is recognized in many nations around the world.

As to his greatness, it is of more than passing interest that David Lloyd George, premier of England in World War I, said of him:

"I doubt whether any statesman who ever lived sank so deeply into the hearts of the people of many lands as Abraham Lincoln did.

"I am not sure that you in America realize the extent to which he is also our possession and our pride.

"His courage, fortitude, patience, humanity, clemency, his trust in the people, his belief in democracy, and, may I add, some of the phrases in which he gave expression to those attributes, will stand out forever as beacons to guide troubled nations and their perplexed leaders.

"Resolute in war, he was moderate in victory. Misrepresented, misunderstood, underestimated, he was patient to the last. But the people believed in him, and they still believe in him.

"In life he was a great American. He is an American no longer. He is one of those giant figures, of whom there are few in history, who lose their nationality in death. They are no longer Greek, or Hebrew, or English or American. They belong to mankind.

"I wonder whether I will be forgiven for saying that George Washington was a great American, but Abraham Lincoln belongs to the common people of every land."

What made Lincoln great? What gave him his great sense of justice? From whence came his mercy and compassion? What made him a "man of God" as he has been called by many?

Lincoln himself used to say: "All that I am or hope to be I owe to my angel mother."

And what made her such an angelic mother?

As one writer expressed it, she possessed "a sense of reverence that lifted her above the dull and deadly routine of the commonplace."

When John Wesley Hill wrote those words, he touched the very heart of the reason for both Abraham Lincoln's greatness and that of his mother.

She was reverent. And because she was reverent her son was likewise reverent. And that reverence could be born only of a deep faith in the God to whom she paid that reverence.

And so it was that her little boy grew up from infancy with reverence for God as a daily example, and with sincere regard for the sacred word.

No matter how hard those frontier days were, no matter how difficult it was to make a true home in a log cabin, to help run the farm, and care for an unpredictable husband, she made whatever sacrifice was necessary to teach faith to her children.

That faith was taught from the Bible, which was the favorite book of the household. She even chose biblical names for her children—Abraham and Sarah. Mother and children alike read the scriptures—studied them—prayed over them—together.

And mother and children sat down before the fireplace in a family group and pondered over lessons from the holy word, absorbing and learning to love the divine rules of right and wrong, of justice, and of mercy. These traits were born and bred into those children. And they bore fruit.

So where did Lincoln learn his consideration for the common people? Not alone from having been one of them; not only from having grown up in adversity. In many men this breeds resentment.

But as Lincoln read of the Savior teaching the common people, feeding them, healing them, even raising a poor widow's only son from the dead, he was impressed and inspired.

Out of his great reverence for the Redeemer and his desire to be like Him, Lincoln learned to love the common people, to sympathize with them, to help and to save them.

This created within him a deep hatred of slavery and injustice of all kinds. It inspired his desire to preserve a government of the people, by the people and for the people. It made him just and true.

When his mother lay dying, she said to him: "I am going away from you, Abraham, and shall not return. I know that you will be a good boy; that you will be kind to Sarah and your father. I want you to live as I have taught you, and love your Heavenly Father, and keep His commandments."

And this is what he did.
