Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Casualties of War

EACH WEEK THE nation counts its war casualties. They are listed as killed, wounded and missing.

These reports are most sobering, and wring the hearts of loved ones who had so fervently hoped that such a loss would never come to them. Every right-thinking American sympathizes deeply with their bereavement and constantly prays that the horrors of war will soon come to an end.

But there are other casualties that are seldom mentioned, casualties which should stagger this nation and compel every man who enters the service to pause and consider their causes.

These casualties are not the flower of America, shot down in defense of our flag. These are innocent babies born as the offspring of adulterous relationships between our soldiers and the women of the Orient.

Medical men warn of the skyrocketing rise of venereal disease among our forces, and it is certainly something to fear. But what of the innocent children born from such relationships?

No one knows exactly how many of these children are now living in Vietnam. The figure may run well beyond the 50,000 mark. In Japan there are known to be more than 20,000 mixed bloods fathered by U. S. servicemen, both white and black. The number of those whose fathers are black is estimated at between 2,000 and 3,000.

Other thousands of GI-fathered illegitimates are in Thailand, Korea and Taiwan.

Nearly all have been abandoned by their fathers who sought a momentary "thrill," as they thought, by cohabiting with Oriental women, not thinking that their own flesh and blood—born of these illicit unions—would become abandoned orphans, shunned by nearly all who see them.

Ebony magazine recently wrote of those born from black American GI's, and told of their rejection and utter hopelessness.

The magazine said that these are the first to be abandoned and the last to be adopted, and that those born of Negro fathers are "thrice damned."

In Japan they are kept in orphanages until they are sixteen, but then they are "on their own."

They become social outcasts, not accepted by anyone. Few will employ them. Seldom will landlords give them housing.

Particularly Negro half-bloods fight a hopeless battle in a hostile world. Homeless and jobless, most of them choose between a life of drudgery and a career of crime.

In Vietnam these unfortunates roam the streets, unwanted, uncared for, begging for a living.

It is said that one in every ten American soldiers—white or black—fathers a child by an Asian woman.

This is nothing new in war areas. The same thing happened in France and Germany following the last two world wars. In India the English created the Eurasians. The French produced the French-Indo-Chinese, and the Dutch the Dutch-Indonesians.

Now Americans are producing what Pearl Buck calls Amerasians.

But they are abandoned! They are neglected! Many are scorned and persecuted because of their birth!

The purpose of this writing is not to solve the problem of caring for these unfortunates. Rather, it is to remind American servicemen of their obligations.

Which of them has the right to have illegitimate children?

Which has the right to take the virtue of an Asian or any other girl or lose his own?

Which American—at home or abroad—has the right to abandon his own flesh and blood and forget that his illegitimate child ever existed?

Can the God of heaven, who holds us all accountable for our sins, overlook this wickedness?

Can America expect the blessings of heaven upon our war efforts when we are so impregnated with sin that many of our men not only violate the laws of morality, but do violence likewise to every principle of family relationship which God has made known to us?

What good are national days of prayer if we do not support our prayers by good works? Will God strengthen the arms of fighting men who desecrate His most holy laws? Will He prosper a nation which apparently condones these illicit practices and does little more than provide prophylactics to men who indulge?

Are our fathers—even of Amerasians—so lacking in a natural affection that they are willing to completely forget and ignore their own offspring in a foreign land?

We sing, almost tearfully at times "God Bless America."

But we are almost constrained to ask: How can He?
