Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Education In Morals

AT ONE TIME President Grant said that people cannot know about the Gospel unless they are taught it. Children are not born with a testimony of the truth, he said, any more than they are born with a knowledge of mathematics.

It is true likewise of good morals, which are an important part of the Gospel. No one can be a good Christian if he is not likewise moral. Morality and spirituality go hand in hand. Christ was our greatest teacher of good morals.

But where are morals to be taught?

Apparently drawing a line between morals and religion, the schools are prohibited from teaching religion—even offering a prayer—but they are at full liberty to discuss a subject upon which morals are based, and to do so in a manner which clearly influences morals.

The inconsistency of such a situation has never been explained.

It is admitted that children need instruction in morals, just as they need it in all phases of the Gospel of Christ.

But where is that teaching to be given?

Is it wise to give it publicly in such a way as to create a desire for corruption? Should it be taught in such a way as to invite ridicule of the foundations of good character?

Is it to be made a part of the "sex revolution" which has engulfed the world and brought about the greatest decline in morality in our age, with a plague of social disease in its wake?

Or, looking at the subject from another point of view we might ask:

Who is competent to give moral instruction to our children on a wholesome basis?

Who can teach sex without referring to the use of sex, legitimate or otherwise, without creating lust?

Does any school teacher, by reason of certification in music, mathematics or geography, automatically become qualified to teach the intricate and almost baffling subject of sex?

Because of the "sex revolution," the public mind has swung to the illicit far more than toward the virtuous. The proper teaching of sex requires the teaching of complete chastity. To vary from chastity in such instruction is to make it a course of study in sex experimentation outside the bonds of matrimony.

The experience of Sweden and other European countries clearly confirms the fact that public sex education increases promiscuity, and as promiscuity is increased, VD spreads like wildfire.

If schools are to be prohibited from teaching religion, they should be barred from destroying religion.

If schools are to be prohibited from teaching morals, they should be barred from aiding in even the least degree a destruction of morals.

If parents are not qualified to teach their children about sex, let us ask if school teachers are any better qualified. Can they uphold personal purity any better than parents?

The fact that a person becomes an educator does not make him an expert in all fields. The teachers themselves will be the first to admit that.

Sex education belongs in the home. Parents should accept their responsibility to teach chastity to their children as they reveal to them the facts of life. This is the appropriate time.

Who can better teach purity of life than a father or mother who believes that procreation is part of the divine creative work of God, and that "multiplying and replenishing the earth" therefore must be kept on a plane of spirituality and purity?

Parents can learn to teach their children. God commands them to do so. And as they teach the facts of life, they must place those facts in the proper perspective which will help youngsters to know that God has made sex pure with a divine purpose.

Movements to place sex education in nearly all grades of public schools can end only in the same result which came to Sweden. To give public sex instruction in mixed classes, and possibly by persons who may not have the highest morals themselves, is an invitation to corruption.

Sex education belongs in the home. It should be provided properly. Parents should assume this responsibility, fully and exclusively.
