Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The "Accepted" Thing

A POET ONCE spoke of sin with the words: "First we pity, then endure, and then embrace."

This is so descriptive of present-day thinking that it is almost startling, particularly as we see so many things which the past generation regarded as debasing now being accepted as entirely proper.

As people change their standards of right and wrong, they begin to suppose that what was a sin a generation ago is no longer so, that standards are relative things which change with usage and desire, and that old-fashioned goodness now has turned into priggishness.

They actually seem to think that popularity is what determines right or wrong and that moral values change with public sentiment.

Under this kind of thinking conscience is erased and there remains only acceptance of any and all acts, no matter what they may be.

One example: A nationally circulated magazine a short time ago carried an article with the heading: "Sex is fun—Enjoy it."

Of course it said nothing of the costs of free love in venereal disease, insanity and other crippling effects of syphilis; the loss of honor, respectability, family and character. It spoke only of "enjoying wallowing in filth."

Recently a high American official quoted a European delegate to an international congress of women on the subject of illegitimate births. This delegate proudly announced that in her country there are no illegitimate children. The American official, at first thrilled at the thought of any country wiping out illegitimacy, was shocked on learning the facts. Illegitimacy there had been wiped out only by making it acceptable. The country under discussion is one in which sex freedom is the expected and accepted thing. It has been made respectable!

Extreme as this may seem, it is nonetheless representative of much of the thinking of the present day.

Styles of dress are part of this over-all pattern.

A generation ago what woman would have exposed her knees to the "admiring" public? Five years ago would any woman have exposed her thighs because it was fashionable?

Someone has said of miniskirts that they cannot get any shorter and remain skirts.

But what if they do not remain skirts? What if fashion decrees even more abbreviated costumes, will women obey and wear them? Just who is this "fashion" and what are his or her motives? Will our women consider that?

The topless craze in restaurants has now gone from coast to coast and all over Europe. Is that good or bad? Is it made good by public acceptance?

How long will police officers in beach cities continue to resist the topless swim suit trend? At first some arrests were made. Has anyone heard of any court action recently? Are we being "conditioned" to this too? Will public opinion soon require the liberalizing of laws on indecent exposure to permit this sinful fad?

A generation ago homosexuality was hardly thought of, and certainly never brought into the open. Today public opinion has been so "conditioned" to this type of moral depravity that some areas are legalizing it!

Many youths do not consider they have had an evening's date unless they have "gone all the way." And they think they can't have fun without a bottle.

This generation may rationalize itself into complete intoxication with sin, and proclaim to high heaven that it is old-fashioned to be clean, but it will yet wake up to the stern reality that God does not change, and that the moral laws are His, not man's to shift with every whim.

The divine laws on morals remain the same throughout the ages, and so do their penalties.

Adultery is still next to murder in the Lord's category of crime.

It was God who made homosexuality a capital crime in ancient Israel.

It was the Almighty who decreed in the very beginning that men and women must cover their nakedness.

No amount of rationalizing can change God's laws.

No amount of fashion designing can turn immodesty into virtue.

No amount of popularity can change sin into righteousness.

"All we like sheep have gone astray," it was once said, but those words should never describe God's kind of sheep.

Those going into the Lord's sheepfold must be Christ-like. There is nothing sacred about the world's unstable conceptions of "the accepted thing."
