Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Where We Should Stand

THE EXPRESSION "CREDIBILITY GAP" has been widely used recently, both in prudence and in ridicule.

Far too many of our actions now bridge that gap. The circle is ever widening and the results are frightening.

One of the most incredible attitudes yet expressed comes from the mother of a girl about to enter college. She wonders if she should give her daughter a supply of "the pill" as she leaves for school. In writing to a doctor who conducts a newspaper column, she said:

"Personally I don't approve of sexual relations outside of marriage, hut I wonder if I should be realistic and supply my daughter with birth-control pills just in case.

Incredible! Even that is hardly the word for it.

Can any mother in her right mind take such a position? Has she never taught her daughter the Lord's law of chastity? Why does she fear pregnancy but apparently have no fear of her daughter losing her virtue?

Can any mother be willing, "just in case," to sacrifice the morals of her child on the altar of social acceptance? Is social prestige more important than virtue? Does she have no respect for divine law?

If any mothers have so far lost their moral equilibrium that they are willing to allow their daughters to become illicit in the name of realism, what are we to expect of the girls themselves—and of the sons—and of the fathers?

Does being realistic mean that we must throw cleanliness away and become filthy because certain other people are filthy?

Do headlines on crime and sex stories so blind us that we fail to realize that there are far more clean people in the world than there are depraved ones?

Is this mother not willing to be realistic enough to admit that immorality can destroy her daughter? Why should she condone loose morals either in her child or in the school she attends?

Of course, the fact of the matter is—if we are to continue to be realistic—that too many people have lost their faith in the Source of virtue and morality—the Almighty.

When we lose faith, we certainly lose respect, and when we no longer respect the Deity it is but natural to ignore His commandments and concentrate on social allurements instead.

People who are truly realistic now recognize the existence of God more than ever before. Persons of genuine intellect, the true researchers, the great philosophers and the outstanding educators not only acknowledge but worship Him.

It is the selfish element in the world which no longer accepts the Deity. And why? Because they do not want to be interrupted in their ingrown pursuits, and are so involved in their personal desires, passions, appetites and lusts, that they have no room for sacred things. Therefore they reject or ignore God.

Of course, there are always those who are not well informed and are willing to take the word of "God-is-dead" rationalists. Such people never do think for themselves.

But to the true realist, God is a great and significant reality who guides the ultimate destiny of the world.

His most basic law concerns morality.

It is irrevocable and inescapable, and is applicable to all, whether we believe in God or not. Everyone is subject to its penalties no matter how we may try to ignore them.

The wage of sin is death—even to the unbeliever!

Immorality is next to murder in Gods category of crime, and always brings its wages of destruction and remorse, even to college students who carry "the pill" with a mother's consent.

Our own nation was built upon a foundation of morality and spirituality. It is just possible that a rejection of these basic factors may bring about its fall. It was so with Greece and Rome. It can happen to us unless we repent.

Every one of us would do well to remember that the "mills of the Gods grind slowly but they grind exceeding small."

No one can flout divine law with impunity.

Every right-thinking person should be willing even to die in defense of virtue, whether that death be physical or social.

"Thou shalt not commit adultery" will forever stand as an immutable law to all human beings.
