Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The World About Us

THE LORD HAS told the Latter-day Saints that Satan is making war against them.

He said that in this war Satan is encompassing us round about in his effort to destroy the work of God.

How does he make war with the Saints?

He does so by attacking the high ideals and sacred standards which protect our spirituality.

He encompasses us round about by encircling us with allurements and temptations which already have destroyed high standards among many people of the world, and by which he now hopes to infiltrate our ranks.

By making sin popular with the world, he hopes to make it equally popular among us.

In the world about us, high standards are falling, and lower ones—not worthy of the name—are being set up. Some efforts are being made toward no standards at all.

It is this moral breakdown that must concern the Latter-day Saints as we train the youth of the Church for their ultimate and divine destiny.

Let us look briefly at the "enemy" in this moral warfare.

The illegitimacy rate has tripled in the last ten years.

Promiscuity has increased to a point where it is thrusting upon this country a plague of social diseases.

There are more than a million new cases of V.D. in the United States each year, with 56 per cent of them being accounted for among teenagers.

Utah and Idaho are among the cleanest areas in the world in this respect.

The incidence of V.D. in the state of New York, for example, is 20 times higher than in Utah and Idaho. In Maryland it is 15 times higher, and in Florida 30 times higher.

In San Francisco, on a per capita basis, there are 30 times more cases than in Utah and Idaho; in New York City it is 40 times higher, and in the city of Newark, New Jersey, it is 100 times more.

Widespread immorality is inseparably related to the staggering increase in pornographic books, magazines, movies and TV programs which are being thrust before the public.

Pornography has become a cancerous growth which is taking a deadly toll in moral corruption in every nation in the free world.

Figures also show that most drug addicts began using narcotics as teenagers, many of them as high school students.

In the United States 4,500 children take up cigarette smoking every day. Some begin at 9 or 10 years of age, many become addicts by the time they are 14.

In a recent eastern survey conducted by Rutgers University among 17,000 students, it was revealed that from one-half to two-thirds of the students in grades 9 to 12 use alcoholic liquors.

Most young Americans get their first drinks in their own homes from their own parents.

The U.S. liquor industry has announced its objective to have at least 73 per cent of the national population as regular drinkers within the next four years.

Already 62 per cent of the adult population drink; only 38 per cent are abstainers.

The National Safety Council says that among automobile drivers responsible for accidents in California, 66 per cent had been drinking. In Florida the figure is 92 per cent.

So the world is all about us. We are "encompassed round about." To what extent will it invade our ranks?

Statistics like these are frightening indeed, but they are a necessary warning. It behooves every home to be vigilant in providing the only protection there is against such sins—a high degree of spirituality.
