Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Stench of Moral Decay

THE FOLLOWING STIMULATING editorial was published recently by the Sacramento (Calif.) Union. It so effectively sets forth one of America's greatest dangers that we reproduce it entirely below:

Entitled "Moral Decay Stench Getting Even Riper," the editorial says:

"Moral decay is as unwelcome in our society as any disease. Yet it is an unwholesome and all-too-common sight today. It is visible, in all its evil degradation, in almost every aspect of life and communications.

"In public and in private, there are few activities which have not been seduced by a permissive environment. This has unhappily led to promotion and acceptance of standards which bring out in man all that leads to excess and indulgence.

"Good taste is rudely brushed aside. The senses, which were made for the fulfillment and enjoyment of things which are beautiful, are tempted to become abused and depraved.

"There is a subversive pretense to be educational, entertaining, and instructive. The moral junk which fills so much of what is offered for reading, hearing, or viewing is an insult. It is an affront to the very spirit and meaning of man's highest endeavors.

"Instead of using the precious gifts of communication for man's betterment and true happiness, we find them overflowing with the decadence of gutter filth.

"Instead of aiming always to achieve excellence and toward helping mankind, there are those who prey like vultures on a public unfortunately only too ready to sink into the contaminated, polluted atmosphere of depravity.

"The poison of pornography is as great a menace to society today as the growing crime rate with which it is so often associated.

"From books, movies, magazines, shows, and meetings there is an overwhelming abundance of encouragement to lower standards. It is made attractive to sink into the `accepted' and depraved ways of the pornographic promoters.

"There is so-called `pop' art, which often is simply an excuse for utter vulgarity. There are `love-ins' which are euphemistic cloaks for immorality.

"On all sides we are experiencing the spread of gutter filth which is passed off as `literature.' It seduces the young and makes a mockery of the fine art of literary expression. The four-letter words and the concentration on deviant sex are excused on grounds of realism.

"Even the beauty of the ballet has been disfigured with portrayals which break the bounds of decency and make a mockery of this beautifully expressive art form.

"Movies, radio, and television, whose mass visual and audio communication should cause producers to ponder their effects, are not innocent. More and more movies stretch to the utmost the limits of decency. And sexual perverts have been featured on both radio' and television as interesting interview personalities.

"We are assuredly at war today on the home front. It is a war to fight against the insidious evil of anything goes. We must re-establish moral codes and endorse them, before everything good is gone."
