Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Is Chastity Outdated?

THE SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE recently carried a special column in which it published interviews with seven "people on the street."

The same question was put to all of them: "Is chastity outdated?"

All answered yes.

A merchant seaman said, "Morals have changed; virginity is on the way out. Love is in."

A furniture dealer said: "Virtue can hurt you. Virgins are really weird."

An engineer commented: "Virginity became outdated long ago. I have nothing against virginity, but in the sixties things just changed."

A psychology student answered, "Yes, morals have changed."

A hair stylist said that virtue passed out five years ago.

Another barber agreed, and said there are very few people these days who are virtuous.

These were all men. One lone girl was also asked the question, and she (pity her) agreed with the men, saying that chastity is outdated because in these enlightened days people are freer.

No one can say whether this is a fair cross-section of the thinking of San Francisco citizens, nor if it is representative of the thinking of people elsewhere.

That it is to some extent, at least, is proven by the vast increase in the prevalence of venereal disease, which is a fairly accurate barometer of the morals of the general public.

V.D., as it is called, is now considered as an epidemic out of hand. This is true in America as well as in other nations.

In the United States 1,500 teenagers catch this dread disease every day, and 1,300 adults do likewise. It is spreading fastest among teens because, as the girl explained, "we are freer."

That matter of being freer simply means to let down the bars, to throw away ideals, good character and good health. It means freer to deny God and the Ten Commandments. But is this kind of freedom desirable?

This question also may be answered in terms of V.D.

The Chicago Tribune reported recently that "the increasing number of gonorrhea cases has reached a point where it is now classified as an alarming epidemic." It quoted the Illinois public health office.

The newspaper went on to say that in this country ONE OUT OF EVERY 30 PERSONS IN THE 20-TO-24-YEAR AGE BRACKET NOW HAS A VENEREAL DISEASE.

Dr. Norman J. Rose, head of epidemiology for the Illinois Department of Public Health, said that "the situation in regard to gonorrhea is extremely bad and getting worse at a frightening rate."

In Illinois the cases have doubled in ten years.

Dr. Rose pointed out that the problem is worse than official figures would indicate because he said that for every case reported to doctors by infected people, there are two that go unreported.

Dr. Jack Sloan, associated with Dr. Rose, said that "contrary to the popular notion that venereal disease is no longer a menace, the U.S. Public Health Service reports: V.D. IS THE NATION'S LEADING COMMUNICABLE DISEASE." Chicago is first among all cities in the nation in the number of syphilis cases, and third in gonorrhea.

Figures sometimes do not portray the real picture. The report says that one in every 30 Americans 20 to 24 years of age has V.D. Think of that in terms of small-pox or polio. What if one in every 30 such persons in America had polio? What if that number had smallpox? What if that many had to be operated on for cancer? Wouldn't we be shaken by the very thought of it? Yet that is the condition in regard to V.D.

Syphilis is a killer; it also maims, causes heart trouble, insanity and blindness. It is the price of "being freer."

Latter-day Saints at least should know the true meaning of virtue. God's word is never passe. It is never outdated. No matter what the philosophies of men may be, God's word—for Latter-day Saints—must prevail.

No man on earth can ever cancel out the divine injunction:

"THOU SHALT NOT COMMIT ADULTERY."
