Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Easy Way To Live

WE OFTEN SPEAK of people who have an easy life—or a hard one—and sometimes we mention those who "come up the hard way."

It seems that some of the best people have the hardest time and that evil ones often have all the advantages in life. But is it really so?

The Lord has said that His people will be tried and even persecuted from time to time, and that they may be spoken of and dealt with in unkindly ways. This is true. Many of the great prophets were martyred.

Our own Pioneers had what many would regard as a hard life, being forced from their homes, obliged to cross plains and mountains to find a refuge, and compelled to subdue the desert to earn a living.

But was theirs a hard life? They didn't consider it so. They were builders of the Kingdom of God, and found joy in their labors. Though their toil was hard and their privations serious, in their hearts they knew the joy that comes to those who serve God and keep His commandments. It made their burdens light.

Then what is the hard life?

Some who are evil enjoy the riches of the earth fine cars, luxurious apartments, costly vacations, even the adulation of the crowd. But is theirs the easy life?

It should be remembered that the prophet of old said there is no happiness in wickedness. As virtue is its own reward, so is sin.

To determine whether a life is hard or easy, we must merely examine the harvest it brings.

Although a saintly life filled with persecution may seem hard, it develops great faith, steadfastness of soul, and strength of character.

Did not the Savior say: "Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven"?

Let it not be supposed that they earned the Kingdom of Heaven by suffering at the hands of wicked people. They earned the Kingdom of Heaven by developing faith, character and Christ-like souls. Of course they were a blessed people, becoming so Christ-like as to be worthy of entering His Kingdom. Only the Christ-like can receive it.

There is no excellence without labor. Gold is not rendered from ore without a crucible. Even the Savior learned obedience by the things which He suffered. Suffering, exertion, patience are all part of the price of progress toward the divine.

So it is not labor which makes a life hard or easy. God expects us to labor. He told Adam and Eve that they were to live by the sweat of their face. Work is good for people. It is part of the good life.

Is the evil life really easy—this life of pleasure, indulgence and abandon?

It is indeed the hard life, for the wages of sin is death. Sometimes it is a slow death brought on by the diseases of indulgence. It includes the enmity of "crooks who catch crooks,"—the breakdown of home, loss of employment, and the heartaches of loved ones deeply distressed because of the prodigality of a son or daughter.

The most wretched part of a life of sin is being without God. To live without Him is the most difficult of all living. To resist Him by knowingly opposing Him is to kick against the pricks senselessly. It leads to self-destruction.

The Gospel is the greatest power known to man for the betterment of the human race. It elevates the soul, providing hope and purpose in life. To live it is intelligent, to enjoy it is to receive the choice blessings of our existence.

The Lord has said that if we will serve Him, He will open the windows of heaven and pour out such blessings that we can hardly contain them.

These blessings have only one purpose—to help us to become "like your Father which is in heaven." That is the ultimate objective of life.

The Female of the Species

IT IS WIDELY believed that most girls and women live cleaner lives than most boys and men.

Whether this be true or not, certainly the right-thinking male rejoices in the sweetness and purity of a virtuous woman.

The strength of good motherhood has been a prime force for stability and righteousness all through history, and it will continue to be so as long as girls and women hold the line for righteousness.

But now the line begins to weaken. The trend in some areas is taking an adverse direction.

The United Press recently reported a significant increase in crime among girls and women.

It is well-known that most shoplifting is done by women and girls and that this type of crime is mounting rapidly.

Other kinds of theft over fifty dollars—not counting automobiles—are growing faster among teenage girls than among boys of the same age, according to this report.

The increase of juvenile crime last year rose twice as fast as the increase in population. A large part of it was among girls, for as the U.P.I. reports: "There was no increase in the number of juvenile cases involving boys."

However, there are still four times as many boys in juvenile court cases as there are girls.

The U.P.I. says that the juvenile delinquency rate in urban areas is three times as high as in rural areas.

Noting the increase in juvenile court cases involving girls, the United States Health, Education and Welfare Department reports:

"Almost half of all female juvenile cases handled by the courts last year involved sex-related offenses. There was also a sharp increase in juvenile drug cases where again the rate of increase for girls was half again above that for boys."

The United States Children's Bureau says that sex-related cases involving girls from ten to seventeen had increased eight per cent over the previous year. The increase in urban areas alone was 13 per cent.

Mrs. Catherine B. Oettinger, Chief of the Children's Bureau, says: "We are particularly alarmed by the fact that so large a percentage of girls are involved in sex-related offenses because they now compose almost half of all girls' delinquency cases handled by the court.'

The hunger for popularity is the basis for much of the willingness to lower the bars, both for boys and girls.

"Everybody does it" is almost the universal defense when youngsters are asked for the reason why.

And that "everybody does it" covers a wide area from miniskirts and tight clothes to drinking, smoking and petting.

But the information of these young people is wrong!

Everyone does not indulge. Everyone is not delinquent. The majority are wonderful!

It may be altogether true—and is—that within certain groups "everyone does it," but they are not representative groups.

Most young people want to be good and they are.

If anyone thinks "everybody does it"—the "it" referring to shady things—then let him open his eyes to the facts and join a new crowd where people are clean and do clean things.

Safety lies to a large extent in being with good people who do not tempt their friends.

Good people want to be with other good people because they want good activities.

We usually think of boys as the ones who should be strong, always protecting their girl friends from harm. And by all means they should be.

But it seems that many girls still can lead many boys any way they like. The girls then must be the stronger of the two.

If girls maintain their standards, the boys are more likely to follow suit, but if the girls fall they drag boys down into the depths with themselves. Girls so often forget that they have most to lose and most to pay.

Virtue is above price, but probably only those who lose it fully measure its value.
