Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Styles And Standards

THE WAYS OF man and the ways of God are far apart and never the twain shall meet, unless man changes his ways to correspond with those of the Lord.

But willful man always has gone his own way. Only the repentant have made the adjustment.

Man's ways nearly always involve popularity. With God's path it is often quite the opposite.

Is popularity to be our measure and standard of personal conduct?

Is "but everyone does it" the controlling factor?

Can custom, style or fashion determine what is good and what is not?

Consider some of the customs and fashions of today, and what they bring to us.

Let us talk about drugs for a moment. Some reports indicate that half the high school students of the nation have experimented with them to some degree and that as many as 20 per cent of the students use them regularly.

Popularity is immediately involved. Even the youngsters who use them know that these drugs are harmful and can bring even insanity or death. And they taste bad, too.

But danger or taste to the contrary, the drugs are used because "everyone does it," not because there is anything desirable about them.

Think next of tobacco and liquor. A 15-year-old boy recently said, "I tried them both but they tasted so bad that once was enough."

But with all their dangers to health and happiness, both are used by many who think it is the thing to do to be popular, awful taste and all. It seems that some will do almost anything to be one with the crowd.

Immorality on a date is becoming "the accepted and expected thing" in some circles. This promiscuity is not only destroying the moral fibre of the nations, but it is spreading venereal disease so rapidly that public health officials now regard it as an epidemic which is out of control.

Does this "accepted thing" make it really acceptable? Can corruption be turned into goodness simply by making it popular?

One of the most notable examples of throwing standards to the winds in favor of popularity is to be found, of course, in both men's and women's styles.

Because misguided publishers and radio program planners give undue publicity to the hippie element, long hair, dirty clothes and filthy habits have appeared on nearly every campus in the country.

Can such popularity make filth and base indulgence good?

And when Paris and New York decree shorter skirts, even mothers and grandmothers expose themselves indecently because it is stylish. They should (and do) know better, which makes it even worse.

History repeats itself in these matters.

The Devil is no more changeable than is God.

Always he has told people to "believe it not" when the sacred word has been preached. Always he has tempted them to sin. Always he has deceived them and made them think that if it glitters, and if he makes it popular, even sin will become acceptable.

But always God has held fast, and has commanded His people to observe His standards.

And always also, even some of His Saints have tried to compromise and serve two masters.

Can we really afford to be "right with fashion" when it makes us wrong with God?
