Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Devil Is A Liar

THE SCRIPTURES TEACH that the Devil is a liar, and has been from the beginning.

But he is not the only one, for he endeavors to persuade all else to become like himself. With many he succeeds abundantly, much to his own gratification.

In speaking of this propensity, the Lord says of the Devil:

"He saith unto them: Deceive and lie in wait to catch, that ye may destroy; behold, this is no harm. And thus he flattereth them, and telleth them that it is no sin to lie that they may catch a man in a lie, that they may destroy him.

"And thus he flattereth them, and leadeth them along until he draggeth their souls down to hell; and thus he causeth them to catch themselves in their own snare." (D&C 10:25-26.)

Since dishonesty, insincerity and a passion to "save face" have become suds a part of our modern way of life, this scripture brings a timely warning.

As criminality has soared tremendously in the recent past, so has lying to cover up dishonesty.

Deceit, wearing a false front, misrepresentation of facts, and scheming for our own aggrandizement, are all part of the same package.

Lying is as despicable as is stealing. Often they are the same, for in lying, people's good names are often stolen away. It is a vicious form of character assassination.

This is particularly true in such cases as are referred to in the above mentioned scripture, where people tell lies in an effort to destroy another person.

Murder is a crime for which there is no forgiveness. How near to it is character assassination?

And yet, how many ostensibly respectable people indulge in it!

Let us ask ourselves frankly: If no unclean thing can enter the Kingdom of Heaven, can a liar do so? Is he clean? Is there anything pure or Christ-like about him—or her?

We might well remember the eternal place to which the Lord says liars will go—if unrepentant:

"These are they who are liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

"These are they who suffer the wrath of God on earth. These are they who suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. These are they who are cast down to hell." (D&C 76:103-106.)

Whenever people lie or even color the truth, they place themselves in league with the Devil, and he is hardly good company for the Saints.

How different is the liar from the true Saint, who endeavors to exemplify the teachings of Christ! How different are his—or her—motives!

The true Saint is one who loves his neighbor as himself, who does unto others as he would be done by; it is he who judges not, that he may not be judged; it is he who is forgiving and kind, patient and long suffering; it is he who seeks a friendly reconciliation with his brother with whom he may have a difference, and does so even before he comes to worship at the altar of God.

The Saint is a good Samaritan, not a robber on the road to Jericho. The Saint will go the extra mile and give his cloak and his coat also, but will never steal another's cloak, and certainly not his good name.

The Saint will know that unless he loves his brother whom he has seen, he obviously does not love God whom he has not seen. He forgives, but does not condemn—he helps, but never hinders—he holds out a light that others may see, but never blinds them.

So strongly does the Lord feel on this matter of lying that He has said:

"These six things doth the Lord hate: yea, seven are an abomination unto him:

"A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood, an heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief, a false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren." (Prov. 6.)
