Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Battle For Virtue

THERE IS NO place for complacency when a serious conflict involves us.

To say that "all is well in Zion" is but to deceive ourselves, as the Book of Mormon so clearly teaches.

As long as there is a vigorous campaign to destroy chastity, no Latter-day Saint can sit by and say "all is well in Zion." And such a campaign is under way.

It is not only directed at Latter-day Saints, it is nationwide, worldwide, and we are but a single segment of the world. But it will hit us as hard as anyone unless we are on guard.

Consider for a moment some of the forces arrayed against virtue:

1—Among us we have a legal battle over the display and distribution of smut among our young people. The community of Provo, for example, passed an ordinance to control pornography. One man and a lawyer blocked the city in its efforts. The majority does not rule. The vast majority wants this smut eliminated from the city. But one man and a lawyer stand in the way. And what does smut do to chastity?

2—Atheistic movements are gaining ground among us as elsewhere. Some professors in school take delight in destroying faith, and nothing is done about it. The "God is dead" philosophy is stimulated by clergymen who have become disgusted with dead forms in their own churches and feel that if this is all religion has to offer then it is not worth while. Dead forms are killing what religion is left in many churches. But how does this affect chastity? It removes the restraints that religion alone can place upon immorality. Loss of faith goes hand in hand with loss of virtue.

3—Legislatures are beginning to relax moral laws relating not only to adulterous relationships but also to homosexuality and prostitution. What is wrong with a lawmaker who condones homosexuality? What is wrong with a lawmaker who condones prostitution to the point where he will work to make it legal for a 16-year-old child to become a commercial harlot? And what is wrong with citizens who elect such lawmakers?

4—Current dating practices among many young people promote lust. Setting aside standards which seem no longer sacred to them, many youngsters go the limit for the sake of popularity, for a thrill, or to show their independence. Nationwide the result is that—in spite of "the pill" and other preventatives—one out of every 14 babies born in America is illegitimate. Serious as this is, it does not indicate the number of illicit contacts made where no pregnancy occurs.

5—Promiscuity is growing so fast in America that it has brought a wave of social disease which not only blinds and cripples thousands every year, but actually kills a thousand people every month.

6—Dating is developing among married people, and this kind of conduct is not ordinary partying. It represents the worst, and is becoming an increasingly important cause of divorce.

7—The introduction of contraceptives on a wide scale, making them available to the unmarried as well as to the married, and the encouragement of the use of these devices by great governments, including our own, is becoming one of the greatest of all threats to morality.

8—Glorifying lustfulness in movies, making it seem desirable and not sinful, cloaking with respectability theatrical people who encourage seduction in the minds of their audiences, contribute to an acceptance of low moral standards or none at all.

Many more factors might be mentioned. But simply stated, the fact is that immorality is increasing rapidly. It is invading our communities, breaking down the standards of some of our own people, and is a potent threat to the very souls of our children.

We are Latter-day Saints. But to be Latter-day Saints indeed, we must live the laws of God, foremost among which is the law of chastity.

Without chastity we are not true Latter-day Saints. Without chastity there is no salvation. Immorality is apostasy from the teachings of Christ. Apostasy leads to destruction of the soul, and this particular type of apostasy leads to destruction of the body as well.

Our whole purpose in being members of the Church is to save our souls. Now that the forces of evil—particularly of unchastity—are so prevalent and so potent, can we remain complacent as they threaten the actual reason for our membership in God's holy Church?

Dare we stand by and see our youngsters destroy themselves morally and physically?

We must exert every necessary effort to save them in our communities in our homes and in the Church.

We must once again enthrone virtue in its proper place, and remember that there is no salvation, no happiness and no progress without it. And we must remember too that in stark reality, the wages of sin is DEATH.
