Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Can God's Laws Be Outmoded?

RECENTLY THE AUTHOR of a book which seeks to persuade legislators to legalize moral perversions listed a set of reasons why he thought the laws of the land should be liberalized to remove all stigma from moral corruption.

One of his principal arguments was:

"Most of the commands of God are now obsolete and people no longer find it necessary to obey them."

He then went on to talk about the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah as an "old wives' tale conveniently ignored by all in modern times." The book then goes on to say that "man can be either homosexual, heterosexual or bisexual—the choice is his."

Most people who commit serious sin attempt to justify their acts. The perverts of the world are now at tempting to do that publicly. For many years—even for generations—this particular type of sinner has been willing to remain in darkness of his own choosing and cover his shame with secrecy.

This is no longer the case. Deviates now are proud of their "profession" and openly advertise it. Brashly and blatantly they demand their place in the sun, and insist upon being regarded as respectable, both under the law and in society at large.

They have become far more numerous than we might suppose. There are literally millions of them in the United States, not to mention those living in other parts of the world. In America they are now organized into groups through which they hope to achieve social acceptance and political strength sufficient to relax the laws against them.

In their struggle they seek to prove that their perversions are not sins, but natural tendencies which should be recognized and accepted. Hence they say that since God's laws are now obsolete, their acts are no longer sinful, and therefore not to be looked down upon.

Few of these deviates will ever be drawn back into a chaste society. Few if any have such a desire. They like their life, they love darkness better than light, and are content to remain so—except that they are no longer willing to carry a stigma, the mark of the unclean.

How utterly blind they are! And how gullible are those who sympathize with the idea that deviates were born with these tendencies, and therefore should be accepted as they are!

And how blind are those who suppose that God's laws are outmoded, and no longer in force!

What these foolish individuals do not seem to know is that God's laws are binding whether mankind chooses to ignore them or not, and they cannot escape the penalties of their own misdeeds. The wheels of the Gods may grind very slowly, but inevitably they grind exceedingly small.

It is not that God sets out deliberately to bring unhappiness upon these much-to-be-pitied but headstrong deviates. They bring upon themselves the wages of their own sins. And then at last, in the depths of suffering from which only death can release them they cry out and defy a Deity who would be so cruel and heartless as to punish them in such a way!

God's laws never change. "It is easier for heaven and earth to pass, than one tittle of the law to fail," the Savior said.

And this is so. Experience demonstrates it day by day. No one can fly in the face of Providence with impunity. No matter how much they deny God, their denials will not exterminate Him. God lives, and still controls the universe. The laws of nature—and of sex—are immutable and unfailing. Death will still continue to be the final wage of sin. Life and joy are the rewards of righteousness.

Sex is for the procreation of the species, not for sensual pleasure. God made it clean and sacred. He in tends that we shall keep it so.

And why do we write in this way about deviates and their peculiar notions? For two reasons:

First, to say to them, and to all other unbelievers, that "God is not dead, nor doth He sleep."

Second, to remind all Latter-day Saints that chastity is more important to us than mortal life, and that as the bearers of the vessels of the Lord, we must be clean—clean as the angels, remembering the divine injunction:

"Keep thy father's commandment, and forsake not the law of thy mother:

"Bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them about thy neck.

"When thou goest, it shall lead thee; when thou sleepest, it shall keep thee; and when thou wakest, it shall talk with thee.

"For the commandment is a lamp; and the law is light; and reproofs of instruction are the way of life." (Prov. 6.)
