Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Have We the Courage?

HOW MUCH COURAGE does the average Latter-day Saint have? Enough to stand by his convictions?

If brought to the test, how strong will he be?

This is no academic question. Actually it comes to the very heart of a situation, which now confronts us, for the test is here and we are in the process of reacting to it.

Today's greatest challenge to our way of life is the world-wide assault upon chastity. Immorality is becoming an acceptable—even a respectable—way of life in the world.

While Sweden admits to 80 per cent promiscuity among its young people, and this without condemnation from its national leaders, that country is not alone.

Others are no doubt equally guilty, but they neither admit it nor do they advertise it. Yet research shows the condition is there.

Fortunately, America is among the cleanest of them all, for which we are most thankful. But this promised land has more than it should have of this condition and the situation here is becoming worse.

This world-wide attack upon chastity has many facets all of which converge on the one point: The destruction of virtue.

What are these facets?

One of the most widespread is our manner of dress, with its direct emphasis on sex appeal, and when we use that expression, we have in mind its literal connotation—an appeal to the sex urge.

Mothers and daughters alike bow to the dictum of fashion. They may or may not realize what they do, but let it be understood plainly that abbreviated, revealing clothing has the base appeal for which it is deliberately designed.

Another facet is the teaching of "new morality" which in fact is immorality, a liberty-giving invitation to promiscuity.

How great will be the condemnation of those who trap others with their flouting of the divine law against unchastity!

Another is the present unwise practice of dating among youth, beginning at an early age, leading to intimacies of varying degrees.

Popular customs in partying by married people who close their eyes to their wedding vows is a rapidly growing phase of this corrupting over-all attack upon virtue.

Liquor, tobacco, and certain drugs have a demoralizing effect on character and tend to lower the bars and open the floodgates to sin. Why do we fail to recognize this? Why do so many love darkness rather than light?

The pressure for public sex education is another facet of this situation. Surely Americans should be willing to learn from others, and in this instance from the Swedes whose ten years of sex education now have made so much of the nation promiscuous.

And then there is the frightening, continuing assault in the form of so-called entertainment in TV in movie films in the drama and in the printed page.

It is amazing that respected and legitimate publishing houses stoop to the publication of books and magazines so filthy that decent-minded people must return them to the dealers, their sensibilities having been grossly insulted by what those pages contained.

There is the tendency in advertising to put seductive pictures in sales displays, in no way related to the products they attempt to sell. Why do they do it?

Under the mistaken notion that the seductive approach may enlarge their market for anything from ties to orange juice, they resort to sex as a gimmick which they believe will most quickly draw the public eye and enrich their purses.

Because the gullible are fast being educated to the "glorification" of sex, some merchants feel fully justified in exploiting it to their own profit.

Now what is to be the position of Latter-day Saints?

To what extent are we to become parties to it all?

President McKay has taught us that the first and most important duty of our people is to teach Christ and Him crucified, which includes a firm advocacy of the principles for which Jesus stands.

There is nothing more basic in all His teachings than chastity. He places unchastity next to murder in the category of crime.

Then can we as a people do less?

Can we then tolerate the insidious influences which break down chastity?

If we say no to this question, then have we the courage to take the necessary stand for Christ and His position in this matter?

Do our women and girls have the courage to create a style of their own, representative of Latter-day Saint ideals? We challenge them to do so!

Do our married couples have the courage to eschew infidelity in all its forms, even to the slightest suggestion of evil? We challenge them to do so!

Do our youth have the courage to put dating on a sensible basis which will encourage, promote and protect the virtue which is so vital to their well-being? We challenge them to do so!

Do young and old alike have the courage to put out of their lives the liquor, tobacco and other elements of the modern "social" life which are so conducive to an over-all moral breakdown? We challenge them to do so!

Will Latter-day Saints take a truly Christian attitude on sex education and keep it within the protective portals of the home where it belongs, giving to our young people the sacred point of view on procreation? We challenge them to do so!

Will every Latter-day Saint have the foresight to refuse to patronize any kind of entertainment which has an evil intent and a degrading theme? We challenge them to stand by the teachings of Christ on moral cleanliness and stay out of the habitation of the wicked!

As true followers of Christ, have we the courage to fight the pornographic literature trade and keep out of our communities the vile publications which seek to seduce our youth? We challenge every clean-minded person to do so, militantly and unhesitatingly!

We challenge every true follower of Christ to obey Him, uphold His standards and be clean.

As bearers of the vessels of the Lord, can we do less?
