Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

The Miniskirts

THE MINISKIRT WAS a British creation. At first it drew the unanimous scorn of the fashion experts in Europe and the United States.

Particularly were the French designers outspoken in their condemnation of the new fad. They pointed out that such styles threw women's clothes out of proper proportion and therefore were evidence of bad designing. Then they pointed to the ugliness of knees in general and of the fat ones and the bony ones in particular. Are there any others?

They explained that "thigh-high" dresses not only were unbecoming but distasteful, and approached the indecent. They said that no woman can be at her best in such a skirt. That was two years ago. Then they saw the financial advantage of making skirts from a minimum of material while charging a full price.

The miniskirt swept Europe, and before the French designers could catch their breath (after decreeing that hem lines should drop below the knee) the mini variety was being worn by half the girls in Paris.

Americans scoffed at it for quite some time too, but here, as in Paris, the London styles swept everything before them, and many of our women now feel obliged not only to display their badly shaped knees, but their thighs as well.

Some of the finest blood on earth came out of Britain, and some of the highest principles of justice and freedom.

Where would we be without the Magna Carta? Where would we be without the standards set for years by the great parliamentarians of that great nation? And where would we be as a Church without the thousands of valiant converts who accepted the Gospel at a time when such strength as only they could give was required for the survival of the Church?

But as it is elsewhere, not everything that comes out of England is good, and one can hardly say that the "mini-craze" has made any wholesome contribution to the attractive appearance of the feminine form, nor to the strength of a skidding morality.

Who likes miniskirts? The men? The women? The teenagers?

Not clean-minded men who are thoroughly disgusted by a display of feminine charm (?) so generously exhibited when the mini-skirted girl takes her seat or crosses her legs.

Not wholesome young boys either, who are fighting to keep their minds off sex in this day when even a real estate agent advertises "sexy apartments" as a means of leasing his property. Not decent youngsters who are fighting a world trend to destroy good morals.

Not Church leaders who are constantly appealing for modesty in dress and protection of moral standards, and who—even in Church—must stand the effrontery of women and girls who brazenly expose themselves in the sacred portals of a chapel.

Not women who are willing to look at other women and suddenly acquire the gift to see themselves as others see them.

And what about teenagers?

They are but the products of the age in which they live. When they were little children they were dressed in skirts that resembled ballet clothes. Even in winter they went bare-legged while their heads and shoulders were covered in woolens. They grew up in mini clothes. They don't know any better, because that is the way their mothers dressed them from earliest childhood.

That is the kind of clothes they wear in school gymnasiums too, where mini uniforms are all the regulations allow. Of course they cannot exercise properly if inhibited by clothes that cover their nakedness!

And what about the young marrieds? They must appear as young as the teenagers. It would not do for anyone to guess that they are "old married people." So to look as young as teenagers, they dress as if they were the same age.

Isn't it time for our women to decide to use their own good sense in regard to dress, and refuse to be like sheep following the dictates of fashion designers who like extremes?

And if they follow fashion designers, why not the French ones who decreed—but now in vain, alas!—that hemlines should go below the knee? Why not assist them to make decent styles popular?

And anyway, why shouldn't Latter-day Saints just decide to forget the world—and not be so much OF the world—and dress beautifully in becoming clothes that preserve the decency which the Lord expects of His lovely daughters?
