Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

And God Clothed Them

THE LORD INTENDED that people should wear clothing, and that such clothing should "cover their nakedness."

Indecent exposure is condemned in the scripture, while purity of mind and body are constantly stressed.

It was the Lord, in the first place, who provided that His children should wear proper clothing, and when He spoke to the Prophet Joseph Smith about our apparel, He commanded: "Let all things be done in cleanliness before me."

But clothing—to be clean—must be more than "laundry-fresh." It must be decent as well.

The Lord commanded that we love Him with all our hearts and with all our minds.

We cannot love God with an impure mind. No unclean thing can stand in His presence. We invite the Holy Spirit to come upon us, but if we have unclean minds He cannot accept our invitation.

Clean minds are a necessary prerequisite to clean hearts, and certainly have a relationship to decent dress.

As styles become less and less modest, and more and more seductive, will the people of God continue to adopt them in the face of the divine command to be clean?

For some reason respectable people seem not to realize that they themselves are caught in this wave of indecency when they surrender to the dictates of fashion and wear whatever the world wears because they do not wish to seem conspicuous.

How far shall we go in being "of the world"?

Latter-day Saints should recognize that the present trend toward revealing clothing is but a part of a world-wide movement to destroy morals. Regardless of some protestations to the contrary, there is such a movement.

Think of some of its facets:

There is the "new morality" widely heralded. It advocates unrestricted indulgence.

There are the "sex revolutions" on some high school and college campuses.

It is becoming more and more common for unmarried couples to go together on unchaperoned vacations where they travel virtually as man and wife.

Dating by many now involves going "all the way" as a matter of routine.

The "pill" is being distributed to youngsters far more widely than anyone is willing to admit.

We have the topless craze, now spreading also more than we care to acknowledge.

Some states and some nations are liberalizing laws on morality, condoning homosexuality and legalizing prostitution for 16-year-olds.

And then the styles! Tight-fitting, abbreviated and revealing! They prescribe skirts that do not allow even a mature woman to be seated and retain her modesty.

All these and more have arisen during the same period of time. And some of our people have followed them. Most of our women have adopted these styles because they say they don't want to appear conspicuous.

But why not be conspicuous in defending decency?

The fact is that many bear testimony of Christ, pledging to keep His commandments, and yet refuse to maintain our standards of modesty.

One is moved to ask: Which is stronger, our faith or our slavery to fashion?

Modesty can be achieved in stylish clothing that is both decent and becoming. There is a happy medium, and it can be achieved and enjoyed. Many are the modest women of our land who have the courage and good taste to be decent and who still retain their attractive appearance. Shall we not all do the same?

It is time to take a stand for decency and for Christ. They do go together. There is no cleanliness without decency, and the followers of the Lord must be clean.

"Let all things be done in cleanliness before me."
