Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Time For Style of Our Own

THE PROPHETS OF old have long referred to the Saints of God as a "peculiar people."

What does "peculiar" mean?

It is true that most people think of it in terms of "queer," "strange" or "unusual." But like many English words, this one has other definitions, and the "strange" one is but minor in the dictionary.

The important meanings of the word are listed as: distinctive, special, individual, exclusive, independent, unlike others, privileged, having to do with private ownership.

Some of the persecution of the past as endured by the "Mormon" people has resulted from their being looked upon as queer, odd, or strange. But as the world becomes acquainted with us it now catches the vision of the true meaning of the word "peculiar" when refer ring to us.

We are peculiar in the distinctive sense of the word in our Welfare Program. We take care of our own. For this we receive nothing but admiration. People recognize us as being different from the rest of the world in this matter, but instead of regarding us as being "odd" they admire us for it, and wish all people would do as well.

We have been considered "queer" because we do not smoke, drink, nor otherwise abuse our bodies. That has been considered "odd" and prudish in the past, but no more. Now only respect comes from those who know us as abstainers. Many have wished they had the strength to do as well.

They don't think we are odd. They admit we are smart!

We have been looked upon for years as peculiar in the "different" sense of the word, because we live the law of tithing. But now churches throughout the world would gladly discard their collection plates for the much more remunerative system of tithing. Many denominations have done so and now invite their people to pay tithing. No longer are we considered queer on this point, either. Again, they think we are superior.

Our young people were once looked upon as oddities because they give up school, scholarships, job inducements, and the "wild oats of youth" to fill missions.

But now large companies place a premium on our returned missionaries and try to hire them, knowing that they are superior in most respects. Our missionaries are admittedly among the finest scholars at many universities. Their clean living and high character have now placed them in the much-to-be-desired distinctive class, far removed from the oddities.

Is there any reason why our girls and women cannot become equally distinctive, special, and independent, by adopting a style of their own in dress? It could be as becoming as anything Paris can produce, and yet preserve modesty and decency.

Now that styles have become "pornographic" in their suggestiveness, is it not time for Latter-day Saints to put decency above fashion, and decide to be beautifully feminine, but still remain becomingly modest?

This they may do regardless of what style-makers in Paris, London and New York decree in their effort to indecently expose the feminine form to create a sex appeal which can lead only to moral degradation.

We are two and a half million strong. No group of that size can take a united stand on an important subject without making a marked impression on the world.

A united stand for decency in dress would bring to us at least as much admiration as have our Welfare Program and our stand on the Word of Wisdom.

And it would be cheered by right-thinking men and women everywhere.

Modesty is never unbecoming. Decency is never a handicap. But both are within the scope of the laws of God.

No woman looks as lovely as when she is properly and fully clothed. What woman can suppose that ugly knees and bony shoulder blades can add luster to her charm?

If we make a style of our own, with the strength of two and a half million people to popularize it, the world will come marching to our feet and admire our courage as they now admire what we do in other ways.

It is true that we would be even more peculiar—but distinctively, specially, and gloriously so. And everyone would love it!

From Baldwin, Michigan, comes the following U.P.I. news item:

In the day of the mod, the mini, the pop and the twig, some girls at Baldwin High School have developed a style of their own.

It's mod, all right—modest.

Ten girls showed up for classes in skirts that had hemlines four inches below the knee. In addition, they wore loose-fitting blouses with long sleeves and high neck lines.

The counter mod movement was started by Thyra Sweet of nearby Beitly.

"We are tired of being embarrassed by showing so much," she told her mother recently. "We are tired of tight fits and we are tired of looking at girls with knobby knees. We like long dresses."

Have Latter-day Saint girls and women the courage to do as well?
