Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

Worship of the Body

WORSHIP IS A sacred word. It should be used only with reference to the Deity, who is the personification of purity and all things good.

But evil forces and false gods have been worshipped from the beginning, and all such worship has been disastrous.

In the days of ancient Greece and Rome there were many kinds of worship. They had false gods and corrupt philosophies, and one of them was the worship of the body.

They glorified it first in athletics. Then the emphasis shifted to the arts, and to physical urges which brought both these nations down into the morass of immorality, finally destroying them.

The world today is following this identical pattern. The body is being glorified in the minds of many, both in athletics and in aesthetics, both heading toward immorality.

Whereas Romans and Greeks seemed to put more emphasis on the male physique, we now do the opposite, making the trend more hazardous.

The Greeks at first chose physical culture as one of the great objectives of their day, but the fact that such emphasis was placed upon the body led them to sinful uses of it.

We currently follow a more dangerous course. To display the female form as is done today, stimulates the sex urge more than was the case with the Greeks. Women usually are not the aggressors in sex-sin. The reaction of men and boys is alarming!

To flagrantly display the almost nude feminine form, as is done in many of our activities, is but to invite the sexual corruption which already has become almost epidemic in every nation.

Why are women's current styles adopted? To emphasize sex.

Why do business houses adopt the sex appeal to sell tires, refrigerators, stoves, automobiles and clothing? Because the emphasis on sex seems to sell anything—from cars to refrigerators, reflecting the state of the public mind.

Is the so-called "new morality" anything other than free love? It is part of the "glorification" of the body as a fun device.

Why the hippie movement? It is largely associated with sex urges and their associated corruption.

Why the wave of pornography in films, the printed page and TV? Because sex appeal has become "sure-fire" business success for the producers.

Anciently the direct result of worship of the body was social disease. It is the same today.

Statistics from Texas, for example, should give pause to the whole nation. A United Press International dispatch from Austin recently said that more Texans die of syphilis than from tetanus, polio, diphtheria and malaria combined. The number of deaths from measles and whooping cough together are only one-third of the deaths from syphilis.

The number of cases of gonorrhea in that state is second only to "strep" throat infections, running about 800 cases a week.

A thousand Americans die every month from the effects of syphilis. Fifteen hundred youngsters between 15 and 20 years of age contract it every day, while there are 1,300 new cases daily among adults.

Syphilis causes heart trouble, crippling, insanity and blindness as well as death. The United States government spends 80 million dollars a year for the care and prevention of social disease, but can work only with known cases. Most cases are never reported. The spread has reached epidemic form.

When will we waken to our true situation? We shut our eyes to the deadly effects of tobacco, and go on smoking.

We refuse to consider the evil results of drinking liquor, and go on drinking.

And now we blissfully close our eyes to the lethal effects of our emphasis on sex.

And we are supposed to be living in an enlightened age! And we are. That is the pitiful part of it. We have the information about all these things, but are so determined to "have fun" that we forget the true source of joy, mistakenly thinking that fun is to be found in filth.

The worship of the body will bring to the modern world what it brought to Greece and Rome. We seem to love darkness more than light, and will have to endure the consequences.
