Mark E. Petersen, Way to Peace ( 1969)

A Do-It-Yourself Project

WHAT IS AS potent as fashion?

Does anything command a following to compare with it?

Fashion becomes world-wide almost over night. Although individual touches may differ, the over-all pattern of dress becomes universal, and people feel conspicuous if they are not in line.

The Orient has taken over Western styles for both men and women. French styles have become world-wide. New York creations are seen the world around. London, too, sets criteria to be followed by millions.

What is as potent as fashion?

But even fashion gets out of line at times, as do most other things. And fashion is in that position today.

In the Church we constantly speak of modesty. Our women particularly are conscious of the problem, but they feel caught between two fires—the demand for modesty on one hand, and the dictates of fashion on the other. What are they to do?

One thoughtful correspondent writes:

"You aren't the first to harp on the fashion of women's dresses. In every meeting we go to, be it Sunday School or Mutual, some one is hammering at us to keep our dresses down.

"Have you tried to buy a dress this year? I bought five for my 14-year-old girl for school. We let the hem out on all of them, and they are still too short. We went through -------`s store last Friday. You should go and take a look. The clothes on the models are from four to six inches above the knees.

"We have shopped at (and here she names five stores) etc., etc., and they are all the same—short, short, short, and no hems.

"And in the summer! Just try to find a dress, let alone sports wear, with a sleeve in!

"If we are strong enough to make our own fashions and styles, where are they? I work, and don't have time to do all of our sewing, though this seems to be the only answer.

"Since this is such a big issue of the day, can you help us instead of condemning us, especially when we have no choice from which to make our selections?"

She then makes reference to an address by one of the General Authorities in which he asks:

"Has not the time arrived when our girls and women must place decency above fashion? Cannot two and a half million people popularize decency by a united effort?"

What is the answer?

Obviously the styles are pointing to shorter and shorter skirts, not longer ones. From time to time the newspapers carry articles saying that hemlines will drop, but they never do. They seem only to rise to the point where some now are as much as eight inches above the knee, almost suggesting that skirts may soon go out of style altogether.

If this is the trend, are decent women to succumb?

Our women say that they cannot find clothing of respectable length in the stores.

If enough women demanded them, the stores would stock them!

For profit reasons, the stores will sell anything the public demands. Our merchants are not dictators. They follow the crowd just as other people do.

It is for the "crowd" to make demands on the stores. Maybe the "crowd" will have to organize for such an effort, and develop enough sentiment to make their feelings felt. We organize for political purposes, for labor reasons, and to market our crops. Why not organize for decency?

Should there be any hesitancy on the part of righteous women of all faiths to thus assert themselves? Most women are good, clean and decent. They want modesty. But they feel that they are trapped by a world movement which they cannot fight. Singly they can't but united they can and should.

Of course, as the author of the above letter indicated, it may be that women and girls will have to become pioneers again and resume the sewing of their own clothes. But is that bad? Our mothers and grandmothers did it successfully. Why not the women of today?

And if enough women began withdrawing their support from the ready-to-wear departments to make their own clothes, the stores would very quickly cooperate, even if they had to start a "do-it-yourself" project of their own.

"Yea, wo be unto the Gentiles except they repent; for it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Father, that I will cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots; And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and throw down all thy strongholds; And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thy land, and thou shalt have no more soothsayers; Thy graven images I will also cut off, and thy standing images out of the midst of thee, and thou shalt no more worship the works of thy hands; And I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee; so will I destroy thy cities. And it shall come to pass that all lyings, and deceivings, and envyings, and strifes, and priestcrafts, and whoredoms, shall be done away. For it shall come to pass, saith the Father, that at that day whosoever will not repent and come unto my Beloved Son, them will I cut off from among my people, O house of Israel; And I will execute vengeance and fury upon them, even as upon the heathen, such as they have not heard.

"But if they will repent, and hearken unto my words, and harden not their hearts, I will establish my church among them, and they shall come in unto the covenant and be numbered among this the remnant of Jacob, unto whom I have given this land for their inheritance; And they shall assist my people, the remnant of Jacob, and also as many of the house of Israel as shall come, that they may build a city, which shall be called the New Jerusalem. And then shall they assist my people that they may be gathered in, who are scattered upon all the face of the land, in unto the New Jerusalem. And then shall the power of heaven come down among them; and I also will be in the midst. And then shall the work of the Father commence at that day, even when this gospel shall be preached among the remnant of this people. Verily I say unto you, at that day shall the work of the Father commence among all the dispersed of my people, yea, even the tribes which have been lost, which the Father hath led away out of Jerusalem. Yea, the work shall commence among all the dispersed of my people, with the Father, to prepare the way whereby they may come unto me, that they may call on the Father in my name. Yea, and then shall the work commence, with the Father, among all nations, in preparing the way whereby his people may be gathered home to the land of their inheritance. And they shall go out from all nations; and they shall not go out in haste, nor go by flight, for I will go before them, saith the Father, and I will be their rearward." (Chap. 10:1.)

O ye remnant of Joseph, your secret is revealed, ye who are despised, smitten, scattered and driven by the Gentiles from place to place, until you are left few in number! "O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest and not comforted"; lift up your heads and rejoice, for your redemption draweth nigh: yea, we have found your record, the oracles of God once committed to your forefathers, which have been hidden from you for a long time, because of unbelief. Behold! they are about to be restored to you again, then shall you rejoice: for you shall know that it is a blessing from the hand of God; and the scales of darkness shall begin to fall from your eyes; and the Gentiles shall not again have power over you; but you shall be gathered by them, and be built up, and again become a delightsome people. And the time has come; yea, the work has already commenced; for we have seen you gathered together, from all parts of the land, unto the place which God has appointed for the Gentiles to gather you; therefore, lay down your weapons of war, cease to oppose the Gentiles in the gathering of your various tribes, for the hand of your great God is in all this, and it was all foretold by your forefathers ten thousand moons ago. Therefore, suffer them peacefully to fulfill this last act of kindness, as a kind reward for the injuries you have received from them.

It is with mingled feelings of joy and sorrow that I reflect upon these things, sorrow, when I think how you have been smitten; joy, when I reflect upon the happy change that now awaits you; and sorrow again, when I turn my thoughts to the awful destruction that awaits the Gentiles, except they repent. But the eternal purposes of Jehovah must roll on, until all his promises are fulfilled, and none can hinder: therefore, O God, Thy will be done. But while I still linger upon this subject, with feelings that are easier felt than described, methinks I can almost hear the Indian's mournful chant resounding through his native woods. It whispers thus:

Great Spirit of our fathers, lend an ear; Pity the red man, to his cries give ear; Long hast Thou scourged him, with Thy chastening sore; When will Thy vengeance cease, Thy wrath be o'er? When will the white man's dire ambition cease, And let our scattered remnants dwell in peace? Or shall we, driven to the western shore, Become extinct, and fall to rise no more? Forbid, great Spirit! make Thy mercy known; Reveal Thy truth. Thy wand'ring captives own; Make bare Thine arm of power for our release, And o'er the earth extend the reign of peace.
