Sperry Symposium, Doctrines of the Book of Mormon: 1991 Sperry Symposium on the Book of Mormon ( 1992)

PREFACE

In his last epistle to Timothy, the apostle Paul prophesied, "For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine" (2 Tim. 4:3). In our present society wickedness and false doctrine seem to prevail, to the point that in the workplace, in the schools, and in the media many people "call evil good, and good evil, [and] put darkness for light, and light for darkness" (2 Ne. 15:20; Isa. 5:20). Nephi saw our day and declared, "Because of pride, and because of false teachers, and false doctrine" (2 Ne. 28:12), individuals in the last days will easily be led astray.

On 26 October 1991 Brigham Young University's Religious Education faculty sponsored the twentieth annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium entitled "Doctrines of the Book of Mormon." Their purpose was to teach "sound doctrine" from the Church's "keystone" scripture, the Book of Mormon. Elder Robert E. Wells of the First Quorum of the Seventy gave the keynote address, "The Liahona Triad," in which he related the significance of a personal spiritual dream that taught him that the Book of Mormon serves as our modern Liahona in leading us to Christ through the triad of faith, diligence, and heeding. Robert L. Millet, dean of Religious Education at BYU, taught the large gathering about the Book of Mormon's profound doctrine and application of the gift of charity. This book contains the written version of these two sermons along with many other presentations made at the symposium.

President Ezra Taft Benson has asked the Saints: "Do eternal consequences rest upon our response to this book [the Book of Mormon]? Yes, either to our blessing or our condemnation.

"Every Latter-day Saint should make the study of this book a lifetime pursuit. Otherwise he is placing his soul in jeopardy and neglecting that which could give spiritual and intellectual unity to his whole life. There is a difference between a convert who is built on the rock of Christ through the Book of Mormon and stays hold of that iron rod, and one who is not" (in Conference Report, Apr. 1975, p. 97; Oct. 1986, pp. 6-7).

The purpose of this collection of eighteen essays is to focus our attention upon some of the most profound doctrines in the volume that the Lord himself testified contains "the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ" (D&C 20:9).

The insights, instruction, and inspiration contained in this volume are offered to members of the Church everywhere, particularly to Gospel Doctrine teachers and class members, to help in grasping some of the central and most inspiring doctrines of the Book of Mormon. May the words contained herein inspire as well as instruct and motivate us to use the holy scriptures to strengthen our individual knowledge and testimonies of "sound doctrine," that we may fulfill the divine injunction: "Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to understand" (D&C 88:78).

Bruce A. Van Orden

Brent L. Top

Editors
