Sperry Symposium, Doctrines of the Book of Mormon: 1991 Sperry Symposium on the Book of Mormon ( 1992)

2

FOUR FACES OF PRIDE IN THE BOOK OF MORMON

K. Douglas Bassett

Brigham Young University

In introducing himself to the latter-day audience who would read his record, Moroni wrote: "Jesus Christ-hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing. And I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts" (Morm. 8:35-36). Many in the world today think of pride as being a positive thing, a driving force for success in our society, but despite that prevailing attitude, President Ezra Taft Benson reminds us: "In the scriptures there is no such thing as righteous pride—it is always considered a sin. Therefore, no matter how the world uses the term, we must understand how God uses the term."fn

The Book of Mormon helps us do that. Toward the end of the Nephite text Moroni included a letter written by his father, Mormon, concerning the people of their own society: "Behold, the pride of this nation, or the people of the Nephites, hath proven their destruction except they should repent" (Moro. 8:27). Hundreds of years before Mormon's epistle, Nephi, the man for whom the Nephite nation was named, prophesied concerning his seed: "For the reward of their pride and their foolishness they shall reap destruction" (2 Ne. 26:10). Nephi and Mormon were speaking almost a thousand years apart, yet they were both referring to the same event. Nephi prophesied and Mormon confirmed that pride was the cause of the destruction of the Nephite nation.

If pride proved the downfall of the covenant people who dwelt on this promised land anciently, then of what import is pride to the covenant people who inhabit this promised land today? In our latter-day Doctrine and Covenants, the Savior repeats the ancient warning against pride: "Beware of pride, lest ye become as the Nephites of old" (D&C 38:39).

President Benson brings the same message to our doorstep with the warning that "pride is the great stumbling block to Zion. I repeat: Pride is the great stumbling block to Zion."fn Our modernday prophet said, further: "The central feature of pride is enmity—enmity toward God and enmity toward our fellowmen. Enmity means `hatred toward, hostility to, or a state of opposition.' It is the power by which Satan wishes to reign over us. . . . Our enmity toward God takes on many labels, such as rebellion, hardheartedness, stiffneckedness, unrepentant, puffed up, easily offended, and sign seekers. The proud wish God would agree with them. They aren't interested in changing their opinions to agree with God's."fn

Pride introduces itself early in the Book of Mormon and wears various faces throughout the text. I have identified four of these faces of pride in the Book of Mormon that have immediate practical application in our day.

COSTLY APPAREL, OR CONSPICUOUS CONSUMPTION

Nephi identified the great and spacious building that his father saw in a dream as the "vain imaginations and the pride of the children of men" (1 Ne. 12:18). He said that pride and vanity are inseparably connected with this great building with no foundation. Nephi's younger brother Jacob chastised the vanity of the Nephites by saying, "Ye are lifted up in the pride of your hearts, and wear stiff necks and high heads because of the costliness of your apparel" (Jacob 2:13). Jacob added that this pride based on clothing caused the Nephites to persecute their brethren "because ye suppose that ye are better than they" (Jacob 2:13).

In the first year of the reign of the judges, a wicked man named Nehor became known among the Nephites. Mormon described Nehor's priestcraft: "He began to be lifted up in the pride of his heart, and to wear very costly apparel, yea, and even began to establish a church after the manner of his preaching" (Alma 1:6). Nehor's church was founded on pride. It seems that this philosophy still had an effect on the members of the true church some eight years after Nehor had left the scene: "The people of the church began to wax proud, because of their exceeding riches, . . . for they began to wear very costly apparel" (Alma 4:6). Alma gave up his political position as chief judge to preach the gospel to the Nephites who were ripening for destruction. To those Nephites Alma boldly proclaimed, "Can ye be puffed up in the pride of your hearts; yea, will ye still persist in the wearing of costly apparel?" (Alma 5:53).

Hierarchy based on what a person wore was not unique to this period in the Book of Mormon. Nearly twenty years later Alma preached to an apostate group of Nephites called Zoramites, a people whose spiritual value base was such that some individuals were excluded from attending church. Speaking of those who were not allowed to enter, Mormon writes, "They were cast out of the synagogues because of the coarseness of their apparel" (Alma 32:2). How can this problem of costly apparel be likened to us in our day?

Moroni spoke directly to those who would receive his record. "And I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts; and there are none save a few only who do not lift themselves up in the pride of their hearts, unto the wearing of very fine apparel. . . . For behold, ye do love money, . . . and your fine apparel, . . . more than ye love the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted" (Morm. 8:36-37). Hundreds of years earlier Nephi had also prophesied concerning the practices of some churches in the latter days when the Book of Mormon would come forth: "Their churches are lifted up; because of pride they are puffed up. . . . They rob the poor because of their fine clothing" (2 Ne. 28:12-13). Two powerful prophets served as witnesses to these evils of pride in our day.

Even though costly apparel was and is a physical manifestation, Mae Blanch rightly identifies it as a spiritual dilemma: "When money and possessions become the chief marks of distinction in society, then the pursuit of money becomes the only action worthwhile. And if this pursuit requires the sacrifice of honesty, integrity, compassion, and all other virtues, then so be it, for the love of money is indeed the root of all evil. Thus the wearing of costly apparel involves the soul as much as the body."fn

Our society may well be as guilty as the wealthy Zoramites of using fashion as "the science of appearances, inspiring us with the desire to seem rather than to be."fn In our day the costly apparel syndrome may be identified as one aspect of the modern-day term "conspicuous consumption." The word conspicuous alludes to the visual side of vanity—the need to be seen, to be recognized. Consumption refers to that which we take in or that which we consume. Conspicuous consumption may be defined as that which we take to ourselves in order to be recognized and approved by others. By its very definition, the person trapped in conspicuous consumption, especially as it applies to "costly apparel," must be focused on the opinions of others, because what is "in" today may be "out" tomorrow. Vanity then becomes its own punishment, because there is never time to be satisfied—the eyes and opinions of others can turn so quickly to embrace someone else.

For us, the disease that afflicted the Zoramites encompasses more than clothing. It can include cars, houses, boats, diplomas, and anything else that has a foundation where the need for the approval of man carries more weight than the need to be accepted by God. Elder Ezra Taft Benson referred to this problem in general conference more than three decades ago: "Are not many of us status-seekers—measuring the worth of a man by the size of his bank account, his house, his automobile? . . . This is a sad commentary on a civilization which has given to mankind the greatest achievements and progress ever known. But it is an even sadder commentary on those of us who call ourselves Christians, who thus betray the ideals given to us by the Son of God himself."fn

A SOCIETY DIVIDED INTO CLASSES

Another result of pride within a society is the separation of people into a class system. The Book of Mormon gives ample evidence of this face of pride. Following the Lord Jesus Christ's visit to the Nephites, "they had all things common among them; therefore there were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift" (4 Ne. 1:3). The record adds, "Surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God" (4 Ne. 1:16). This society continued for almost two hundred years, at which time it "began to be divided into classes" (4 Ne. 1:26). What could make a people who were filled with "the heavenly gift," a people of exquisite happiness, degenerate into a society torn by class divisions? The Book of Mormon tells us "there began to be among them those who were lifted up in pride" (4 Ne. 1:24).

Prior to Jesus' visit, the Nephite society had degenerated to such an extent that the Lord swept the land clean of the wicked so that his people could begin anew. Just before this cleansing the prophet Mormon explained, "The people began to be distinguished by ranks, according to their riches and their chances for learning" (3 Ne. 6:12). Even the Church was not immune to this class system, as Mormon's words bear witness: "And thus there became a great inequality in all the land, insomuch that the church began to be broken up; yea, insomuch that . . . the church was broken up in all the land" (3 Ne. 6:14). Mormon identified the cancer that caused the church to be broken up: "The cause of this iniquity of the people was this—Satan had great power, . . . to the puffing them up with pride" (3 Ne. 6:15).

Mormon's description of this soon-to-be-fallen society merits further review. He explained that the pride that caused that society to be broken up was based upon "their riches and their chances for learning" (3 Ne. 6:12). President Benson likened this message to our day when he said, "The two groups in the Book of Mormon that seemed to have the greatest difficulty with pride are the `learned, and the rich.'"fn

Just what is it about education and wealth that proved to be such a stumbling block for the Nephites? The prophet Jacob taught: "When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves" (2 Ne. 9:28). He then turned his attention from the educated to the wealthy. "But wo unto the rich . . . their hearts are upon their treasures; wherefore, their treasure is their god" (2 Ne. 9:30).

How did education enter into this negative scenario? Education to the Nephites brought wealth, and wealth was needed to obtain an education. This process created an inner circle that allowed the upper class to serve itself while at the same time separating it by a wall of pride from those who had little hope of obtaining "the good life." Mormon described that wall very well: "Some were ignorant because of their poverty, and others did receive great learning because of their riches" (3 Ne. 6:12). Wealth was the key to education, and education was the key to wealth. The lower classes never held either of the keys. It is amazing to think that education could have proven so destructive to their society.

Jacob qualified his condemnation of learning and riches and suggested a solution to both concerns. In addressing the educated he counseled, "But to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God" (2 Ne. 9:29). He then addressed the management of wealth: "Think of your brethren like unto yourselves, and be familiar with all and free with your substance, that they may be rich like unto you. But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God" (Jacob 2:17-18).

Jacob's counsel, however, is at variance with most worldly philosophies. The world would have us believe that the Lord helps those who help themselves. Jacob seems to be saying that the Lord helps those who help others. That places wealth and education in a different light. When we use wealth and education to serve our fellow beings, we are placing ourselves in a better position to gain the Lord's approval. In this way a person uses wealth and education not as weapons to separate himself from others in a vain attempt to rise above the rest but as tools to serve and lift his fellow man.

Moroni accused his latter-day readers of a class system of exclusion based upon pride: "And your churches, yea, even every one, have become polluted because of the pride of your hearts. For behold, ye do love money, and your substance, and your fine apparel, and the adorning of your churches, more than ye love the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted" (Morm. 8:36-37). The magnitude of this type of pride, which deeply divides society, has been well documented in our day. Richard E. Johnson has written: "Social commentators almost unanimously refer to the 1980s as `America's Age of Greed.' . . . The Census Bureau reports that the richest one-fifth of American households now receive almost 10 times the average income of the poorest one-fifth, which is the highest ratio of inequality since they began keeping records following World War II."fn As President Harold B. Lee said during the 1970s: "Today we are basking in the lap of luxury, in the like of which we have never seen in the history of the world. It would seem that probably this is the most severe test of any we have ever had in the history of the Church."fn

After the Saints arrived in the Salt Lake Valley, Brigham Young hinted that such a challenge would befall the Church: "This people will stand mobbing, robbing, poverty, and all manner of persecution, and be true. But my greater fear for them is that they cannot stand wealth."fn

CONTENTION

President Ezra Taft Benson stated: "Another face of pride is contention. Arguments, fights, unrighteous dominion, generation gaps, divorces, spouse abuse, riots, and disturbances all fall into this category of pride. Contention in our families drives the Spirit of the Lord away. It also drives many of our family members away. Contention ranges from hostile spoken words to worldwide conflicts. The scriptures tell us that `only by pride cometh contention' (Prov. 13:10; 28:25)." fn

Contention was an unfortunate part of Lehi's family on account of the murmuring of his two eldest sons, Laman and Lemuel. They murmured against virtually every recorded commandment given them by their father with the possible exception of returning to Jerusalem for the daughters of Ishmael. Lehi's final blessing to his rebellious sons challenged them to "awake" (see 2 Ne. 1), but their spiritual slumber apparently had lapsed into coma. After Lehi's death, Laman and Lemuel's contentious natures were fueled to the point that, as Nephi recorded, "They did seek to take away my life" (2 Ne. 5:4). Only after the Lord commanded him to depart with his followers could Nephi say of his people, "We lived after the manner of happiness" (2 Ne. 5:27). But that bliss was short-lived. "Forty years had passed away, and we had already had wars and contentions with our brethren" (2 Ne. 5:34).

Nonetheless, from that point on, it seems from the Book of Mormon text, the most damaging contention was among the Nephites themselves and more specifically from those within the Church itself. Mormon explained that during the reign of Alma there was a "strict law" within the Church forbidding that kind of behavior (Alma 1:21). He continued, "Nevertheless, there were many among them who began to be proud, and began to contend warmly with their adversaries, even unto blows. . . . It was a cause of much affliction to the church; yea, it was the cause of much trial with the church" (Alma 1:22-23).

Still later, about three decades before the Savior's visit to the Nephites, Mormon said of the society, "The more part of the people . . . were converted unto the Lord" (3 Ne. 1:22). This peace was interrupted, however, not from outside the Church but from within. "And there were no contentions, save it were a few that began to preach, endeavoring to prove by the scriptures that it was no more expedient to observe the law of Moses" (3 Ne. 1:24).

After the destruction of the Nephite people who had formed this contentious society, Jesus Christ appeared to those who had been spared because they "were more righteous" (3 Ne. 9:13). One of the first things recorded in his teachings to these people was "He that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention . . . this is my doctrine, that such things should be done away" (3 Ne. 11:29-30). As was mentioned earlier, these people subsequently dwelt in peace for two centuries. Mormon described their culture in these terms, "There was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people. And surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God" (4 Ne. 1:15-16). It was not enough for them to have an absence of contention; contention had to be replaced with the love of God. And because that process had taken place, Mormon was prompted to describe them as the happiest of all people.

Contention did not begin with the Book of Mormon. As Elder Russell M. Nelson declared in general conference, the "war in heaven was not a war of bloodshed. It was a war of conflicting ideas—the beginning of contention. Scriptures repeatedly warn that the father of contention opposes the plan of our Heavenly Father. Satan's method relies on the infectious canker of contention."fn

And what about us—is contention a part of our society? Can it be found even among the members of the Church? These questions were also addressed by Elder Nelson. "My concern is that contention is becoming accepted as a way of life. From what we see and hear in the media, the classroom, and the workplace, all are now infected to some degree with contention. . . . Well do I remember a friend who would routinely sow seeds of contention in church classes. His assaults would invariably be preceded by this predictable comment: `Let me play the role of devil's advocate.' Recently he passed away. One day he will stand before the Lord in judgment. Then, I wonder, will my friend's predictable comment again be repeated?"fn

Even within the Church it is so easy to fall into a trap of contention when good, well-meaning people disagree over how a particular program should be administered. Many years ago George Q. Cannon addressed that challenge. "It is better to carry out a plan that is not so wise, if you are united on it. Speaking generally, a plan or a policy that may be inferior in some respects is more effective if men are united upon it than a better plan would be upon which they were divided."fn This process hints at a celestial strategy within the Church based on the Lord's program of unity. If the ancient covenant Nephites had learned this principle, the Lamanites might not have proven the overpowering adversary they turned out to be. Are we as a covenant people free from contention? We need to look no further than our homes, neighborhoods, and wards, including our participation in Church-sponsored athletic competitions, for the answer.

ANTIENEMY ATTITUDES, OR COUNTERFEIT PATRIOTISM

President Spencer W. Kimball issued the following warning: "When threatened, we become antienemy instead of pro-kingdom of God. . . . We forget that if we are righteous the Lord will either not suffer our enemies to come upon us—and this is the special promise to the inhabitants of the land of the Americas (see 2 Ne. 1:7)—or he will fight our battles for us."fn President Kimball did not say that we should never revert to a military solution, but he connected the military with a spiritual perspective. It is the "anti-enemy" slant regarding military aggression that President Kimball warned us against.

Lehi spoke in his final blessing of those who should dwell on this promised land and of the Lord's role in their freedom: "And if it so be that they shall serve him according to the commandments which he hath given, it shall be a land of liberty unto them; wherefore, they shall never be brought down into captivity" (2 Ne. 1:7). He quoted the words of the Lord: "Inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments ye shall prosper in the land; but inasmuch as ye will not keep my commandments ye shall be cut off from my presence" (2 Ne. 1:20). This kind of divine protection for the obedient is a theme that runs throughout the Nephite text.

As a second witness Moroni chose to include the record of the Jaredites in the book of Ether. He added his own inspired commentary to that abridged record by paraphrasing Lehi's promise: "Behold, this is a choice land, and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall be free from bondage, and from captivity, and from all other nations under heaven, if they will but serve the God of the land, who is Jesus Christ" (Ether 2:12). Both Lehi and Moroni confirmed a divine promise relative to this land—a promise that did not end with the destruction of the Jaredites or the Nephites. Obviously these two prophets were also speaking to the people who would dwell on this covenant land in the latter days. Their unmistakable message is that freedom and obedience to the Lord's commandments are inseparably connected.

Using President Kimball's terms, we can see that the Book of Mormon presents a fascinating military contrast between the "prokingdom" Nephites who trusted in the Lord during their times of conflict and the antienemy Nephites who trusted in the arm of flesh, giving credit for victory to their own might. This type of pride became a boasting patriotism rather than a grateful acknowledgment of the hand of the Lord.

A strong example of this "antienemy" attitude existed among the Nephite people of King Noah. After a victory in a battle with the Lamanites, we are told, "And now, because of this great victory they were lifted up in the pride of their hearts; they did boast in their own strength" (Mosiah 11:19). Immediately the Lord sent the prophet Abinadi to cry repentance to these people. Abinidi's words shocked the people, who said to King Noah, "What great evil hast thou done, or what great sins have thy people committed, that we should be condemned of God or judged of this man? . . . And behold, we are strong, we shall not come into bondage, or be taken captive by our enemies" (Mosiah 12:13, 15). These words of Noah's people proved to be a vain expression, because the muscle in their "arm of flesh" never again proved strong enough to win in battle during the reign of King Noah.

Contrast this "antienemy" approach to the "pro-kingdom" strategy applied by Zeniff, the father of Noah. "Yea, in the strength of the Lord did we go forth to battle against the Lamanites; for I and my people did cry mightily to the Lord that he would deliver us out of the hands of our enemies" (Mosiah 9:17). Referring to another confrontation, Zeniff records, "I did stimulate them to go to battle with their might, putting their trust in the Lord" (Mosiah 10:19).

A story from the darkest days of the American Civil War illustrates the difference between the camp of Noah and the camp of Zeniff. As President Abraham Lincoln paced the floor wondering who would be the victor, North or South, his secretary said, "Mr. Lincoln, I hope the Lord is on our side." To this, the president responded, "I hope we are on the Lord's side."fn Both Zeniff and Lincoln understood that righteousness in the defense of freedom is a key component.

Because of the Lord's hand in defense of the righteous, the Nephites were taught "never to give an offense. . . . And this was their faith, that by so doing God would prosper them in the land, or in other words, if they were faithful in keeping the commandments of God that he would prosper them in the land; yea, warn them to flee, or to prepare for war, according to their danger; And also, that God would make it known unto them whither they should go to defend themselves against their enemies, and by so doing, the Lord would deliver them" (Alma 48:14-16). The concept of the Lord's involvement in their preservation was so ingrained in the Nephites that "it was the custom among all the Nephites to appoint for their chief captains, (save it were in their times of wickedness) some one that had the spirit of revelation and also prophecy" (3 Ne. 3:19). So it was not odd that they would choose Mormon to be their military leader when he was only at the tender age of sixteen (see Morm. 2:1-2). The surprising thing is that the Nephites were a wicked people at the time. Apparently the tradition of seeking a righteous military leader was so much a part of their culture that they remained true to it even to the end.

But contrary to their earlier strategy of trusting in the Lord, the Nephite army during the time of Mormon trusted in its own prowess. After a Nephite victory Mormon recorded: "They did not realize that it was the Lord that had spared them. . . . And behold they did harden their hearts against the Lord their God" (Morm. 3:3). Gradually they became so bold and proud that they "did swear by the heavens, and also by the throne of God, that they would go up to battle against their enemies" (Morm. 3:10). Their disposition was to attack rather than to defend. Because of their great wickedness Mormon "did utterly refuse from this time forth to be a commander and a leader of this people" (Morm. 3:11). Mormon then explained: "It was because the armies of the Nephites went up unto the Lamanites that they began to be smitten; for were it not for that, the Lamanites could have had no power over them" (Morm. 4:4). As an epitaph to the military he added, "And from this time forth did the Nephites gain no power over the Lamanites" (Morm. 4:18).

Near the end of their civilization, war was not a necessary evil to the Nephites—it was a way of life. Mormon wrote to his son Moroni from the battlefield, "They thirst after blood and revenge continually" (Moro. 9:5). By this time they not only had separated themselves from the Lord's promises but "they did curse God, and wish to die" (Morm. 2:14). By becoming "antienemy" they had also become "anti-God." They had fallen so far from relying upon the Lord to aid in preserving their freedom that upon capturing Lamanite women they raped, tortured, and murdered them and then ate their flesh as "a token of bravery" (Moro. 9:10). The Lamanites had become the enemy and as such could be treated with a barbarism that was not possible when they were viewed as "our brethren, the Lamanites." The horror of Book of Mormon is not just the physical destruction of the Nephites by the Lamanites but the spiritual self-destruction of the Nephites. Their destruction was a slow spiritual suicide that separated them from the protecting arm of the Lord. President Ezra Taft Benson echoes the witness of the Book of Mormon: "Great nations do not fall because of external aggression; they first erode and decay inwardly, so that, like rotten fruit, they fall of themselves. The strength of a country is the sum total of the moral strength of the individuals in that country."fn

In our day, this living prophet is equally yoked with the Book of Mormon prophets in declaring that our freedom is directly tied to our obedience. Following are three statements by President Benson relative to this principle:

"I do not believe the greatest threat to our future is from bombs or guided missiles. I do not think our civilization will die that way. I think it will die when we no longer care—when the spiritual forces that make us wish to be right and noble die in the hearts of men."fn

"Before the final triumphal return of the Lord, the question as to whether we may save our constitutional republic is simply based on two factors—the number of patriots and the extent of their obedience."fn

"The gospel is the only answer to the problems of the world. We may cry peace. We may hold peace conferences. And I have nothing but commendation for those who work for peace. But it is my conviction that peace must come only by following the teachings and the example of the Prince of Peace."fn

Thus, our beloved prophet is proclaiming that true patriotism is "pro-kingdom of God" as opposed to "antienemy." We hold the key to freedom—it can never be taken away, no matter the size of the opposing army. Our freedom is tied to our faith in the Lord. If it is lost, it will be lost in the same way the Nephites and the Jaredites lost their liberty: by wilful disobedience to the Lord Jesus Christ, who secured this land to those who would have him to be their God.

CONCLUSION

Costly apparel, class distinctions, contention, and military aggression are only four of the many faces of pride in the Book of Mormon. The remedy to this powerful illness of pride was also given to us by President Ezra Taft Benson:

"The antidote for pride is humility—meekness, submissiveness. . . . God will have a humble people. Either we can choose to be humble or we can be compelled to be humble. . . . Let us choose to be humble.

"We can choose to humble ourselves by conquering enmity toward our brothers and sisters, esteeming them as ourselves, and lifting them as high or higher than we are. We can choose to humble ourselves by receiving counsel and chastisement. We can choose to humble ourselves by forgiving those who have offended us. We can choose to humble ourselves by rendering selfless service. We can choose to humble ourselves by going on missions and preaching the word that can humble others. We can choose to humble ourselves by getting to the temple more frequently. We can choose to humble ourselves by confessing and forsaking our sins and being born of God. We can choose to humble ourselves by loving God, submitting our will to His, and putting Him first in our lives. Let us choose to be humble. We can do it. I know we can."fn

A review of history, secular as well as religious, often shows temporary success to be nothing more than postponed failure. Pride is often the key ingredient in this "success" formula. Like the Nephites of old, we can choose to bask in the temporary successes of pride, which led to their eventual failure, or we may follow the word of warning spoken by the Book of Mormon prophets as well as by our own living prophet. The two roads lie before us with their destinations clearly defined. It is for us to choose.

NOTES
