Sperry Symposium, Doctrines of the Book of Mormon: 1991 Sperry Symposium on the Book of Mormon ( 1992)

3

THE FIRST FAMILIES OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

Douglas E. Brinley

Brigham Young University

As Latter-day Saints, our commitment to establish and foster strong, happy families is at the very heart and core of our theology, our lives, and our individual well-being. The essence of our religion is that exaltation, the highest of eternal opportunities, is the continuation of marriage and family life into eternity. We value this mortal experience as a time to participate in marriage and parent-child relationships in preparing for that everlasting privilege. The Savior's atonement enables our spirits, in the resurrection, to be restored to a tangible physical body of element complete with male or female characteristics as we enjoy in this temporal setting. There, however, our associations will be "coupled with eternal glory, which glory we do not now enjoy" (D&C 130:2). Priesthood ordinances in modern temples provide the keys to organize such an eternal family unit.

The Book of Mormon is replete with help for families. Though outwardly it may not appear to be a commentary on family relations, it is a book about families—beginning with two who leave a corrupt Jerusalem to escape the inevitable Babylonian captivity. The opening chapters of this text record two families struggling desperately to maintain unity and religious faith under intensely challenging circumstances. Following these families on their journey to the land of promise provides many episodes of family interaction. There are family issues to resolve. We have record of how a husband responds when his wife questions his leadership; we read counsel from a father both to faithful and to wayward sons; we witness brothers fighting among themselves; we see numerous family interactions; and we are even able to trace family lines through several generations. Even without the specific doctrines of celestial marriage and family exaltation, the Book of Mormon may be the best scriptural record to help us learn more effective ways of being marriage partners and rearing our offspring. After all, if prophets model Christlike behavior, then perhaps Lehi and Nephi portray how Christ would deal with stressful family situations.

THE FAMILIES OF LEHI AND ISHMAEL

Lehi and Ishamael headed the first two families in the Book of Mormon. Their children, along with Laban's servant, Zoram, intermarried and peopled the promised land. Lehi's family was the prophetic line. Lehi and his wife Sariah had a number of sons—at least six. We know they had daughters also, but the record is silent about how many (2 Ne. 5:6). Two sons, Joseph and Jacob, were born to this couple during their travels to the covenant land (1 Ne. 18:7). Ishmael fathered at least five daughters who married Lehi's sons and his eldest daughter married Zoram (1 Ne. 16:7). There is no mention of the name of Ishmael's wife, but we know she accompanied her husband and family into the desert and on one occasion intervened to preserve Nephi's life (1 Ne. 7:19).

The Lord commanded Lehi to send his sons back to Jerusalem twice—once to obtain the brass plates of Laban, and another time to bring Ishmael's family so "that his sons should take daughters to wife, that they might raise up seed unto the Lord in the land of promise" (1 Ne. 7:1). Of that event, Nephi recorded:

"We did gain favor in the sight of Ishmael, insomuch that we did speak unto him the words of the Lord. And it came to pass that the Lord did soften the heart of Ishmael, and also his household, insomuch that they took their journey with us down into the wilderness to the tent of our father" (1 Ne. 7:4-5).

It seems likely that Lehi and Sariah were already related in some way to Ishmael and his wife before the exodus from Jerusalem. Evidently two other sons of Ishmael were married before the departure from Jerusalem, and they brought their families to the land of promise (1 Ne. 7:6). Possibly these two sons of Ishmael had previously married older daughters of Lehi and Sariah. In a discourse given in Logan in 1882, Elder Erastus Snow explained that the Prophet Joseph Smith had taught that "Ishmael was of the lineage of Ephraim, and that his sons married into Lehi's family, and Lehi's sons married Ishmael's daughters.fn That may have been the reason Nephi and his brothers went to Ishmael's home in Jerusalem. They would already have been familiar with Ishmael's family and its makeup.

Unfortunately, Ishmael died en route to the land of promise, an event that first saddened and then angered his daughters and their husbands, Laman and Lemuel (1 Ne. 16:35). Using Ishmael's death and the physical hardships of their journey as an excuse, they seriously threatened to go back to Jerusalem and to kill both Nephi and Father Lehi (1 Ne. 16:35-37). The Lord intervened, however, and their murderous attempts were thwarted. The family held together until Lehi's death, at which time Nephi lost all influence with his older siblings and the Lord commanded him to remove his clan to another area, which his descendants named "Nephi" (2 Ne. 5:5-8).

LEHI AS SPIRITUAL LEADER

Lehi wrote an account of his own ministry and experiences that Mormon later abridged. Unfortunately that record was lost through the foibles of Joseph Smith and Martin Harris. The Prophet explained that the lost manuscript material was a part of the "Book of Lehi" (see original 1830 edition, Preface). Though it is Nephi's writings that have been preserved, it is clear that Lehi, until his passing, was the presiding figure in this moving family epic. H. Donl Peterson has written of Lehi:

"We honor father Lehi as one of the noble and great ones; as the head of a major dispensation of the gospel of Jesus Christ; the father of a multitude of nations; as a prophet, seer, and revelator; a loving, caring parent and husband; a man of courage and convictions; one given a land inheritance forever for himself and his posterity; a pioneer and explorer; a patriarch and inspired scribe; an exemplar and a true disciple of the Lord Jesus Christ."fn

Lehi was the spiritual head of the colony and was the one told by the Lord to flee Jerusalem to escape the impending destruction. This righteous prophet received visions and revelations concerning the mission and destiny of his family in the land of promise. The Lord gave him the Liahona to guide the families through the wilderness. It was Lehi who initially saw the impressive dream of the tree of life. And it was to Lehi, his father, that Nephi went when he fashioned a replacement bow and needed to know where to go to find game for food.

LEHI AS HUSBAND

In reference to a husband's responsibility, President Ezra Taft Benson quoted Paul: "Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church" (Eph. 5:25). He then added, "In latter-day revelation the Lord speaks again of this obligation. He said, `Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else' (D&C 42:22). To my knowledge there is only one other thing in all scripture that we are commanded to love with all our hearts, and that is God Himself. Think what that means!"fn

What can be said of Lehi as a husband? Did he love his wife? Did Sariah love and support him? Clues to the quality of their relationship are apparent from two instances: one was her willingness to leave Jerusalem in the first place; the second was the exchange between Lehi and Sariah when their sons failed to return from Jerusalem within the expected time.

Sariah appears to have been willing to leave the family home at Jerusalem. No doubt she gave up much. The record states that her "house, and the land of [her] inheritance, and [her] gold, and [her] silver, and [her] precious things" were gone (1 Ne. 2:4). Nevertheless, when her motherly instincts were aroused by the lengthy absence of her sons on their trip to Jerusalem, her faith faltered, perhaps understandably. Not until that incident did Sariah complain against her husband or his leadership. She charged that Lehi was a "visionary man," that he had led them forth from the land of their inheritance, that her sons were "no more," and that the rest of them would also "perish in the wilderness" (1 Ne. 5:2).

Darwin Thomas suggested that this event between Lehi and Sariah could have become a major marital argument had a lesser man been involved:

"This sounds like the beginning of a rousing argument. One person lodges a complaint against the other person: `This is what I have against you . . .' Then the complaint identifies a basic personality problem the person has (you are a visionary man). It next pinpoints some unfortunate consequences of that person's problem (because of your foolish ideas, we have lost our inheritance, we stand to lose our own lives, and furthermore, the children are already dead). A very natural response would be for the accused party to quickly defend: `Well, I may have my problems, but who are you to be telling me what's wrong? You're not so perfect yourself. Why only yesterday you . . .' The accused spouse then drags out all the skeletons of previous problems to show that the accuser really is worse than the accused."fn

Yet Lehi responded to Sariah's fears, accusations, and complaints in a compassionate, tender, and Christlike manner. He acknowledged her concerns. The scriptural account says that Lehi comforted Sariah (1 Ne. 5:6). He exhibited only charity in understanding and helping his wife with her anxiety over her sons' absence. He knew that, in time, she would come to know that the Lord was indeed leading her husband. And she did. When her sons returned from securing the plates and she listened to their miraculous story of the Lord's intervention in preserving them from Laban's treachery, in her heart her husband's inspiration as prophet and patriarch was confirmed. Nephi recorded her thoughts and feelings:

"Now I know of a surety that the Lord hath commanded my husband to flee into the wilderness; yea, and I also know of a surety that the Lord hath protected my sons, and delivered them out of the hands of Laban, and given them power whereby they could accomplish the thing which the Lord hath commanded them" (1 Ne. 5:8).

When Sariah's sons again left for Jerusalem, this time to retrieve Ishmael's family, there is no indication that she voiced any objection.

Lehi thus responded with Christlike love in resolving his companion's concern in a way that encouraged her and lifted her spirits. President Spencer W. Kimball explained why husbands should lead their families in this manner:

"For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the church: . . . so let the wives be to their own husbands in every thing (Eph. 5:23-24). A woman would have no fear of being imposed upon nor of any dictatorial measures nor of any improper demands if the husband is self-sacrificing and worthy. Certainly no sane woman would hesitate to give submission to her own really righteous husband in everything. . . . Here is the answer: Christ loved the Church and its people so much that he voluntarily endured persecution for them, stoically withstood pain and physical abuse for them, and finally gave his precious life for them."

"When the husband is ready to treat his household in that manner, not only the wife, but also all the family will respond to his leadership. Certainly, if fathers are to be respected, they must merit respect; if they are to be loved, they must be consistent, lovable, understanding, and kind, and must honor their priesthood."fn

Lehi also exemplified the self-control and patience required of a righteous patriarch. President Ezra Taft Benson explained, "Patience is composure under stress. A patient man is understanding of others' faults. . . . A Priesthood holder who is patient will be tolerant of the mistakes and failings of his loved ones. Because he loves them, he will not find fault nor criticize nor blame."fn If this incident is typical of the way Lehi applied the gospel in his relationship with Sariah, then he was a blessing to his wife and he ministered to her needs.

LEHI AS FATHER

President Ezra Taft Benson, in an address entitled "To the Fathers in Israel," counseled men about their two major responsibilities in marriage: "First, you have a sacred responsibility to provide for the material needs of your family. . . . Second, you have a sacred responsibility to provide spiritual leadership in your family."fn That Lehi had provided well for his family may be inferred from the accumulated treasures that the sons tried to exchange for Laban's plates of brass.

In providing spiritual leadership, Lehi ministered and blessed his family. He taught them Hebrew history, prophecy, and doctrine. He detailed for them the fall of man and the atonement of Christ. He reviewed the prophetic future of the promised land and its inhabitants. Nephi and Jacob recorded several doctrines that their father had taught them. Why Laman and Lemuel did not follow their father is not clear. Though there were occasions when they were curious about what they heard from both Lehi and Nephi, their spirituality appears to have been shallow most of the time (see 1 Ne. 15:21, 23, 26, 31; 1 Ne. 22). Nevertheless, Lehi never shrank from his responsibility to teach, exhort, preach, explain, confront, and prophesy to these older sons (1 Ne. 8:37-38).

Children need individual time and attention. Lehi taught his sons one-to-one (2 Ne. 2-3). That approach seems to have worked with Sam, Nephi, Jacob, and Joseph. These sons responded to their father's instruction. Contrary to the reaction of Laman and Lemuel, Nephi loved his father because Lehi taught him great spiritual truths. Nephi's opening lines reflect his love for his father and mother: "I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents, therefore I was taught somewhat in all the learning of my father" (1 Ne. 1:1). No doubt he chose these opening words carefully. Nephi first learned of God's majesty and handiwork from his father's teachings and received his own testimony and revelation when he sought for a confirmation of his father's teachings.

That Lehi loved his children and was concerned about their future is clear from the record, particularly as his life was coming to an end. Laman and Lemuel certainly had to know their father was sincere, that he had their best interests at heart. The inspired record portrays Lehi as a sensitive person and a conscientious father who loved his children and did his best to bless them. Here are a few illustrations:

When love and charity failed, however, Lehi resorted to confronting his wayward sons frequently and openly with reason and power, warning them of their ultimate destiny if they did not repent. From the comments of Nephi, Lehi did his utmost as a father to use his influence, knowledge, and testimony to persuade his wayward sons to return to the path that leads to eternal life. He tried everything short of force. Nowhere in Nephi's record is there any hint that the Lord chastised Lehi as a father. The Lord has chastened others of his servants, on occasion, for neglecting their paternal roles. For example, the Lord rebuked Joseph Smith and his counselors in the First Presidency, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams, for neglecting their patriarchal duties:

"I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth. . . . You have not taught your children light and truth. . . . if you will be delivered you shall set in order your own house, for there are many things that are not right in your house. . . . Your family must needs repent and forsake some things, and give more earnest heed unto your sayings, or be removed out of their place" (D&C 93:40, 42-43, 48).

Lehi was diligent in teaching his children, and though Lehi had seen in vision that these two sons would not follow him, he labored even more earnestly to convince them to repent and follow God. Finally, when Lehi saw that his efforts would not bear fruit, he compassionately absolved his grandchildren of the sins of their parents. To the children of his oldest sons, he said, "Wherefore, if ye are cursed, behold, I leave my blessing upon you, that the cursing may be taken from you and be answered upon the heads of your parents" (2 Ne. 4:6).

THE ROLE OF HUSBAND AND FATHER TODAY

Thus, like Father Lehi, men are to lead their families by following the same principles by which Christ led the Church (Eph. 5:23). A man's first ministry is to his wife and children: he is accountable to God for his family's physical and spiritual welfare. In contrast to Lehi, many husbands and fathers of today are roundly criticized in much of the social science literature for failing to provide leadership to the family. Husbands and fathers have been accused of being responsible for the breakup of the family because they are unwilling to take the lead and are often unfeeling and insensitive to the needs of their wives and children. Many are workaholics and philanderers. In short, they are accused of being the prime contributors to most marital discord and family trauma.

Church leaders have not spared men, either. President Gordon B. Hinckley of the First Presidency spoke to them plainly in the April 1983 general priesthood meeting: "Brethren, I spend much time listening to the tales of unhappy people. As a percentage of the entire membership of the Church, they constitute a relatively small number. But there are too many, and every case is a tragedy. With few exceptions, it would appear that the husband and the father is the chief offender, on whom the intruders of sin and selfishness take their greatest toll."fn

At the October 1977 general conference, Elder L. Tom Perry of the Quorum of the Twelve reprimanded delinquent husbands and fathers:

"I stand before you today to accuse many of the husbands and fathers who are within the sound of my voice and throughout the world of failing in your two major God-given responsibilities. The reason for most of the problems we find in the world today must be laid at your door. Divorce, infidelity, dishonesty, the use of drugs, deterioration of family life, loss of identity, instability and unhappiness have resulted from the lack of your leadership in the home."fn

Elder H. Burke Peterson, in the welfare meeting of the same conference, expressed similar thoughts:

"We [as Church leaders] have great concern about the growing number of homes in the Church where the influence of a father is hardly felt. In more and more families the mother and children are left to carry out the father's duties as well as their own. Divorce, pursuit of wealth, and indifference to sacred things are only three of many reasons why fathers neglect the welfare of their families. In this life a father is never released from his responsibility. We call bishops, and they serve for a time and are released. . . . But a father's calling is an eternal calling if he lives worthily."fn

LEHI-NEPHI AND LAMAN-LEMUEL

Laman and Lemuel rejected not only their father Lehi but their brother Nephi as well. Three problems may have contributed to the rejection: Lehi's favoring Nephi because of his obedience, Nephi's bluntness as a younger brother in rebuking his older brothers, and the "wilderness factor"—perhaps the prosperity of their younger years had left them spiritually ill-prepared for a challenging and difficult life in the wilderness.

First, like Jacob and Joseph of old, favoritism (at least from Laman and Lemuel's point of view) on the part of Lehi toward Nephi may have been an important factor in the family schism (see 1 Ne. 7:8-15). For example, on one occasion, Laman and Lemuel accused Nephi of usurping authority over them (1 Ne. 16:37-38). Lehi came to the defense of Nephi and confirmed that God favored Nephi over them (2 Ne. 1:28).

Second, Nephi used great bluntness with his brothers, and he rebuked them many times. Here are two examples:

"Behold ye are mine elder brethren, and how is it that ye are so hard in your hearts, and so blind in your minds, that ye have need that I, your younger brother, should speak unto you, yea, and set an example for you? How is it that ye have not hearkened unto the word of the Lord? How is it that ye have forgotten that ye have seen an angel of the Lord?" (1 Ne. 7:8-10).

"How is it that ye do not keep the commandments of the Lord? How is it that ye will perish, because of the hardness of your hearts? Do ye not remember the things which the Lord hath said? . . . And this is what our father meaneth" (1 Ne. 15:10-11, 17).

Frequently Nephi also reminded Laman and Lemuel of the great miracles in Hebrew history in an effort to increase their faith in God and to inspire them to live righteously. Occasionally his efforts worked and they were humbled for a time. But in the long run they resented Nephi's exhortations, accusing him of trying to rule over them and of making their lives uncomfortable with his "words" (2 1 Ne. 5:3). They were simply unable to accept correction from their younger brother even though they probably knew he was right.

Indeed, it must have been clear to Laman and Lemuel during their journey that the Lord was blessing them with food, guidance, and other miracles (1 Ne. 17:2). For example, the Lord gave Lehi the Liahona to guide the family through the wilderness (1 Ne. 16:10). Futhermore, the Lord was sustaining his prophet, their father, Lehi: when he rebuked his oldest sons, they felt the Spirit of the Lord shake them (1 Ne. 2:14) the Lord sent an angel to interrupt their abuse of Nephi (1 1 Ne. 3:29-31) the Lord gave them signs that finally convinced them to loosen Nephi's bands (1 Ne. 17:48, 54-55) and finally, the Lord himself rebuked them (1 Ne. 16:39).

Third, how strong was the "wilderness factor" in the apostasy of Laman and Lemuel? How did these sons adjust to this great adversity? Perhaps, having grown up with a comfortable life-style, they found it hard to adjust to living in the desolate wilderness. We know they were not happy about leaving their home and inheritance (1 Ne. 2:11, 13), for they grumbled that the city was not sufficiently wicked to be destroyed. Nephi recorded their complaints:

"For behold [Laman and Lemuel] did murmur in many things against their father, because he was a visionary man, and had led them out of the land of Jerusalem, to leave the land of their inheritance, and their gold, and their silver, and their precious things, to perish in the wilderness. And this they said he had done because of the foolish imaginations of his heart" (1 Ne. 2:11).

As the hardships of their journey increased, perhaps Laman and Lemuel began to lose faith in the entire venture and became defensive when Lehi and Nephi continued to attribute their journeyings to the Lord's will. Moreover, their aging father and younger brother reminded them repeatedly of their lack of faith and diligence. Laman and Lemuel's wives—Ishmael's daughters—may have also contributed to their husbands' final rebellion by their own grumbling at the death of Ishmael (1 Ne. 16:35-38). In any case, they took further offense and would not repent.

LAMAN AND LEMUEL'S APOSTASY

The record shows, however, that Laman and Lemuel did not rebel all at once. Despite their ultimate apostasy, they did manifest, on occasion, positive signs during the eight years of traveling in the wilderness:

That discourse appears to have been the final time that these two older brothers listened to Nephi, however. The schism between the brothers widened into an impassable gulf as Laman and Lemuel became more determined not to be ruled by their younger brother.

In his last discourse before his death, Lehi pleaded with his two oldest sons to follow Nephi, but his sermon fell on deaf ears. After Lehi's death, Nephi and those who followed him moved their families elsewhere to preserve their lives. The die was now cast. There would be no more friendly contact between these two groups for hundreds of years. Laman and Lemuel and their posterity cut themselves off from revelation. They severed their ties with their brother Nephi, who followed Lehi as the prophet, and thereby apostatized. These actions were a fulfillment of the prophecy that the Lord had given earlier to Nephi (see 1 Ne. 2:19-24; 2 Ne. 5:19-20; see also D&C 1:14).

CONCLUSIONS

It was a tragic division for two families who had been through so much together. Although sometimes crisis can unite families, sometimes it splits them apart. Nonetheless, the Lord sustained Lehi as a father because of his obedience and diligence in his family roles. A responsible father, Lehi loved his family and was determined to do all he could to see that every member of his family would accept and live the gospel. Laman and Lemuel, however, exercised their agency in the opposite direction. Perhaps in Lehi's story there is comfort for parents in knowing that not every child will respond to parental teachings, no matter how strong and faithful the parents may be.

Heavenly Father had a similar experience in the premortal life when one-third of his children refused his blessings. And who would suggest that he was not the perfect teacher? When children have agency, they may make unwise choices, choices that will damage them spiritually and eternally. It is a heartbreaking lesson that many parents have learned, from the days of Adam and Eve with their sons Cain and Abel down to the present.

Perhaps Elder James E. Faust's counsel would apply to Lehi and Sariah:

"Let parents who have been conscientious, loving, and concerned and who have lived the principles of righteousness as best they could be comforted in knowing that they are good parents despite the actions of some of their children. The children themselves have a responsibility to listen, obey, and, having been taught, to learn. Parents cannot always answer for all their children's misconduct because they cannot ensure the children's good behavior. Some few children could tax even Solomon's wisdom and Job's patience."fn

Nephi said that his father, Lehi, "had fulfilled all the commandments of the Lord which had been given unto him" (1 Ne. 16:8; emphasis added). Lehi loved his wife and was a conscientious father. He was a model for fathers in dealing with children who are rebellious: he taught them the doctrines of the kingdom so that they were responsible for their own use of agency; he continually loved them and exhorted them to be faithful but never sought to force them. There is no better course that a righteous father could take.

Were Lehi and Sariah successful as parents? Elder Howard W. Hunter once said:

"A successful parent is one who has loved, one who has sacrificed, and one who has cared for, taught, and ministered to the needs of a child. If you have done all of these and your child is still wayward or troublesome or worldly, it could well be that you are, nevertheless, a successful parent. Perhaps there are children who have come into the world that would challenge any set of parents under any set of circumstances. Likewise, perhaps there are others who would bless the lives of, and be a joy to, almost any father or mother."fn

By this definition, Lehi and Sariah were successful parents. Their inspired prophet-son honored his parents and paid them the greatest tribute when he wrote for posterity on plates of gold, "I [was] born of goodly parents."

NOTES
