Sperry Symposium, Doctrines of the Book of Mormon: 1991 Sperry Symposium on the Book of Mormon ( 1992)

5

ENDURING TO THE END

Dennis L. Largey

Brigham Young University

Historically, Christians have supported divergent views of the doctrine of perseverance, or endurance to the end. The New Testament gives both assurance of salvation for believers and a warning to Christians who fall away from their faith. For example, the assurance is given in the following scriptures: "He that . . . believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life" (John 5:24). "And I give unto them [my sheep] eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand" (John 10:28). "Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God" (Rom. 8:39). ["[Christ] shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless" (1 Cor. 1:8). "Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ" (Philip. 1:6).

Following are examples of verses that give warning: "Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall" (1 Cor. 10:12). "Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation" (Matt. 26:41). "For it is impossibe for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, . . . if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance" (Heb. 6:4-6). "For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins" (Heb. 10:26). These scriptures and others have been used to argue the important doctrinal question concerning the extent of an individual's influence in his own salvation: once obtained, can a state of grace be forfeited through a Christian's failure to endure? Christian writer R.E.O. White summarized Saint Augustine's views on this doctrine as follows: "Electing, effectual grace includes not only the call to salvation, the impulse of faith to respond, the inspiring of a good will, but also . . . the gift of enduring to the end. Such being the decree of the unchanging divine will, backed by divine power, it is irresistible; the assurance of persevering in grace is therefore absolute and infallible."fn

John Calvin affirmed in his Institutes of the Christian Religion: "We have not the least hesitation to admit what Paul strenuously maintains, that all, without exception, are depraved and given over to wickedness; but at the same time we add, that through the mercy of God all do not continue in wickedness. Therefore, while we all labour naturally under the same disease, those only recover health to whom the Lord is pleased to put forth his healing hand. The others whom, in just judgment, he passes over, pine and rot away till they are consumed. And this is the only reason why some persevere to the end, and others, after beginning their course, fall away."fn

The opposite view of this doctrine was argued by such notable figures as Pelagius, a contemporary of Augustine, and James Arminius, born four years before the death of Calvin. Pelagius rejected predestination and maintained that grace "was nothing else than the free will we have received from God."fn Mankind has the free will to do right and can keep the divine requirements without the grace of God. Arminius taught that "God [had] decreed the election . . . of `those who repent and believe' and who persevere in righteousness to the end."fn Thus, grace assists believers in Christ, God's call can be rejected, and one can fail to persevere.

Debates over the doctrine of endurance to the end, which necessarily includes a discussion of the influence of and the balance between God's grace and man's works, would have been heard by young Joseph Smith as he attended various religious meetings in an attempt to decide which church to join and which theology to embrace. Joseph Smith concluded that "the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible" (Joseph Smith—History 1:12).

The answer to these debates lay buried in a sacred record in a hill not far from Joseph's home. The book that was lifted from the earth was literally God's statement on doctrine, compiled both to restore true doctrine (see 1 Ne. 13:25-29) and to confound false doctrine (see 2 Ne. 3:12).

WHAT THE BOOK OF MORMON TEACHES

The doctrine taught in the Book of Mormon about enduring to the end is "Unless a man shall endure to the end, in following the example of the Son of the living God, he cannot be saved" (2 Nephi 31:16). Nephi made it clear that following Christ requires obedience to the Father's commandments.

That obedience includes repentance, baptism, and the reception of the Holy Ghost. Nephi stressed that one's following had only just begun with baptism. One must then "press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life" (2 Ne. 31:20).

Nephi summarized this doctrine when he taught that to be reconciled with Christ one must "enter into the narrow gate, and walk in the strait path which leads to life, and continue in the path until the end of the day of probation" (2 Ne. 33:9). Three actions are mentioned: enter, walk, and continue. We must enter the gate through repentance and baptism, walk on the path to eternal life by believing in Christ and keeping his commandments, and continue in the effort throughout life, whatever length that life might be.

King Benjamin echoed this same teaching:

"I say unto you, if ye have come to a knowledge of the goodness of God, and his matchless power, and his wisdom, and his patience, and his long-suffering towards the children of men; and also, the atonement which has been prepared from the foundation of the world, that thereby salvation might come to him that should put his trust in the Lord, and should be diligent in keeping his commandments, and continue in the faith even unto the end of his life, I mean the life of the mortal body—

"I say, that this is the man who receiveth salvation, through the atonement which was prepared from the foundation of the world for all mankind" (Mosiah 4:6-7).

The doctrine of endurance to the end is taught twenty-two times in the Book of Mormon in teachings by Christ, an angel, and seven prophets. The doctrine spans the entire Book of Mormon time period and probably was taught in the plates of brass as well. The requirement of endurance to the end appears consistently in context with the first principles and ordinances of the gospel. One could easily make the case that the Book of Mormon teaches that there are five first principles and ordinances of the gospel, the fifth being enduring to the end.

Continuing in the faith to the end of one's mortal life was a part of the Nephite baptismal covenant. Before baptizing them at the Waters of Mormon, Alma stipulated that the people must be willing to "stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that ye may be in, even until death, that ye may be redeemed of God, and be numbered with those of the first resurrection, that ye may have eternal life" (Mosiah 18:9; emphasis added).

Later, in recounting the Nephite requirements for baptism, Moroni wrote that "none were received unto baptism save they took upon them the name of Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end" (Moro. 6:3). The concept of endurance was even part of the set prayer for ordaining priests and teachers. The elders of the Church would lay their hands upon the one to be ordained and say, "In the name of Jesus Christ I ordain you to be a priest, (or, if he be a teacher) I ordain you to be a teacher, to preach repentance and remission of sins through Jesus Christ, by the endurance of faith on his name to the end. Amen" (Moro. 3:3).

The Book of Mormon skillfully ties together the doctrines of atonement, grace, free agency, and enduring to the end. It contradicts the reformed traditions of predestination and guaranteed perseverance for God's elect. It teaches that "the children of men" are free to "act for themselves" (2 Ne. 2:26), and it invites one to choose "eternal life" over "eternal death" (2 Ne. 2:28-29).

APPLICATION OF THE DOCTRINE

Many who enter through the gates of baptism and begin their walk on the path to eternal life fail to continue. Sin, apathy, boredom, burnout, discouragement, and pride all take their toll. For this reason, the concept of enduring is critical to all of us. Jesus told the Twelve in Jerusalem that he had ordained them "that [they] should go and bring forth fruit, and that [their] fruit should remain" (John 15:16). To "remain" is the challenge for all Church members. The Savior's admonition anciently still applies today: "If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed" (John 8:31).

As well as teaching the doctrines of salvation, the Book of Mormon story line illustrates their application. It is a manual on how to endure life's wilderness and achieve a far greater promised land. It teaches us how to endure to the end by seeking and trusting in the Lord as we battle through affliction and temptation.

ENDURING LIFE'S AFFLICTIONS

The first verse of the Book of Mormon was written thirty years after Nephi left Jerusalem. Nephi describes himself as "having seen many afflictions in the course of my days, nevertheless, having been highly favored of the Lord in all my days" (1 Ne. 1:1). Nephi was favored yet afflicted. Obedient as Nephi was, his obedience did not shield him from afflictions. The Book of Mormon teaches that opposition is a necessary part of life's test. Nephi's bow broke in the wilderness, even though his family needed food. Today righteous Saints lose their jobs even though they have paid their tithing and magnified their Church callings. The test of the "broken bow" is not only for the one who breaks the bow but also for those affected by the break. Nephi noted that "Laman and Lemuel . . . did begin to murmur exceedingly, because of their sufferings and afflictions in the wilderness; and also my father began to murmur against the Lord his God" (1 Ne. 16:20). Yet Nephi found a solution to his dilemma in one simple act: "I, Nephi, did make out of wood a bow, and out of a straight stick, an arrow" (1 Ne. 16:23). Instead of murmuring, Nephi simply went to work and made another bow. Murmuring wastes time, lengthens one's journey, and hardens one's heart. But getting up after becoming discouraged accelerates personal growth. God may not always stop bows from breaking, but he does help in the construction of new ones.

Alma repeatedly admonished his sons that if they would trust in God, they would be "supported in their trials, and their troubles, and their afflictions" (Alma 36:3). Trusting God often requires patience and a willingness to "wait on the Lord" (Ps. 27:14). In the gospel, patience is rewarded. Waiting on the Lord and allowing the "blessing clock" to be set according to his wisdom demonstrates our trust in our Heavenly Father. Alma and Amulek must have experienced tremendous growth from their prison experience in Ammonihah. They were deprived of food and water, spat upon, mocked, and continually struck by the priests before the miraculous collapse of the prison walls that slew their captors (see Alma 14). Righteous Nephite families anxiously observed sunset after sunset, hoping for the sign of the Savor's birth to be given, yet the sky continued to darken with the setting of every sun until the day of martyrdom was imminent (see 3 Ne. 1). Nephi and his brothers had to go back to Laban's house three times before they finally obtained the brass plates (see 1 Ne. 3-4). Elder Neal A. Maxwell makes the sobering observation that "God is a tutorial activist who loves His children too much to let us go on being just what we now are, because He knows what we have the power to become."fn

Our ability to endure the sometimes arduous journey through the barren deserts and across the choppy seas of this probationary experience increases when we can view our destination with the eye of faith. Nephi had an entirely different perspective of his family's journey into the wilderness than did Laman and Lemuel. Nephi acknowledged, "And so great were the blessings of the Lord upon us, that while we did live upon raw meat in the wilderness, our women did give plenty of suck for their children, and were strong, yea, even like unto the men; and they began to bear their journeyings without murmurings" (1 Ne. 17:2). Nephi pressed forward through his afflictions without murmuring because he knew there was a promised land ahead. He had seen it in vision, and this knowledge sustained his enthusiasm to push forward.

Now compare Nephi's perception of the wilderness experience with that of Laman and Lemuel, who said:

"And thou art like unto our father, led away by the foolish imaginations of his heart; yea, he hath led us out of the land of Jerusalem, and we have wandered in the wilderness for these many years; and our women have toiled, being big with child; and they have borne children in the wilderness and suffered all things, save it were death; and it would have been better that they had died before they came out of Jerusalem than to have suffered these afflictions. Behold, these many years we have suffered in the wilderness, which time we might have enjoyed our possessions and the land of our inheritance; yea, and we might have been happy" (1 Ne. 17:20-21).

Lacking the desire, the righteousness, and the faith so evident in Nephi's life, Laman and Lemuel had no eye of faith fixed on the promised land, and they rejected the sustaining spiritual influence of the Holy Ghost. Laman and Lemuel were thus left to fend for themselves, to dwell on their afflictions, to long for a land soon to be destroyed, and to yearn for the lost possessions upon which their happiness depended.

The Lord delights in supporting his children in times of affliction. After dwelling in the wilderness for eight years, Lehi's family came to Bountiful. Nephi wrote: "And we did come to the land which we called Bountiful, because of its much fruit and also wild honey; and all these things were prepared of the Lord that we might not perish" (1 Ne. 17:5). This story reminds us that we will not be tested beyond our ability to endure. The Lord strategically places spiritual nourishment in our lives so we likewise will not perish in our journey toward eternal life. An illustration of how this can happen is the story of a man who was having dinner with his son. The boy excused himself for a moment from the dinner table. While he was away his father reached over and cut up his meat for him. When the boy returned, he resumed his meal without any acknowledgment of his father's act. Similarly, we may one day learn of many unobserved preparations made by our Father in Heaven to prepare lands of Bountiful for us, where we have received nourishment and encouragement to continue our journey.

ENDURING TEMPTATION

In Lehi's dream of the tree of life, several enemies of endurance are revealed. Satan endeavors to produce any distraction that will redirect our steps from the strait and narrow path. Mists of darkness screen direct routes. The tree of life, which is a representation of the love of God, can be hidden by these mists, and travelers become lost traveling on strange roads. Satan desires us to become over-committed to any road other than the road that leads to eternal life.

The key to pressing forward with a steadfastness in Christ through the mists of darkness is to hold to the iron rod, a symbol of the word of God. Nephi told his brothers that "whoso would hearken unto the word of God, and would hold fast unto it, they would never perish; neither could the temptations and the fiery darts of the adversary overpower them unto blindness, to lead them away to destruction" (1 Ne. 15:24; emphasis added).

In Lehi's dream, another enemy of enduring to the end lay in the distance, across the river in a great and spacious building full of people whose "dress was exceedingly fine," who were "in the attitude of mocking and pointing their fingers towards those who had come at and were partaking of the fruit" (1 Ne. 8:27). Lehi instructed his family that "as many as heeded them, had fallen away" (1 Ne. 8:34). To heed is to pay attention to, notice, regard, or consider. We may not be able to escape noticing the variety of distractions the world offers, but we can avoid giving our attention to them. Dividing our loyalty between the world and the gospel slows the pace of our journey—Satan also knows that it is impossible for anyone to serve two masters. Jesus warned, "No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God" (Luke 9:62). There is certainly a lesson in the fate suffered by Lot's wife. We need to make sure that our feet and our hearts are traveling in the same direction.

Many other stumbling blocks to endurance are identified in the Book of Mormon. Episodes of murmuring, hard-heartedness, disobedience, immorality, false doctrine, and priestcraft are included "that [we] may learn to be more wise" than the Nephites (Morm. 9:31). The arguments advanced by Korihor remind us of voices in today's society which advocate naturalism, social relativism, hedonism, and secular humanism. Korihor practiced no religion; Nehor, an easy religion; and the Zoramites, a hypocritical religion.

Pride that develops from a love of riches is the obstacle to endurance that finally destroyed the Nephites. The acquisition of wealth often demands complete devotion. Such devotion creates the danger of shifting what we "seek first." Priorities can become centered on those things that can be seen and owned in this world rather than on kingdoms and riches visible only to the eye of faith. People can forget God or perhaps even unconsciously place his work further down on their list of priorities as they race to acquire more and more possessions. Samuel the Lamanite reprimanded Nephites who were similarly off course: "Ye do not remember the Lord your God in the things with which he hath blessed you, but ye do always remember your riches" (Hel. 13:22).

We can use strategies from the Nephite war stories to help us endure to the end and to overcome temptation. Helaman wrote, "And they were so much more numerous than was our army that we durst not go forth and attack them in their strongholds" (Alma 58:2). From this we learn that we must avoid Satan's strongholds and consistently seek to stand in holy places. Corianton could have avoided his encounter with the harlot Isabel had he stayed away from the land of Siron. Virtually every city has a land of Siron where circumstances, environment, and designing persons can influence us to sin.

Captain Moroni's troops wore armor; Zarahemna's men were clothed merely in loincloths in the battle at the river Sidon. This story contains a wonderful lesson on achieving victory through putting on the "whole armor of God" (see Alma 43, 44). After suffering a horrible defeat, the Lamanite troops determined not to be without physical protection in their next conflict, so they made themselves fine armor and proceeded to wage war against the weaker Nephite cities. Captain Moroni, however, had strategically fortified the weak cities with trenches and mounds of dirt so that the attacking forces could not penetrate. Likewise Satan is very careful in his planning and strategic in his efforts. Cunningly, he works on our weak areas. President Harold B. Lee warned:

"Using words that are common to modern warfare, we might say that there are in the world today fifth columnists [spies] who are seeking to infiltrate the defenses of every one of us, and when we lower those defenses, we open avenues to an invasion of our souls. There are carefully charted on the maps of the opposition the weak spots in every one of us. They are known to the forces of evil, and just the moment we lower the defense of any one of those ports, that becomes the D Day of our invasion, and our souls are in danger."fn

But like Moroni, we can inventory our lives to discover our weaknesses and then fortify those areas against attack. Why should we leave an entrance open to an uninvited guest whose declared mission is to separate us eternally from God?

CONTINUING IN THE FAITH

Third Nephi, chapter 18, contains five verbs that present important messages in the Book of Mormon: remember (v. 7); keep (v. 14); watch (v. 18); pray (v. 18); and meet (v. 22). Each of these verbs plays a significant role in our continued belief in Christ and his gospel as we travel on the strait and narrow path after baptism.

As travelers we are repeatedly admonished to "always remember." We must remember who we are, what our purpose is, and what is required of us. Part of Laman and Lemuel's fickle behavior can be attributed to their wilfully forgetting significant spiritual experiences. Nephi inquired, "How is it that ye have forgotten that ye have seen an angel of the Lord? . . . How is it that ye have forgotten what great things the Lord hath done for us . . . ? How is it that ye have forgotten that the Lord is able to do all things according to his will . . . ?" (1 Ne. 7:10-12). Most important, we are to remember "that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that [we] must build [our] foundation; . . . which is a sure foundation, a foundation whereon if men build they cannot fall" (Hel. 5:12).

The verb keep refers to keeping the commandments, which assures us that we are following all the right turns on our journey to the promised land. The promise made repeatedly in the Book of Mormon is that "inasmuch as ye shall keep my commandments, ye shall prosper, and shall be led to a land of promise" (1 Ne. 2:20). Disobedience disables individual Liahonas, which in turn results, as it did in Lehi's family, in tarrying in the wilderness, failing to travel in a direct course, and often suffering afflictions (see Alma 37:38-45).

Jesus told the Nephites to "watch . . . for Satan desireth to have you, that he may sift you as wheat" (3 Ne. 18:18; emphasis added). There is opposition to our probationary journey. A watchful servant will not "have suffered his house to be broken through" (Luke 12:39).

Combined with the Savior's caution to watch is the command to pray. Through prayer we stay in contact with the Lord and can receive the directions so vital to our progress.

And finally, to meet together often also contributes to the spiritual safety of our journey. It is easier to stand when we are supported by the faith and testimonies of others (see Moro. 6:4-6).

The Zoramites were a people who once had had the truth but failed to endure in the faith. They had little regard for basic gospel principles. Mormon informed his readers:

"Now the Zoramites were dissenters from the Nephites; therefore they had had the word of God preached unto them.

"But they had fallen into great errors, for they would not observe to keep the commandments of God. . . .

"Neither would they observe the performances of the church, to continue in prayer and supplication to God daily, that they might not enter into temptation" (Alma 31:8-10).

Alma, preaching to Church members in Zarahemla, asked, "And now behold, I say unto you, my brethren, if ye have experienced a change of heart, and if ye have felt to sing the song of redeeming love, I would ask, can ye feel so now?" (Alma 5:26). Feeling so now is perhaps ultimately more important than feeling so then, at the time of our conversion, baptism, or other spiritual experience. It is a way to measure whether we are persistently "feasting on the word of Christ." Elder Neal A. Maxwell counseled Church members:

"Spiritual staying power requires strength—strength to be achieved by feasting upon the gospel of Jesus Christ regularly, deeply and perceptively. If you and I go unnourished by the gospel feast which God has generously spread before us, we will be vulnerable instead of durable.

"As Paul warned, we can become `wearied and faint in [our] minds' (Heb. 12:1-3).

"There are some among us who have become intellectually weary and who faint in their minds because they are malnourished, they are not partaking regularly of the fullness of the gospel feast. Partaking of that feast in the appropriate spiritual rhythm leads to what Alma described as giving `thanksgiving daily.' Then we can `take up the cross daily,' and then `endure in the faith on his name to the end'."fn

DIVINE HELP

Lehi summarized one of the central messages of the entire Book of Mormon when he testified to his son Jacob "that there is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the Holy Messiah" (2 Ne. 2:8; emphasis added). Even one's best efforts, over any length of time, do not merit salvation without Christ.

The Latter-day Saint Bible Dictionary defines grace as the "divine means of help or strength, given through the bounteous mercy and love of Jesus Christ." It asserts that "it is . . . through the grace of the Lord that individuals, through faith in the atonement of Jesus Christ and repentance of their sins, receive strength and assistance to do good works that they otherwise would not be able to maintain if left to their own means. This grace is an enabling power that allows men and women to lay hold on eternal life and exaltation after they have expended their own best efforts" (p. 697, s.v. "grace").

Jesus instructed the Nephite disciples "that whoso repenteth and is baptized in my name shall be filled; and if he endureth to the end, behold, him will I hold guiltless before my Father at that day when I shall stand to judge the world" (3 Ne. 27:16). When we "put on Christ" through the covenant of baptism, we engage the assistance of deity—that is God's grace—in our quest for eternal life. Elder Dallin H. Oaks defined an ordinance as "a sacred act prescribed by our Savior Jesus Christ as one of the conditions upon which we receive the purifying and exalting blessings of his atonement."fn The Atonement enables us to receive a divine exchange. Christ takes our sins, and we draw upon his perfections (see 2 Cor. 5:21). United with Christ in this powerful covenant, we are able to progress toward our salvation.

Perhaps Moroni articulated the doctrine best when, in closing the Book of Mormon record, he invited his readers to "come unto Christ, and be perfected in him" (Moro. 10:32). He then promised that if we would "deny [ourselves] of all ungodliness, and love God with all [our] might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for [us], that by his grace [we] may be perfect in Christ" (Moro. 10:32).

After baptism we are given the gift of the Holy Ghost, which provides us, through our continuing faith in Jesus Christ, with the gifts and blessings necessary to endure to the end. Guidance, comfort, discernment, confirmation, warning, strength, perseverance, perspective, and a brightness of hope are all blessings of the Spirit. The Holy Ghost is committed to the Father's will in["[bringing] to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). Thus, it is little wonder that when the Nephite multitude knelt down together in the land Bountiful, "they did pray for that which they most desired; and they desired that the Holy Ghost should be given unto them" (3 Ne. 19:9).

Application of the first principles of the gospel throughout our lives ensures our retaining God's grace through the Atonement and the assistance of the Holy Ghost. Continued faith in Christ inspires continued repentance, which makes renewal of our baptismal covenants effective when we partake of the sacrament. By retaining a remission of sin, we secure the promise that we will "always have his Spirit to be with [us]" (D&C 20:77). Mormon recorded that after the Nephite multitude had partaken of the sacrament, "they were filled with the Spirit" (3 Ne. 20:9). Strengthened by the Spirit and filled with new capacity, renewed strength and confirmed commitment, Saints endure and go forward, week by week, and step by step, toward eternal life. Concerning our growth toward perfection, Elder Bruce R. McConkie testified:

"As members of the Church, if we chart a course leading to eternal life; if we begin the processes of spiritual rebirth, and are going in the right direction; if we chart a course of sanctifying our souls, and degree by degree are going in that direction; and if we chart a course of becoming perfect, and, step by step and phase by phase are perfecting our souls by overcoming the world, then it is absolutely guaranteed—there is no question whatever about it—we shall gain eternal life."fn

CONCLUSION

Jacob identified the righteous who will inherit the kingdom of God as those "who have believed in the Holy One of Israel" and who have "endured the crosses of the world" (2 Ne. 9:18). Believing in Christ and enduring crosses are interrelated, for our belief is reflected in our response to the challenges that come our way. Sustained belief in the Savior over a lifetime requires allegiance to him at all times, in all places, and in all things.

When Nephi said, "I will go and do," it is unlikely he had any idea of what it would take to keep his commitment to retrieve the plates. Nephi was robbed, threatened, beaten by his brothers, and finally instructed to kill Laban. As the tests intensified he could have turned back at any point. At baptism, Church members pledge that they will "go and do," or, in the later words of Nephi, "walk," and "continue." Thus continuing and completing this walk by faith through mortality by overcoming temptations, enduring afflictions, and maintaining our belief in Christ, "it is absolutely guaranteed—there is no question whatever about it—we shall gain eternal life."fn

NOTES
