Sperry Symposium, Doctrines of the Book of Mormon: 1991 Sperry Symposium on the Book of Mormon ( 1992)

6

THE BOOK OF MORMON: THE PATTERN IN PREPARING A PEOPLE TO MEET THE SAVIOR

E. Dale LeBaron

Brigham Young University

One great responsibility of this dispensation is to prepare a generation to meet the Savior at his second coming. The Lord told Enoch that the primary objective for restoring the gospel in the last dispensation was to gather the elect and prepare and preserve a Zion people for the coming of the Lord (Moses 7:61-64). President Joseph F. Smith stated that we "live in a day in which the Lord our God has set his hand for the last time, to gather out the righteous and to prepare a people to . . . meet the Bridegroom when he comes to reign over the earth, even Jesus Christ."fn

The Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants have a divine role in this vital preparation. President Ezra Taft Benson has testified that "these two great books of latter-day scripture are bound together as revelations from Israel's God for the purpose of gathering and preparing His people for the Second Coming of the Lord."fn

The relevance of the Doctrine and Covenants to these latter days is soon obvious to those who study it. It describes our time, it was written in our day, and its powerful message applies to us. Section one, which is a revealed preface to the book, describes the Doctrine and Covenants as a "voice of warning . . . unto all people, . . . unto the day when the Lord shall come" (D&C 1:4, 10). Two days after revealing the preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord gave the appendix (D&C 133), in which he reaffirmed that these scriptures were to help people prepare for the coming of "the Lord who shall come down upon the world with a curse to judgment; yea, upon all the nations that forget God, and upon all the ungodly among you" (D&C 133:2).

But what of the Book of Mormon? It describes an ancient time. It was written in an ancient day. How does its message apply to us? Those who truly receive the Book of Mormon soon discover the answer to this question. When Moroni first visited the Prophet Joseph Smith, he declared that the work about to commence would begin "the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah" and that the gospel would be preached "unto all nations that a people might be prepared for the millennial reign."fn President Ezra Taft Benson also testified that "in the Book of Mormon we find a pattern for preparing for the Second Coming."fn

Thus, like the Doctrine and Covenants, the Book of Mormon is a voice of warning unto all people until the Lord shall come. Its powerful message applies to us. It was written anciently for our day, and its descriptions of former societies give us an important pattern for our times—a pattern for preparing a people to meet the Lord Jesus Christ at his coming.

This ancient preparation of the Book of Mormon was as unique as its latter-day translation. And its divine preparation is the key to its power and importance. The Lord carefully prepared the prophets who wrote this record, especially the three major ones: Nephi, Mormon, and Moroni. Nephi began the record, left us more of his own writings than did any other Book of Mormon prophet, and gave directions concerning future inclusions. Mormon abridged and commented on the record. Moroni concluded the record, abridged the book of Ether, and later delivered the gold plates to Joseph Smith (D&C 27:5).

These three prophets had at least two great experiences in common that qualified and prepared them for their divine duty of writing a holy record for us. First, the Savior visited and ministered to them. Nephi testified, "I, Nephi, write more of the words of Isaiah, . . . for he verily saw my Redeemer, even as I have seen him" (2 Ne. 11:2). Mormon recounted that at the age of fifteen he was personally visited of the Lord, and tasted and knew of the goodness of Jesus" (Morm. 1:15). Moroni testified of God's judgment bar: "Then shall ye know that I have seen Jesus, and that he hath talked with me face to face, and that he told me in plain humility, even as a man telleth another in mine own language, concerning these things" (Ether 12:39).

Second, all three had a clear vision of our day and the events preceding the Second Coming of the Lord. Thus, their writings were specifically for us many centuries later. These prophets were also seers. "A seer can know of things which are past, and also of things which are to come, and by them shall all things be revealed . . . and also things shall be made known by them which otherwise could not be known" (Mosiah 8:17). Nephi was given the same panoramic vision of the history of the world as John the Beloved (1 Ne. 14:24-25). Although most of the pages of 1 and 2 Nephi are filled with prophecies of the latter days, Nephi assured us, "I have written but a small part of the things which I saw" (1 Ne. 14:28). Nephi delighted in the words of Isaiah and painstakingly recorded many of his prophecies regarding the latter days (2 Ne. 11:2-4; 25:1). Nephi also received specific instructions from the Lord regarding what he should record for our benefit (see 1 Ne. 18:3, 2 Ne. 25:7-10, 21-22, 28; 26:7, 14; 33:3, 13).

Mormon was blessed with a vision of our day, as he testified that he made his record "according to the knowledge and understanding which God [had] given [him]" (W of M 1:9). He stated further: "And I did even as the Lord had commanded me; and I did stand as an idle witness to manifest unto the world the things which I saw and heard, according to the manifestations of the Spirit which had testified of things to come. Therefore I write unto you, Gentiles, and also unto you, house of Israel. . . . And these things doth the Spirit manifest unto me; therefore I write unto you all" (Morm. 3:16-17, 20).

Moroni, after explicitly describing conditions in the last days, assured us:

"Behold, the Lord hath shown unto me great and marvelous things concerning that which must shortly come, at that day when these things shall come forth among you. Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing. . . . Behold, I speak unto you as though I spake from the dead; for I know that ye shall have my words" (Morm. 8:34-35; 9:30).

Truly the Lord showed these prophets and seers the last days and told them what to record. President Ezra Taft Benson has stated:

"The Book of Mormon was written for us today. God is the author of the book. It is a record of a fallen people, compiled by inspired men for our blessing today. Those people never had the book—it was meant for us. Mormon, the ancient prophet after whom the book is named, abridged centuries of records. God, who knows the end from the beginning, told him what to include in his abridgment that we would need for our day."fn

Under the Lord's direction, Book of Mormon prophets emphasized some periods of Nephite history more than others. Their emphases are noteworthy. For example, the prophets strongly emphasized the 164 years preceding the resurrected Savior's coming to the Nephites. Mormon devoted 282 pages to the events and teachings of this period of time, hence, 56 percent of the Book of Mormon covers only 16 percent of the Nephites' chronological history. In contrast, 4 Nephi—covering a period of 285 years—is briefly summarized in four pages or, in other words, less than 1 percent of the record covers 28 percent of their history. Therefore, the 164 years before the coming of the Savior to the Nephites receives 123 times the number of pages per year than the 285 years following that event. Perhaps more details about that 285 years of "Millennium-like" Nephite history will one day be given to the future faithful. Mormon speaks of other records that contain one hundred times more of Jesus' teachings than the Book of Mormon, which will someday come to the faithful (3 Ne. 26:6-9). If this statement by Mormon is to be taken literally, then the faithful will eventually have the equivalent of about 6.4 times the entire Book of Mormon just in the teachings of Jesus to the Nephites.

But today, we face premillennial problems and challenges, which the Book of Mormon can help us meet successfully. As we understand how this sacred record was prepared, it should affect how we study it. President Ezra Taft Benson counseled:

"If they saw our day and chose those things which would be of greatest worth to us, is not that how we should study the Book of Mormon? We should constantly ask ourselves, `Why did the Lord inspire Mormon (or Moroni or Alma) to include that in his record? What lesson can I learn from that to help me live in this day and age?'

" . . . By careful study of that time period, we can determine why some were destroyed in the terrible judgments that preceded His coming and what brought others to stand at the temple in the land of Bountiful and thrust their hands into the wounds of His hands and feet."fn

In studying how the conditions before the coming of the Savior to the Nephites so closely parallel prophecies of the latter times, we see powerful evidence that the inspired writers of the Book of Mormon truly saw our day. Indeed, because of the great significance of the second coming of the Savior, the Lord prepared, preserved, and provided this record of a people who had previously experienced the coming of the risen Christ. As it will be in the last days, his appearance was preceded by the destruction of the wicked while the righteous were privileged to witness his ministration among them.

Along with the Doctrine and Covenants, the Book of Mormon contains prophecies and warnings about the signs and calamities that will occur before the second coming of Jesus Christ. The Book of Mormon explains the purpose of these signs and calamities with great clarity. Samuel the Lamanite prophet warned the Nephites of the destructions that would occur before the Savior's coming:

"And the angel said unto me that many shall see greater things than these, to the intent that they might believe that these signs and these wonders should come to pass upon all the face of this land, to the intent that there should be no cause for unbelief among the children of men—

"And this to the intent that whosoever will believe might be saved, and that whosoever will not believe, a righteous judgment might come upon them; and also if they are condemned they bring upon themselves their own condemnation.

"And now remember, remember, my brethren, that whosoever perisheth, perisheth unto himself; . . . for behold, ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold, God hath given unto you a knowledge and he hath made you free" (Hel. 14:28-30).

As the time left before Christ's second coming decreases and the signs increase, it is imperative that we be alert and prepared. The Lord warns us to "be the children of light, and that day shall not overtake you as a thief" (D&C 106:5). One danger of signs increasing in frequency is that we tend to become less affected by them. President Joseph Fielding Smith warned: "The words of the prophets are rapidly being fulfilled, but it is done on such natural principles that most of us fail to see it."fn The scriptures prophesy that the second coming will occur at a time of great wickedness. The Book of Mormon describes the escalating wickedness of the Nephites before Jesus' visit to them. It also teaches that pride was at the heart of their wickedness. Today, the Lord directs us to take the Book of Mormon as a guide in preparing for the Savior's coming by warning us to "beware of pride, lest ye become as the Nephites of old" (D&C 38:39).

Because only the worthy can be in the presence of the Savior at his coming, the wicked must be destroyed before that event. The Lord has decreed: "All the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, . . . that wickedness shall not be upon the earth" (D&C 29:9). All of the destructions which came upon the Nephites before Christ's coming to them are a type of the Second Coming.

The righteous among the Nephites, however, were protected and spared. Elder Marion G. Romney, of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, said:

"There would be a people who, through acceptance and obedience to the gospel, would be able to recognize and resist the powers of evil, build up the promised Zion, and prepare to meet the Christ and be with him in the blessed millennium. And we know further that it is possible for every one of us, who will, to have a place among those people."fn

Righteousness was dependent then, as it is now, on following the living prophets of God. Righteousness was for the Nephites, as it is for us, a matter of life or death—temporal as well as spiritual. After the destruction of the wicked, the voice of Christ spoke: "Wo, wo, wo unto this people; . . . it is because of their iniquity and abominations that they are fallen! . . . because of their wickedness in casting out the prophets, and stoning those whom I did send to declare unto them concerning their wickedness and their abominations" (3 Ne. 9:1-2, 10). Concerning those who were spared, the record states: "And it was the more righteous part of the people who were saved, and it was they who received the prophets. . . . Whose readeth, let him understand; he that hath the scriptures, let him search them" (3 Ne. 10:12, 14).

In giving a latter-day example of heeding the warning voice, Elder Boyd K. Packer described the devastating Teton Dam flood in Idaho in 1976. This huge earthwork dam collapsed, allowing seventeen miles of water to rush down the Snake River Valley on a beautiful Saturday morning. In the immediate path of this wall of water were seventy-eight hundred people and another thirty thousand further down the valley. Almost all of them were Latter-day Saints. The flood destroyed 790 homes and severely damaged another eight hundred homes, churches, schools and places of business. Considering the amount of water, the speed with which it moved, and the population of the area, one expert estimated that fifty-three hundred people should have been killed. Incredibly, only six were drowned by the flood. Elder Packer said:

"Only six died by drowning—six of about thirty-five thousand. How could there be such a terrible destruction with such little loss of life? . . . Because they were warned! They didn't have very long, but they were warned; and every man who was warned, warned his neighbor. . . . What about the six that drowned? One of them was just below the dam and had no choice. Two of them wouldn't believe the warning until it was too late. They later found them both in their car, but they hadn't heeded the warning. Three of them went back to get some material possessions, and they lost their lives. But it was a miracle of tremendous proportion. As Latter-day Saints we learn to heed warnings."fn

As the floods of evil increase today, the Book of Mormon can strengthen us to meet those challenges, as President Benson explained:

"From the Book of Mormon we learn how disciples of Christ live in times of war. From the Book of Mormon we see the evils of secret combinations portrayed in graphic and chilling reality. In the Book of Mormon we find lessons for dealing with persecution and apostasy. We learn much about how to do missionary work. And more than anywhere else, we see in the Book of Mormon the dangers of materialism and setting our hearts on the things of the world. Can anyone doubt that this book was meant for us and that in it we find great power, great comfort, and great protection?"fn

Ultimately, the faithful of this dispensation must become a Zion people in the midst of wickedness, as did the people of Enoch's day, and prepare for a grand reunion with the people of Enoch's city Zion (Moses 7:62-63). The qualifications and blessings of becoming a Zion people were explained by Elder John Taylor:

"When Zion descends from above, Zion will also ascend from beneath, and be prepared to associate with those from above. The people will be so perfected and purified, ennobled, exalted, and dignified in their feelings and so truly humble and most worthy, virtuous and intelligent that they will be fit, when caught up, to associate with that Zion that shall come down from God out of heaven."fn

The Book of Mormon contains the only detailed account we have of a people privileged to enjoy the personal ministry of the resurrected Savior. One of the richest treasures we have in all scripture is the account in 3 Nephi of this ministry. It is a rare glimpse into a millennial experience. Mormon expressed his inability to effectively communicate celestial experiences in mortal language:

"No tongue can speak, neither can there be written by any man, neither can the hearts of men conceive so great and marvelous things as we both saw and heard Jesus speak; and no one can conceive of the joy which filled our souls at the time we heard him pray for us unto the Father" (3 Ne. 17:17).

Even though we could not enjoy complete comprehension of these celestial experiences, the Lord kindly parted the veil for us to have a brief insight into what it might be like for the righteous at the Second Coming. The feelings expressed in 3 Nephi seem similar to the few accounts given by some of the Brethren in this dispensation who have been privileged to experience the presence of the Savior. Elder Melvin J. Ballard related a dream in which he found himself in the temple:

"I saw, seated on a raised platform, the most glorious Being my eyes have ever beheld or that I ever conceived existed in all the eternal worlds. As I approached to be introduced, he arose and stepped towards me with extended arms, and he smiled as he softly spoke my name. If I shall live to be a million years old, I shall never forget that smile. He took me into his arms and kissed me, pressed me to his bosom, and blessed me, until the marrow of my bones seemed to melt! When he had finished, I fell at his feet, and, as I bathed them with my tears and kisses, I saw the prints of the nails in the feet of the Redeemer of the world. The feeling that I had in the presence of him who hath all things in his hands, to have his love, his affection, and his blessing was such that if I ever can receive that of which I had but a foretaste, I would give all that I am, all that I ever hope to be, to feel what I then felt!"fn

The power of the account of the Savior's ministry to the Nephites was described by President Ezra Taft Benson: "If that account doesn't shake you, then you're unshakable. It is one of the sweetest accounts and one of the greatest things to build a testimony I think you will ever read."fn

The signs of the times are ominous and dreadful. President Wilford Woodruff said: "We are approaching some of the most tremendous judgments God ever poured out upon the world."fn The Lord assures us, however, that "if ye are prepared ye shall not fear" (D&C 38:30). The prophecies are warnings from the scriptures are given to help us to prepare, not to cause us to fear. In 1831 (D&C 45), the Savior told the Prophet Joseph Smith of the calamities of the last days, which had troubled His disciples. Of that Elder Marion G. Romney said:

"That the Lord recounted these predictions to the Prophet Joseph in 1831 surely emphasizes their importance to us. And since the disciples were troubled when they were but being told of these calamities to come far in the future, it is no wonder that we are troubled as we witness their occurrence. . . . It was in the light of Christ's foreknowledge . . . that he said to his disciples, `be not troubled.' . . . I hope that we are familiar with these coming events; I hope also that we keep the vision of them continually before our minds. This I do because upon a knowledge of them, and an assurance of their reality and a witness that each of us may have part therein, rests the efficacy of Christ's admonition, `be not troubled.'"fn

Our challenge in this dispensation is monumental. Nevertheless, it is important to realize that the Lord and his prophet have confidence in the youth of today to meet tomorrow's challenges. In 1980 President Benson told the BYU student body:

"You students are a part of a choice young generation—a generation which might well witness the return of our Lord. Not only is the Church growing in numbers today, it is growing in faithfulness and, even more important, our young generation, as a group, is even more faithful than the older generation. God has reserved you for the eleventh hour—the great and dreadful day of the Lord."fn

President Benson told another group of LDS young adults at Ricks College: "Make no mistake about it—this is a marked generation. There has never been more expected of the faithful in such a short period of time than there is of us."fn

Even from the beginning of this dispensation the prophets have seen the immensity of the task before us. The First Presidency declared in 1840:

"The work which has to be accomplished in the last days is one of vast importance, and will call into action the energy, skill, talent, and ability of the Saints, so that it may roll forth with that glory and majesty described by the prophet; and will consequently require the concentration of the Saints, to accomplish works of such magnitude and grandeur."fn

The First Presidency then observed that the Book of Mormon would "throw a light on the proceedings of Jehovah which have already been accomplished, and mark out the future in all its dreadful and glorious realities."fn The Doctrine and Covenants is a warning of the events yet to come on this earth prior to the coming of the Savior. The Book of Mormon is a witness and a guide in how to properly prepare for that great event. Truly, it is a divine handbook to prepare a people to meet the Savior.

NOTES
