Sperry Symposium, Doctrines of the Book of Mormon: 1991 Sperry Symposium on the Book of Mormon ( 1992)

7

"KNOWEST THOU THE CONDESCENSION OF GOD?"

Gerald N. Lund

Church Educational System

A GRAND VISION

After Lehi recounted to his family his marvelous vision in which he had seen the tree of life, Nephi reported that he was "desirous also that [he] might see, and hear, and know of these things, by the power of the Holy Ghost" (1 Ne. 10:17; emphasis added). Nephi was caught up into an exceedingly high mountain where a grand vision was unfolded before him, and he saw not only what his father had seen but also much more. In the early part of that vision, on two different occasions, the angelic messenger used an unusual phrase—"the condescension of God." In the first instance, Nephi was shown the Virgin Mary, and then the angel asked, "Knowest thou the condescension of God?" (1 Ne. 11:15-16). A few verses later, the angel again used the phrase, this time not as a question, but in an imperative command. "And the angel said unto me again: Look and behold the condescension of God!" (1 Ne. 11:26). As Nephi obeyed and looked, he saw the Redeemer of the world. He saw his earthly ministry and its culmination in the death of the Savior (see 1 Ne. 11:26-32).

Later in his writings, Nephi used a phrase similar to that used by the angel. In what is often called the psalm of Nephi, he said: "O then, if I have seen so great things, if the Lord in his condescension unto the children of men hath visited men in so much mercy, why should my heart weep and my soul linger in the valley of sorrow, and my flesh waste away, and my strength slacken, because of mine afflictions?" (2 Ne. 4:26; emphasis added).

By examining the context in which Nephi refers to the "condescension of God," we can get a fuller understanding of what is meant by the phrase. The three contexts in which Nephi uses the phrase are the following:

Exploring these three contexts of the use of the phrase "condescension of God" can reveal its implications for us today.

THE BIRTH OF JESUS CHRIST

As we read the scriptures that prophesied the coming of Christ into the world, we sense that the ancients had a different perspective on this event than perhaps we in the latter days do. This difference probably stems from the fact that, to them, Jehovah was their God. He was the God with whom they dealt. He was the Lord of all the earth. He was the Almighty, the Lord of Hosts. They viewed Jehovah in a way similar to the way we view God the Father. In the latter days, we start with a view of Jesus in his mortal ministry and think of him secondarily as Jehovah, but to them he was not yet come in the flesh, and so the idea that their God—this almighty, all-powerful, all-knowing being—would come down to earth, take upon himself a body of flesh, and be born of woman left them with a great sense of awe and wonder. For example, after King Lamoni's remarkable conversion, he said with the deepest of reverence, "For as sure as thou livest, behold, I have seen my Redeemer; and he shall come forth, and be born of a woman, and he shall redeem all mankind" (Alma 19:13; emphasis added). Paul similarly declared, "But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law" (Gal. 4:4; emphasis added).

Consider the implications of Christ's leaving his position as a member of the Godhead to come to earth, taking upon himself the body of a mortal being, being born of a mortal mother, and living out a life of mortality among his fellow men. In a marvelous passage to the Philippian Saints, Paul wrote, "Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross" (Philip. 2:5-8).

Paul used two interesting phrases here. He said that though Christ was in the form of God, he did not think it was robbery to be equal with him. Through an examination of the Greek, we get a better sense of what it is he tried to teach us. The New Testament scholar, M. R. Vincent, in his New Testament Word Studies indicates that in Greek the word that is translated robbery had three different definitions—(1) the act of stealing or robbing something from another; (2) the thing which has been robbed, that is a piece of plunder; or (3) a prize, something to be grasped and held onto.fn Thus Vincent indicates that the Greek word arpagmon, which the King James Version translates as robbery is better thought of as something which is considered a highly prized possession.

Vincent next explained the significance of verse 7, in which Paul used a phrase from the Greek that is translated "made himself of no reputation." Again Vincent indicated that this Greek phrase literally means "emptied Himself."fn Vincent then added: "The general sense is that He divested Himself of that peculiar mode of existence which was proper and peculiar to Him as one with God. He laid aside the form of God. In so doing, He did not divest Himself of His divine nature. The change was a change of state: the form of a servant for the form of God."fn

Trying to reflect more accurately a sense of the Greek, Phillips Modern English Translation renders that passage as follows: "For He, who had always been God by nature, did not cling to his prerogatives as God's equal, but stripped himself of all privilege by consenting to be a slave by nature and being born as a mortal man."fn In short, Paul reminded us that though Christ had incomprehensible stature, majesty, power and position in the premortal existence, he did not consider that position something that was to be seized and held tightly and not released, but rather, he emptied himself or allowed himself to be taken from that high and holy position and placed into the body of a man with all of its consequent weaknesses and limitations.

This concept deserves examination in more detail. If we are to more fully comprehend the idea of God's condescension, we must first understand who he was before coming to the earth. As we look at Christ as the Creator, we are told in latter-day revelation that the extent of his creations is so vast that they cannot be numbered unto man (Moses 1:33, 35, 37). Enoch stated the same idea in a much more dramatic form when he said the following: "And were it possible that man could number the particles of the earth, yea, millions of earths like this, it would not be a beginning to the number of thy creations" (Moses 7:30).

For much of the world's history, man has had to accept these statements basically on faith, for as we look up in the heavens with the naked eye, we can see approximately six thousand stars. Only in our own century have we begun to sense the vastness of the universe. Sir Edwin Hubble, one of the great astronomers in our time, using the one-hundred-inch telescope on Mount Wilson in California, discovered that what we had thought were clouds of interstellar gas visible to the eye through smaller telescopes, are actually whole new galaxies of stars. Since then our concept of the universe has expanded tremendously, and astronomers now estimate there are at least one hundred billion galaxies in the known universe with each of those galaxies averaging around a hundred billion separate stars.fn With newer, more powerful telescopes, like the two-hundred-inch telescope located on Mount Palomar near San Diego, astronomers can focus on just the tiny portion of the sky encompassed by the bowl of the Big Dipper, and count more than a million galaxies there alone!fn

The vastness of space is such that normal measurements do not suffice to describe the distances between stars and galaxies. So astronomers have come up with a measurement called the "light year" or the distance that light traveling at approximately 186,000 miles-per-second will travel in a year's time. That distance turns out to be approximately six trillion miles. Here is an analogy to help us conceptualize the vastness of the universe. Someone calculated that if we took the distance from the earth to the sun, which is ninety-three million miles, and reduced that in scale down to where it was the thickness of a single sheet of typing paper, the distance from our earth to the nearest star would be a stack of paper seventy-one feet high! On that same scale, the diameter of the Milky Way, our own galaxy, would be a stack of paper three hundred and ten miles high. And if we carried that same scale on to the edge of the known universe, we would have a stack of paper thirty-one million miles high or a stack of paper that would stretch from the earth nearly one third of the way to the sun.fn

When we consider the incredible vastness of the numbers of creations, all of which were completed under the direction of the Father by the Only Begotten, we begin to sense the position, the majesty and power that were his before his coming to earth. The Doctrine and Covenants gives us even more insight as to his position not only as the Creator but as the sustainer of creation. Speaking of Christ, we read, "He is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made. As also he is in the moon, and is the light of the moon, and the power thereof by which it was made; As also the light of the stars, and the power thereof by which they were made; And the earth also, and the power thereof, even the earth upon which you stand. . . . Which light proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—The light which is in all things, which giveth life to all things, which is the law by which all things are governed" (D&C 88:7-13; emphasis added). If this light that emanates from Christ is indeed the law by which all things are governed, the implication is that if somehow that light were extinguished, the entire universe would collapse back into chaos. That is the being of whom we speak. That is who Jehovah was before he came to mortality.

Now we begin to sense the incredible scope of the condescension of Christ in leaving that position, that majesty, that power, and taking upon himself mortality—becoming an infant totally dependent on others, requiring daily nourishment, being subject to the weaknesses of the flesh, feeling pain when he slipped in the carpenter's shop and hit his finger, being vulnerable to suffering and sickness. Imagine the God of the universe being subject to the common cold! But, as Paul said, Christ thought it not robbery that he should leave that position, but rather, he emptied himself of that glorious power and took upon himself all that mortality implies. That is one sense of the condescension of God.

THE MORTAL MINISTRY OF THE LORD

In the vision of Nephi, the second time the angel referred to the condescension of God, it was not a question but a command: "Behold the condescension of God!" (see 1 Ne. 11:26). As noted before, after receiving that command Nephi then saw the mortal ministry of the Savior. After seeing John the Baptist, the Twelve Apostles, and Jesus healing all sorts of infirmities, Nephi was again commanded by the angel to look. "And I looked and beheld the Lamb of God, that he was taken by the people; yea, the Son of the everlasting God was judged of the world; and I saw and bear record. And I, Nephi, saw that he was lifted up upon the cross and slain for the sins of the world" (1 Ne. 11:32-33; emphasis added). As we look at the mortal ministry of Christ, we see several different aspects of this condescension of God.

Considering who the Savior was and what he had been before coming to mortality, one could naturally expect that his birth would have taken place in the grandest, most resplendent palace the world had ever known. One could expect that all mankind would hail him; that kings, potentates, and rulers from every country would come to pay him homage; that they would bring him gifts of wealth, power, prestige, and national alliances. One could even wonder why he chose to come in the age that he did. Had he come in our age, his birth could have been heralded by national television and broadcast over international satellite systems. Estimates say that the Olympics, which are held every four years, are broadcast to more than one billion viewers. Think of the start such coverage would have given to the ministry of the Savior. But instead he was born in a tiny village in the hill country of Judea. Only shepherds, a few wise men, and an old man and woman at the temple were chosen to herald his birth. The only political ruler who did take note of the birth ordered him killed, and Jesus had to flee with his family into a foreign country. When he was finally allowed to return to his native land, he took up residence in another backward village in the hill country of Galilee, where for the next thirty years he quietly spent his life as a carpenter.

Once his formal ministry began, the Savior chose to act in a way that did not indicate his previous position of power, majesty, and status. He chose his leaders and closest associates not from the world's upper crust but from common men—Galileans who were despised even by their own countrymen for being backward and simple. He chose fishermen, a tax collector, a zealot. And that was not all. As he went out among the people, he made no attempt to screen out the unwashed and the unworthy. His whole life was spent dealing and working with those who were what others would define as the dregs of society—lepers, the sick, the diseased, the halt, the maimed, prostitutes, publicans, sinners. He mixed freely among them without the slightest hint of disdain or condescension, although when one considers who he was and where he came from, that alone was a remarkable condescension.

In 1 Ne. 19, Nephi made a statement, which when we consider it carefully, is almost mind-boggling in its horror and irony. "And the world, because of their iniquity, shall judge him to be a thing of naught; wherefore they scourge him, and he suffereth it; and they smite him, and he suffereth it. Yea, they spit upon him, and he suffereth it, because of his loving kindness and his long-suffering towards the children of men" (1 Ne. 19:9; emphasis added). The God who created everything was judged to be nothing! And yet he endured it with complete patience. Imagine the Being whose power, whose light, whose glory holds the universe in order, the Being who speaks and solar systems, galaxies, and stars come into existence—standing before wicked men and being judged by them as being of no worth or value!

When we think of what he could have done to these men who took him to judgment, we have a new and different sense of his condescension. When Judas led the soldiers and the high priests to the Garden of Gethsemane and betrayed him with a kiss, Jesus could have spoken a single word and leveled the entire city of Jerusalem. When the servant of the high priest stepped forward and slapped his face, Jesus could have lifted a finger and sent that man back to his original elements. When another man stepped forward and spit in his face, Jesus had only to blink and our entire solar system could have been annihilated. But he stood there, he endured, he suffered, he condescended.

In all of the world, there was only one perfectly holy, perfectly sinless being (see Heb. 4:15; D&C 20:22). Only one man lived his very life without a single thought, word, or action that was out of harmony with the will of God. And yet, so that he could bring about our redemption, he stood before the justice of God and paid as though he were guilty of every sin and every transgression ever committed. We cannot begin to quantify or comprehend the vastness of the requirements of that suffering.

Yet, to help us begin to grasp with our finite, mortal minds the enormous price required, consider a few rough indicators of how much sin there is in our world. If you look at the United States alone, there are now more than fifty murders committed every day (that's nearly nineteen thousand per year). There are more than twenty-one thousand thefts reported every day, and more than fifty-five hundred reported cases of child neglect and abuse.fn Alma said adultery is the second most serious sin next to murder (see Alma 39:5). Think of how many times on a single day adultery or some other violation of the law of chastity is committed somewhere in the world. How many cases of incest, child abuse, pornography, burglary, robbery? How many times in any one day is the name of God taken in vain? How many times are sacred things profaned? Then multiply these over the span of human history. And that takes into consideration only our world. We know that the Atonement extended to other worlds as well.fn

Jesus went to the Garden and to the cross and paid in personal suffering an infinite price for all of these horrible, unthinkable things. That gives a completely different meaning to the commandment, "Behold the condescension of God!"

In one of the great discourses of the Book of Mormon, Nephi speaking of the Savior said, "For behold, he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam" (2 Ne. 9:21). At first one might think the pains that Nephi referred to are only those caused by sin, but Alma is even more specific and shows that this suffering included other things as well. "And he shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people. And he will take upon him death, that he may loose the bands of death which bind his people; and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities" (Alma 7:11-12; emphasis added).

Elder Neal A. Maxwell, commenting on this dimension of the Atonement, said:

"Thus, in addition to bearing our sins—the required essence of the Atonement—the `how' of which we surely do not understand, Jesus is further described as having come to know our sicknesses, griefs, pains, and infirmities as well. Another `how' we cannot now comprehend! (See Isa. 53:4; Matt. 8:17; Mosiah 14:4; Alma 7:11-12.) Jesus thus not only satisfied the requirements of divine justice but also, particularly in His Gethsemane and Calvary ordeals, demonstrated and perfected His capacity to succor His people and his empathy for them. He came to know, personally and perfectly, `according to the flesh' how to help us become more like His fully comprehending Father `Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite' (Ps. 147:5).

"Jesus' daily mortal experiences and His ministry, to be sure, acquainted Him by observation with a sample of human sicknesses, grief, pains, sorrows, and infirmities which are `common to man' (1 Cor. 10:13). But the agonies of the Atonement were infinite and first-hand! Since not all human sorrow and pain is connected to sin, the full intensiveness of the Atonement involved bearing our pains, infirmities, and sicknesses, as well as our sins. Whatever our sufferings, we can safely cast our `care upon him; for he careth for [us]' (1 Pet. 5:7)." fn

Who could even begin to fathom the depths of the suffering and the depths of the pain that the Savior condescended to take upon himself so that he could meet the needs of his children and redeem them? No wonder it could be said, "The Son of Man hath descended below them all" (D&C 122:8).

THE MERCIES OF THE SAVIOR

Nephi records one other use of the phrase "the condescension of the Lord": "O then, if I have seen so great things, if the Lord in his condescension unto the children of men hath visited men in so much mercy, why should my heart weep and my soul linger in the valley of sorrow?" (2 Ne. 4:26; emphasis added). Consider this context of the word condescension as it differs from the context of his coming into this mortal world and the various ways in which he condescended during his mortal ministry.

In the Book of Mormon two great aspects of God's character are described as mercy and justice. The perfect justice of God requires that every sin and every transgression be recompensed or punished (see Alma 42:16-25). Otherwise, those who have been wronged could cry out that there is no justice. But by the same token, because all men sin and come short of the glory of God (see Rom. 3:23), justice would require that all of us be banned from the presence of God forever because no unclean thing can dwell in his presence (see Moses 6:57). Fortunately God is also a perfectly merciful being and has devised a plan of redemption whereby justice can be paid through the suffering of the Savior and we can be redeemed and brought back into his presence (see 2 Ne. 2:5-7).

Let us consider the quality of mercy. Mercy is an attribute whose very nature requires condescension, because nothing that man could do merits that mercy. In other words, once we have sinned, we have put ourselves beyond the holy nature of God. For him to then extend mercy and love and grace to us, in spite of what we have done, is another great act of condescension.

There are probably several dimensions to this aspect of condescension as well, but two come to mind. It is interesting, considering what he could legitimately ask, how little the Lord requires of us before he responds with his blessings and mercy. For example, as the Creator of the heavens and earth and all things that in them are (see D&C 104:14), by every right God could ask that we give everything to him or as a minimum he could ask that he receive nine-tenths and that we live on one-tenth of what we have. But just the opposite is true. He asks only a tenth. Instead of asking us for six days of worship and one day for ourselves, it is just the other way around. And out of a twenty-four-hour day, if we spend even no more than 1/48th of that time—a half an hour—in scripture reading and personal prayer, we will receive immediate and recognizable blessings. So it is in every aspect of our lives. Most of the truly valuable things in this world—life, health, and a beautiful world in which to live—come freely and without price.

Related to that is the idea of the condescension of God's mercy in our repentance. In the classic story of the prodigal son is a reference after the young man came to himself and realized the foolishness of what he had done. He determined that he would return to his father and ask for his forgiveness. "And he arose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him" (Luke 15:20; emphasis added). It was not required that the son come all the way back. The father was watching and went out to meet him while he was yet a long way off.

This principle was illustrated in the example of a man who as a youth rejected the Church and became totally inactive for some twenty years. He paid no tithing and did not go to Church. Fairness would seem to indicate that if this man wanted to come back into full fellowship and become a "full" tithe payer, he would be required to pay the twenty years of back tithing and even, legitimately, the interest that would have accrued on that tithing. But such is not the case. The Lord simply teaches that if we turn back, then we can be forgiven and begin again to receive his blessings. That, of course, is the lesson of the parable of the laborers in the vineyard (see Matt. 20:1-16). Even those who went to labor in the vine-yard in the final hour of the day were given the same wage as those who had labored all the day long. In the eyes of the world, that is not fairness, but when we understand that God condescends in extending his mercy to unworthy, unprofitable servants, then we see this other dimension of the condescension of God. He condescends in his mercies to us—sinful, unworthy, quick to stray—and lets his arm of love stretch out all the day long.

IMPLICATIONS FOR US INDIVIDUALLY

It is all well and good to note the various aspects that might be implied by Nephi's phrase "the condescension of God," but what are the individual implications for us? The first is that once we come to understand who God is and what greatness and glory that he represents, we ought to be filled with overwhelming reverential awe. The religious-minded person should ideally have God as a common part of his life; but that doesn't mean that God should ever become common. Sometimes in our prayers, we kneel down and, with the business of the day pressed in upon our minds, lightly address the Master of the universe. At times it would be well if we said to ourselves as we begin our prayers, "Wait a moment, remember to whom you are speaking." We should feel a great reverence for who he is and what he is and gratitude that he should care for us and allow us to communicate with him. Great awe would then fill our hearts as we began to pray.

Indeed, one of the meanings of true humility is to realize just how insignificant we really are in relation to God's power and position. It is interesting that one of the injunctions given clearly and specifically in holy places is that we avoid lightmindedness. The scriptures give us a similar injunction (see D&C 88:121), and we are counseled in numerous places to be filled with soberness when it comes to the things of eternity. (See for example Jacob 2:2; Mosiah 4:15; D&C 6:19, 35.) The Lord himself commanded, "let the solemnities of eternity rest upon your minds" (D&C 43:34).

A second way in which the phrase "the condescension of God" should affect us has to do with a warning given by Nephi. We have already cited Nephi's sobering comment about how the world judged the Holy One of Israel to be "a thing of naught" (1 Ne. 19:9). Two verses before that, Nephi warned: "For the things which some men esteem to be of great worth, both to the body and soul, others set at naught and trample under their feet. Yea, even the very God of Israel do men trample under their feet; I say, trample under their feet but I would speak in other words—they set him at naught, and hearken not to the voice of his counsels" (1 Ne. 19:7). In other words, if we set aside the counsels of God and refuse to follow them, then we have in reality judged God to be a thing of naught and we trample him under our feet.

As part of our understanding of the condescension of God, then, we should be especially careful to seek to follow the counsel of the Lord. Since much of that counsel comes to us through his servants (see D&C 1:37-38), we must also be earnest in our attempts to follow the Brethren. In this age we have many opportunities to become critical of the Church and its leaders, to put our own desires above the counsel of the Lord, and to reject the warnings of the living prophets. In doing that we may ignore Christ and thus set him at naught.

In a poem by an unknown author, the idea that we can judge Christ by ignoring him was captured in a most sobering form.

When Jesus came to Golgotha, They hanged him on a tree. They drove great nails through hands and feet, They made—a Calvary! They crowned him with a crown of thorns; Red were his wounds and deep; For those were crude and cruel days, And human flesh was cheap. When Jesus came to our town, They simply passed him by. They never hurt a hair of him! They merely let him die. For men had grown more tender now; They would not give him pain! They only passed on down the street, And left him standing in the rain.fn

A third practical implication that can come from a deeper understanding of the condescension of God is that we finite, imperfect, and very limited human beings do not seek to impose our own agenda on the Lord. In Jacob we are warned, "Wherefore, brethren, seek not to counsel the Lord, but to take counsel from his hand. For behold, ye yourselves know that he counseleth in wisdom, and in justice, and in great mercy, over all his works" (Jacob 4:10; emphasis added). One would think that in recognizing our own finite limitation, we would know better than to seek to counsel the Lord, but how frequently we fall into the trap of trusting more in our own wisdom than in his.

One of the classic examples of that is found in Church history in the loss of the 116 pages of Book of Mormon manuscript translated by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Joseph so wanted to please Martin Harris who had helped him so much that he refused to accept the Lord's counsel the first two times it was given. Do we fall into similar traps when we impose deadlines on the Lord as to when we need a prayer answered or when we decide what form we want revelation to come in or what solution we need for a particular problem? We are counseled by Nephi not to trust in the arm of flesh (2 Ne. 4:34). When we trust our own judgment and wisdom instead of God's, we are relying on our own arm of flesh. A true understanding of the condescension of God will help us keep our perspective about our need for him.

In the sacramental prayers on both the bread and water, one of the covenants we make is that we will "always remember him" (D&C 20:77, 79; emphasis added). Is not this perhaps the most profound and important lesson that we should learn from our understanding of the condescension of God? If he in his greatness, power, and glory condescends always to remember, us, how much more should we then seek to remember him? It is such a simple thing but can so profoundly affect our lives if the Savior is foremost in our minds. When our thoughts turn to him and we ask ourselves the question, "What would he do?" or "What would he have me do?" then we begin to accept the condescension of God. He left his high and holy station to come to this world to set the example for us and to guide us back into the presence of the Father. That is the ultimate implication for us, and following him is how we can make the condescension of God become real in our own lives.

NOTES
