Sperry Symposium, Doctrines of the Book of Mormon: 1991 Sperry Symposium on the Book of Mormon ( 1992)

8

WHAT THE BOOK OF MORMON TELLS US ABOUT THE BIBLE

Robert J. Matthews

Brigham Young University

The Book of Mormon is a document to be reckoned with, and I am confident that everyone's spiritual well-being will ultimately depend on what he or she knows and feels about it. I like this expression from Elder Orson Pratt:

"The nature of the message in the Book of Mormon is such, that if true, no one can possibly be saved and reject it; if false, no one can possibly be saved and receive it."fn

In keeping with Elder Pratt's statement, I will endeavor to show what the Book of Mormon tells us about the Bible and therefore, what it requires the reader to believe about the Bible. Because the Book of Mormon is neither neutral nor bland, it forces us into decision-making situations.

The Book of Mormon declares first that the Bible is a true and sacred witness for Jesus Christ and contains teachings, doctrines, covenants, history, and prophecy of great worth to the human family; second, that the Bible available in our day is not as complete nor as doctrinally accurate as it was when written by the ancient prophets and apostles and, moreover, that the loss of material is both substantial and extensive; third, that the missing material was deliberately removed from the Bible by persons of evil intent among the Gentiles; fourth, that many people have stumbled spiritually because of the loss of so much plain and precious information from the Bible; fifth, that the crucial missing parts shall be restored to the Bible through latter-day scripture; sixth, that many in the last days, because of pride and unbelief, reject the miraculous events and doctrinal precepts of the Bible; and seventh, that the Book of Mormon is the greatest of all documentary witnesses for the Bible.

Although the Bible has been greatly altered and many parts and concepts are lost, it has remained among mankind and has been a source of inspiration and spiritual uplift to millions, even in its diminished condition. It is only when its doctrine is compared with latter-day revelation that the ambiguity and incompleteness of the Bible become evident. Nevertheless, many in the world, with limited faith and understanding, are not yet ready for stronger doctrine and thus are content with and blessed by the Bible as it is.

The Book of Mormon, on the other hand, was prepared specifically to be a corroborating record, compiled at the direct command of the Lord, to be made available in the latter days after the Bible had become corrupted. The ancient Nephites and Lamanites never had the Book of Mormon as we have it. It contains the doctrines especially needed in the world today.

The Book of Mormon is a record similar to the Bible because, like the Bible, it is a witness for Jesus Christ and was written by and about people who came from the time, the land, and the people of the Old Testament. The Lord says that he speaks "the same words unto one nation like unto another" (2 Ne. 29:8). Yet the Book of Mormon is separate and independent and does not depend on the Bible for its existence. The Book of Mormon is not intended as a commentary about the Bible, nor is it intended to replace the Bible. It does not compete with the Bible but complements it.

Because of a certain obscurity and lack of completeness to the Bible, no one in our generation can truly understand the doctrines of the Bible without the help of the Book of Mormon and other latter-day revelations. A study of history, archaeology, religion, language, and culture can yield much useful information, but the true spirit of the Bible and its doctrine will elude all searchers who do not include the Book of Mormon in their study. An examination of the Book of Mormon tells us much about our present-day Bible, both by direct statement and by inference. It also reveals why it was important that such information be included in its restorative message.

THE BIBLE TESTIFIES OF CHRIST

The Book of Mormon verifies the truth of the Bible in many ways: by quoting extensively from Isaiah and Malachi; by referring to dozens of biblical persons and events from Adam to John the Revelator; and by speaking of such spiritual things as visions, angels, healings, baptism, priesthood.fn In the Book of Mormon we find Adam, Eve, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Pharaoh, Moses, David, Solomon, Zedekiah, Malachi (all Old Testament personalities), mentioned with detailed events and circumstances of their lives such as the Garden of Eden, the fall of Adam, the flood of Noah's day, the tower of Babel, the covenant of Abraham, the Egyptian bondage, Moses' dividing the Red Sea and getting water from the rock, the serpent of brass, the captivity of the ten tribes, and the Babylonian captivity of the Jews. Further-more, the high esteem that the Book of Mormon prophets had for the writings on the plates of brass is a verification and support for that part of the Old Testament.

With regard to the New Testament, we find in the Book of Mormon frequent prophetic mention of Jesus, Mary, John the Apostle, and the Twelve Apostles. Jesus Christ is repeatedly declared to be the Son of God and to be the God of Israel. John the Baptist is spoken of as a prophet, although he is not mentioned by name. The Book of Mormon prophetically details events in these persons' lives, such as the birth of Jesus, his baptism and receiving of the Holy Ghost, his miracles, his sweating blood, his crucifixion, burial, bodily resurrection, ascension into heaven, and visit to the "other sheep" referred to in John 10:16.

OUR PRESENT BIBLE HAS SUFFERED EXTENSIVE LOSS

In a vision narrated by an angel, Nephi was shown the history of the Bible after the New Testament was written. Recorded in 1 Ne. 13 and 14, his is the clearest, most accurate, and most reliable statement regarding the history of the Bible manuscripts that we have any knowledge of at this time. Without the viewpoint of the Book of Mormon, neither scholar nor layman, even in the Church, would sense the magnitude of the depletion of the Bible.

Nephi saw in panoramic vision the colonists from Europe who settled in the Western Hemisphere, and he learned that they brought the Bible with them:

"And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld that they did prosper in the land; and I beheld a book, and it was carried forth among them.

"And the angel said unto me: Knowest thou the meaning of the book?

"And I said unto him: I know not.

"And he said: Behold it proceedeth out of the mouth of a Jew. And I, Nephi, beheld it; and he said unto me: The book that thou beholdest is a record of the Jews, which contains the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel; and it also containeth many of the prophecies of the holy prophets; and it is a record like unto the engravings which are upon the plates of brass, save there are not so many; nevertheless, they contain the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel; wherefore, they are of great worth unto the Gentiles.

"And the angel of the Lord said unto me: Thou hast beheld that the book proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew; and when it proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew it contained the fulness of the gospel of the Lord, of whom the twelve apostles bear record; and they bear record according to the truth which is in the Lamb of God.

"Wherefore, these things go forth from the Jews in purity unto the Gentiles, according to the truth which is in God.

"And after they go forth by the hand of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, from the Jews unto the Gentiles, thou seest the formation of that great and abominable church, which is most abominable above all other churches; for behold, they have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away.

"And all this have they done that they might pervert the right ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men" (1 Ne. 13:20-27).

This passage speaks of both the Old Testament ("the prophecies of the holy prophets") and the New Testament ("the gospel of the Lord, of whom the twelve apostles bear record").

THE LOSSES WERE INTENTIONAL

The angel declared to Nephi that the deletions from the Bible were deliberate, made with intent to deceive and to lead people away from "the right ways of the Lord." That does not refer to honest errors that translators and copyists make because of human frailty and the difficulties of transcription and translation. That is telling us that soon after the New Testament was written there were persons among the Gentiles who systematically, with wicked motives and evil intent, removed portions of the sacred word and took from the Bible much very important doctrinal information. Moroni says they "transfigured the holy word of God" (Morm. 8:33). To do that effectively, two circumstances were necessary: it had to be done early, before there were multiple copies of the various books; and it had to be accomplished by someone near the source, who had access to the originals or earliest copies. The angel said to Nephi that the alterations were made before the Bible was distributed among the nations of the Gentiles (see 1 Ne. 13:28-29). In other words, the process began early, by the end of the first century, and continued into the second and third centuries after Christ.

Who among the Gentiles would deliberately expunge these things from the Bible? Perhaps early Greek Christians who valued secular philosophy above the sacred word of scripture may have altered the New Testament. That men would deliberately take away from the Old Testament because they esteemed God's words as "naught" is also referred to in Moses 1:40-41.

Because of the early dating when these things happened, the "great and abominable church" spoken of in these particular instances cannot be the formal Roman Catholic Church, for there was no such officially organized church at this point. Nonetheless, apostates and conniving persons were corrupting the true Church among the Gentiles. The Book of Mormon says the devil is the founder of this corrupt church.fn

Unfortunately, existing records tell us little about the Christian church in the second century after Christ. Much more is known about the first century and then from the third century onward. During the second century the leadership of the church changed from the Apostles to the Greek Fathers, but the actual transmission is shrouded in mystery. It is as if a busload of people had headed up Provo Canyon with a certain destination in mind and with a well-defined map. In the canyon they encountered a heavy fog. During the fog the bus made an unscheduled stop. New passengers got on board. There was a struggle. When the bus emerged from the fog, the bus held new drivers and some new passengers and was following a different map and contemplating a different destination. The new drivers were heavily influenced by Greek philosophy. This was not a gentle drifting away. Our colleague Stephen Robinson calls it a "mutiny"—a forcible takeover. He likens it to a situation with several people in a room. The lights go out, there is a skirmish in the dark. When the lights come on again, the furniture has been rearranged, and new people are sitting there.fn

THE LOSSES HAVE HAD SERIOUS CONSEQUENCES

What effect would a weakened and diluted Bible have on future readers? That also was explained by the angel:

"And after it goeth forth unto all the nations of the Gentiles, yea, even across the many waters which thou hast seen with the Gentiles which have gone forth out of captivity, thou seest—because of the many plain and precious things which have been taken out of the book, which were plain unto the understanding of the children of men, according to the plainness which is in the Lamb of God—because of these things which are taken away out of the gospel of the Lamb, an exceedingly great many do stumble, yea, insomuch that Satan hath great power over them. . . .

"Neither will the Lord God suffer that the Gentiles shall forever remain in that awful state of blindness, which thou beholdest they are in, because of the plain and most precious parts of the gospel of the Lamb which have been kept back by that abominable church, whose formation thou hast seen. . . .

"And after the Gentiles do stumble exceedingly, because of the most plain and precious parts of the gospel of the Lamb which have been kept back by that abominable church, which is the mother of harlots, saith the Lamb—I will be merciful unto the Gentiles in that day, insomuch that I will bring forth unto them, in mine own power, much of my gospel, which shall be plain and precious, saith the Lamb" (1 Ne. 13:29, 32, 34).

Both Nephi's vision and its angelic interpreter emphasized the serious consequences of the incomplete Bible. The angel explained that many would stumble in an awful state of blindness and that even sincere believers (perhaps even some members of the true Church) would be led astray because of the lack of clarity of the biblical record (1 Ne. 13:29, 32, 34; 2 Ne. 26:20; 28:14). The awfulness of the condition is enhanced because those who have only the Bible are generally not aware of the extent to which it has been diluted or that it was once much stronger doctrinally than it is now. They do not realize that the gospel of Jesus Christ is more than is contained in the Bible alone. Without a standard and a key to interpretation, Bible readers do not have the necessary information to judge the accuracy or inaccuracy of differing texts. When something is taken out of a record, there is, obviously, a loss of that material but also that which remains is often rendered less clear because of the loss of related information that would have been a key to understanding. If members of the Church do not use the Book of Mormon to understand the Bible, they will be as uninformed as the rest of the world.

THE MISSING PARTS WILL BE RESTORED THROUGH LATTER-DAY SCRIPTURE

The Lord showed Nephi, by vision and by the angel's explanation, that the Nephite record—the Book of Mormon—would subsequently come forth and contain the pure gospel of Jesus Christ. The angel further explained that there would also come "other books" in addition to the Book of Mormon and that these books would convince the Gentiles, the Jews, and the Lamanites in the latter days, that the records of the prophets and the Twelve Apostles are true. The angel said that these "last records," which will be among the Gentiles, shall "establish the truth of the first, which are of the twelve apostles . . . and shall make known the plain and precious things which [had] been taken away from them; and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world" (1 Ne. 13:40).

I understand these "last records" to be the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, the Joseph Smith Translation, and additional sacred records that the Lord might yet bring forth through his authorized prophets. I do not believe that this passage refers to the Dead Sea Scrolls, or the Nag Hammadi library, or other similar documents, which, while extremely valuable for scholarly research and historical evidence, are not official records prepared by designated prophets or apostles of Jesus Christ and are not sources of doctrine for the latter-day Church.

Thus in 1 Ne. 13 and 14 we find the basic pronouncement in the scriptures regarding the origin, manuscripts, history, and condition of the Bible. If we focus our understanding on those two chapters, we will have a correct perception of the Bible and realize how greatly it has been depleted. Consequently, we will also see the true character of the Restoration. Otherwise, we will realize neither the worth of Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible as part of the Restoration nor the extent to which the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price contribute to an understanding of the Bible.

Using the latter-day scripture as our guide, we ascertain that among the losses to the Bible are such things as the understanding that the gospel of Jesus Christ was taught to Adam and to all the patriarchs; that baptism, priesthood, and the gift of the Holy Ghost were had among the ancient patriarchs; and that the gospel and the ordinances have always been the same. Also missing from the present Old Testament are the clear teachings of the divinity of Jesus Christ, the doctrine of the fall of Adam, and the resurrection of Jesus Christ. There are hints remaining, but the Bible was once as unmistakable as the Book of Mormon on these points.

DOCTRINAL AND MIRACULOUS ASPECTS OF THE BIBLE ARE ATTACKED BY THEOLOGIANS

Anciently, removing things from the Bible was perhaps done partly by the process of canonization. The attack on the Bible continues in our day, but in a different manner. Today, because of pride and a humanistic emphasis, many theologians seriously question the divinity of Jesus Christ, reject man's divine origin, and accept only the ethical teachings.

There exists a substantial lack of belief in the divinity of Jesus Christ and in the Bible, even among those who profess to have religious and Christian affiliation. That is the "stumbling" spoken of by Nephi. President Brigham Young said in 1870 that in contrast to the Latter-day Saints, who accept the Bible and believe its teachings, he expected "to see [the Bible] voted out of the so-called Christian world very soon, they are coming to it as fast as possible."fn A century latter, in 1971, President Harold B. Lee observed:

"Fifty years ago or more, when I was a missionary, our greatest responsibility was to defend the great truth that the Prophet Joseph Smith was divinely called and inspired and that the Book of Mormon was indeed the word of God. But even at that time there were the unmistakable evidences that there was coming into the religious world actually a question about the Bible and about the divine calling of the Master himself. Now, fifty years later, our greatest responsibility and anxiety is to defend the divine mission of our Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, for all about us, even among those who claim to be professors of the Christian faith, are those not willing to stand squarely in defense of the great truth that our Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, was indeed the Son of God. So tonight it would seem to me that the most important thing I could say to you is to try to strengthen your faith and increase your courage and your understanding of the place of the Master in the Great Plan of Salvation."fn

Following is evidence I have obtained from books, newspapers, and magazines written by ministers and scholars verifying the words of President Young and President Lee that the Christian world is departing from the Bible. As a young BYU student I found in the library a book titled, The Story of the Bible written in 1934 by a prominent minister.fn The author ruled out everything of a miraculous nature and also dismissed Adam and Abraham as individuals, saying they were only the idealized representatives of early man but were not actual persons. He regarded everything having to do with angels, visions, revelation, and miracles as the imagination and invention of primitive peoples. He said it was naive to believe that the miraculous things of the Bible actually happened.

This trend in biblical interpretation had been developing for a long time. A book written in 1929 entitled The Beliefs of Seven Hundred Ministers, and Their Meaning for Religious Education reports the findings of a survey among mainstream Christian ministers. The study considered the beliefs of the older clergy compared with those of the younger ones still in theological school. The primary question was "Can the great professional class of religionists give the masses a certainty of belief on the crucial questions of religion?"

The tally showed that the younger ministers and theological students had considerably less belief in the Bible than did the older ones. The younger ones were more willing to accept organic evolution for the origin of man, to deny Christ's virgin birth, and to deny his supernatural powers and his physical resurrection. Neither did the younger ministers and students believe as deeply in the second coming of Jesus or that there would be a final judgment. Furthermore, the younger ones were low in the scale of belief in a devil or in the fall of Adam as an actual event. The survey indicated considerable lack of unity among the churches in theological and doctrinal beliefs and a strong evidence of uncertainty. The report concluded that in the future (remember, this was in 1929) "human experience, demonstrated knowledge, and reasoned conclusions will be the primary sources of religious belief. These will supersede what is written in the Bible." It was concluded that the professional religionists and clergy cannot give the masses a certainty of belief, for they themselves do not have it, except in a very limited sense.fn

The trend today is for parish ministers to be sociologists and for theologians in the divinity schools to be philosophers greatly influenced by ancient Greek philosophy. One of the latest manifestations of this rational approach to Jesus and the Bible is the "Jesus Seminar" that has been held every six months in several major United States cities (including Atlanta, Salem [Oregon], and Boston) from February 1986 to March 1991. This seminar was sponsored and attended by nearly two hundred Bible scholars and Christian ministers in the United States who have investigated the sayings attributed to Jesus in the four Gospels. Their conclusions are not necessarily accepted by Christian people generally, but their work illustrates a continuing trend toward humanism in biblical exegesis and interpretation.

According to the Associated Press, Los Angeles Times, New York Times, and Christian Science Monitor, here are some of their major conclusions:

In addition, the "Jesus Seminar" concluded that about 80 percent of the words attributed to Jesus in the New Testament are not his words or even based on his ideas. Nearly all of Jesus' words in the Gospel of John were declared invalid, and all of the sermons spoken by Jesus were invalidated as later concoctions and collections. Individual scholars have been saying these things for years, but it appears that these opinions have become more intense and widespread, for these pronouncements were issued by two hundred seminar participants.fn

This is not a condition peculiar to America, for it exists even more prominently in Europe. In 1977 seven British Protestant theologians and church leaders co-authored a 211-page book entitled, The Myth of God Incarnate. Their basic assertion was that Jesus himself never claimed to be the Son of God and that original Christianity didn't claim, it for him, but that this is a false concept introduced after the death of Jesus. These seven theologians (six men and a woman) claim that the genius of Christianity is its flexibility. They say that Christians developed the idea of Jesus' being a God when people were superstitious and needed such a belief. But now that men are scientifically astute, it is necessary that the supernatural nature of Jesus be discarded so that Christianity can be adapted into a religion that is currently believable. The book claims that modern Christianity made two adjustments in the nineteenth century that enabled it to survive in the modern world: it accepted organic evolution as the origin of man on this earth, and it proclaimed that the Bible need not be accorded divine authority. The writers say they are convinced that another major theological adjustment must now be made in the twentieth century. The churches must give up the idea of Jesus' being God incarnate on the earth. They admit the Bible teaches it, but they say it is only a mythological or poetic way of expressing his significance and is not literally true. They say it is no longer needed in the light of modern intelligence.

These authors say there is nothing new to their book and that all Protestant theologians today believe as these seven do. They believe Jesus was a wonderful human being—but not a God. They admit, however, that many laymen still believe in a supernatural incarnate Jesus. These writers also list other myths (as they call them) that have crept into Christianity and need to be discarded. These are the myth of Creation, the myth of the Fall of Adam, and the myth of the Resurrection.fn

Contrast these teachings with the Book of Mormon, which repeatedly declares that "JESUS is the CHRIST, the ETERNAL GOD" (see title page), and with the heavy emphasis in the Book of Mormon on the Creation, the Fall, the Atonement, and the Resurrection. Without such certain knowledge of the divinity of Jesus Christ, the world has only a network of philosophical ideas, unable to save anyone.

President Ezra Taft Benson, being aware of these trends, said in 1976:

"The first and most central theme of the Book of Mormon is that Jesus is the promised Messiah, our Lord and Redeemer. He came to redeem mankind from a lost and fallen condition brought about by Adam's transgression. Nearly all Christian churches accepted this truth as fundamental to their faith when the Book of Mormon was published to the world in 1830. The fact that another book had come forth as a second witness to Christ's divinity was regarded by many churches as being both superfluous and spurious. They said, We already have a Bible, why do we need another? (2 Ne. 29:3.)

"But the nineteenth century was not the twentieth. Who but God and inspired prophets could have foreseen the need for an additional witness for the divinity of His Son. . . . Who but God and inspired prophets could have foreseen the day when ministers of prominent denominations would openly challenge the divinity of Jesus Christ?"fn

We live in an age in which many interpret the scriptures by their own wisdom and learning rather than by seeking understanding from the scriptures by the Spirit. They set aside the revelations, "supposing they know of themselves" (2 Ne. 9:28). What is so popularly heralded today as our great age of learning, sophistication, and intellectual accomplishment may very possibly, by future generations more advanced in righteousness, be looked back upon as the age of apostasy, unbelief, and spiritual darkness. Lucifer inspired persons to take things away from the Bible anciently, and that same spirit prompts mankind today to disbelieve the divinity of Jesus Christ. The reports from these ministers and students of the Bible are similar to the reply of the men at Ephesus when Paul asked them, "Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed?" They answered, "We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost" (Acts 19:1-2). Modern scholars seem equally confused.

THE BOOK OF MORMON IS THE GREATEST DOCUMENTARY WITNESS OF CHRIST AND OF THE BIBLE

The Book of Mormon demonstrates that in the last days many people will not believe the Bible, even though they have had it among them for centuries. It further says that the Book of Mormon will be the means of convincing Jew, Gentile, and Lamanite that the record of the Jews, which has "already gone forth among them," is true (Title page; 1 Ne. 13:39-40; 2 Ne. 3:11-12). The prophet Mormon says:

"Therefore . . . lay hold upon the gospel of Christ, which shall be set before you, not only in this record but also in the record which shall come unto the Gentiles from the Jews, which record shall come from the Gentiles unto you.

"For behold, this [Book of Mormon] is written for the intent that ye may believe that [Bible]; and if ye believe that ye will believe this also; and if ye believe this ye will know concerning your fathers, and also the marvelous works which were wrought by the power of God among them" (Morm. 7:8-9).

Furthermore, in D&C 20:11 the Lord says that one purpose of the Book of Mormon is to prove to the world that the "holy scriptures are true" (D&C 20:11).

BIBLICAL AUTHORSHIP

Textual critics commonly place the writing of the Gospels, particularly Matthew and John, late in the first century after Christ. That placement is based upon several factors relating to literary and linguistic analysis and usually concludes that these books originated in the Greek language. It then follows that if these Gospels were written late, and in Greek, the real authors could not have been Jesus' disciples Matthew and John. They must have been others who are today unknown but who placed the names of these apostles on the documents to give them credence. A late-written composition also presupposes a period of oral transmission in which the record of Jesus' life took on a supernatural aura beyond what actually occurred. Persons unsympathetic to the divinity of Jesus and his miracles are comfortable with the idea of this developmental period and ascribe the supernatural events to myth and elaboration by the disciples during the long oral transmission period. Moreover, if one holds that the documents were written after the destruction of Jerusalem in A.D. 70, he has a ready-made excuse for discounting the Savior's prophecy about Jerusalem and the temple.

In addition to questioning the authorship of the books of Matthew and of John, literary critics frequently question the authorship (and thus the authenticity) of the Revelation of John and the three Johannine epistles. Likewise, they cast doubt upon the authenticity of several of Paul's epistles, as well as on the Second Epistle of Peter. The net result of this so-called objective study of the New Testament is to question the validity of many of the books and to take the authorship largely out of the hands of the Twelve Apostles, assigning it to unknown second- or third-generation persons.

Nevertheless, 1 Ne. 13 tells us that the testimony of the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb is found in the record of the Jews:

"These last records, which thou hast seen among the Gentiles, shall establish the truth of the first, which are of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. . . . and the words of the Lamb shall be made known in the records of thy seed, as well as in the records of the twelve-apostles of the Lamb; wherefore they both shall be established in one" (1 Ne. 13:40-41).

The apostle John is specifically singled out and named (1 Ne. 14:19-20, 27), and it is precisely stated that his writings shall be in the record of the Jews that Nephi saw in vision:

"Wherefore, the things which he shall write are just and true; and behold they are written in the book which thou beheld proceeding out of the mouth of the Jew" (1 Ne. 14:23).

Such statements in the Book of Mormon certify that the New Testament contains the writings of the apostles of Jesus Christ, not just of Matthew, John, James, and Peter. Such statements could also suggest that Mark, Luke, Paul, and Jude became bona fide, ordained apostles of Jesus Christ and members of the Quorum of the Twelve.

AUTHENTICATION OF THE WORDS OF JESUS

As to the Sermon on the Mount being delivered by the Savior as an actual, unified speech, the Savior's sermon in 3 Ne. 12-14 is the evidence that he not only could but did deliver such a sermon in Palestine to his Jewish disciples. Furthermore, in 3 Ne. 15:1 after delivering the sermon to the Nephites, Jesus said, "Behold, ye have heard the things which I taught before I ascended to my Father" — clearly a reference to his teaching the Jews in Palestine. Moreover, Joseph Smith's translation of the Sermon on the Mount preserves its character as a genuine sermon.

THE VIEW OF BIBLE INERRANCY

There is another view of present-day Bible interpretation that holds that everything in the Bible is complete, correct, and absolutely just as it was originally spoken or written, without error or loss. That view is called Bible inerrancy and is held by a number of fundamentalist evangelical churches. But even those groups generally hold that the miracles and the visions of biblical days are no longer needed today.

The position of the Latter-day Saints is between the two extremes. The passages we have read from the Book of Mormon show both extremes to be in error. The need is even greater now for a second witness, a corroboration of the Bible and of the divinity of Jesus Christ, than it was in the nineteenth century, and it will no doubt be even more vital in the future. In light of this, we see the importance of the subtitle added a few years ago to the Book of Mormon: "Another Testament of Jesus Christ."

THE BIBLE AND THE BOOK OF MORMON

I do not feel that all textual and literary critics are subversive. They interpret the information that is in the biblical documents available to them. A major problem is that these scholars are working with documents that have already had so much taken out of them and that have been so edited by unknown hands that many things are no longer clear. Without the corroborating evidence of the Book of Mormon as a standard, one can unwittingly arrive at false conclusions. As the Book of Mormon says, many have "stumbled, because of the greatness of their stumbling block". (2 Ne. 26:20), and yet the Book of Mormon could remove those stumbling blocks from their path (1 Ne. 14:1), teach them "the very points of his doctrine" (see 1 Ne. 15:14; Hel. 11:22-23; 3 Ne. 11:28), and rescue them from the false speculation that Jesus is only a human. Lehi said that the Bible and the Book of Mormon would "grow together" to the putting down of contention and the confounding of false doctrines (2 Ne. 3:12). The imperfect Bible is one of the stumbling blocks, but pride in secular learning is also a stumbling block. Many continue to use the Bible but apparently don't really believe it. Many read it, preach from it, and revere it as a religious, moral, and cultural record but doubt the historicity of it and deny the doctrines and principles it teaches.

The Book of Mormon is neither neutral nor bland. One cannot literally believe the history and doctrines of the Book of Mormon and at the same time doubt the historicity and doctrine of the Bible. That is one reason the Book of Mormon is a keystone. It is the standard of interpretation. Some have said that the Book of Mormon, the Bible, and the Pearl of Great Price are religious truths but not historical truths. That is actually a thinly veiled expression of unbelief. The reader of the Book of Mormon is forced to decide: either Joseph Smith was a fraud who has now been exposed through his citing biblical passages that have been disproved by scientific investigation, or Joseph Smith was a prophet who translated an ancient historical, doctrinal, religious record— a new witness for Jesus Christ. There is no middle ground to this matter without compromise and a loss of truth.

When I first read the Book of Mormon nearly fifty years ago, I could feel by the Spirit that it was true, but I did not sense the significance of what that meant. As the years have passed, I continue to see just how important it is. I remember the first time I read 2 Ne. 29:8, in which the Lord asks: "Know ye not that the testimony of two nations is a witness unto you that I am God?" That hit me with a force of conviction. Why is the matter of witnesses so important? For at least two reasons: to make the message unmistakably clear so that believing men and women can be saved; and to leave the world without excuse in the day of judgement.

I am grateful for this marvelous, wonderful Book of Mormon, which is historically and doctrinally true, and I know it by the revelations of the Holy Ghost.

The Book of Mormon cites specific biblical events and persons. I have listed 106 specific points in which the Book of Mormon offers confirmation of the biblical record, and many of these are supported by more than one reference.

OLD TESTAMENT

Creation to Abel

Noah to Babel

Abraham to Bondage

Moses and Events Connected with Him

From the Israelites' Entrance into Canaan until Jesus' Time

NEW TESTAMENT

Work of John the Baptist (Name not given)

Jesus Christ (Named beforehand by prophecy;

2 Ne. 10:3; Mosiah 3:8)

Mary, Mother of Jesus (Named beforehand by prophecy;

Mosiah 3:8; Alma 7:10)

Other

Experiences Similar to Those Recorded in the Bible

Some Other Similarities

NOTES
