Sperry Symposium, Doctrines of the Book of Mormon: 1991 Sperry Symposium on the Book of Mormon ( 1992)

9

TO BECOME AS A LITTLE CHILD: THE QUEST FOR HUMILITY

Byron R. Merrill

Brigham Young University

On the fourth day of the first month of the thirty-fourth year of the Nephite calendar, a storm arose such as never had been known among the people. In the course of only three hours, an enormous destruction swept the face of the land. Then a palpable darkness settled upon the earth. For three days there was no light. In the midst of this darkness, a voice was heard crying, "Wo, wo, wo unto this people" (3 Ne. 9:2). The voice, declaring itself to be that of Jesus Christ, the Son of God (v. 15), described the destruction, explained its cause, and issued a divine invitation: "Whoso repenteth and cometh unto me as a little child, him will I receive, for of such is the kingdom of God" (3 Ne. 9:22). In these dramatic circumstances, the Savior thus succinctly stated the requirement for entrance into his kingdom: to come unto him as a little child.

The Lord had announced that same principle in a very different setting as recorded in Matt. 18. His disciples approached him with the query "Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?" (v. 1). The Master responded by calling a little child to him, setting the child in the midst of the gathering, and stating, "Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven" (vv. 3-4).

CHARACTERISTICS OF A CHILD

Why would the Savior use a little child as an example of those worthy to reenter his presence? What are the attributes of a little child that he would have us emulate? Perhaps the clearest scriptural statement on childlike qualities was given in King Benjamin's great discourse:

"For the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father" (Mosiah 3:19).

The words nature and natural as used in the Book of Mormon often carry with them the connotation "carnal, sensual, and devilish" (Alma 42:10; Mosiah 16:3; Alma 41:11). The phrase "natural man" in Mosiah 3:19 applies to man, who carries the trappings of the fallen world, in contrast to the specifically named qualities of a little child.

All five traits enumerated in Mosiah 3—submissiveness, meekness, humility, patience, being filled with love—are really complementary aspects of a single virtue. One cannot be full of love without being patient or submissive. One cannot be meek and at the same time be unwilling to submit to God. I wish to call this collective childlike virtue "humility."

HUMILITY

Humility is closely associated with meekness. According to the world's definition, humility or meekness is often not considered a virtue. One who is weak, fearful, continually self-effacing, or spineless has little if any relationship to one who is humble in a scriptural sense: The most noble and powerful person to ever walk the earth said, "I am meek and lowly in heart" (Matt. 11:29).

What then is humility? As used in the scriptures, humility indicates an individual's cheerful willingness to do the will of the Lord, to sublimate his or her own desires to the Lord's desires. It is not enough to do good at certain times or even to be good at certain times. It is a continual willingness to do what the Lord wants done, however uncomfortable that may be. Joseph Smith said, "Whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may not see the reason thereof till long after the events transpire."fn For example, it had never entered Nephi's mind to take a human life. He was willing to kill Laban only after the Spirit's powerful persuasion indicated such was the will of God so that Nephi might obtain the sacred records of his people. The significance of that act of humble obedience may not have been fully understood by Nephi but would become apparent with the unfolding of time. Almost five hundred years later, King Benjamin commented: "My sons, I would that ye should remember that were it not for these plates [the plates of brass], which contain these records and these commandments, we must have suffered in ignorance, even at this present time, not knowing the mysteries of God" (Mosiah 1:3).

ACQUIRING HUMILITY

If becoming as a little child—or acquiring this attribute of humility—is an absolute requirement for salvation and exaltation, how does one become humble? President Kimball taught: "How does one get humble? To me, one must constantly be reminded of his dependence. On whom dependent? On the Lord. How remind one's self? By real, constant, worshipful, grateful prayer."fn Prayerful and studious pondering of the scriptures will also aid in the search for humility. Written, canonized revelation often acts as a Urim and Thummim for personal revelation. Sometimes, when reading under inspiration, it is as though a given scripture were written for us personally. Elder Bruce R. McConkie said people "will be denied the sweet whisperings of the Spirit that might have been theirs unless they pay the price of studying, pondering, and praying about the scriptures."fn

To receive those impressions that will lead us to humility, our hearts and minds must be open, willing, and receptive, and then we must follow with action. The heart, in scriptures, is the seat of our desires. To become humble, then, our heart must be totally surrendered to God and his will. We must desire to know his will. Additionally, we must consciously assent to his will. In other words, we must have a willing mind as well as a willing heart. And lastly, we must take action upon the impressions received. That is the element of obedience. The Lord summarized these requirements: "Behold, the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind; and the willing and obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days" (D&C 64:34).

Sometimes, although we feel that we have a willing heart and a willing mind and are seemingly worthy, we simply are not receptive. We may become so programmed and preoccupied that we are not ready vessels for revelation. It is then that we may need to unclutter our lives and take a more childlike and simple approach so that we may feel the Spirit's promptings. Elder Robert L. Simpson has said, "As we complicate our lives, we discourage the gifts of the Spirit."fn

Yet, if we place humility as a central priority in our lives and work diligently toward it, can we obtain this attribute on our own? No. To do so requires divine assistance, as is implied in the prayer revealed to Joseph Smith for the dedication of the Kirtland Temple: "Help thy servants to say, with thy grace assisting them: Thy will be done, O Lord, and not ours" (D&C 109:44). Alma gave counsel in a similar vein: "But that ye would humble yourselves before the Lord, and call on his holy name, and watch and pray continually, that ye may not be tempted above that which ye can bear, and thus be led by the Holy Spirit, becoming humble, meek, submissive, patient, full of love and all long-suffering" (Alma 13:28; emphasis added). Acquiring humility is not so much reaching a goal as it is being blessed by the Lord with a gift after all our strivings. The result is thus an outpouring of love and gratitude instead of a smug sense of accomplishment. As Nephi said, after all we can do, "it is by grace that we are saved" (2 Ne. 25:23). Like charity, humility is a gift of God.

MAINTAINING A HUMBLE HEART

If we succeed in consolidating heart and mind with an eye single to the glory of God and receive this gift of humility, how can we successfully maintain it? With this comprehensive formula, Alma encouraged those who had received the truth and acted thereon to continue their endurance in humility:

"And now I would that ye should be humble, and be submissive and gentle; easy to be entreated; full of patience and long-suffering; being temperate in all things; being diligent in keeping the commandments of God at all times; asking for whatsoever things ye stand in need, both spiritual and temporal; always returning thanks unto God for whatsoever things ye do receive.

"And see that ye have faith, hope, and charity, and then ye will always abound in good works" (Alma 7:23-24).

The prophet Mormon also indicated that if we are meek and lowly, we must needs also have charity (Moro. 7:43-44). If humility is a willingness to submit our will to the will of the Lord, and his commandments are that we love him and others, how do we do that? King Benjamin taught that we loved and serve God by losing ourselves in the service of others (Mosiah 2:17). He also further instructed his people that they could retain a remission of their sins, and thus their humility, by serving others:

"Humble yourselves even in the depths of humility, calling on the name of the Lord daily, and standing steadfastly in the faith of that which is to come. . . .

"And now, for the sake of these things which I have spoken unto you—that is, for the sake of retaining a remission of your sins from day to day, that ye may walk guiltless before God—I would that ye should impart of your substance to the poor, every man according to that which he hath" (Mosiah 4:11, 26).

Early in the visit of the resurrected Christ to the Nephites, he repeated to them his earlier injunction that they must become as a little child: "And again I say unto you, ye must repent, and become as a little child, and be baptized in my name, or ye can in nowise receive these things. And again I say unto you, ye must repent, and be baptized in my name, and become as a little child, or ye can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God" (3 Ne. 11:37-38). At first reading these two verses seem almost identical, but they are not. In the first verse, the Lord commands that each person repent, become as a little child, and be baptized in order to "receive these things." What things? To receive the fulness of his doctrine and be visited with fire and the Holy Ghost. In the next verse the stated order of requirements is changed. He says they must repent, be baptized, and become as a little child in order to inherit the kingdom of God. Taken together, these two verses indicate that we must enter a childlike state before baptism to receive the blessings of the gospel and then continue in that childlike humility to inherit exaltation. There is no time, regardless of how sophisticated we become, how much knowledge we gain, or how many good works we have performed, when we can safely leave behind the childlike virtues. President Joseph F. Smith warned:

"Show me Latter-day Saints who have to feed upon miracles, signs and visions in order to keep them steadfast in the Church, and I will show you members of the Church who are not in good standing before God, and who are walking in slippery paths. It is not by marvelous manifestations unto us that we shall be established in the truth, but it is my humility and faithful obedience to the commandments and laws of God."fn

Alma stated, "Yea, he that truly humbleth himself, and repenteth of his sins, and endureth to the end, the same shall be blessed" (Alma 32:15). This continuing attitude of humility and its reward is summarized in Hel. 3:35: "Nevertheless they did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God." Is not the phrase "yielding their hearts unto God" a fitting definition of the attributes of being childlike?

Is it ever too late to become humble? Naaman, the leprous Syrian captain, left Elisha's house in disgust when the prophet did not come out to meet him personally but sent instructions for his healing, instructions that seemed so simple that he was insulted by them. Yet, when his servant suggested that he at least try, he humbly listened and agreed. Better a late retrenchment and repentance than a stubborn staying with pride and suffering and, in Naaman's case, with leprosy (2 Kgs. 5). From an eternal perspective, it is never too late to truly humble oneself. The danger is that one may procrastinate so long and become so hardened that all desire to change departs, until it is "everlastingly too late," as Samuel the Lamanite warned the Nephites (Hel. 13:38). Such was the case when Mormon continually prayed that his people would be humble, knowing that the Lord would then turn away his wrath from them. But rather than a willingness to be humble and turn to the Lord, his people were only willing to experience what Mormon called the "sorrowing of the damned" (Morm. 2:13). The Lord indicated several times through Isaiah's poetic writings recorded in 2 Nephi that "his hand is stretched out still" (2 Ne. 19:12, 17, 21; 20:4). If we will stop looking down and complaining and instead reach up to take his hand, there will always be hope.

PRIDE

The opposite of humility is, obviously, pride. The Zoramites on their Rameumptom are a prime example of a people who had been caught up in their sophisticated "adulthood" to the exclusion of the childlike virtues they needed. Similarly, King Saul in ancient Israel was commanded by the Lord through Samuel to "slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass" (1 Sam. 15:3). Thinking he knew better than God, Saul spared the king and the best of the sheep and cattle, allegedly for sacrifice. Samuel chastised him: "Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams" (1 Sam. 15:22). Samuel then declared that when Saul was little in his own sight, or humble, the Lord had made him king over Israel; but now he was rejected from being king (1 Sam. 15:17, 23). Humility will not long remain with one who follows his own desires rather than the Lord's commands. The Holy Ghost is easily offended.

The preface to the Doctrine and Covenants indicates that the great sin of our age is that the people "seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god, whose image is in the likeness of the world" (D&C 1:16). We read in another revelation that "although a man may have many revelations, and have power to do many mighty works, yet if he boasts in his own strength, and sets at naught the counsels of God, and follows after the dictates of his own will and carnal desires, he must fall and incur the vengeance of a just God upon him" (D&C 3:4). The popular song "I Did It My Way" reflects the pervasive lack of humility that characterizes our society. Similarly, the attitude exemplified by the excuse so often heard, "You can't teach an old dog new tricks," reflects a solidifying of mind and habit that defies change, indicating an intention to continue with one's own ideas in the face of proposed instruction and inspiration.

FALSE FORMS OF HUMILITY

A dangerous pitfall sometimes mistaken for true humility is that attitude we might term "false humility." The Lord was perhaps warning of this in 3 Ne. 13. He said that fasting or prayer or the giving of alms should be in private, not for open and often vain display. Our devotions are for the Lord's view, not our neighbor's. Likewise, we sometimes feign humility by saying we are ready to learn new things or change our ways but are then frustrated and upset because the learning or changing proceeds painfully and slowly. In a somewhat similar vein, at times we express our desire to follow the Lord but then ignore or discredit the counsel of his servants. The Lord has said, "Whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same" (D&C 1:38). To rebuff the servant is to rebuff the Master.

Self-pity is also a form of false humility. While true humility acknowledges weakness and leads its possessor to God, who in mercy promises to "make weak things become strong" (Ether 12:27), selfpity wallows in the weakness itself, feigning entrapment and hopelessness. It expresses itself as insecurity, always seeking praise for its efforts and often grumbling when praise is not received. When a person continually expresses sadness at having nothing or being nothing, consciously or unconsciously seeking the sympathy of all around, that is not humility but rather its antithesis, ingratitude, one of the faces of pride.

LIVING HUMBLY

How then should humility be evidenced in our lives? Are we to be perpetually apologetic and self-deprecating? No! Can one not be humble and bold simultaneously? Certainly. Humility may take the form of quiet occupation in serving others or a firm and unwavering denouncement of evil. In either case, the individual is concerned for the will of the Lord and the well-being of others. Joseph Smith relates an example:

"Some of the company thought I was not a very meek Prophet; so I told them: `I am meek and lowly in heart,' and will personify Jesus for a moment, to illustrate the principle, and cried out with a loud voice, `Woe unto you, ye doctors; woe unto you, ye lawyers; woe unto you, ye scribes, Pharisees, and hypocrites!' &c. But you cannot find the place where I ever went that I found fault with their food, their drink, their house, their lodgings; no, never; and this is what is meant by the meekness and lowliness of Jesus."fn

One may be bold in reproof when moved upon by the Holy Ghost and, in so doing, be the epitome of humility because one is doing the Lord's will (D&C 121:41-44). An added insight on reproving within the bounds the Holy Ghost would sanction was given by Brigham Young. He said, "If you are ever called upon to chasten a person, never chasten beyond the balm you have within you to bind up."fn

True humility tempers our view, enabling us to see things as they really are. We recognize God as supreme. We view ourselves as totally dependent upon him and see others as our equals. The English author John Ruskin observed: "I believe that the first test of a truly great man is his humility. I do not mean by humility, doubt of his own power. But really great men have a curious feeling that the greatness is not in them, but through them. And they see something divine in every other man and are endlessly, foolishly, incredibly merciful."fn Humility engenders gratitude, patience, and love instead of frustration, impatience, and criticism.

Thus, humility not only requires us to patiently watch the unfolding of the Lord's purposes in our own lives but also to view their development in others. It requires our willingness to allow others to exercise their God-given agency. We can teach and exhort, plead and pray, but we cannot coerce or compel. If the Lord will not deprive us of the freedom to exercise agency, how can we deprive another of it—even to get someone to do what is right—and still claim to be doing the Lord's will? The gospel is indeed true, but that is not license to force people into the waters of baptism.

EXAMPLES OF DOING THE WILL OF THE LORD

Being childlike is doing the Lord's will on his timetable and in his way, however inconvenient it may seem. How rarely in the Book of Mormon do the great individuals we read about get to do what "natural" or worldly people might desire. It is doubtful that Lehi and Sariah wished to leave all their belongings and head into the wilderness. Nephi would probably have preferred to live quietly and peacefully with his brothers but was constrained by his devotion to God to confront them frequently. Jacob preached against pride and unchastity saying that it grieved him to use "so much boldness of speech" (Jacob 2:7). King Benjamin could have taxed his people heavily to provide for himself, but his love for the Lord and his people prevented that. Abinadi undoubtedly did not look forward to delivering his message to the wicked King Noah. After being cast out of Ammonihah, Alma left dejected but returned "speedily" when commanded by an angel (Alma 8:18). In part, it was Amulek's humility that permitted him to receive the gospel while suffering rejection by his friends and family (Alma 15:16). And how difficult it must have been for Alma to forcefully counsel his son Corianton to repent! But he did so because the Spirit of the Lord had directed him: "Command thy children to do good" (Alma 39:12).

There are many more examples. Captain Moroni's whole mission seemed to be involved with the shedding of blood, the thing he wanted least of all to do (Alma 48:11), but that was what the Lord needed him to do to preserve the liberty of his people. Nephi, the son of Helaman, preached against the wickedness of his own community, for which he was bound and questioned. Upon his release, as he wandered to his home, much cast down, a voice came blessing him because of his unwearyingness. The voice commanded him to go again to the people and declare repentance. Rather than go home for even a short respite before undertaking his assignment, he returned immediately to preach as commanded (Hel. 9:19; 10:3, 12).

Samuel the Lamanite preached many days in Zarahemla and was rejected, but he humbly submitted to the Lord's will that he return again (Hel. 13:1-4). Mormon refrained from preaching when forbidden by the Spirit and then preached powerfully when the moment was right (Morm. 1:16, 3:2). He led the Nephites to battle even when he knew the outcome was hopeless. His son Moroni wandered alone for decades to fulfill the Lord's will.

One of the greatest examples of childlike humility from the Book of Mormon is found in the experience of the brother of Jared. He was "a large and mighty man" (Ether 1:34) who, although conversant with the ways of the world, had not been hardened by them. The Lord challenged his faith and ingenuity by letting him devise a plan for lighting the Jaredite vessels. The brother of Jared went to the Lord in prayer, asking him to touch the sixteen stones he had brought, that they might shine in darkness. When the veil was withdrawn and the brother of Jared saw the finger of the Lord, he fell to the earth in fear. The Lord inquired of him, "sawest thou more than this?" (Ether 3:9). With what must have been a heart full of wonder and anticipation, and a humility and innocence that was truly childlike, he simply replied, "Nay; Lord, show thyself unto me" (Ether 3:10).

A single phrase, speaking specifically of the bondage suffered by Alma the elder and his people, really applies to all those in the Book of Mormon who came to the Lord as little children: "And they did submit cheerfully and with patience to all the will of the Lord" (Mosiah 24:15).

Other adults in more modern times have achieved a great sense of the childlike virtue of humanity. One such example is George Washington, a man who at many critical junctures in the beginning of America could have stepped forward and assumed absolute control of government. That he never did spoke tellingly of his innate humility. During one of the most desperate moments of the Revolutionary War, it may have been his personal humility that saved this nation. Though the war with Britain was nearly over, rebellion was brewing among the officers and enlisted men because of the appalling lack of monetary and military support from the fledgling government of the new United States. Some of Washington's generals encouraged him to declare himself king and turn his army against the Continental Congress, collecting taxes by force.

"Washington called together the grumbling officers on March 15, 1783. They filled the hall called the Temple, which served for worship, dances, and conferences. He began to speak carefully and from a written manuscript, referring to the proposal of `either deserting our Country in the extremest hour of her distress, or turning our Arms against it. . . .' Washington appealed simply and honestly for reason, restraint, patience, and duty—all the good and unexciting virtues.

"And then Washington stumbled as he read. He squinted, paused, and out of his pocket he drew some new spectacles. `Gentlemen, you must pardon me,' he said in apology. `I have grown gray in your service and now find myself growing blind.'

"Most of his men had never seen the general wear glasses. Yes, the men said to themselves, eight hard years. They recalled the ruddy, full-blooded planter of 1775; now they saw the man of 51 who needed no powder for his hair. A big, good, fatherly man grown old. They wept, many of these warriors. And the [rebellion] dissolved."fn

President Spencer W. Kimball's steady, submissive attitude is an example of this childlike quality in our day. With a great love for his fellowmen, he struggled to know clearly the Lord's will that he might "do it" with the fortitude he displayed throughout his life. In his own words:

"I remember very vividly that day after day I walked to the temple and ascended to the fourth floor where we have our solemn assemblies and where we have our meetings of the Twelve and the First Presidency. After everybody had gone out of the temple, I knelt and prayed. I prayed with much fervency. I knew that something was before us that was extremely important to many of the children of God. I knew that we could receive the revelations of the Lord only by being worthy and ready for them and ready to accept them and put them into place. Day after day I went alone and with great solemnity and seriousness in the upper rooms of the temple, and there I offered my soul and offered my efforts to go forward with the program. I wanted to do what he wanted. I talked about it to him and said, `Lord, I want only what is right. We are not making any plans to be spectacularly moving. We want only the thing that thou dost want, and we want it when you want it and not until.'"fn

In response to this humble supplication and others like it, the Lord revealed that the priesthood could be extended to all worthy male Church members.

The supreme example of being like a little child is of course found in the Savior. He is the epitome of the words in Mosiah 3:19: "becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father." Isaiah, as quoted by Abinadi, explained that it pleased the Father for Christ to suffer, meaning that it pleased him that the Son would voluntarily submit himself as a willing sacrifice for the sins of the world (Mosiah 14:10). Nephi prophesied:

"Wherefore they scourge him, and he suffereth it; and they smite him, and he suffereth it. Yea, they spit upon him, and he suffereth it, because of his loving kindness and his long-suffering towards the children of men. . . . Yea, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, yieldeth himself, according to the words of the angel, as a man, into the hands of wicked men, to be lifted up, . . . crucified, . . . and to be buried in a sepulchre" (1 Ne. 19:9-10).

The Lord's supreme example of submission to the Father's will began in the premortal world. First he gave his intellectual and spiritual consent to the Father's plan of redemption. Then in the Garden of Gethsemane and on Calvary he added his complete spiritual and physical submission to the Father's will. His sublime phrase, "not my will, but thine, be done" is the clear standard of a humble attitude (Luke 22:42).

When Mormon wrote to his son Moroni about the purity and innocence of little children who have been redeemed by the atonement of Jesus Christ, he referred to Jesus as the Father's "Holy Child" (Moro. 8:3). In Elder Orson F. Whitney's report of a vision he had of the Savior's agony in Gethsemane, he described the Lord in these words: "I was perfectly familiar with his appearance—face, form and movements. He was of noble stature and majestic mien—not at all the weak . . . being that some painters have portrayed; but the very God that he was and is, as meek and humble as a little child."fn

CONCLUSION

Who then are those who have acquired the childlike qualities we have collectively entitled "humility"? Those who become as a little child, like Jesus. We must discard all of the unfortunate trappings of adulthood that encumber our ability to receive and follow the promptings of the Spirit. We must remember to cultivate the childlike attributes that permit us to draw close to the Lord. Perhaps if we unclutter our lives and take a long, loving look at little children, we will stop trying so hard to have them be like us and learn instead to be more like them and, in the end, more like him. By so doing, we may qualify for inclusion in the group to whom the Lord referred when he said, "Fear not, little children, for you are mine, and I have overcome the world, and you are of them that my Father hath given me; And none of them that my Father hath given me shall be lost" (D&C 50:41-42).

NOTES
