Sperry Symposium, Doctrines of the Book of Mormon: 1991 Sperry Symposium on the Book of Mormon ( 1992)

11

BY THE BOOK OF MORMON WE KNOW

Monte S. Nyman

Brigham Young University

The importance of the Book of Mormon in interpreting the doctrine of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was declared by the Lord at the time of the organization of the Church. In a series of revelations given on or around 6 April 1830, the Lord outlined the contents of the Book of Mormon, its purposes, and its effect upon the Church collectively and individually (D&C 20:8-18). These revelations were compiled and published as one revelation under the date of 6 April 1830. In these revelations, hereafter referred to as the April 6th revelation, the Lord said: "By these things [the Book of Mormon] we know" (D&C 20:17) and then gave twenty statements concerning doctrines that were definitely taught in the newly translated scripture (D&C 20:17-36). fn A full analysis of each of these twenty declarations is impossible here, but it is possible to give a brief overview of the doctrines and the major references where the teachings can be verified.

The first doctrine the Lord said was known through the Book of Mormon is that "there is a God" (D&C 20:17). The existence of God is reaffirmed in the Book of Mormon in the record of two separate encounters with anti-Christs, Sherem (Jacob 7) and Korihor (Alma 30). In both cases, a prophet of God refuted the pseudoarguments of his antagonist and presented convincing evidence that there is a Supreme Creator. In another Book of Mormon incident, Aaron, a missionary among the Lamanites, taught the agnostic Lamanite king to pray. His prayer is a witness that an agnostic can pray and thus come to know that there is a God (Alma 22:7-18). Nephi, son of Lehi, boldly testified: "For if there be no Christ there be no God; and if there be no God we are not, for there could have been no creation. But there is a God, and he is Christ, and he cometh in the fulness of his own time" (2 Ne. 11:7). Finally, near the end of the Book of Mormon, Moroni spoke to those of our day who do not believe in Christ and asked if they would believe in the day when the Lord visited the earth. He then testified that they would, at that time, know of a surety that there is a Christ but under a consciousness of guilt (Morm. 9:1-5). Throughout the Book of Mormon there is ample evidence that there is a God.

The April 6th revelation confirming the existence of God also declares that he "is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God" (D&C 20:17). These attributes of God are verified throughout the Book of Mormon. His nature, as stated by Samuel the Lamanite, is "of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head" (Hel. 13:38). His attributes are further described by Ammon as a God who "has all power, all wisdom, and all understanding; he comprehendeth all things, and he is a merciful Being, even unto salvation" (Alma 26:35). These five qualities illustrate facets of his infinite and eternal nature. Moreover, throughout the Book of Mormon, the prophets declare that he is the "same yesterday, today, and forever, and in him there is no variableness neither shadow of changing" (Morm. 9:9; see also 1 Ne. 10:18, 2 Ne. 27:23, Alma 31:17; Moro. 10:7.)

The April 6th revelation states further that the God in heaven is "the framer of heaven and earth, and all things which are in them" (D&C 20:17). The Book of Mormon bears witness to this throughout its pages. Father Lehi testified that "there is a God, and he hath created all things, both the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are" (2 Ne. 2:14). Jacob wrote that the "earth was created by the power of [God's] word" (Jacob 4:9). King Benjamin informed his subjects that to obtain salvation they must "believe in God; believe that he is, and that he created all things, both in heaven and in earth" (Mosiah 4:9). These three references are only a few of many similar testimonies (see Alma 18:28; 22:10), but there is one more of special significance. When Jesus Christ spoke to the Nephites after his crucifixion, he informed them that he had "created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are" (3 Ne. 9:15; see also Hel. 14:12). Thus the Creator God spoken of in the above passages is Jesus Christ. This same doctrine is taught in the New Testament (John 1:10; Col. 1:16; Heb. 1:2) as well as in the Doctrine and Covenants (D&C 76:24) and in the Pearl of Great Price (Moses 1:31-33). The Book of Mormon verifies the Creation and the Creator.

Another doctrine attributed to the Book of Mormon in the April 6th revelation is that God "created man, male and female, after his own image and in his own likeness, created he them" (D&C 20:18). This concept is, of course, the teaching of the first chapter of Genesis and illustrates what the revelation had stated earlier — that one of the purposes of the Book of Mormon is to prove the holy scriptures are true (D&C 20:11). The Book of Mormon references sustaining the creation of man in God's image are also many. Lehi bore testimony that God "created our first parents" (2 Ne. 2:15). Nephi bore witness that the Lord God "created all men" (2 Ne. 29:7). Jacob recorded that God "created all flesh" (Jacob 2:21). Abinadi was put to death because he said "Christ was the God, the Father of all things, . . . [who] should take upon him the image of man, and it should be the image after which man was created in the beginning" (Mosiah 7:27). And hundreds of years later, Moroni also testified that God created Adam (Morm. 9:11-12).

After the male and female were created, the Lord "gave unto them [Adam and Eve] commandments that they should love and serve him, the only living and true God, and that he should be the only being whom they should worship" (D&C 20:19). Implied in the statement is that Adam and Eve had their agency about whether or not they kept the commandments. The Book of Mormon illustrates the significance of agency in the keeping of the commandments. Lehi explained to his son Jacob, "to bring about his eternal purposes in the end of man, after he had created our first parents, . . . it must needs be that there was an opposition; even the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life; the one being sweet and the other bitter. Wherefore, the Lord God gave unto man that he should act for himself. Wherefore, man could not act for himself save it should be that he was enticed by the one or the other" (2 Ne. 2:15-16). Lehi further declared that "men are free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great Mediator of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil" (2 Ne. 2:27). This eternal doctrine of agency continued with Adam's posterity, as the Book of Mormon also repeatedly teaches (see Alma 3:26; Hel. 14:29-31).

Further, concerning the choices of Adam and Eve, the April 6th revelation states that "by the transgression of these holy laws man became sensual and devilish, and became fallen man" (D&C 20:20). The Book of Mormon is replete with teachings of man's fallen state. Lehi taught that "all mankind were in a lost and in a fallen state" (1 Ne. 10:6). Later he told Jacob that the Lord "showed unto all men that they were lost, because of the transgression of their parents" (2 Ne. 2:21). Lehi summarized the function of the Fall in these well-known words to his son Jacob: "Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy" (2 Ne. 2:25). An angel of the Lord told King Benjamin that "the natural [fallen] man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit" (Mosiah 3:19). Abinadi testified that the wicked "are carnal and devilish, and the devil has power over them; yea, even that old serpent that did beguile our first parents, which was the cause of their fall; which was the cause of all mankind becoming carnal, sensual, devilish, knowing evil from good, subjecting themselves to the devil. Thus all mankind were lost; and behold, they would have been endlessly lost were it not that God redeemed his people from their lost and fallen state" (Mosiah 16:3-4). As the above passages also show, the Book of Mormon testifies that the Fall is literal and purposeful. Alma taught Zeezrom that after the Fall, "this life became a probationary state; a time to prepare to meet God; a time to prepare for that endless state which has been spoken of by us, which is after the resurrection of the dead" (Alma 12:24). The fall of man is a misunderstood and controversial concept in the religious world, but it is clarified beautifully in the Book of Mormon.

Because of the Fall "the Almighty God gave his Only Begotten Son, as it is written in those scriptures which have been given of him" (D&C 20:21). The Book of Mormon references that describe the giving of the Only Begotten Son, or the Atonement, declare that the Atonement prepared the way "from the fall of man, and salvation is free" (2 Ne. 2:4), and it "prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit" (2 Ne. 9:10). Such references further reveal that because of the Atonement, the plan of mercy will "appease the demands of justice, that God might be a perfect, just God, and a merciful God also" (Alma 42:15; see also Alma 34:15-16) and that "the atonement bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead; and the resurrection of the dead bringeth back men into the presence of God" (Alma 42:23). The Book of Mormon is full of the doctrine of Christ's atonement.

The April 6th revelation explains that Christ "suffered temptations but gave no heed unto them" (D&C 20:22). The temptations of Christ, as revealed in the Nephite record, were a part of his mission, as outlined by an angel instructing King Benjamin and as later taught by Alma. The angel told King Benjamin that the Lord Omnipotent would "dwell in a tabernacle of clay, and shall go forth amongst men, working mighty miracles, such as healing the sick, raising the dead, causing the lame to walk, the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear, and curing all manner of diseases. And he shall cast out devils, or the evil spirits which dwell in the hearts of the children of men" (Mosiah 3:5-6). Alma bore a similar testimony: "And he shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people" (Alma 7:11). Thus, the first part of his mission in his three-year ministry was his setting the example for all mankind.

A second part of his mission was his crucifixion and resurrection, the overcoming of death. The angel told King Benjamin that the people in the meridian of time would "consider him a man, and say that he hath a devil, and shall scourge him, and shall crucify him. And he shall rise the third day from the dead; and behold, he standeth to judge the world; and behold, all these things are done that a righteous judgment might come upon the children of men" (Mosiah 3:9-10). Alma bore witness that Christ "will take upon him death, that he may loose the bands of death which bind his people" (Alma 7:12). This aspect of his mission (the overcoming of death) paid for the transgression of Adam.

The third part of his mission was his paying for the sins of all mankind in the garden of Gethsemane. The angel told King Benjamin, "For behold, and also his blood atoneth for the sins of those who have fallen by the transgression of Adam, who have died not knowing the will of God concerning them, or who have ignorantly sinned" (Mosiah 3:11). Alma said, "The Son of God suffereth according to the flesh that he might take upon him the sins of his people, that he might blot out their transgressions according to the power of his deliverance; and now behold, this is the testimony which is in me" (Alma 7:13). Jacob taught that the Atonement was infinite. He stated that Christ suffered "the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam" (2 Ne. 9:21). The Bible tells us that the Atonement was made, but the Book of Mormon tells us the doctrine of what the Lord's atonement did, how it was accomplished, and why.

Following Christ's suffering in Gethsemane, "He was crucified, died, and rose again the third day" (D&C 20:23). The Book of Mormon provides a second witness of this in its record of Christ's appearance to the Nephites. They heard the Father bear witness of him, and they saw the Savior descend and personally testify of his having drunk of the bitter cup of the Atonement. At his invitation, they felt the wounds in his body, "and did know of a surety and did bear record, that it was he, of whom it was written by the prophets, that should come" (3 Ne. 11:1-15). The Book of Mormon also bears record that there were others on the American continent who were resurrected at this time (3 Ne. 23:7-13) just as there had been in Jerusalem (Matt. 27:52-53). Many Book of Mormon prophets before the time of Christ testified of the coming resurrection. Samuel the Lamanite (Hel. 14:25) Alma (Alma 40:16-23); Amulek (Alma 11:40-45) Abinadi (Mosiah 15:20-26) and Jacob (2 1 Ne. 9:10-13) are among the Nephite prophets who foretold the resurrection. Through these prophets, the Book of Mormon defines the resurrection (Amulek), whereas the Bible does not, gives the order of the resurrection (Abinadi and Alma) in more detail than the Bible, and verifies what is taught in the Bible (Jacob and Samuel). The doctrine of the resurrection is significantly enhanced in the Book of Mormon.

Following Christ's brief ministry on earth as a resurrected God, he "ascended into heaven, to sit down on the right hand of the Father, to reign with almighty power according to the will of the Father" (D&C 20:24). As a resurrected being, Christ testified that he was "the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth" (3 Ne. 11:14). As the Creator, "the light and the life of the world" and "Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end" (3 Ne. 9:15-18), he had certainly reigned over the world before his earthly ministry. Abinadi (Mosiah 15:4) and Amulek (Alma 11:39) testified that he was the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth. The brother of Jared (about 2000 B.C.) recognized Christ as the God of the land (Ether 2:12). Christ caused the Nephite cities to be destroyed at the time of his crucifixion (3 Ne. 9:1-12). Mormon testified that all people will stand before the "judgment seat of Christ" (Morm. 3:20), reaffirming the biblical teaching that the Father has committed all judgment to Christ (John 5:22), who is thus now reigning in heaven. Moroni concluded the Book of Mormon by declaring he will see us "before the pleasing bar of the great Jehovah, the Eternal Judge of both quick and dead" (Moro. 10:34). These Nephite prophets sustained Christ as the Eternal Judge, who is the reigning God of the earth.

The April 6th revelation teaches that those who obtain salvation at the bar of God will be those who believe and are "baptized in his holy name, and endure in faith to the end" (D&C 20:25). The Savior, in defining his doctrine to the Nephites, said that "whoso believeth in me, and is baptized, the same shall be saved; and they are they who shall inherit the kingdom of God" (3 Ne. 11:33). Four hundred years later, Moroni quoted Jesus Christ: "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved" (Morm. 9:23). The Book of Mormon teaches that baptism is required for entrance into the kingdom of God.

The gospel principles are eternal. As the Lord revealed on April 6th, the requirements for salvation were for "not only those who believed after he came in the meridian of time, in the flesh, but all those from the beginning, even as many as were before he came" (D&C 20:26). For example, baptism has always been a requirement for salvation. It was initiated with Adam (Moses 6:64-65). Nephi taught the principle about 550 B.C. (2 Ne. 31). Alma outlined the covenant between God and man at baptism at the time he organized the Church of Christ about 150 B.C. (Mosiah 18:8-10). Every other basic principle of the gospel was likewise taught in Old Testament times. The Book of Mormon reveals that the principles of the gospel are eternal.

The gospel principles are not the only factors that are eternal. Concerning those who lived before the meridian of time and obtained salvation, the April 6th revelation states that they were those "who believed in the words of the holy prophets, who spake as they were inspired by the gift of the Holy Ghost, who truly testified of him in all things, [these] should have eternal life" (D&C 20:26). In this reference, three concepts are attributed to the Old Testament period: belief in the words of the prophets, the gift of the Holy Ghost, and prophets testifying of Christ. The first is rather commonly accepted but not the latter two. Once more the Book of Mormon verifies these concepts.

For example, using the definition of a prophet as one who speaks in the name of the Lord (Deut. 18:20-22), the Book of Mormon is a record of prophets. In the opening chapter, Lehi was called to be a prophet and lead the righteous out of Jerusalem (1 Ne. 1:5-18; 2:1). In the next chapter, Nephi heard the Lord speak to him and tell him he would be "a ruler and a teacher over [his] brethren" (1 Ne. 2:19-22). He was to be the Lord's spokesman. In subsequent chapters, the Lord designated other prophets. Jacob carried on in his brother's stead (Jacob 1:17). King Benjamin was assisted by the prophets in establishing peace in the land (W of M 1:18). Abinadi was a man among the apostate Nephites who began to prophesy in the name of the Lord (Mosiah 11:20). Alma was an instrument in the Lord's hands in bringing many to a knowledge of the truth (Mosiah 23:10). The list could go on: Alma the Younger; Amulek; Helaman; Nephi, son of Helaman; Samuel the Lamanite; and Nephi, son of Nephi. The Book of Mormon also shows that those Nephites who believed in their words obtained salvation, as the April 6th revelation declares.

That the prophets spoke "as they were inspired by the gift of the Holy Ghost" (D&C 20:26) settles, in the affirmative, an oftdebated subject—did the Holy Ghost function in Old Testament times? Nephi testified that the mysteries of God were revealed to his father, Lehi, and at all times by "the power of the Holy Ghost, which is the gift of God unto all those who diligently seek him" (1 Ne. 10:17-19). Nephi later detailed the role of the Holy Ghost as he spoke concerning the doctrine of Christ. He spoke of those who were baptized receiving the Holy Ghost and of the baptism of the Holy Ghost that would enable them to speak with the tongues of angels or to speak the words of Christ by revelation (2 1 Ne. 31:13-33:2 The mysteries of God, declared Lehi, would be unfolded "by the power of the Holy Ghost" (1 Ne. 10:19). There are frequent references to the gift of the Holy Ghost throughout the Book of Mormon (see 1 Ne. 13:37; Jacob 6:8; Alma 9:21). The prophets and others among the Nephites were influenced by the gift of the Holy Ghost. Thus the Book of Mormon confirms that the Holy Ghost is and always has been a revelator.

The prophets of the Old Testament also testified of Jesus Christ as aforementioned (3 Ne. 11:10). Although this was also declared by Jesus himself at the end of his Jerusalem ministry (Luke 24:27), it is not so obvious in the Old Testament. The Book of Mormon, however, bears witness that all the holy prophets had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming (Jacob 4:4) and "that none of the prophets have written, nor prophesied, save they have spoken concerning this Christ" (Jacob 7:11). Many specific prophets throughout the Nephite record verified the statement in Jacob: Lehi (1 Ne. 10:4-5), Nephi (1 1 Ne. 11:16-26), Jacob (Jacob 7:9-12), King Benjamin (Mosiah 3:5-13), and so on. Indeed, all the Nephite prophets and all other prophets testified of Christ.

The April 6th revelation speaks "as well of those who should come after, who should believe in the gifts and callings of God by the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of the Father and of the Son" (D&C 20:27). These gifts of the Spirit were enumerated by Moroni as he concluded the Book of Mormon record. He spoke of the source of these gifts and of their purposes (Moro. 10:8-19). There are other testimonies of these gifts functioning among the Nephites throughout the record (see, for example, Omni 1:25; Alma 9:21). The Nephites surely experienced the gifts of the Spirit.

The gifts of the Spirit bear "record of the Father and of the Son; which Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one God, infinite and eternal, without end" (D&C 20:27-28). Nephi bore testimony that the doctrine of Christ was "the only and true doctrine of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which is one God, without end" (2 Ne. 31:21). Alma spoke of the singular judgment to be made at "the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Spirit, which is one Eternal God" (Alma 11:44). Jesus commanded the Nephite Twelve to baptize "in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost" (3 Ne. 11:25). He then declared "that the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one" (3 Ne. 11:27; emphasis added). On another occasion, Mormon spoke of those who dwell in the presence of God singing "ceaseless praises with the choirs above, unto the Father, and unto the Son, and unto the Holy Ghost, which are one God, in a state of happiness which hath no end" (Morm. 7:7; emphasis added). The doctrine of the oneness of the Godhead in the Book of Mormon clarifies a long-debated and confusing biblical issue.

The April 6th revelation continues, "And we know that all men must repent and believe on the name of Jesus Christ, and worship the Father in his name, and endure in faith on his name to the end, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God" (D&C 20:29). These same principles are outlined by Nephi as the doctrine of Christ, which will bring salvation (2 Ne. 31:13-21). Nephi taught this doctrine in the Old Testament period before the advent of Christ and the supposed introduction of the higher law. Jesus later gave the same gospel to the Nephites as his doctrine and his gospel (3 Ne. 11:31-40; 27:9). The Book of Mormon shows once more that the gospel is eternal.

The April 6th revelation continues by using broader terms of the gospel that summarize the basic principles outlined above by Nephi and the Savior. As it states "we know that justification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true" (D&C 20:30). The doctrine of justification is that a person has met the requirements to receive the effects of Christ's atonement in his or her personal life and is forgiven of past sins. In Book of Mormon terminology, he or she is "guiltless before God" (see Mosiah 4:25-26; Morm. 7:7). This condition is attained through faith, repentance, and baptism of water and of the Spirit (3 Ne. 27:16; Moro. 6:4; 8:25). The recipient is justified because of the grace of Jesus Christ in atoning for the sins of all mankind (2 Ne. 9:21). Although these terms are used in the New Testament (Rom. 4:25; 5:1), the Book of Mormon makes them more understandable.

The follow-up doctrine of justification is sanctification, "sanctification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true, to all those who love and serve God with all their mights, minds, and strength" (D&C 20:31). The Book of Mormon teaches that sanctification is a condition that is attained through the reception of the Holy Ghost (3 Ne. 27:20). To be sanctified is to be made pure or holy and is a process that develops from fasting, prayer, humility, faith, and yielding one's heart to God (Hel. 3:35). Through the proper use of the priesthood and the gift of the Holy Ghost, a person is sanctified and cannot "look upon sin save it [be] with abhorrence" (Alma 13:12). The Book of Mormon gives examples of individuals who attained this condition: Nephi (2 1 Ne. 4:15-35), General Moroni (Alma 48:17), Ammon, the other sons of Mosiah, and Alma and his sons (Alma 48:18), and Helaman and his sons (Alma 48:19). The Book of Mormon also testifies that there were "many, exceedingly great many, who were made pure and entered into the rest of the Lord their God" (Alma 13:12). Sanctification is necessary to come into the presence of the Lord, for no unclean thing can dwell with him (3 Ne. 27:19). The Book of Mormon teaches the doctrine of sanctification and exemplifies its attainment among the Nephites.

Even though one is sanctified, he or she must endure in faith to the end. The Lord warned in the April 6th revelation that "there is a possibility that man may fall from grace and depart from the living God" (D&C 20:32). The Book of Mormon testifies that people may lose their opportunity to reach the celestial kingdom. For example, the people of Ammonihah were warned by Alma that "after having been such a highly favored people of the Lord; . . . having been visited by the Spirit of God; having conversed with angels, and having been spoken unto by the voice of the Lord; and having the spirit of prophecy, and the spirit of revelation, and also many gifts, the gift of speaking with tongues, and the gift of preaching, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and the gift of translation . . . should transgress contrary to the light and knowledge which they do have, . . . it would be far more tolerable for the Lamanites than for them" (Alma 9:20-23). Where much is given, much is required (Luke 12:48). Other Book of Mormon references verify what Alma taught the people of Ammonihah (Mosiah 4:11-12; Alma 4:13-14).

In relation to the possibility of falling from grace, the Lord warns: "Therefore let the church take heed and pray always, lest they fall into temptation" (D&C 20:33). This warning could be addressed to the individual members of the Church or to the Church collectively. In the Nephite record, it was often a collective warning. Alma resigned as chief judge to preach to the Church members, "seeing no way that he might reclaim them save it were in bearing down in pure testimony against them" (Alma 4:19). The Zoramites had fallen into apostasy, and Alma also headed a mission to save their souls (Alma 31). The Church was again broken up in A.D. 30, except among the Lamanites (3 Ne. 6). The Lord always provided inspired leaders to help people remain faithful, but "Satan had great power, unto the stirring up of the people to do all manner of iniquity, and to the puffing them up with pride, tempting them to seek for power, and authority, and riches, and the vain things of the world" (3 Ne. 6:15). Although the Book of Mormon addresses the Church collectively, the members of the Church both individually and collectively must take heed against the forces of evil.

The Lord continued his warning by saying, "Yea, and even let those who are sanctified take heed also" (D&C 20:34). King Benjamin likewise issued a warning to such people:

"After ye have known and have been taught all these things, if ye should transgress and go contrary to that which has been spoken, that ye do withdraw yourselves from the Spirit of the Lord, that it may have no place in you to guide you in wisdom's paths that ye may be blessed, prospered, and preserved—

"I say unto you, that the man that doeth this, the same cometh out in open rebellion against God; therefore he listeth to obey the evil spirit, and becometh an enemy to all righteousness; therefore, the Lord has no place in him, for he dwelleth not in unholy temples.

"Therefore if that man repenteth not, and remaineth and dieth an enemy to God, the demands of divine justice do awaken his immortal soul to a lively sense of his own guilt, which doth cause him to shrink from the presence of the Lord, and doth fill his breast with guilt, and pain, and anguish, which is like an unquenchable fire, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever.

"And now I say unto you, that mercy hath no claim on that man; therefore his final doom is to endure a never-ending torment" (Mosiah 2:36-39).

The above verses seem to describe sons of perdition, but they are sufficient to warn us of the sacredness of the gospel and the consequences of sinning against it.

The Lord concluded the April 6th revelation concerning the doctrines taught in the Book of Mormon with this anticipatory declaration:

"And we know that these things are true and according to the revelations of John, neither adding to, nor diminishing from the prophecy of his book, the holy scriptures, or the revelations of God which shall come hereafter by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, the voice of God, or the ministering of angels.

"And the Lord God has spoken it; and honor, power and glory be rendered to his holy name, both now and ever. Amen" (D&C 20:35-36).

Many people today refer to Rev. 22:18-19 as a refutation of the Book of Mormon because they claim it is adding to the Bible. The Book of Mormon clarifies and interprets the Bible, but it does not add to the principles of the gospel. It is a second witness to the truthfulness of what the Bible teaches. It confirms the doctrines and the gospel of Jesus Christ laid down in the Bible. This paper contains a summary of those doctrines that the Lord declared in D&C 20 we would know through the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. It seems apparent that one of the purposes in giving the revelation was to show that the Book of Mormon is the source for the establishment of Church doctrine.

Indeed, the Bible itself contains a second witness to the doctrinal importance of the Book of Mormon. Isaiah, in prophesying of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, testified that the people would learn doctrine from reading it (Isa. 29:24; 2 Ne. 27:35). The doctrine of the Church is important. As Elder Boyd K. Packer has testified:

"True doctrine, understood, changes attitudes and behavior.

"The study of the doctrines of the gospel will improve behavior quicker than a study of behavior will improve behavior. Preoccupation with unworthy behavior can lead to unworthy behavior. That is why we stress so forcefully the study of the doctrines of the gospel."fn

We now have the Book of Mormon. May we read it and learn of the doctrine of Jesus Christ.

NOTES
