Sperry Symposium, Doctrines of the Book of Mormon: 1991 Sperry Symposium on the Book of Mormon ( 1992)

12

"AS PLAIN AS WORD CAN BE"

D. Kelly Ogden

Brigham Young University

Prophets in Bible lands sometimes spoke and wrote using obscure figurative language because the people hardened their hearts and rejected the many plain and precious things, which were plain, and pure, and easy to the understanding of all men (see 1 Ne. 13:29; 14:23).

"But behold, the Jews were a stiffnecked people; and they despised the words of plainness, and killed the prophets, and sought for things that they could not understand. Wherefore, because of their blindness, which blindness came by looking beyond the mark, they must needs fall; for God hath taken away his plainness from them, and delivered unto them many things which they cannot understand, because they desired it" (Jacob 4:14).

Old Testament prophets delivered their prophecies plainly, "for the salvation of [their] souls," but some Jews despised plainness, sought complexity, and God took away the plainness. Satan has always tried to lead our minds away "from the simplicity that is in Christ" (2 Cor. 11:3).

While figurative language may thus be used to disguise some messages, it can also be used to enhance the meaning for those who understand. Figurative language is poetic; it is a unique use of language. It uses words that, if they were understood literally, could obscure the actual intent of the expression. Figurative language is saying one thing that represents another. The rib of Adam used in creating a woman (Gen. 2:22), the burning coal used in cleansing Isaiah (Isaiah 6:6-7), and the scrolls or books that Ezekiel and John were to eat (Ezek. 3:1; Rev. 10:9) were all symbolic expressions. The woman was formed to be "one" with Adam, but she was not necessarily formed from his rib. Isaiah's cleansing was literal, but it was spiritual rather than physical. Ezekiel and John took to heart and performed their missions to the people of Israel, but not by literally eating written words.

The Book of Mormon features some of the world's most beautiful and powerful poetic writings, replete with figurative expressions. From deep in the sensitive heart of the prophet Nephi we feel these words rich with meaning: "By day have I waxed bold in mighty prayer before him; yea, my voice have I sent up on high. . . .

"And upon the wings of his Spirit hath my body been carried away upon exceedingly high mountains. . . .

" . . . if the Lord in his condescension unto the children of men hath visited men in so much mercy, why should my heart weep and my soul linger in the valley of sorrow, and my flesh waste away, and my strength slacken . . . ?

" . . . why should I give way to temptations, that the evil one have place in my heart to destroy my peace and afflict my soul? . . .

"May the gates of hell be shut continually before me, because that my heart is broken and my spirit is contrite! O Lord, wilt thou not shut the gates of thy righteousness before me, that I may walk in the path of the low valley, that I may be strict in the plain road!

"O Lord, wilt thou encircle me around in the robe of thy righteousness!" (2 Ne. 4:24-33).

And Jacob, Nephi's brother, was not one whit behind him in strength of poetic expression: "Our lives passed away like as it were unto us a dream, we being a lonesome and a solemn people, wanderers, cast out from Jerusalem, born in tribulation, in a wilderness, and hated of our brethren, which caused wars and contentions; wherefore, we did mourn out our days" (Jacob 7:26).

Centuries later, Mormon, the general, prophet, and historian, described the value of studying the scriptures, or, as he put it,["lay[ing] hold upon the word of God":

"We see that whosoever will may lay hold upon the word of God, which is quick and powerful, which shall divide asunder all the cunning and the snares and the wiles of the devil, and lead the man of Christ in a strait and narrow course across that everlasting gulf of misery which is prepared to engulf the wicked—

"And land their souls, yea, their immortal souls, at the right hand of God in the kingdom of heaven, to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and with Jacob, and with all our holy fathers, to go no more out" (Hel. 3:29-30).

As is apparent from the preceding passages, ancient prophets in the western hemisphere were skilled in the use of figurative language. They generally avoided using obscure figures with hidden meanings, however, for they delighted in things "plain and precious." Beginning with Nephi, the Book of Mormon prophets carefully and intentionally explained many of their revelations and their doctrines in plain language. Nephi, Jacob, Benjamin, and Alma all gave reasons for this approach (in italics):

"My soul delighteth in plainness unto my people, that they may learn" (2 Ne. 25:4).

"I proceed with mine own prophecy, according to my plainness; in the which I know that no man can err. . . . I have spoken plainly that ye cannot err" (2 Ne. 25:7, 20).

"My soul delighteth in plainness; for after this manner doth the Lord God work among the children of men . . . unto their understanding" (2 Ne. 31:3).

"These things are manifested unto us plainly, for the salvation of our souls" (Jacob 4:13).

"I have spoken plainly unto you that ye might understand" (Mosiah 2:40).

"I have spoken unto you plainly that ye cannot err, or have spoken according to the commandments of God" (Alma 5:43).

"They are made known unto us in plain terms, that we may understand, that we cannot err" (Alma 13:23).

Nephi taught that the Lord operates with plainness among his people: "He doeth nothing save it be plain unto the children of men" (2 Ne. 26:33). Writings on the brass plates, and later on the Liahona, were plain and simple (1 Ne. 1:19; 16:29). Further testimonials of the Lord's manner of speaking in plainness have come forth in our own day:

"Behold, here is the agency of man, and here is the condemnation of man; because that which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them" (D&C 93:31).

"For this cause, that men might be made partakers of the glories which were to be revealed, the Lord sent forth the fulness of his gospel, his everlasting covenant, reasoning in plainness and simplicity" (D&C 133:57).

PLAINNESS WHEN USING FIGURATIVE LANGUAGE

Often when Book of Mormon prophets used figurative language they would immediately explain what they meant so that there would be no confusion or misunderstanding. Nephi, who gloried in plainness and truth (2 Ne. 9:47; 33:6), gave us a classic illustration, as recorded in 1 Ne. 10:14. Note how, after each phrase of his father's prophecy, Nephi immediately followed it with an explanation (the italicized words signal the plainer rendering):

"And after the house of Israel should be scattered they should be gathered together again; or, in fine, after the Gentiles had received the fulness of the Gospel, the natural branches of the olive-tree, or the remnants of the house of Israel, should be grafted in, or come to the knowledge of the true Messiah."

As if those internal explanations were not sufficient, Nephi later went on to expound in yet greater detail the meaning of the figures his father had introduced (see 1 Ne. 15:12-20). Nephi's lengthy explanation is testimony to his devotion to the plainness required of him by the Lord.

Throughout the Book of Mormon, other prophets were equally as conscientious about clarifying their figurative expressions. Following are more examples of figures of speech accompanied by immediate and plain definition or explanation (in italics):

Trampling under feet: setting at naught or hearkening not to counsel.

"The things which some men esteem to be of great worth, both to the body and soul, others set at naught and trample under their feet. Yea, even the very God of Israel do men trample under their feet; I say, trample under their feet but I would speak in other words — they set him at naught, and hearken not to the voice of his counsels" (1 Ne. 19:7).

Kingdom of the devil: includes churches and individuals with various evil practices.

"The time speedily shall come that all churches which are built up to get gain, and all those who are built up to get power over the flesh, and those who are built up to become popular in the eyes of the world, and those who seek the lusts of the flesh and the things of the world, and to do all manner of iniquity; yea, in fine, all those who belong to the kingdom of the devil are they who need fear" (1 Ne. 22:23).

Making flesh his arm: trusting in man.

"I will not put my trust in the arm of flesh; for I know that cursed is he that putteth his trust in the arm of flesh. Yea, cursed is he that putteth his trust in man or maketh flesh his arm" (2 Ne. 4:34).

"Cursed is he that putteth his trust in man, or maketh flesh his arm, or shall hearken unto the precepts of men" (2 Ne. 28:31).

Monster: death and hell, meaning death of body and death of spirit.

[[God] prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit" (2 Ne. 9:10).

Chains: death and hell, captivity by the devil.

"He grasps them with his awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance. Yea, they are grasped with death, and hell" (2 Ne. 28:22-23).

"They are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell" (Alma 12:11).

Lake of fire and brimstone: endless torment.

"Ye must go away into that lake of fire and brimstone, whose flames are unquenchable, and whose smoke ascendeth up forever and ever, which lake of fire and brimstone is endless torment" (Jacob 6:10; see also 2 Ne. 28:23; Jacob 3:11).

Seed: heirs of the kingdom of God.

"Whosoever has heard the words of the prophets, yea, all the holy prophets who have prophesied concerning the coming of the Lord — I say unto you, that all those who have hearkened unto their words, and believed that the Lord would redeem his people, and have looked forward to that day for a remission of their sins, I say unto you, that these are his seed, or they are the heirs of the kingdom of God" (Mosiah 15:11).

Seed: the word (of God); and planting seed: exercising faith.

[[The people] sent forth unto [Alma] desiring to know . . . [how] they might obtain this fruit of which he had spoken, or how they should plant the seed, or the word of which he had spoken, which he said must be planted in their hearts; or in what manner they should begin to exercise their faith" (Alma 33:1).

Good fruit: works of righteousness.

"Whosoever bringeth forth not good fruit, or whosoever doeth not the works of righteousness, the same have cause to wail and mourn" (Alma 5:36).

Fruits of their labors: their own evil works.

"They are cast out, and consigned to partake of the fruits of their labors or their works, which have been evil" (Alma 40:26).

Turning from right to left: turning from right to wrong.

[[God] cannot walk in crooked paths; neither doth he vary from that which he hath said; neither hath he a shadow of turning from the right to the left, or from that which is right to that which is wrong" (Alma 7:20).

The last day: the day we stand before God to be judged.

"As a testimony to our God at the last day, or at the day that we shall be brought to stand before him to be judged" (Alma 24:15).

Murdered his children: led them away to destruction.

"Yea, and I had murdered many of his children, or rather led them away unto destruction" (Alma 36:14).

PLAINNESS WHEN TEACHING DOCTRINE

Nephi did not want anyone to mistake the identity of the Messiah. When speaking of the coming Messiah, in the space of only a few verses he defined and described him with several other role-titles: Savior (1 Ne. 10:4), Redeemer (10:5), Lamb of God (10:10; 12:18), Lord (10:14), and Son of God (10:17). Helaman later supplemented that identification with the following admonition to his sons: "Remember, remember that it is upon the rock of our Redeemer, who is Christ, the Son of God, that ye must build your foundation" (Hel. 5:12). Still later, the Redeemer appeared to his people in the western world and clarified further his identity: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ the Son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, . . . I am the God of Israel [i.e., the great Jehovah], and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world" (3 Ne. 9:15; 11:14). In light of the confusion over Jesus Christ that is so prevalent among modern-day Christians, it was wise for ancient writers to specify in plain written language, using titles and descriptions, just who our God is.

Furthermore, some Christian sects have taught that children are born into this world with the "original sin" of Father Adam weighing upon them and are thus consigned to eternal misery and damnation until they are baptized in the name of Christ to remove that sin. Later biblical words came down to us in the following form: "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Cor. 15:22). King Benjamin clarified the doctrine with additional explanation: "For behold, as in Adam, or by nature, they fall, even so the blood of Christ atoneth for their sins" (Mosiah 3:16; emphasis added). The Hebrew noun adam occurs more than five hundred times in the Old Testament with the generic meaning "man" or "mortal man" or "natural man." King Benjamin plainly taught that by birth into this world we become "natural man," an enemy to God and all righteousness, and must overcome that nature by submission to the Holy Ghost and the atonement of Jesus Christ. Indeed, children are not born in sin (that is, with sin hanging over them because of that original transgression) but are born into a natural or fallen or sinful world. We as individuals are fallen not because of Father Adam's personal act but because we chose to take on a mortal or natural body. It is, as King Benjamin's words indicate, "in Adam, or by nature" that we fall.

The prophet Alma clarified another misconception. The apostle Paul, writing more than a century after Alma (but possibly quoting an older document), penned a general doctrinal epistle to the "Hebrews," and in that epistle something is described as "having neither beginning of days, nor end of life" (7:3). The context as preserved in our modern Bible would identify "Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of the most high God" as the antecedent to which the description refers. Alma, however, clarified the meaning of the words in a great discourse on the priesthood of God: "This high priesthood being after the order of his Son, which order was from the foundation of the world; or in other words, being without beginning of days or end of years, being prepared from eternity to all eternity . . ." (Alma 13:7; emphasis added).

On another occasion Alma defined in plain terms what is meant by resurrection from the dead: "Behold, I say unto you, that there is no resurrection — or, I would say, in other words, that this mortal does not put on immortality, this corruption does not put on incorruption — until after the coming of Christ" (Alma 40:2; emphasis added). This is an especially valuable clarification since many modern religions do not believe in a literal resurrection of the body.

PLAINNESS WHEN USING CULTURAL OR THEOLOGICAL TERMS

In our English translation of the Book of Mormon, a word derived from Greek is used to describe places of worship. When Joseph Smith came to the passage we now identify as 2 Ne. 26:26, he used the familiar word synagogues, which means places of assembly, or meetinghouses. While engraving his teachings on the plates, Nephi likely employed a Hebrew or cognate word and, to avoid having anyone misunderstand what he meant, he also provided a simple description: "Behold, hath he commanded any that they should depart out of the synagogues, or out of the houses of worship?" (emphasis added).

As another example, the term day is often used in scripture to refer not to a twenty-four-hour period but to a general time or period. We speak of Abraham's day or Lehi's day. We refer to the "days" of Jesus. Day simply means a period of time, as Jacob noted in his prophesying about the future of Israel: "And the day that he shall set his hand again the second time to recover his people, is the day, yea, even the last time, that the servants of the Lord shall go forth in his power, to nourish and prune his vineyard" (Jacob 6:2; emphasis added).

Another important contribution comes from the book of Mosiah. Most readers of scripture in the ancient and modern worlds have probably wondered how to define the concept of "devils." King Benjamin taught that the mortal Messiah would "cast out devils, or the evil spirits which dwell in the hearts of the children of men" (Mosiah 3:6; emphasis added). That definition is in itself figurative, for no spirits literally "dwell in the hearts" of others, though devils, or evil spirits, can and do influence the hearts (the feelings and thoughts) of humankind.

Mormon was also conscious of plainness in his writings. At least three times he mentioned the attempts of antagonists to "cross" the prophets in their words (Mosiah 12:19; Alma 10:16; and Hel. 9:19). To ensure that no one misunderstand the image of "crossing," Mormon added a definitive explanation of the word: "it came to pass that they began to question Amulek, that thereby they might make him cross his words, or contradict the words which he should speak" (Alma 10:16; emphasis added).

Some of these antagonists suffered the condemnation of having their names "blotted out." So no one could mistake the meaning of the figure here employed, the writer quickly added the customary definition and explanation: "that the names of the wicked shall not be numbered among the names of the righteous" (Alma 5:57; 6:3; emphasis added).

And thus we can learn from these few examples the remarkable propensity of Book of Mormon writers to delight in plainness, the manner in which the Lord himself works among the children of men. All of this is done, as the prophets explained, to the end that we may understand and learn and not err. They intentionally wrote in this "most correct of any book on earth" with a plainness and simplicity that invites us to "get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book" (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, 4:461). The Book of Mormon was given "in plainness, even as plain as word can be" (2 Ne. 32:7).
