Sperry Symposium, Doctrines of the Book of Mormon: 1991 Sperry Symposium on the Book of Mormon ( 1992)

13

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS IN THE BOOK OF MORMON

David Rolph Seely

Brigham Young University

The Ten Commandments are an integral part of the covenants the Lord has made with his children throughout history and are found in various forms in the Old and New Testaments, the Book of Mormon, and the Doctrine and Covenants.fn Biblical scholars have examined the Ten Commandments and how they function, individually and as a corpus, in the Old and New Testaments. Because the descendants of Lehi were well versed in the laws recorded on the brass plates — which contained much of the same material in our Old Testament — some of these scholarly observations may prove useful to Book of Mormon studies: first, providing a definition of the significance of the Ten Commandments in the Old and New Testaments and, second, providing points of comparison by which the Ten Commandments in the Book of Mormon can be more sharply defined.

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS IN THE BIBLE

Old Testament scholar Moshe Weinfeld observed: "The Decalogue is to be seen, then, as a basic list of concrete imperatives applicable to every individual Israelite. They represent a distillation, so to speak, of the core demands made by the God of Israel on those covenanted to him."fn He pointed out these imperatives recorded in the Old Testament were concrete and absolute because they dealt with injunctions that are not tempered by time, space, or circumstance.

The Ten Commandments were applicable to each individual because they were the words of God himself to his children, not through Moses as a mediator but to each individual Israelite in the imperative — the second person singular: "thou shalt" or "thou shalt not" (Ex. 20:1-17; Deut. 4:12; 5:4; 12). To remind the people of the centrality of these commandments, the Lord wrote them with his finger on tablets of stone, which were then placed in the Ark of the Covenant (Ex. 31:18, 32:16; 34:1, 28; Deut. 4:13; 9:10; 10:1). These commandments, accepted by the people by covenant, thus defined the covenant community and membership in it. They embodied what the Lord demanded of his people; and those who disobeyed those commandments excluded themselves from the covenant community.

From ancient times commentators have seen a natural division in the Ten Commandments between the first five and the last five. The first five deal with the relationship between God and man, and the second five, with the relationship between man and man. Some commentators have found a separate hierarchy within each set, as described by Moshe Greenberg: "Even within each set of five there is a specific hierarchy: the obligation to worship God precedes the duty to honor His name, and both of these injunctions precede honoring His holy day. Finally in the first set, one must also honor one's parents. There is also a hierarchy among the five ethical Commandments: the value of life, the marriage bond (in the Masoretic version), the right to possession, reliability of public testimony, and finally the prohibition of guilty desires, which aims at safeguarding the previous four superior values."fn

The Ten Commandments as a group and as individual commandments play an important role in the Old Testament text. They are found in a group in Ex. 20:1-17 and again in Deut. 5:6-21, with some significant differences.fn Each of the commandments, except the tenth against coveting, are attested to several times in the Pentateuch as an essential part of the Mosaic law (Lev. 19:3-4, 11-13; Deut. 27:15-26). In addition these commandments are cited, either individually or as a group, in the prophetic literature as indictments against Israel for breaking the covenant, and the reason for which she will be punished and destroyed (see especially Hosea 4:1-2; Jer. 7:9; Ezek. 18, 22).

Scholar David Noel Freedman has noted that the text of the Primary History (the continuous historical narrative from Genesis through 2 Kings) contains a specific incident of the breaking of each of nine of the Ten Commandments. He suggests that this may have been a deliberate attempt by a prophetic editor of this work to emphasize the systematic breaking of each of the Commandments, thus further justifying the Lord's eventual destruction of Israel for breaking the covenant.fn

Interestingly, Freedman did not identify an example of the tenth commandment "Thou shalt not covet" — a sin present in several episodes of biblical history: Achan, David and Bathsheba, and Ahab and Naboth's vineyard. He did not count these episodes because they do not focus in detail on that particular sin but rather focus respectively on stealing, adultery, and false witness. Freedman noted, "The tenth commandment is distinctive. Its emphasis is on motivation or attitude, rather than action, as is clearly the case with the other commandments. It functions therefore as a complement or supplement to several of the preceding commandments — stealing, murder, adultery and false swearing — providing the motivation clause or explanation of the mental or emotional process behind the commission of crime."fn

In the New Testament Jesus acknowledged the Ten Commandments as the foundation of the law when he recited them to the rich man seeking eternal life (Matt. 19:17-19; Mark 10:19; Luke 18:20), and in the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. 5) where he referred to murder, adultery, and forswearing. When Jesus was asked, "Master, which is the great commandment in the law?" he answered, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets" (Matt. 22:36-40). Jesus' pronouncement reflected the rabbinic tradition that the whole Torah could be summarized by two commandments, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God," found in Deut. 6:5, covering all those commandments between God and man, and "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself," found in Lev. 19:18, covering those commandments between man and man.fn

Some have argued that Jesus was summarizing not just the entire law but more specifically the Ten Commandments into two commandments.fn Paul also cited the last five of the Ten and summarized them into one commandment: "Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loveth another hath fulfilled the law. For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness, Thou shalt not covet; and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. Love worketh no ill to his neighbour: therefore love is the fulfilling of the law" (Rom. 13:8-10).

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS IN THE BOOK OF MORMON

It is logical to assume that the Ten Commandments were on the brass plates as part of the law of Moses (1 1 Ne. 4:15-16; 5:11). Nephi specifically mentioned one of the reasons for going back to Jerusalem for the brass plates was to obtain a written record of the law, nothing, "They could not keep the commandments of the Lord according to the law of Moses, save they should have the law" (1 Ne. 4:15). Constant references to the law of Moses in the Book of Mormon (2 1 Ne. 25:20, 24, 30; Jacob 4:5; Alma 25:15-16; Hel. 13:1; 3 Ne. 1:24) indicate the righteous people's devotion to the law. In contrast, the Mulekites, who brought no records with them, lost a knowledge of God (Omni 1:17; 1 Ne. 4:15).

When Abinadi was brought before the priests of Noah to be examined, he asked them, "If ye teach the law of Moses why do ye not keep it?" (Mosiah 12:29) and proceeded to recite to them the Ten Commandments. Abinadi's sermon to the priests of Noah affirmed that the Ten Commandments were known to the Book of Mormon people in essentially the same form as we know them from Ex. 20. As he read the commandments, he was endowed with the Spirit, "and his face shone with exceeding luster, even as Moses' did while in the mount of Sinai, while speaking with the Lord" (Mosiah 13:5). The description of the Spirit of the Lord upon him as it was on Moses added to Abinadi's prophetic stature and the authority of his words.

I will now examine the Ten Commandments as they are represented in the Book of Mormon either by direct reference or by allusion. Just as in the Old Testament, the Ten Commandments represent the warp and woof of Book of Mormon religious understanding and practice both with respect to the law of Moses as well as the higher law. I will cite each commandment as it is recorded in Mosiah from the mouth of Abinadi.

Commandment 1

"I am the Lord thy God, who hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt have no other God before me" (Mosiah 12:34-35; see Ex. 20:2-3). Although the Book of Mormon does not contain a precise quotation of this commandment other than the quotation of Abinadi, the Lord alluded to this commandment in similar language — associating the obligation to honor the Lord God with his deliverance of Israel from Egypt and, more specifically, with his deliverance of the Lehites from the destruction of Jerusalem: "After ye have arrived in the promised land, ye shall know that I, the Lord, . . . did deliver you from destruction; yea, that I did bring you out of the land of Jerusalem" (1 Ne. 17:14-15). Nephi interpreted the Lehites' experience in the wilderness and their journey to the promised land as a type of the Exodus and Moses' leading his people to the promised land (1 Ne. 4:2-3; 17:13; Alma 36:28). Furthermore Nephi taught his brothers that the relationship prescribed in the law of Moses is based on love: "And he loveth those who will have him to be their God. Behold, he loved our fathers, and he covenanted with them, yea, even Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob" (1 Ne. 17:40; see also 2 Ne. 25:20; Mosiah 7:19; 12:34; Alma 36:28-30).

Abinadi introduced the Ten Commandments in Mosiah 12 thus: "I know if ye keep the commandments of God ye shall be saved; yea, if ye keep the commandments which the Lord delivered unto Moses in the mount of Sinai, saying: I am the Lord thy God, who hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt have no other God before me" (Mosiah 12:33-34). A similar juxtaposition of deliverance with obedience is found in Alma's talk with his son Helaman: "For he has brought our fathers out of Egypt, and he has swallowed up the Egyptians in the Red Sea; and he led them by his power into the promised land; yea, and he has delivered them out of bondage and captivity from time to time.

"Yea, and he has also brought our fathers out of the land of Jerusalem. . . .

"But behold, my son, this in not all; for ye ought to know as I do know, that inasmuch as ye shall keep the commandments of God ye shall prosper in the land" (Alma 36:28-30; see also 36:1-2).

Commandment 2

"Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image. . . . Thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them" (Mosiah 13:12-13; see Ex. 20:3). There is no other passage in the Book of Mormon that quotes this commandment, but idolatry is an important part of apostasy throughout. For example, several passages from Isaiah and Micah about idolatry are included in the Book of Mormon. Nephi quotes Isaiah in 1 and 2 Nephi, and the Savior quotes Micah in 3 Ne. 21:12 (1 Ne. 20:5 = Isa. 48:5; 2 Ne. 12:7-8, 18, 20 = Isa. 2:7-8, 18, 20; 2 Ne. 20:10-11 = Isa. 10:10-11; and 3 Ne. 21:17 = Micah 1:7). One sign of Lamanite degradation and apostasy was idolatry, as recorded in Enos 1:20; Mosiah 9:12; Alma 17:15; Morm. 4:14, 21. It was also a sign of Nephite apostasy, most notably the Nephites under King Noah (in Mosiah 11:6-7) — a people addressed by Abinadi, who read the commandment forbidding idolatry. Apostasy is also noted in the time of Alma the Younger (Mosiah 27:8), in particular the Zoramites, who were led "to bow down to dumb idols" in Alma 31:1, and the Jaredites, in Ether 7:23.

Of particular interest are several passages addressed to latter-day readers. Jacob warned, "Yea, wo unto those that worship idols, for the devil of all devils delighteth in them" (2 Ne. 9:37). Mormon addressed our time: "And repent of your evil doings, of your lyings and deceivings, and of your whoredoms, and of your secret abominations, and your idolatries" (3 Ne. 30:2).

Commandment 3

"Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain" (Mosiah 13:15; see Ex. 20:7). Solemn oaths in the Old Testament were sworn by invoking the name of the Lord. An oath that was made falsely or without intent to fulfill it would thus be categorized as "taking the name of the Lord in vain."fn Of course this commandment also applies to any profane usage of the name of God. The solemnity of oaths is well illustrated in the Book of Mormon, as in the case of Zoram, who swore "as the Lord liveth" (1 Ne. 4:32).

In a legal setting, if perjury were committed in the name of God, the third commandment would be related to the ninth commandment regarding "bearing false witness." The third commandment is probably the commandment addressed by Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount about "forswearing," where he taught that an oath ought to be valid simply on a person's word "yea, yea;" or "nay, nay" (3 Ne. 12:33-37 = Matt. 5:33-37). Jesus also repeated to the Nephites a passage from Malachi regarding this commandment: "I will be a swift witness . . . against false swearers" (3 Ne. 24:5 = Mal. 3:5).

Nephi warned the latter-day readers of the Book of Mormon of their obligation to this commandment when he said, "The Lord God hath commanded that men . . . should not take the name of the Lord their God in vain" (2 Ne. 26:32).

Commandment 4

"Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy" (Mosiah 13:16; see Ex. 20:8-11). Only two references exist to this commandment in the Book of Mormon. Jarom said about the Nephites: "They observed to keep the law of Moses and the sabbath day holy unto the Lord" (Jarom 1:5). And Alma, when he organized the Church at the waters of Mormon, instructed the members "that they should observe the sabbath day, and keep it holy, and also every day they should give thanks to the Lord their God" (Mosiah 18:23).

Commandment 5

"Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee" (Mosiah 13:20; see Ex. 20:12). The only reference to this commandment is Nephi's sermon to his brothers Laman and Lemuel when they were commanded to build a ship. Nephi quoted the commandment in full: "wherefore, worship the Lord thy God, and honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God shall give thee" (1 Ne. 17:55). The reference to the land here is undoubtedly the promised land in the new world that was promised to the posterity of Lehi as descendants of Joseph (3 1 Ne. 15:12-13), just as Canaan was promised to the children of Israel.

Apart from this reference, the Book of Mormon is full of narratives that illustrate the significance of this commandment in the experiences of Nephi, Jacob, Enos, Mosiah, Helaman, Shiblon, Helaman's stripling warriors, and Moroni. Negative examples exist with Laman, Lemuel, Alma the Younger, the sons of Mosiah, and Corianton. Eventually some of these "bad examples" repented through the efforts of their parents.

Commandment 6

"Thou shalt not kill" (Mosiah 13:21; see Ex. 20:13). The Hebrew word (rasah) translated here as "kill" does not distinguish between the English words "kill" and "murder." The translators of the King James Version rendered the Hebrew rasah as "kill" as well as "murder."

The commandment against killing is found throughout the Book of Mormon in contexts ranging from premeditated murder and secret combinations to war. Satan, the author of secret combinations, "hath caused man to commit murder from the beginning" (Ether 8:25; see also 2 Ne. 26:22). Murder was the basis of the secret combinations that led to the downfall of the Jaredites and the Nephites. In 2 Ne. 26 Nephi cited six of the Ten Commandments together: "The Lord God hath commanded that men should not murder" (2 Ne. 26:32). Alma reminded his son Corianton that the worst sin was "the shedding of innocent blood" (Alma 39:5). Jesus cited this commandment when he said: "It is also written before you, that thou shalt not kill, and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment of God" (3 Ne. 12:21).

The seriousness of murder is emphasized in several passages advocating capital punishment: the story of Nehor, who was killed because he "shed the blood of a righteous man" in Alma 1:13-14, as well as similar injunctions found in Alma 34:11-12 and 42:19. In lists of laws or sins in the Book of Mormon, relating to two or more of the Ten Commandments, "kill" occurs only twice whereas "murder" occurs twenty times.

Commandment 7

"Thou shalt not commit adultery" (Mosiah 13:22; see Ex. 20:14). The phrase "commit adultery" occurs six times outside Abinadi's quotation of the commandments and the passage in the Sermon on the Mount that Jesus teaches to the Nephites (3 Ne. 12:27-32). The English word adultery does not occur in the translation of the small plates at all. On the small plates the term for immorality is most often rendered "whoredoms." For example, Jacob spoke to the Nephites, "Wo unto them who commit whoredoms" (2 Ne. 9:36) and "For I, the Lord God, delight in the chastity of women. And whoredoms are an abomination before me" (Jacob 2:28; see also v. 33). Nephi warned latter-day readers "that they should not commit whoredoms" (2 Ne. 26:32). Whereas the term "commit whoredoms" covers a broad range of immorality, it often occurs in contexts suggesting it to be synonymous with adultery.

Commandment 8

"Thou shalt not steal" (Mosiah 13:22; see Ex. 20:15). The commandment against stealing is specifically referred to by Nephi in the passage directed towards the Gentiles in which he refers to six of the Ten Commandments: "And again, the Lord God hath commanded that men . . . should not steal" (2 Ne. 26:32).

In the Book of Mormon lists of sins, four different English words were used to mean "stealing": "steal," "thieve," "rob," and "plunder." Usually the word "steal" is accompanied by the term "plunder" (Mosiah 2:13; 29:14, 36; Alma 16:18; 23:3; Hel. 4:12; 6:23; 7:21).

Working from comparative evidence, Latter-day Saint scholar John Welch has demonstrated that there is a distinction in the Book of Mormon, just as in biblical and ancient Near Eastern law, between stealing (or theft) and robbery. Stealing was a crime committed by an individual against his neighbor and was dealt with in court; robbery involved outsiders who attacked in groups and was most often dealt with militarily.fn In several passages the term "plunder" is used with "rob" in relation to the secret combinations (Mosiah 10:17; Hel. 6:17-18; 11:25), suggesting that plunder is more closely associated with a group than with an individual. It is unclear, however, whether the terms are always used with such precise distinctions.

Commandment 9

"Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor" (Mosiah 13:23; see Ex. 20:16). The phrase to "bear false witness against your neighbor" is used once in the Book of Mormon, when Nephi, son of Helaman, called his people to repentance (Hel. 7:21). Technically, the phrase "bearing false witness" in the Old Testament probably refers specifically to perjury in a formal legal proceeding, specified in the commandment as "against one's neighbor." Its application, however, was probably not confined to such formal proceedings but was extended to any untruth told that would injure one's fellow.

Eleven times in the lists of laws and sins throughout the Book of Mormon we find the English terms "lie" or "lying" (2 Ne. 26:32; Alma 1:17; 16:18; Hel. 4:12; 3 Ne. 16:10; 21:19; 30:2; Ether 8:16; Morm. 8:31). In five of these cases "lie" is accompanied by "deceive" (Alma 16:18; 3 Ne. 16:10; 21:19; 30:2; Morm. 8:31). The term "lying" admittedly represents a larger category of sins than "bearing false witness against one's neighbor," but it is likely that this term, as it is found in the lists including others of the Ten Commandments, represents the ninth commandment in the Book of Mormon.

Commandment 10

"Thou shalt not covet" (Mosiah 13:24; see Ex. 20:17). The Book of Mormon contains one occurrence of the word "covet." King Benjamin, instructing his people on how to be charitable, warned that even those who have few possessions should be charitable in their hearts, saying "I give not because I have not, but if I had I would give" (Mosiah 4:24), otherwise, they are condemned, because "ye covet that which ye have not received" (Mosiah 4:25). fn

A review of the lists of sins in which others of the Ten Commandments are found suggests that the Book of Mormon synonym for "covet" is "envy." The English definitions are virtually identical and the term "envy" is a good translation of the Hebrew hamad. The best evidence is 2 Ne. 26:32, which lists in explicit language five of the Ten Commandments (having to do with murder, lying, stealing, taking the name of the Lord their God in vain, and committing whoredoms). Included in this list is the phrase "that they should not envy," which occurs in nine other passages where one or more of the Ten Commandments are mentioned (Alma 1:32; 4:9; 5:29; 16:18; Hel. 13:22; 3 Ne. 21:19; 30:2; 4 Ne. 1:16).

BOOK OF MORMON LISTS OF LAWS AND SINS

While all of the Ten Commandments are represented in the Book of Mormon in some form, no evidence exists of a conscious effort to include an historical example of the breaking of each commandment, as is the case in the Old Testament. The most dramatic way the Ten Commandments are represented in the Book of Mormon is in series of laws or lists of sins. Besides the passage in Mosiah 12-13 where Abinadi cited the Ten Commandments, twenty-four passages are found in the Book of Mormon where two or more of the Ten Commandments are specifically referred to together.fn For example Nephi referred to six of the Ten Commandments in his address to the latter-day readers of the Book of Mormon in 2 Nephi 26:

"And again, the Lord God hath commanded that men should not murder; that they should not lie; that they should not steal; that they should not take the name of the Lord their God in vain; that they should not envy; that they should not have malice; that they should not contend one with another; that they should not commit whoredoms; and that they should do none of these things; for whoso doeth them shall perish" (2 Ne. 26:32; emphasis added).

King Benjamin reminded his people at the end of his reign:

"Neither have I suffered that ye should be confined in dungeons, nor that ye should make slaves one of another, nor that ye should murder, or plunder, or steal, or commit adultery; nor even have I suffered that ye should commit any manner of wickedness, and have taught you that ye should keep the commandments of the Lord, in all things which he hath commanded you" (Mosiah 2:13; emphasis added).fn

The time period of Alma and Amulek is thus described:

"Now those priests who did go forth among the people did preach against all lyings, and deceivings, and envyings, and strifes, and malice, and revilings, and stealing, robbing, plundering, murdering, committing adultery, and all manner of lasciviousness, crying that these things ought not so to be" (Alma 16:18; emphasis added).

The wicked Nephites living in Ammonihah helped bring about their own destruction:

"And we see that these promises have been verified to the people of Nephi; for it has been their quarrelings and their contentions, yea, their murderings, and their plunderings, their idolatry, their whoredoms, and their abominations, which were among themselves, which brought upon them their wars and their destructions" (Alma 50:21; emphasis added).

Numerous observations can be made about these lists. In the twenty-four lists, the terms "murder" or "kill" occur twenty-two times; "commit adultery" or "whoredoms," eighteen times; and "steal," "rob," or "plunder," seventeen times; "lie" or "bear false witness," twelve times; and "envy," seven times. The commandment against idolatry occurs five times in these lists, and the commandment against taking the Lord's name in vain, forswearing, and false swearing three times. These statistics are not surprising considering the propensity of humans to sin in these ways and the gravity of unrighteousness these commandments represent.

The frequency of these occurrences, however, reinforces the traditional division between the first and second sets of five commandments known elsewhere in scripture. The idea that there is a hierarchy in the order of the commandments is also reinforced. For example, the commandment against murder is almost always accompanied by the commandments against adultery and stealing, and often, but less frequently, by those against lying and envying. These lists demonstrate the knowledge and importance of the Ten Commandments in Book of Mormon theology.fn

Professor John W. Welch has also noted the occurrence of "series of laws" in the Book of Mormon.fn Because the lists of laws in the Book of Mormon contain more than just the Ten Commandments, Welch has attempted to create a composite list from nine of these passages of all of the laws and commandments known in the Book of Mormon. Interestingly, almost all of these can also be found in the so-called Covenant Code in Ex. 20-23. Welch's conclusion, consistent with the evidence of this paper, is that the Nephite law lists demonstrate a relationship with the biblical law codes undoubtedly contained on the brass plates, a relationship that persists throughout the Book of Mormon. At the same time the occurrences of these laws form a distinctive pattern as various Book of Mormon prophets apply these law codes to their contemporary situations.

The Book of Mormon thus reflects the same emphasis concerning the Ten Commandments found elsewhere in scripture. The commandments found in the prophetic passages of the Old Testament—for example, in Hosea, against "swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery" (Hosea 4:1-2), and in Jeremiah, "Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal [idolatry]" (Jer. 7:9) fn—are found in the Book of Mormon series of laws and lists of sins.

The emphasis on these five commandments is prominent in the rabbinical tradition as summarized by the phrase "love thy neighbor as thyself" and commonly called by them the Golden Rule.fn Jesus cited to the man who sought eternal life in the New Testament these same commandments: "honour thy father and thy mother" and do not murder, commit adultery, steal, or bear false witness (Matt. 19:17-19; Mark 10:19). In addition, Paul's list in the letter to the Romans refers to the commandments against all five of these: adultery, killing, stealing, bearing false witness, and coveting (Rom. 13:8-10; see also 1 Cor. 6:9-10; James 2:10-11). The list of commandments in D&C 42 also refers to four of the commandments against killing, stealing, bearing false witness, and committing adultery (D&C 42:18-27).

The second five commandments are more often mentioned together as the sins of the people that bring judgment.fn Why is this the case? First, these are clearly serious sins. Furthermore, in ancient Israel religious law, the law of Moses was to be the law of the land. We do not always know how all of these commandments were enforced anciently in the old or in the new world, but several allusions in the Book of Mormon show that many of these five of the Ten Commandments were enforced. King Benjamin, for example, specifically mentioned that he did not condone murder, plundering, stealing, or committing adultery (Mosiah 2:13). His son Mosiah stated that he sought to eliminate stealing, plundering, and murdering (Mosiah 29:14, 36). At the time of Nehor, Mormon states, those convicted of lying, stealing, robbing, or murder were punished (Alma 1:32). Also at the time of Korihor, as indicated in Alma 30:10, the murderer, robber, thief, and adulterer were punished. Finally, murdering, plundering, stealing, and committing whoredoms are "contrary to the laws of their country and also the laws of their God" (Hel. 6:23). From these lists it appears that murder, plundering, stealing, robbing, and committing adultery were also crimes that were legislated against and enforced. Issues of belief, on the other hand, perhaps including several of the first five commandments, were not dictated or enforced. See, for example, Alma 30:7-9: "Now there was no law against a man's belief. . . . Now if a man desired to serve God, it was his privilege . . . but if he did not believe in him there was no law to punish him." In other words it is easier to legislate and enforce the relationships between man and man than between man and God. The Lord does not coerce his children to love him.

These lists acquire added significance when we note two addressed to the modern readers of the Book of Mormon. Jesus described the latter days:

"At that day when the Gentiles shall sin against my gospel, and shall reject the fulness of my gospel, and shall be lifted up in the pride of their hearts above all nations, and above all the people of the whole earth, and shall be filled with all manner of lyings, and of deceits, and of mischiefs, and all manner of hypocrisy, and murders, and priestcrafts, and whoredoms, and of secret abominations; and if they shall do all those things, and shall reject the fulness of my gospel, behold, saith the Father, I will bring the fulness of my gospel from among them" (3 Ne. 16:10; emphasis added).

Moroni likewise described the latter days:

"Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be great pollutions upon the face of the earth; there shall be murders, and robbing, and lying, and deceivings, and whoredoms, and all manner of abominations" (Morm. 8:31; emphasis added).

The precepts in the Ten Commandments form the backbone of religion in the Book of Mormon—both before and after the coming of Christ. They are not attached only to the law of Moses. The breaking of these commandments—particularly those against murder, adultery, and stealing—are explained as reasons for the destruction of the covenant people in the Book of Mormon (Alma 50:21; Hel. 6:23; 7:21; 13:22), just as they were cited in the Old Testament (Hosea 4:1-2; Jer. 7:9; Ezek. 18; 22). When Nephi, Jesus, Mormon, and Moroni included a list of these commandments to us in the latter days, they understood the spiritual and actual historical consequences of living in a society that breaks and tolerates the breaking of these laws.

In the New Testament, Jesus acknowledged the Ten Commandments as the foundation of the law when he recited them to the rich man seeking for eternal life (Matt. 19:17-19; Mark 10:19; Luke 18:20) and in the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. 5) when he referred to murder, adultery, and forswearing. In both cases, however, Jesus taught that obedience to these commandments was not enough. To the man seeking eternal life, who had obeyed all of the commandments, Jesus taught, "If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor . . . and come and follow me" (Matt. 19:21), and in the Sermon on the Mount Jesus taught that to become perfect we need to conquer anger and lust and become perfectly honest.

Along these lines Abinadi taught the priests of Noah that salvation does come by obedience to the commandments of God (Mosiah 12:33) but reminded them that "salvation doth not come by the law alone; and were it not for the atonement, which God himself shall make for the sins and iniquities of his people, that they must unavoidably perish, notwithstanding the law of Moses" (Mosiah 13:28). The Book of Mormon emphasizes the Ten Commandments throughout but constantly reminds us that salvation comes not only through obedience to the laws but through the atonement of Christ. In the words of Nephi, "It is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do" (2 Ne. 25:23).

NOTES

1—no other gods before me; 59:5 love the Lord thy God

2—no images; 1:16 after image of own God

3—take Lord's name in vain; 63:62; 136:21

4—keep Sabbath holy; 59:9-13; 68:29; 77:12

5—honor father and mother (not found)

6—do not murder; 42:18-19, 79; 59:6

7—do not adultery; 42:24-25; 59:6; 66:10

8—do not steal; 42:20; 59:6

9—do not false witness; 42:21

10—do not covet; 19:25-26; 88:123; 136:20
