Sperry Symposium, Doctrines of the Book of Mormon: 1991 Sperry Symposium on the Book of Mormon ( 1992)

16

SANCTIFICATION BY THE HOLY SPIRIT

Bruce A. Van Orden

Brigham Young University

Sanctification is a vital Book of Mormon doctrine. Without understanding it and fulfilling its provisions, we will not inherit the celestial kingdom. "Sanctification is a basic doctrine of the gospel," declared Elder Bruce R. McConkie. "Indeed, the very reason men are commanded to believe, repent, and be baptized is so they `may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost,' and thereby be enabled to stand spotless before the judgment bar of Christ."fn

To sanctify, simply defined, is to make holy or sacred. The Oxford English Dictionary explains the term sanctify more fully: "to make (a person) holy, to purify or free from sin; to cause to undergo sanctification." One definition of sanctification in this distinguished dictionary reads, "The action of the Holy Spirit in sanctifying or making holy the believer."fn Thus, one is considered sanctified when he or she has become clean, pure, and sinless before God. And yet one does not reach the state of sanctification in one day or as a result of one experience. Indeed the process of sanctification takes place over scores of years and through hundreds of spiritual experiences. One scholar describes sanctification as "progressive newness."fn

Two religious education colleagues offer this definition:

"Sanctification is the process whereby one comes to hate the worldliness he once loved and love the holiness and righteousness he once hated. To be sanctified is not only to be free from sin but also to be free from the effects of sin, free from sinfulness itself, the very desire to sin."fn

Actually, the Book of Mormon speaks of two kinds of sanctification, both closely related: (1) sanctification by the Holy Ghost, the process by which one becomes pure and is purged of the very desire to do evil and (2) sanctification through the blood of Christ, which cleanses a person of all sin. Once we have been sanctified by the Holy Ghost, even though we may never sin again, no number of good deeds can ever satisfy justice for the sins committed previous to sanctification by the Holy Ghost. Hence, the need for sanctification by Christ's blood.

SANCTIFICATION AND RELATED DOCTRINES

The doctrine of sanctification is often correctly linked with the doctrine of spiritual rebirth. When we are born of the Spirit to any degree, we are simultaneously sanctified by the Spirit and our souls are cleansed by the blood of Christ. A careful examination of the Book of Mormon, and the other standard works shows that the doctrine of sanctification is closely connected with the principles of justification, enduring to the end, and conversion. Indeed, the difference between justification and sanctification is almost indistinguishable. More important than wrestling with legalistic definitions, however, is becoming aware of the process that is going on and the change that is taking place.

Alma clearly defines the doctrines of spiritual rebirth and sanctification: "For there can no man be saved except his garments are washed white; yea, his garments must be purified until they are cleansed from all stain, through the blood of him of whom it has been spoken by our fathers, who should come to redeem his people from their sins" (Alma 5:21). The Lord taught his Nephite Twelve the basic sanctification doctrines, both sanctification through Christ's blood and by the Spirit:

"And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end.

"Now this is the commandment: Repent, all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me and be baptized in my name, that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day.

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, this is my gospel" (3 Ne. 27:19-21).

The correlation between these two interrelated types of sanctification and the doctrines of spiritual rebirth and justification is also set forth in the book of Moses:

"Even so ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory;

"For by the water ye keep the commandment; by the Spirit ye are justified, and by the blood ye are sanctified" (Moses 6:59-60).

Still another witness of this correlation comes from Alma in his words to the people of Ammonihah:

"Therefore they were called after this holy order, and were sanctified, and their garments were washed white through the blood of the Lamb.

"Now they, after being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, having their garments made white, being pure and spotless before God, could not look upon sin save it were with abhorrence" (Alma 13:11-12).

Summarized simply, "Sanctification by the Spirit and by the blood work hand in hand to purify and redeem our souls."fn

THE PROCESS OF SANCTIFICATION

Now that we have some understanding that sanctification by the Holy Ghost and through Christ's blood produces purity and holiness in a person, what can we learn from the Book of Mormon about the process of sanctification?

The prophet Nephi began his discourse on "the doctrine of Christ" late in his second book. This treatise, found in 2 Ne. 31 and the first six verses of chapter 32, probably contains the best single description of the plan of salvation. Nephi clearly taught the need to change from a state of unholiness to one of holiness, or, as we are now describing it, to complete the process of sanctification. Sanctification, then, is achieving the full application of Nephi's "doctrine of Christ." How does Nephi present the elements of the "doctrine of Christ," especially those pertaining to sanctification by the Holy Spirit?

THE BOOK OF MORMON AS AN INSTRUMENT IN THE SANCTIFICATION PROCESS

Because of plain and powerful passages such as those in the writings of Nephi, the Book of Mormon stands preeminent among our four standard works. It is the body of scripture most likely to incite change in a person or, in the language of this essay, to bring about the sanctification of the individual. Joseph Smith so observed in his oft-quoted statement: "I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book."fn Our living prophet, President Ezra Taft Benson, likewise testified, "God uses the power of the word of the Book of Mormon as an instrument to change people's lives."fn

Furthermore, President Benson has demonstrated that the Book of Mormon invites all human beings to "come unto Christ, and be perfected in him" (Moro. 10:32). fn "The Lord works from the inside out," President Benson explained. "The world would mold men by changing their environment. Christ changes men, who then change their environment. The world would shape human behavior, but Christ can change human nature."fn

Specifically, President Benson challenged members of the Church to use one particular chapter in the Book of Mormon to promote such change and sanctification: "Do we frequently review the crucial questions which Alma asks the members of the Church in the fifth chapter of Alma?"fn Elder McConkie testified of this same Book of Mormon chapter: "The fifth chapter of Alma is a very expressive sermon on being born again. Alma teaches the great truths incident to that doctrine in some language and with some expressions that are not found anywhere else in the revelations."fn

The author of Alma 5, Alma the Younger, testified after his mighty conversion that the Lord had declared to him: "Marvel not that all mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters;

"And thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this, they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God" (Mosiah 27:25-26).

If one must be born of the Spirit to become sanctified, and if Alma 5 is one of the best sources on the doctrine of rebirth or of change from wickedness to righteousness, it follows that Alma's counsel to the Zarahemla Saints should be studied. His admonitions and teachings, often in the form of pointed questions, can guide us on the path toward sanctification.

Alma's questions and recommendations allow us to inventory our progress in the sanctification process. His discourse contributes greatly to an understanding of the process of spiritual rebirth or sanctification.

The Book of Mormon provides additional valuable insight into the sanctification process. The Nephites' cyclical pattern—exercising pride, practicing worldliness, being called to repentance and humbling themselves but afterwards falling to pride again—was not followed by one branch of the Nephites that refused to give in to worldliness. Mormon described a people who remained humbled and unbowed under the pressures of persecution and affliction (Hel. 3:31-34). In a classic passage, Mormon described their behavior and faith and clearly described what one likewise might do to become sanctified: "Nevertheless they did fast and pray oft, and did wax stronger and stronger in their humility, and firmer and firmer in the faith of Christ, unto the filling their souls with joy and consolation, yea, even to the purifying and the sanctification of their hearts, which sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God" (Hel. 3:35). One commentary on this passage explains, "How much the Spirit cleanses or purifies depends on the obedience of the person. According to Hel. 3:35, to receive the sanctifying power of the Spirit a person should fast and pray often, strengthen his humility, increase the firmness of his faith in Christ and yield his heart to God."fn

As we yield our hearts unto God, the Holy Ghost can enter into our hearts and baptize us by fire and purge our souls of wicked desires. Indeed, after his resurrection the Lord commanded the Nephites to discontinue offering sacrifices to him of burnt offerings and to replace the old offerings with a new sacrifice—that of "a broken heart and a contrite spirit" (3 Ne. 9:19-20). "And whoso cometh unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, him will I baptize with fire and with the Holy Ghost" (3 Ne. 9:20).

Clearly, then, the Holy Ghost is the Great Sanctifier. Alma verified that when he described the holy state of certain high priests: "Now they, after [they were] sanctified by the Holy Ghost, having their garments made white, [were] pure and spotless before God" (Alma 13:12; emphasis added). Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "It is the work and mission and ministry of the Holy Spirit of God to sanctify the souls of men. This is his assigned labor in the Eternal Godhead. How he does it we do not know, except that it is a work that can only be performed by a spirit being, and hence the need for one of his personality, status, and standing in the Supreme Presidency of the universe."fn

EVIDENCE OF THE SANCTIFICATION PROCESS IN OUR LIVES

What are the evidences that sanctification has either taken place in a person or that the process is going well? Alma stated that those who were being sanctified "could not look upon sin save it were with abhorrence" (Alma 13:12). That is another way of saying that we must experience the "mighty change in [our] hearts," referred to previously by Alma (Alma 5:14). President Spencer W. Kimball suggested that a person strive toward a "point of no return" wherein "there is not merely a renunciation but also a deep abhorrence of the sin—where the sin becomes most distasteful to him and where the desire or urge to sin is cleared out of his life."fn

President Ezra Taft Benson emphasized the progressive nature of sanctification where he wrote: "Part of this mighty change of heart is to feel godly sorrow for our sins. This is what is meant by a broken heart and a contrite spirit. God's gifts are sufficient to help us overcome every sin and weakness if we will but turn to Him for help. Most repentance does not involve sensational or dramatic changes, but rather is a step by step, steady and consistent movement toward godliness."fn President Benson provided us a word of hope and encouragement when he further confirmed that this repentance/sanctification process is gradual: "We must be careful, as we seek to become more and more godlike, that we do not become discouraged and lose hope. Becoming Christlike is a lifetime pursuit and very often involves growth and change that is slow, almost imperceptible."fn In fact, this baptism of fire may even come upon some people unawares, as with the Lamanites who were taught by the noble prophets Nephi and Lehi in Hel. 5. Christ, referring to these Lamanites during his visit to the Nephites, taught this principle when he proclaimed,["[I will] baptize with fire and with the Holy Ghost, even as the Lamanites, because of their faith in me at the time of their conversion, were baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and they knew it not" (3 Ne. 9:20).

Accordingly, we should never become disheartened when confronted again and again with temptation or occasional relapses into some sins. We will eventually become pure in heart if we continue to earnestly try. President Spencer W. Kimball devoted a section of his book The Miracle of Forgiveness to the concept of "Sanctification through Overcoming." He wrote: "In the Book of Revelation it is written that he that overcometh shall `eat of the tree of life,' receive `a crown of life,' [and] not be hurt of the second death," President Kimball further observed: "It would seem that these people had not always been perfect. They had had soiled robes and many weaknesses, but had now overcome and had washed the soiled raiment in the blood of the Lamb. They were now clean and purified."fn

Naturally, if we are to become sanctified, we will also gradually exhibit more and more godlike attributes. Taking on these divine attributes means we are "partakers of the divine nature" (see 2 Pet. 1:4). We become such by adding one righteous character trait to another, as the apostle Peter declared, "And beside this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge;

"And to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness;

"And to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity" (2 Pet. 1:5-7).

President Ezra Taft Benson commented on Peter's suggested formula for becoming partakers of the divine nature by declaring that this achievement is possible: "To be like the Savior—what a challenge for any person! He is a member of the Godhead. He is the Savior and Redeemer. He was perfect in every aspect of His life. There was no flaw nor failing in Him. Is it possible for us as priesthood holders to be even as He is? The answer is yes. Not only can we, but that is our charge, our responsibility. He would not give us that commandment if He did not mean for us to do it."fn

Now that we have examined the doctrine of sanctification, I would like to add a heartfelt concern and word of caution. Some think they can force this process to take place in their lives according to their own timetable by becoming obsessed with the doctrine itself. I feel that we should rather consecrate ourselves to being kinder, more Christlike, and more serviceable in God's kingdom. We will never become sanctified by focusing on the nuances and ramifications of this doctrine, but instead, practicing faith, repenting, developing humility, and yielding our hearts unto God will permit the process to take place in our lives. The Holy Ghost will much more likely work on us and burn out of us the dross of our fallen natures if we concentrate more on cultivating goodness than on dissecting the doctrine.

I pray that each of us will yearn for an increased understanding of the healing blood of Christ and of how the Lord's atoning sacrifice can rescue us from our sins and imperfections. I pray that we will seek the Holy Spirit to be our guide so that the third member of the Godhead can transform us from a natural man to saint (see Mosiah 3:19). "Truly the Holy Ghost is the sanctifier, and the extent to which men [and women] receive and enjoy the gift of the Holy Ghost is the extent to which they are sanctified. In the lives of most of us, sanctification is an ongoing process, and we obtain that glorious status by degrees as we become saints in deed as well as in name."fn

NOTES
