Sperry Symposium, Doctrines of the Book of Mormon: 1991 Sperry Symposium on the Book of Mormon ( 1992)

18

THE BOOK OF MORMON AND OVERCOMING SATAN

Clyde J. Williams

Brigham Young University

Recently the First Presidency cautioned "members of the Church not to affiliate in any way with the occult or those mysterious powers it espouses." Furthermore, "these things should not be pursued as games, be topics in Church meetings, or be delved into in private, personal conversations."fn

We should not endeavor to expose the oaths, covenants, and secret combinations of Satan. Alma commanded his son Helaman that those things should be kept from the people lest "they should fall into darkness also and be destroyed" (Alma 37:27). Nevertheless, there is cause for us to become aware of Satan, his tactics, and his objectives. President Spencer W. Kimball acknowledged the importance of "an awareness of the existence, the power, and the plans of Satan" in moving towards eternal life.fn The young Prophet Joseph Smith was shown not only the power of God but also that of the prince of darkness and his associates, according to Moroni, "that you may know hereafter the two powers and never be influenced or overcome by that wicked one."fn

In every dispensation the Lord's prophets have been made aware of Satan and his power and intentions. The scriptures record how Adam and Eve, Enoch, Moses, and the Savior learned from their encounters with Satan.fn In the beginning of the Nephite dispensation, the Book of Mormon details how Nephi was shown the power of the devil to tempt men and bring them down to destruction (see 1 Ne. 12:17-19; 13:6). It is also likely that Nephi learned from his father, as did his brother Jacob, the nature of Satan's rebellion against God and his fall in premortality (see 2 Ne. 2:17-18). The Lord has preserved these accounts so that we might learn from their experiences. President Ezra Taft Benson has declared that the Book of Mormon "exposes the enemies of Christ." "It fortifies the humble followers of Christ against the evil designs, strategies, and doctrines of the devil in our day."fn Thus, the Book of Mormon clarifies Satan's role, his characteristics, and goals. The Book of Mormon also teaches us how Satan gains power over mankind and the means by which we can overcome the snares of the adversary.

SATAN'S ROLE

One most significant contribution of the Book of Mormon would go unnoticed unless we referred to the Old Testament. The Old Testament contains only six references to Satan or Lucifer. The most notable occurrence is the exchange between God and Satan concerning Job (see Job 1-2). Evidence of Satan's role and identity is so lacking in the Old Testament that one Protestant scholar wrote: "Nowhere in the [Old Testament] does Satan appear as a distinctive demonic figure, opposed to God and responsible for all evil."fn Another writes, "Satan is depicted [in Job 1-2] as a member of God's court whose basic duty it was to `accuse' human beings before God. He is clearly not at this point an enemy of God and the leader of the demonic forces of evil, as he becomes later."fn Still another scholar after discussing the depiction of Satan in the Old Testament acknowledged, "Admittedly we have not yet the fully developed doctrine" concerning Satan.fn

The confusion over Satan's role in the Old Testament is a classic example of the plain and precious truths that have been taken from the Bible. The Book of Mormon is itself an evidence that Old Testament prophets had a knowledge of Satan, his role in premortality, and his efforts to make mankind share in his misery. Lehi learned from the brass plates much of what he knew about the fall of Lucifer in premortality (see 2 Ne. 2:17). With the aid of the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible and the Book of Mormon, it is apparent that Satan is quite a different being from what one might believe by using what remains in our current Old Testament. The Book of Mormon exposes Satan as the adversary of the Father and the enemy of all righteousness.

CHARACTERISTICS OF SATAN

Lucifer, as he was known in the premortal existence, means "shining one" or "light bringer."fn That name seems to illustrate the great hope Heavenly Father had for this "Son of the Morning." He was an angel in authority who rebelled against God and his Son Jehovah (see D&C 76:25; 2 Ne. 2:17). There was great sorrow and weeping over his apostasy and fall in premortality (see D&C 76:26). From a bringer of light, an angel in authority, Lucifer became Satan, which in Hebrew means "Adversary."fn He became the adversary to the Father and his plan (see 2 Ne. 24:12-15; 2 Ne. 2:17-18).

The Book of Mormon tells us that Satan is the "father of all lies" (2 Ne. 2:18; Ether 8:25). He is the "author" or "master" of all sin (Hel. 6:30; Mosiah 4:14) and he is an "enemy" to God and to all righteousness (Mosiah 16:5; Moro. 7:12; Mosiah 4:14). These descriptive titles tell us not only what Satan is like but how he intends to accomplish his purposes. He has pitted himself against God, who is the Father of all truth and the author of righteousness.

SATAN'S PURPOSE

Some of Satan's goals are expressly stated in the Book of Mormon. First, he desires that "all men might be miserable like unto himself" (2 Ne. 2:27). He wants us to be permanently cut off from our Heavenly Father's presence just as he is. Second, he strives unceasingly to have mankind become subjected to him and not to God that he may seal us to his fate (Alma 34:35; 2 Ne. 9:46). Third, he endeavors to destroy the souls of men (Hel. 8:28; D&C 10:27). It is apparent that Satan's revenge lies in mocking the Father and his plan and thereby spiritually destroying his sons and daughters.

HOW SATAN GAINS POWER

In the book of Revelation, chapter 12, Satan is depicted as a dragon with seven heads. Perhaps one of the reasons for the multiple heads is to convey that Satan has many ways or "fronts" from which he can attack. The various ways and means by which Satan is attempting to accomplish his goals are also described in the Book of Mormon.

First, Satan gains power over people because they lack gospel knowledge. The Lord through Isaiah lamented, "Therefore, my people are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge; and their honorable men are famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst" (2 Ne. 15:13). Nephi mourned for his people, saying, "They will not search knowledge, nor understand great knowledge, when it is given unto them in plainness, even as plain as word can be" (2 Ne. 32:7). Without the gospel individuals are deprived of the "bread of life" and the "living water" (John 6:48, 4:10). Thus, they are spiritually "famished" and "dried up with thirst."

One reason Sherem, the anti-Christ, was able to deceive the Nephites was that they lacked scriptural knowledge. Only after Jacob had confronted Sherem and Sherem confessed his lies did the people realize the error of their ways. In Jacob 7:23 we read, "And it came to pass that peace and the love of God was restored again among the people; and they searched the scriptures, and hearkened no more to the words of this wicked man" (emphasis added).

Today individuals in the Church deceive others by their smooth words and scholarly language. These modern Sherems call for such things as modifications in Church doctrine and liberalized moral standards. Some are led into inactivity and even apostasy because they do not search and understand the scriptures as they are illuminated by the light of the Spirit.

Second, Satan often gains power over people when they become learned and rely on their own knowledge. Jacob warned: "O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish" (2 Ne. 9:28). Frequently, some "intellectuals" in and out of the Church endeavor to spread their philosophy of doubt and defiance among those who are not spiritually alert. They seek to undermine the doctrine, the authority, and the divinity of the Church. They call into question the decisions and directions of the Lord's anointed. They mock and ridicule those who wholeheartedly sustain and defend the kingdom of God. Sherem, Nehor, and Korihor are Book of Mormon prototypes for today's undermining "intellectuals."

Third, Satan uses his deceptive influence to change peoples' perception of evil. Isaiah wrote: "Wo unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!" (2 Ne. 15:20). The Book of Mormon is full of examples of this switch in values. From Laman and Lemuel, to King Noah, to the Gadianton robbers, we see example after example of those who professed principles that were opposite to what the truth really is. Our society is no different. The great switch in values has taken place in many areas, such as our music, movies, marriages, dress, and family size. Things that are wholesome, modest, or uplifting are often ridiculed or demeaned as worthless, outdated, or unrealistic. Things that bring fleeting, temporary pleasure are valued most in today's world. Concerning this moral inversion, Elder W. Grant Bangerter declared, "The voices and enticements of the world make good seem evil and evil, good. The false attractions to engage in immorality, to view that which is forbidden on your home video, to seek unbounded pleasure as if God did not exist, are, in reality, the yawning pit of hell, set there by the one who will try to bind you with his awful chains."fn

Fourth, and closely related to the third point, Satan is stirring up people to anger against that which is good. Nephi declared: "For behold, at that day shall he [Satan] rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir them up to anger against that which is good" (2 Ne. 28:20). Laman and Lemuel were stirred to anger because of Nephi's righteousness (1 Ne. 17:45-50). The more wicked part of the Lamanites were stirred up to anger against the Lamanite converts of Ammon and his brothers, to the point that they sought to kill them (Alma 24:19-25).

In today's world Satan continues to incite many to anger at righteousness. Elder Bangerter summarized our situation in the following words: "In doing these wicked things [adultery, pornography, licentiousness, etc.] they [the world] suggest that it is not so bad anymore. Since so much of the world accepts these actions, if we [the Latter-day Saints] resist them or speak out against them, we will be scoffed at. We will be called prudish, Victorian, puritan, and self-righteous, as if we had become the sinners. We will be accused of being evil-minded in our failure to appreciate the "beauty and naturalness" of the human body."fn The importance of this principle is not just that Satan has caused people to perceive evil as good, but that he has used his influence to spread anger and resentment towards people and principles which are righteous.

Fifth, Satan teaches people that there is happiness in iniquity. Samuel the Lamanite warned the Nephites of the impending fate that awaited them if they continued in their quest to find happiness in sin: "But behold, your days of probation are past; ye have procrastinated the day of your salvation until it is everlastingly too late, and your destruction is made sure; yea, for ye have sought all the days of your lives for that which ye could not obtain; and ye have sought for happiness in doing iniquity, which thing is contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head" (Hel. 13:38).

The Book of Mormon has numerous examples of those who thought wickedness would lead them to happiness, but who learned otherwise. The Nephites in Mormon's fateful day sorrowed "because the Lord would not always suffer them to take happiness in sin" (Morm. 2:13; see also 3 Ne. 27:11). King Noah, Corianton, and many others learned that "wickedness never was happiness" (Alma 41:10).

Modern day advertisements and movies portray evil as the source of happiness. Alcohol, tobacco, and infidelity are all represented as bringing easy and immediate pleasure and satisfaction. Many media sponsors and producers maximize pleasure and minimize consequences. Seldom do we see portrayed the pain, sorrow, and suffering caused by sin. Satan plays upon these scenes of artificial bliss and entices many to do evil.

Sixth, Satan spreads abroad the rumor that there is no devil. Nephi cautioned: "And behold, others he [Satan] flattereth away, and telleth them there is no hell; and he saith unto them: I am no devil, for there is none—and thus he whispereth in their ears, until he grasps them with his awful chains, from whence there is no deliverance" (2 Ne. 28:21-22). Evidence of the denial of Satan and the false security it leaves in peoples' hearts is abundant. There are those who profess belief in a devil, yet live as though Satan were not real. By failing to keep the Sabbath day holy or by violating the laws of chastity and other God-given laws, many of our Father's children show their disbelief of the power their actions give to Satan to influence and destroy their souls. Others say that the idea of a devil is nothing but a fictional creation of designing men who would use fear to keep people under their control. That intellectual denial of Satan is like stepping into a boxing ring and convincing oneself there is no opponent even while one is continually pummelled by the enemy. "We Latter-day Saints need not be, and we must not be, deceived by the sophistries of men concerning the reality of Satan," warned Elder Marion G. Romney. "There is a personal devil, and we had better believe it. He and a countless host of followers, seen and unseen, are exercising a controlling influence upon men and their affairs in our world today."fn

Seventh, "the evil spirit teacheth not a man to pray, but teacheth him that he must not pray" (2 Ne. 32:8). Even the righteous brother of Jared fell prey to the subtleties of Satan and was chastised by the Lord for lack of diligence in his prayers (see Ether 2:14). Satan knows that our sole way to communicate with God is prayer. He does all he can to cause us to forget or forgo our prayers. Some he convinces that they cannot pray because they have committed serious transgressions. Others he lulls away from their prayers by complacency or neglect.

Eighth, Satan uses apathy or the "all is well" approach. Concerning the latter days Nephi warned: "And others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well—and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell" (2 Ne. 28:21). "The peril of this century," declared President David O. McKay, "is spiritual apathy."fn Spiritual apathy, complacency, and procrastination lead to spiritual weakness and leave us dangerously susceptible to the ravages of temptation and sin. Failure to actively choose righteousness can cost us our exaltation as surely as choosing wickedness.

Ninth,["[Satan] will justify in committing a little sin," Nephi warned (2 Ne. 28:8). Rationalization of sin is one of the adversary's most successful tactics. The acceptance of what some call lesser degrees of sin is a common justification in today's society. The following phrases are often used by youth and others: "this music isn't that bad compared to the really heavy stuff"; "if you think that's bad, you ought to hear what the kids say in school"; "all we did was neck and pet a little"; or "we didn't tell the clerk he undercharged us because the prices were so high anyway." Nephi warned that the devil would lead many "by the neck with a flaxen cord, until he bindeth them with his strong cords forever" (2 Ne. 26:22). A flaxen cord would be made of the fine, light-colored fiber manufactured from flax. It would be soft and thin and easily broken. Nevertheless, if we continue to rationalize our involvement with flaxen cords, or "little sins," eventually we will become bound with the "strong cords" and find ourselves subject to Satan.

Tenth, Satan uses contention and rumors to stir up strife. After the preaching of Samuel the Lamanite, the condition among the Nephites was reported as follows: "And many more things did the people imagine up in their hearts, which were foolish and vain; and they were much disturbed, for Satan did stir them up to do iniquity continually; yea, he did go about spreading rumors and contentions upon all the face of the land, that he might harden the hearts of the people against that which was good and against that which should come" (Hel. 16:22; emphasis added). The effect of Satan's efforts ultimately led most of the people to destruction.

During his visit among the Nephites the Savior also warned: "For verily, verily I say unto you, he that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another" (3 Ne. 11:29; emphasis added). The downfall of both the Nephite and the Jaredite nations is a sober reminder of the role contention plays in the destruction of a people. The spirit of contention leads to family conflicts and neighborhood disputes. It is also the wind that fans the flames of war and strife between nations. Pride, selfishness, and the pursuit of power are set forth in the Book of Mormon as preludes to contention and contention as the prelude to destruction.

Rumors can be malicious attempts to harm or ruin the reputation and stability of individuals or institutions. For instance, in recent years, there appeared forged historical documents that were designed to spread false rumors about Joseph Smith and destroy his reputation and that of the Church. Rumor and gossip have also been the cause of many personal hardships and stumbling blocks within the general membership of the Church. They strike at the very unity or oneness that would make us true followers of Jesus Christ (see D&C 38:27).

Eleventh, Satan uses pride, power, and riches to lead away the hearts of the people. Concerning the Nephites, just before the destruction that preceded Christ's coming, Mormon wrote: "Now the cause of this iniquity of the people was this—Satan had great power, unto the stirring up of the people to do all manner of iniquity, and to the puffing them up with pride, tempting them to seek for power, and authority, and riches, and the vain things of the world. And thus Satan did lead away the hearts of the people to do all manner of iniquity" (3 Ne. 6:15-16). In Alma the Younger's day, people in the Church also became proud because of riches, seeking the vain things of the world. This in turn led them to ridicule one another and persecute those who did not believe as they did (see Alma 4:6-8).

Unfortunately for many in today's society, pride and prestige are all-important. Materialism causes them to sacrifice spiritual goals to fulfill their worldly quest for position, possessions, and power. Alexander Solzhenitsyn warned that while his people (the Soviets) were oppressed by Communism, the people of the western world have been oppressed by materialism, and thus he said: "I could not recommend your society as an ideal for the transformation of ours."fn

Twelfth is a catch-all: all the ways and means Satan uses to drag us down cannot be numbered. King Benjamin declared: "And finally, I cannot tell you all the things whereby ye may commit sin; for there are divers ways and means, even so many that I cannot number them" (Mosiah 4:29).

Satan may not get us to commit adultery, murder, or rob a bank but then he doesn't have to in order to cause us to lose our exaltation. All he has to do is cause us to be distracted from the things that matter most. Sins of omission and complacency are just as effective in depriving us of exaltation as are more serious sins of commission. The distance by which we miss the mark of celestial glory will not matter. What will matter is that we missed.

OVERCOMING SATAN

To overcome the adversary, we must understand several principles and act on them.

Satan's reaction when we sin and suffer is laughter and rejoicing: "Wo, wo, wo unto this people; wo unto the inhabitants of the whole earth except they shall repent; for the devil laugheth, and his angels rejoice, because of the slain of the fair sons and daughters of my people; and it is because of their iniquity and abominations that they are fallen!" (3 Ne. 9:2; see also Moses 7:26).

To awake from Satan's sleep we must put on the armor of righteousness. President Marion G. Romney declared: "During these closing years of Satan's power, he is frantically using every conceivable means to deceive and corrupt us. There has never been a time since the world began when obedience to Paul's charge, `Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil,' was more imperative than it is today."fn

To put on the armor of righteousness requires more than lip service to spiritual things. We must be willing to put spiritual things first in our lives.

Prayer is the means we have of communicating with our Heavenly Father. We are not capable of overcoming Satan by ourselves. Because he remembers premortality, he may know more about us than we do. Therefore, we must pray continually for the sustaining help of our Heavenly Father in overcoming Satan. President Brigham Young declared, "The men and women, who desire to obtain seats in the celestial kingdom, will find that they must battle with the enemy of all righteousness every day."fn

To hold to the rod of iron obviously means more than simply holding the scriptures in our hand or even just reading them. Holding to the rod requires us to understand and incorporate the principles found in the scriptures in our daily lives. The Book of Mormon is an excellent source to which we may turn to see Satan as he really is, to see his devilish plans, and to know how to avoid his pitfalls. Commenting on what he learned from Nephite history, Mormon observed:

"Yea, we see that whosoever will may lay hold upon the word of God, which is quick and powerful, which shall divide asunder all the cunning and the snares and the wiles of the devil, and lead the man of Christ in a strait and narrow course across that everlasting gulf of misery which is prepared to engulf the wicked—And land their souls, yea, their immortal souls, at the right hand of God in the kingdom of heaven, to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and with Jacob, and with all our holy fathers, to go no more out" (Hel. 3:29-30; emphasis added).

"And charity suffereth long, and is kind, and envieth not, and is not puffed up, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil, and rejoiceth not in iniquity but rejoiceth in the truth, beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things . . . Wherefore, my beloved brethren, pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons of God" (Moro. 7:45, 48).

This power, or Christlike love, will be obtained only by those who deeply desire it and seek it through prayer. It is a gift of the Spirit available to the faithful. Elder H. Burke Peterson explained, "In a world and society where Satan is launching his most vicious attacks ever on the children of men, we have no greater weapon than pure, unselfish, Christlike love."fn

The old ideas that "the devil made me do it" or "I couldn't help myself" are simply false notions. "The devil has no power over us only as we permit him," the Prophet Joseph Smith taught. "The moment we revolt at anything which comes from God, the devil takes power."fn

"How, then, will Satan be bound during the Millennium? It will be by the righteousness of the people . . . It is not that men cannot sin, for the power is in them to do so—they have their agency—but it is that they do not sin because Satan is subject to them, and they are not enticed by his evil whisperings."fn

It is a change of heart and a will to live righteously that can bind Satan. Thus, in the Book of Mormon we find accounts of those who had received a mighty change in their hearts and could say, "We have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually" (Mosiah 5:2; see also Alma 19:33).

The Book of Mormon provides a classic example of one who in large part bound Satan in his life. In Alma 48:11-13 we read:

"And Moroni was a [1] strong and a mighty man; he was a man of [2] a perfect understanding; yea, a man that [3] did not delight in bloodshed; a man whose soul did [4] joy in the liberty and the freedom of his country, and his brethren from bondage and slavery; yea, a man whose [5] heart did swell with thanksgiving to his God, for the many privileges and blessings which he bestowed upon his people; a man who did [6] labor exceedingly for the welfare and safety of his people. Yea, and he was a man who was [7] firm in the faith of Christ, and he had sworn with an [8] oath to defend his people, his rights, and his country, and his religion, even to the loss of his blood."

The qualities of Captain Moroni, identified by number in the verses above, all contributed to his ability to bind Satan in his life. Mormon, who abridged this record, was so impressed he wrote: "Yea, verily, verily I say unto you, if all men had been, and were, and ever would be, like unto Moroni, behold, the very powers of hell would have been shaken forever; yea, the devil would never have power over the hearts of the children of men" (Alma 48:17).

This brief tribute to Captain Moroni seems to include all that we could hope for or desire in our quest to overcome Satan. Moroni obviously understood Satan, his characteristics, and his goals. He recognized the means by which Satan was gaining power over his people. Finally, and most important, he understood the things that he and his people must do to overcome the adversary in their lives, and he led out by example, binding Satan in his own life.

The Book of Mormon is here to help us overcome Satan as Moroni and others have done. The Book of Mormon stands as a witness to us that we can bind Satan in our lives. In the words of President Spencer W. Kimball, "When Satan is bound in a single home—when Satan is bound in a single life—the Millennium has already begun in that home, in that life."fn It is my sincere desire that we will use the Book of Mormon to help us bind Satan in our lives.

NOTES
