I really enjoyed the story “The Miracle of Jenni” in the November 1996 issue. I know a girl similar to Jenni who doesn’t have very many good friends. She was recently baptized, and some of her friends didn’t want her to be around them anymore. I’ve tried to be her friend, but often some of my friends ask me why I’m nice to her. I really didn’t know what to say. The story made me think of ways to be a better friend to her. Next time I’m faced with that question, I’ll know what to say.

Name Withheld

I live in Perm, Russia, in the Ural Mountains. In March 1996 I met the missionaries. At that time I was all alone; during the previous four months, I had lost my husband and both parents and had gone through two operations. The missionaries told me about the Book of Mormon, about the life of Jesus Christ, and about The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. They invited me to their meetings. I became friends with the members of the Church and was baptized. We are now like a family; we support each other through difficult times.

I was given a copy of the Liahona (Russian). I have found in it much to help me in my life and in teaching others. The support and testimonies we receive from members throughout the world have helped me the most. I testify that the Church is true and that the Liahona helps bring people together.

Margarita Andreyevna Rusanova,
Penn Central Branch, Russia Yekaterinburg Mission

At the present time, I represent the Lord as a full-time missionary. When I read the Liahona (Hungarian), my testimony is strengthened. I feel assured that I am doing the Lord’s work, that the restored gospel of Jesus Christ is true, and that this gospel can bring about the salvation of all people.

I am thankful for our prophet, President Gordon B. Hinckley, and I know that our Savior called me on a mission through him.

Elder Köszegi Sándor Ádám,
Hungary Budapest Mission

The Liahona (Spanish) has long sustained me in my daily efforts to live the gospel. One day I was reading the September 1996 issue, hoping to find an answer to my prayers in its pages, and I noticed the illustration on the back cover depicting Lehi’s vision of the tree of life. I immediately knew that this reminder was the answer to the problems I was having. I know that the Liahona teaches of the iron rod—from which we should never let go.

Rosa María García Baena,
Málaga First Branch, Málaga Spain District
