To be an instrument in the hands of the Lord is really quite easy. We just need to be willing to let the Spirit guide us and have the courage to follow His promptings. Such was the case when my wife’s parents joined the Church in 1968. A young missionary who wanted to be an instrument in the Lord’s hands helped bring their family into the Church.

My in-laws met with the missionaries once, but after that, my father-in-law didn’t want to continue. Then a new missionary, Elder Fetzer, was transferred to the area, and this young missionary and his companion felt prompted to visit and minister to the family. Elder Fetzer was able to touch the hearts of the family members in a way that other missionaries had not.

For the next six months the missionaries ministered to the family’s needs. In time, my wife’s parents were touched by the Spirit and joined the Church. They received the blessings that come as we make and keep covenants. Through them, more families have joined the Church and received the blessings of the gospel.

This happened, in part, because a young man from Utah was willing to “let God prevail” in his life. He had the courage to leave the comfort of home, learn a new language, and serve the Lord in Brazil.

About one year ago my wife, Alessandra, got a text message on her phone from a sister in our home ward in Brazil. It had been more than two years since they had last met. This sister wrote: “On one of the worst days of my life, I don’t know how I got to church. When I did, you saw me. You held my arm and told me to sit by you. I talked to you. You listened and counseled me.”

This seemed to be a simple conversation at the time. But it turned out to be an opportunity for my wife to be an instrument in the hands of the Lord. She ministered to that dear sister who was going through a challenging time. Alessandra didn’t really think about it. She simply felt prompted to listen and to offer comfort, and she acted on the prompting. Now, more than two years later, she received this text message from that sister, expressing her gratitude.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="150892558" id="aside1_p1">We don’t need a calling to be an instrument in the Lord’s hands. We just need to have the desire.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

Through these events I have learned that we don’t need a calling to be an instrument in the Lord’s hands. We just need to have the desire. “Therefore, if ye have desires to serve God ye are called to the work” (Doctrine and Covenants 4:3).

In the Old Testament we read about another person who served as an instrument in God’s hands. Esther was a young woman who lost her parents at an early age. She was raised by her cousin Mordecai.

After King Ahasuerus divorced Queen Vashti, he chose Esther to be his new queen. “And the king loved Esther above all the women, and she obtained grace and favour in his sight” (Esther 2:17). Esther was Jewish, but the king did not know it.

Haman, one of the king’s advisors, was promoted to sit above all the princes that were with him (see Esther 3:1). And he plotted “to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all Jews, both young and old” (Esther 3:13).

When Esther learned about Haman’s plot, Mordecai urged Esther to speak to the king. Doing so posed great personal risk to her, but she took courage from the words of Mordecai. He declared, “Who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?” (Esther 4:14).

“If I perish, I perish,” she said (Esther 4:16) and went to the king without being summoned. This was an offense punishable by death. Due to her bravery, Esther was able to influence the king. As a result, he issued a decree to spare the Jews. In it, he “granted the Jews which were in every city to gather themselves together, and to stand for their life” (Esther 8:11).

Esther was willing to be an instrument in the hands of the Lord. Her life of obedience and devotion had prepared her. When I think about her going into the king’s inner court without an invitation, I marvel at her courage. It reminds me of President Russell M. Nelson’s invitation to all of us to let God prevail in our lives. Esther was willing to let God prevail.

Esther’s cousin Mordecai was also an instrument in the hands of the Lord. He raised Esther well. He gave her support, courage, and inspiration. We all have a role to play, and each role is equally important and critical.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="150892579" id="aside2_p1">Just as He did with Esther, the Lord puts us where we can help to fulfill His purposes. We must be ready and worthy when faced with opportunities He presents.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

The Lord placed Esther in the king’s house for a purpose—to save the Jews. Just as He did with Esther, the Lord puts us where we can help to fulfill His purposes. For this reason, we must be ready and worthy when faced with the opportunities He presents.

Opportunities to be instruments in the hands of the Lord are all around us. Our responsibility is to be prepared to act. Often we do not know when or how those opportunities will present themselves. We need to live worthy of the companionship of the Holy Ghost and have a willing heart. Then the Lord will guide us to do what He needs us to do.

In Doctrine and Covenants 35:3, the Lord tells Sidney Rigdon, “I have looked upon thee and thy works. I have heard thy prayers, and prepared thee for a greater work.”

The Lord knows us and has a work for each of us to do. Sometimes it is a work that only we can do. This work can be in the home as parents helping a struggling son or daughter. Or it can be within our Church responsibilities. In fact, it can be anytime, anywhere, and with anyone.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="150892601" id="aside3_p1">The Lord knows us and has a work for each of us to do. Sometimes it is a work that only we can do.</p> [/SIDEBAR]

President Dieter F. Uchtdorf, then Second Counselor in the First Presidency, said: “The Lord gave you your responsibilities for a reason. There may be people and hearts only you can reach and touch. Perhaps no one else could do it in quite the same way.”

President Uchtdorf also said, “As we emulate [the Savior’s] perfect example, our hands can become His hands; our eyes, His eyes; our heart, His heart.”

Like Esther, Mordecai, Elder Fetzer, my wife, and many others, we can all be instruments in the hands of the Lord.
