It is a great blessing to belong to the Church and to have the established programs to benefit our spiritual growth. I feel that besides being a guide, the Liahona (Spanish) is the means by which we unite ourselves in thoughts and feelings with Latter-day Saints around the world.

The love of our Heavenly Father and his Son Jesus Christ is felt in each experience I read in the magazine. My family was particularly touched by the article, “Cécile Pelous: Love and Friendship in India” (March 1992). What a magnificent example of service for us all. Thank you for sharing her story with us.

Ayala Ramírez
Gavidia Ward, San Miguel El Salvador Stake

In the past, I did not always like to read the Church magazines. But I have developed a habit of reading O Le Liahona (Samoan), and I enjoy it very much.

There is much to learn in the messages of the First Presidency and the other Brethren. As a young person, I find their counsel of great help in these troubled times.

I like reading articles dealing with the history of the Church, especially those that tell of the Saints in the Pacific.

In all, O Le Liahona is of great value in my life.

Suisami Luatua
Alema Ward, Manureva Auckland Stake
New Zealand

I want to express my great joy and gratitude for Nordstjärnan (Swedish). I think it is a marvelous magazine. I look forward each month to the articles, the beautiful illustrations and color photography, the children’s section, and the covers.

I consider Nordstjärnan to be like continuous scripture coming to me month after month. I have had copies of the magazine bound from 1951 through 1973. And since then, I’ve kept the issues in special files.

The magazine is a great missionary tool, too. I often have a couple of copies with me when I go on a trip, so I can share them with friends and other travelers.

Thank you for a fine publication.

Gunnar Nilsson
Jönköping Ward, Göteborg Sweden Stake

It is a pleasure for me to read the Liahona (Spanish). I have received many blessings from reading the First Presidency Message and the testimonies of other Saints. As I read of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ at work in people’s lives, my heart is filled with faith and hope.

To me and my family, the magazine is a perfect complement to the Book of Mormon and the other scriptures.

Aida Pomoles
Guayama, Puerto Rico
