Who is Jesus Christ? People of many faiths know that He lived more than 2,000 years ago. Many believe that He was a great teacher. But there is more.

Who is Jesus Christ? Christians, including members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, know He performed many miracles. He fed the multitude with five loaves of bread and two fishes, healed the sick, caused the blind to see, and raised the dead. But there is more.

Who is Jesus Christ? He asked the Apostles, “Whom say ye that I am?

“And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God” (Matt. 16:15–16).

Who is Jesus Christ? He is the Son of God. Heavenly Father sent Him to organize His Church, teach the gospel, suffer and die for our sins, and be resurrected.

Where is He now? The Prophet Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon had a vision and proclaimed: “He lives! For we saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father” (D&C 76:22–23).

Who is Jesus Christ? He is our Savior and our Redeemer. He lives today. If we choose the right and ask Heavenly Father in prayer, we can know for ourselves, through the witness of the Holy Ghost, that He is Heavenly Father’s Son and that He died to save us from our sins.

1.  Mount page 7 on heavy paper.

2.  Cut out the figures, the stones, and the diorama; then cut the heavy diagonal line.

3.  Fold along the broken line, and glue the blank section underneath the diorama (see illustration).

4.  Cut slits on the short heavy lines; insert the tabs for the figures into the slits, and fold them so the figures will stand.

5.  Locate and read the scriptures on the stones, and add the stones to the diorama.

Matt. 1:21

John 11:25

1 Cor. 15:20

Mosiah 3:17

3 Ne. 11:8–10

JS—H 1:11, 15–17

D&C 101:32

D&C 110:1–4

1.  Write the following scripture references on separate pieces of paper: Matt. 3:13–17; Acts 2:1, 38, 41; Mosiah 18:14–17; JS—H 1:68–72; Moses 6:64–66. Divide the Primary into groups; have each group read a scripture and form a discussion panel. Have the rest of the Primary ask each panel questions about the scripture, such as, Who was baptized? Where did this take place? How did the people feel? How would baptism help? How were those baptisms like your own? Sing songs or hymns about baptism, and testify of the blessings of baptism.

2.  Several weeks before you teach “Easter Hosanna” (see this issue, pp. F8–9), help an older child or adult leader learn the verses. Teach the Primary children the chorus first. Read John 12:12–18 and talk about when the people cried “Hosanna” as the Savior entered the city. Explain that people in the Americas also rejoiced when the Savior came. Have the children read aloud 3 Ne. 11:15–17. As they sing the chorus of “Easter Hosanna,” have the children touch their ears when they hear “Hosanna.” Have the children listen as the older child or adult sings the verses. Have the entire Primary join in singing the chorus. To help the children learn the verses, invite the soloist to sing the first line. Then have the children sing that line. Repeat this process with the second line. Have the children sing the second line again, then the first two lines. Repeat this process for the complete verse.
