Elder Stephen D. Nadauld, while serving as a member of the Seventy, related the following experience: “A stake president and I took the opportunity to visit a young woman. … Her husband had been killed in a car accident; she was living in a modest apartment with her two young children. I suppose we expected to find her upset and discouraged. … On the contrary, she was cheerful; she was calm; she was very gracious. She thanked us for coming and then said, … ‘Brethren, I want you to know I believe in the plan of redemption. I am grateful to my Savior for the promise of a glorious resurrection with my husband. I am grateful for His redeeming sacrifice.’ Then, putting her arms around her two children, she said, ‘Our faith in Jesus Christ will see us through’” (“Faith and Good Works,” Ensign, May 1992, 82–83).

This sister’s humble declaration demonstrates how faith in the Savior can replace fear and doubt with hope and courage.

In today’s uncertain world, we may not know what tomorrow will bring, but faith in Jesus Christ can give us spiritual peace, even in the face of calamity and heartbreak. As President Ezra Taft Benson (1899–1994), while President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, explained, “Faith in [Jesus Christ] means believing that even though we do not understand all things, He does” (“Jesus Christ: Our Savior and Redeemer,” Ensign, November 1983, 8).

Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is the first principle of the gospel (see A of F 1:4). By exercising faith we receive strength to face difficulties and overcome temptations. As we put our faith in Him, repent, and are obedient, He will forgive our sins and help us return to Him. “If ye will have faith in me,” He has promised, “ye shall have power to do whatsoever thing is expedient in me” (Moro. 7:33).

We study and practice to develop the skills we need in any earthly endeavor. So also do we develop faith. “Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God,” the Apostle Paul explains (Rom. 10:17). Elder Henry B. Eyring of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles observes that “simply hearing the words of doctrine can plant the seed of faith in the heart. And even a tiny seed of faith in Jesus Christ invites the Spirit” (“The Power of Teaching Doctrine,” Liahona, July 1999, 86).

Once the seed of faith has been planted in our hearts, it must be nourished. Our faith in Jesus Christ is nourished as we study, search, and ponder the scriptures; fast and pray; participate in sacred ordinances; keep our covenants; serve the Lord and others; sustain our Church leaders; and obey the commandments.

As our faith in Jesus Christ grows stronger, we learn to walk with faith in Him. “To have faith in Christ,” says Sister Sheri L. Dew, second counselor in the Relief Society general presidency, “is to believe in Him, follow Him, and rely on Him. And it is to be blessed with the peace of conscience and mind that the Apostle Paul spoke of when he said, ‘I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me’ (Philip. 4:13)” (“Our Only Chance,” Liahona, July 1999, 78).
