Gene R. Cook, Searching the Scriptures (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1997)

Introduction

Why Read This Book

"O that I were an angel," Alma exclaimed, ". . . that I might go forth and speak with . . . a voice to shake the earth." He would proclaim repentance, he said, inviting "every soul" to "come unto our God, that there might not be more sorrow upon all the face of the earth." (Alma 29:1-2.)

Alma's desires are my desires—and I know they're shared by many others as well.

O that I were an angel, that I might proclaim the sweetness and wonder of God's word, that all the people of the whole world might come to the blessing of "feasting upon the word of Christ" as it is found in the scriptures. (2 Ne. 31:20.)

O that I were an angel, that I could help people learn how to search the scriptures more diligently—and to motivate them to search daily.

O that I were an angel, that I could convince families everywhere to discover the power of family scripture reading.

I suspect it's impossible for anyone to fully convey his feeling for the true value and importance of the scriptures. I fear that all of us treat them lightly, not giving them the time, attention, or thought they deserve. But I also believe that if we have a deeper understanding of what the scriptures really are, it will motivate us to view them differently, to treat them differently, and to truly seek, by the Spirit of the Lord, to understand what the Lord is saying to us through them.

I love the words of the hymn that says, "As I search the holy scriptures. . . ." The standard works are not just scriptures; they are holy. I believe they ought to be handled in a holy way. They ought to be thought of in a holy way. They are the very words of God.

As I search the holy scriptures, Loving Father of mankind, May my heart be blessed with wisdom, And may knowledge fill my mind.

When you read the scriptures with the Spirit, you do indeed feel knowledge fill your mind.

As I search the holy scriptures, Touch my spirit, Lord, I pray. May life's mysteries be unfolded As I study day by day.

Through the scriptures the Lord can bless us—not just month by month or week by week, but day by day.

As I search the holy scriptures, May thy mercy be revealed. Soothe my troubled heart and spirit; May my unseen wounds be healed.

Isn't that your experience when you read the scriptures? I know it is mine. They truly do soothe the troubled heart and spirit. If we will read the word of the Lord with the Spirit of the Lord, what peace they can bring to us. And how many "unseen wounds" do they heal in us? I'm confident that your experience has been like mine: as I read and ponder and pray, I feel the Lord speak to me and truly heal the wounds hidden within my heart.

As I search the holy scriptures, Help me ponder and obey. In thy word is life eternal; May thy light show me the way. (Hymns [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985], 277.)

To ponder and to obey are two key principles of searching the scriptures—we'll talk in some detail about both in this book. As we ponder and obey the scriptures, they'll show us the way to walk in this life. And they'll show us the way back home. After all, that's ultimately what they were given for—to help us learn how to return home, once again, to our Heavenly Father.

How Can This Book Help You?

It is my hope that this book will both motivate you and serve as a practical guide as you search the scriptures more diligently. In the first section of the book, about the power and blessing of the Lord's word, we focus on the purpose and importance of the scriptures—not only for the Church, but also for each of us individually.

One of the most valuable purposes of the scriptures is to serve as a tool to help us hear the voice of the Lord. But that blessing doesn't come through casual effort. Instead, we need to search the scriptures diligently: pondering and questioning, marking and cross-referencing, and seeking understanding of how they apply to our lives. Then we need to obey what we understand. The second section of the book seeks to explore how we can effectively do those things.

The third section is designed to be a blessing to families. Again, I hope it will serve to motivate and be a practical aid to families as they seek to learn better how to search the scriptures together. Taking cues from the experience of my own family, as well as others, I offer suggestions on how to organize for family study, how to invite and maintain the Spirit of the Lord in your family reading time, and how to use the scriptures as a way to bless each member of your family.

As you read the pages of this book, I invite you to pray for the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord. Ask the Lord to open your heart and mind so you can receive truth and be blessed by it. If you will do that with an honest heart, I promise you that the Lord will bless you and help you to grow in your understanding and appreciation of these great books, which are nothing less than a record of the words of God revealed to his children on the earth.
