Gene R. Cook, Searching the Scriptures (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1997)

Part 1

The Purpose of the Scriptures: The Power and Blessing of the Lord's Word

Chapter 1

Worth Any Sacrifice

What is the power of the scriptures? How important are they? Here is a fascinating true story that will give us some clues.

In 1910 a young Italian preacher in New York City, named Don Vincenzo di Francesca, found a book on top of a barrel of ashes. "Curious, I picked up the book and knocked it against the side of the barrel to shake the ashes from its pages," he wrote.

The Book without a Cover

As I stood there with the book in my hands, the fury of the wind turned the pages, and one by one, the names Nephi, Mosiah, Alma, Moroni, and Isaiah appeared before my eyes. Since the cold wind was bitter, I hurriedly wrapped the soiled book in a newspaper and continued my journey. . . .

Back in my room I carefully turned the torn pages. . . . What could be the name of the church that taught such doctrine in words so easily understood? The cover of the book and the title page were missing. I read the declaration of witnesses in the opening pages and was strongly impressed by the strength of their testimonies, but there was no other clue to the book's identity.

I purchased some alcohol and cotton from the drugstore beneath my lodgings and began cleaning the soiled pages. Then for several hours I read what was written in the book. When I had read chapter ten of the book of Moroni, I locked the door of my room; and with the book held in my hands, I knelt down and asked God, the Eternal Father, in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, to tell me if the book was of God. As I prayed, I felt my body becoming cold. Then my heart began to pound, and a feeling of warmth and gladness came over me and filled me with such joy that I cannot find words to express. I knew that the words of the book came from God.

I continued my services in the parish, but my preaching was tinged with the new words I had found in the book. The members of my congregation were so interested in my words that they became dissatisfied with the sermons of my colleagues, and they asked them why they did not preach the sweet arguments of Don Vincenzo. This was the beginning of troubles for me. When members began leaving the chapel during the sermons of my colleagues and remained when I occupied the pulpit, my colleagues became angry with me.

"I Could Not Deny the Words of the Book"

Don Vincenzo eventually was called before a "committee of censure" for disciplinary action. They instructed him to burn the book, saying it was of the devil. Vincenzo replied that the book was the word of God.

"I declared that if I were to burn the book, I would displease God. I would rather go out of the congregation of the church than offend him."

The council dropped the matter until 1914, when he was again instructed to burn the book.

"In reply, I stated I could not deny the words of the book nor would I burn it, since in doing so I would offend God. I said I looked forward with joy to the time when the church to which the book belonged would be made known to me and I would become a part of it."

The council responded by stripping him of his position as pastor of the church. Three weeks later he was excommunicated.

In 1914 he was drafted into the Italian army and saw action in Europe during World War I. "Remembering the lessons of the book I had read, I related to some of the men in my company the story of the people of Ammon—how they refused to shed the blood of their brothers and buried their arms rather than be guilty of so great crimes. The chaplain reported me to the colonel. . . . I received as punishment a ten-day sentence on bread and water, with the order that I was to speak no more of the book and its stories."

After the war Vincenzo was readmitted to his church in New York and was sent by them on a mission to New Zealand and Australia. While teaching the people, he continued to share truths from the Book of Mormon. His companion "reported me to the synod, and . . . I was cut off from the church forever. Soon after, I returned to Italy."

"At Long Last I Learned"

In 1930 he accidentally happened on the entry Mormon in a French dictionary. He recognized the name Mormon from his book and read the entry carefully. It said that a Mormon Church had been established in 1830 and that this church operated a university at Provo, Utah. It was the first clue he had of where the book without a cover might have come from.

He wrote a letter to the president of the university, which later brought correspondence from President Heber J. Grant and Elder John A. Widtsoe (who was president of the European Mission). From these brethren Vincenzo received a Book of Mormon in Italian and a pamphlet telling the story of Joseph Smith and the gold plates.

"At long last I had learned the rest of the story begun so long ago when, guided by the hand of God, I found the torn book lying on top of a barrel of ashes on a street in New York City."

Vincenzo sought baptism, but missionaries were unable to reach him because of war in Sicily and later in Europe. For the next thirteen years he had no contact with the Church, but he remained faithful to its teachings—and he continued to share his understandings from the scriptures with others.

Finally, in 1951, he was baptized; as far as we know, it was the first baptism in Sicily. Five years later he was able to receive his endowments in the Swiss Temple.

"At last, to be in the presence of my Heavenly Father!" he wrote. "I felt I had now proved faithful in my second estate, after having searched for and found the true Church by means of an unknown book that I found so many years ago, lying on an open barrel of ashes in the city of New York."

Don Vincenzo di Francesca died in 1966 in Italy, in the province of his birth. (For the full account of his experience, see Improvement Era, May 1968, 4-7.)

God's Precious Gifts

I am grateful for this account because it shows a man who was willing to sacrifice everything for the word of God. Brother Vincenzo was willing to sacrifice his employment as a preacher, his membership in his church, and his reputation among his fellowman to stay true to what he had learned in the scriptures.

The scriptures can have such a powerful influence on us that they are worth such sacrifice. Alma and his brethren found that "the preaching of the word had a great tendency to lead the people to do that which was just—yea, it had had more powerful effect upon the minds of the people than the sword, or anything else, which had happened unto them—therefore Alma thought it was expedient that they should try the virtue of the word of God." (Alma 31:5.)

The written word of God—the scriptures—is one of the greatest blessings the Lord has given us. Until we recognize that fact, I am afraid we will hold them lightly. Conversely, if we recognize their supreme importance in our lives—even standing in awe of these precious gifts—we then will treat them with more respect and greater attention. And, in turn, we will receive much greater benefits from them.

Cost of Preserving Scriptures

How much are we willing to sacrifice to give the scriptures a prominent place in our lives? How important are these things to us?

Some of the best blood that has ever been shed upon the earth has come from martyrs who sought to preserve and protect the holy word of the Lord. These men felt the scriptures were so important that they were willing to give their lives for them. Others, though spared a martyr's death, gave their fortunes and sometimes their freedom for the great privilege of sharing God's word.

John Wycliffe, for example, sought in the 1300s to create an English translation of the Bible for his countrymen to read. (At that time, Bibles were translated into Latin, which most people could not read.) For his desires he was fired from his position at Oxford and shunned by many friends and associates. One of his assistants was excommunicated from his church and spent the next five years in prison or in exile. Wycliffe died soon after he completed his work. Because of official opposition to his work with the Bible, his body was later dug up and his bones were burned to ashes, which were then scattered in a river.

In the 1520s and 1530s, after the printing press had been invented, William Tyndale sought to provide a printed version of the English Bible. To escape capture and punishment, he had to travel from city to city in Europe under assumed names. The printing of the Bible had to be done in secret, and the copies could only be smuggled into England. In 1535, in Antwerp, he was betrayed by a friend, captured, and imprisoned. He suffered in a damp dungeon for sixteen months, leaving only for his trial and subsequent execution. He was tied to a stake, strangled, and burned. Refusing to recant, his dying words were, "Lord, open the King of England's eyes."

Others also suffered, and many were put to death just for reading or possessing the forbidden Bibles.

Protecting the Book of Mormon

The Book of Mormon also came at great cost, not only to those who so painstakingly melted ore and created plates on which to record, but also to Joseph Smith and those who sought to help him protect those plates.

Joseph Smith said:

The . . . heavenly messenger delivered them [the plates] up to me with this charge: that I should be responsible for them; that if I should let them go carelessly, or through any neglect of mine, I should be cut off; but that if I would use all my endeavors to preserve them, until he, the messenger, should call for them, they should be protected.

I soon found out the reason why I had received such strict charges to keep them safe, and why it was that the messenger had said that when I had done what was required at my hand, he would call for them. For no sooner was it known that I had them, than the most strenuous exertions were used to get them from me. Every stratagem that could be invented was resorted to for that purpose. The persecution became more bitter and severe than before, and multitudes were on the alert continually to get them from me if possible. But by the wisdom of God, they remained safe in my hands, until I had accomplished by them what was required at my hand. (JS-H 1:59-60.)

On the day Joseph Smith actually received the plates from Moroni, he wrapped them in his linen frock and started to carry them home. His mother, Lucy Mack Smith, writes:

After proceeding a short distance, he thought it would be more safe to leave the road and go through the woods. Traveling some distance after he left the road, he came to a large windfall, and as he was jumping over a log, a man sprang up from behind it, and gave him a heavy blow with a gun. Joseph turned around and knocked him down, then ran at the top of his speed. About half a mile further he was attacked again in the same manner as before; he knocked this man down in like manner as the former, and ran on again; and before he reached home he was assaulted the third time. (Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith, the Prophet and his Progenitors for Many Generations [Liverpool: published for Orson Pratt and S. W. Richards, 1853], 104-5.)

When he finally reached the house, he was "speechless from fright and the fatigue of running." (Ibid.)

Joseph's troubles did not end there, of course. He writes: "As soon as news of this discovery [of the gold plates] was made known, false reports, misrepresentation and slander flew, as on the wings of the wind, in every direction; the house was frequently beset by mobs and evil designing persons. Several times I was shot at, and very narrowly escaped, and every device was made use of to get the plates away from me." (Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1902-1923], 4:538.)

It was the Lord's plan in the ancient Americas that the plates "should be kept and handed down from one generation to another, and be kept and preserved by the hand of the Lord until they should go forth unto every nation." In doing so, he would "show forth his power unto future generations," namely those of us in this generation. (Alma 37:4, 14.)

Truly a tremendous effort has been made to bring these scriptures to the latter days, to where we stand today. They ought to be held in a sacred way. If they are, and if we can learn how to use them, they will change lives—our own and those we influence.

I love these admonitions from the Lord:

These words are given unto you, and they are pure before me; wherefore, beware how you hold them, for they are to be answered upon your souls in the day of judgment. (D&C 41:12.)

These sayings are true and faithful; wherefore, transgress them not, neither take therefrom. (D&C 68:34.)

What a great witness from the Lord himself about the exactness of his word. It causes me to stand in awe, in deep humility, when I think of the greatness of the gift he has given me.

Testimonies of Others

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is filled with people who love the scriptures as I do, people who have a deep sense of the value of these volumes. In one of the stakes of Zion, for instance, the stake president challenged his people to read the Book of Mormon before the next stake conference—and they responded with faith and commitment. Here are some of their testimonies of how the scriptures helped to change and bless their lives:

"A Glorious Time"

Our stake president challenged us to read or reread the Book of Mormon prior to our next stake conference. While I had read the Book of Mormon several times before, and had studied it in high school seminary, at Ricks College, and in institute sessions, my new husband had not. He was intrigued by the challenge and thought we should accept it.

My husband is not a member of the Church.

Although we have not yet completed the book, we have been studying each morning for at least thirty minutes when our schedules allow. Often we find more of that time is spent in discussion than in actual reading.

This is the first time in my life that I have gleaned so much from this book, despite all the past years of reading. . . . It has also turned out to be a glorious time for my husband and me to draw closer to each other.

Thank you for helping us to find this added light in our lives!

"I Knew from the First Words"

Rereading the Book of Mormon has been a wonderful reunion, getting reacquainted with my brethren and friends who paved the way on this continent before me.

The first time I read the Book of Mormon was two years before I joined the Church. I was a young mother of two little ones, and my marriage was on the verge of ending. I prayed for the help and strength to hold my little family together and to find the inner peace I so desperately needed. It was then that the Book of Mormon stood out on our bookshelf as if it was illuminated. (The missionaries had left it at our home two years earlier.) I took it down and read the great and comforting words contained therein. I knew from the first words that what I was reading was true. Beginning at that point I made the necessary changes and preparations, so that almost two years later when missionaries again came to my door I was ready for baptism.

My life presently has been almost as confusing and frightening as it was those many years ago. Although I have read the Book of Mormon several times over the twenty years I've been a member, at this time I needed to hear the words of those dear friends from the dust whisper the peace and strength of the gospel to me again.

This reading has strengthened my testimony that Mormon truly saw our day, and that he, through divine inspiration, gleaned out the precious words we needed. It has also helped me to see more than ever that you are to hate the sin, but love the sinner. And that it is love for our brothers and sisters that will win them back, as the great missionaries of the Book of Mormon proved over and over. Love and service—the true examples that Jesus Christ left us—are the first stepping-stones on the path to exaltation.

This was the most wonderful assignment I've ever been asked to fulfill. Thank you again for the challenge.

"Something I Could Rely on Unconditionally"

I accepted your invitation to read the Book of Mormon this year prior to stake conference. I'm very glad I did.

Though I have read it cover to cover many times before, in some way or another every time is like the first time. This time I think what struck me the most was the thoroughness of the book. By the time you reach the end you realize that every important lesson you need to spiritually thrive in today's world, and to find joy and eternal life, has been taught to you in great clarity many times over. It is such an astounding book, and I marvel at it more now than I ever have.

I also, as you suggested, put Moroni's promise (Moro. 10:3-5) to the test once again. I felt a little sheepish in doing so—I was asking the Lord for something I already had. But still the peaceful, uplifting, reassuring feeling came to me that this book was something I could rely on unconditionally—an iron rod to guide my family and me through the mists of darkness in today's world. How grateful I am for it, and for my testimony of it!

During this same time, my wife and I also read our children's illustrated Book of Mormon series with the kids. Every night they look forward to reading their scriptures before going to bed, and the lessons and characters of the Book of Mormon have become a part of their walk and talk much more than I thought they would at this age.

Back when I was investigating the Church, I was shocked at the audacity of Joseph Smith's statement that "the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth." But now, and particularly after this most recent reading, that fact is crystal clear to me. I guess what I am shocked at now is that anyone could read the book through with "real intent" and not come to know of its truth.
