Gene R. Cook, Searching the Scriptures (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1997)

Chapter 3

A Personal Liahona

Why did the Lord give us the scriptures? Why is it important that we read them? Why do we love them? Why should we care? What is the value of the scriptures to us?

I once asked these questions in a fireside and received the following excellent responses:

• They bear witness of God the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ.

• They establish a pattern of living. If you truly desire to learn that pattern, you will find it in the scriptures—and it will help you return to your eternal home. Someone once said that the scriptures are like letters from home. They're letters the Lord has written to us with instructions on how to get back to him.

• They give daily direction as you seek for it.

• They bring solace in times of hardship and pain. They seem to have an ability to heal the soul, to bring comfort, to bring peace, to bring joy. Sometimes when you feel like your heart is about to burst, you can pick up the scriptures and read those passages that most speak to your soul; and as you do, you will begin to feel the Spirit of the Lord working within you, bringing a deep and wonderful peace.

• They help reveal the Lord's purposes.

• They show the history of people and how they acted, and they warn us not to follow the same course. The Book of Mormon, for example, is the record of a fallen people, given so that we can clearly see what happens through the years to those who keep the commandments of God and what happens to those who do not. It's a picture painted very plainly so we won't misunderstand.

• They answer important questions. In fact, 2 Nephi 32:3 says that the words of Christ will give us answers to all questions, to everything. I believe that means the scriptures contain true principles that give us the answer to any question we could ask of the Lord—even if the answer is to "listen to the prophet" or to "seek personal revelation," which are two other sources of the words of Christ. (At times I've had a fun time with missionaries and others to see if they could ask a meaningful question the scriptures couldn't answer. They have always failed—the scriptures contain principles that govern everything you can think of. Of course, it may require deep thought, prayer, and inspiration to discover those principles and their application.)

• They offer an invitation to all to come unto Christ. In fact, that is the most basic purpose of the scriptures—to stand as a witness of Christ and to teach us how to come unto him.

• They are the very voice of God to man. Many of the passages, particularly in the writings of the Old Testament prophets and in the Doctrine and Covenants, are the actual words of Jesus Christ, in print. (That's a wonderful thing to me. The greatest part of the Doctrine and Covenants is a quote from Jesus Christ himself. Consider what a unique book it is!)

Why We Have the Book of Mormon

As we talk about the purpose and importance of the scriptures, it is appropriate to specifically focus on the Book of Mormon, which was preserved by the Lord for us in this day. President Gordon B. Hinckley once said of the Book of Mormon: "Its narrative is a chronicle of nations long since gone. But in its descriptions of the problems of today's society, it is as current as the morning newspaper and much more definitive, inspired, and inspiring concerning the solutions to those problems." (Ensign, June 1988, 4.)

The Book of Mormon has had few champions like President Ezra Taft Benson. Let me share with you something of his testimony of the Book of Mormon:

It is not just that the Book of Mormon teaches us truth; though, indeed, it does that. It's not just that the Book of Mormon bears testimony of Christ; though, indeed, it does that too. But there is something more. There is a power in the book which will begin to flow into your lives the moment you begin a serious study of the book. You will find greater power to seriously study the book. You'll find great power to resist temptation. You'll find the power to avoid deception. . . . These books contain the voice of the Lord to us in these latter days. (Ensign, Nov. 1986, 7, 80.)

To those words I would add the witness of Elder Bruce R. McConkie:

Few men on earth, either in or out of the Church, have caught the vision of what the Book of Mormon is all about. Few are they among men who know what part it has played and will yet play in preparing the way of the coming of him of whom it is a new witness. . . . The Book of Mormon shall so affect men, that the whole earth and all its peoples will have been influenced and governed by it. . . . There is no greater issue ever to confront mankind in modern times than this: Is the Book of Mormon the mind and will and the voice of God to all men? . . .

The voice we hear is one that whispers from the dust. It is the voice of all the . . . Nephite and Jaredite prophets. It is the voice of the Lord Jesus Christ, who ministered among the Nephites. . . . It is the voice of doctrine and testimony and miracles. It is the voice of God speaking to men. (The Millennial Messiah [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1982], 159, 170, 179-80, 151-52.)

President Benson used to like to say, "Brothers and sisters, the Book of Mormon is not on trial; we are!" (See Ensign, Nov. 1984, 8.) What a great statement! The Book of Mormon is not on trial as to whether or not it's true. It is true. We are on trial to see if we'll come to a testimony of it.

Some years ago, I searched through the Book of Mormon to discover the answer to two questions: "First, what is the purpose of the Book of Mormon in the latter days? Second, why did the Lord expend such a tremendous effort to preserve the record for our time?"

Here are some of the answers I came up with:

The Role and Purpose of the Book of Mormon in the Last Days

• It is a witness for Jesus Christ. (Certainly that has to be listed first.) (Preface to the Book of Mormon; 1 Ne. 15:14; 2 Ne. 25:17-18.)

• It contains the fulness of the gospel. (D&C 20:9; JS-H 1:34.)

• It is the instrument of conversion. As President Benson wrote: "Combined with the Spirit of the Lord, the Book of Mormon is the greatest single tool which God has given us to convert the world. If we are to have the harvest of souls, we must use the instrument which God has designed for that task—the Book of Mormon." (Ensign, Nov. 1984, 7. See also Hel. 15:7-8; D&C 3:18-20.)

• It is a standard of the Lord's values for the people. As we search through its passages, it becomes clear that it contains the very values of the Lord, the values we must assume and absorb, as it were, into our own bosoms. (2 Ne. 29:2.)

• It is given to gather all nations. (2 Ne. 3:23-24.) It is an ensign to the people. (2 Ne. 30:7; D&C 39:11.)

• It is a companion witness to the Bible. In fact, the Book of Mormon testifies that if you believe the Bible, really believe it, you will believe the Book of Mormon. And if you believe the Book of Mormon, it will prove the Bible also to be true. (1 Ne. 13:24-26, 29, 40-41; Morm. 7:8-9.)

• It is given to bring people to a knowledge of their forefathers. (1 Ne. 15:14; 2 Ne. 30:5.)

• It is given to make known the covenants of the Father. (1 Ne. 13:23; 1 Ne. 22:7-9; 2 Ne. 3:21.)

• It is a means to assist in the salvation of the elect. (Hel. 3:29.)

• It is given to help prepare a tabernacle and a "holy city," and to prepare a people for both. (Moses 7:62.)

• It is designed to help prepare the world for the Second Coming. (Moses 7:62-64.)

• It helps us have power to discern right and wrong. (Moro. 7:16-19.)

• It will help the Church come out from under condemnation. (D&C 84:54-57.)

• It provides us with the new covenant. (D&C 84:57.)

• It contains the record of a fallen people, given to help us avoid their fatal mistakes. (D&C 20:9.)

• It contains the plan of opposition. (2 Ne. 2:11.)

• It shows us the enemies of Christ. (Alma 30:12-18.)

I am sure there are many more reasons than these, but this list gives us at least part of the Lord's purpose in preserving the Book of Mormon in this last day.

When I let these ideas pass through my heart and mind, I see the majesty and power with which the Lord is operating around the earth. I see how he is using this book to gather Israel and all the nations on the face of the earth. At the time of this writing, we have units of the Church or members of the Church in 159 nations. And this book, the Book of Mormon, is the instrument that is gathering them to God. We must learn how to utilize it so it will help change our very lives and the lives of those around us, drawing us all closer to God.

Why We Have the Other Standard Works

At least to a degree, each of the scriptures has a different purpose. They all bear witness of Christ, of course, but they each have a different focus.

As mentioned above, the Book of Mormon is the instrument of conversion. It will lead us to Jesus Christ. It will convert us to the Lord better than any other book that exists on earth.

The Doctrine and Covenants has a different purpose. It is provided to convert men to the Lord's church. President Ezra Taft Benson said:

The Doctrine and Covenants is the binding link between the Book of Mormon and the continuing work of the Restoration through the Prophet Joseph Smith and his successors. . . . "Search these commandments," said the Lord of the Doctrine and Covenants, "for they are true and faithful, and the prophecies and promises which are in them shall all be fulfilled. . . ." (D&C 1:37.) The Book of Mormon brings men to Christ. The Doctrine and Covenants brings men to Christ's kingdom, even The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. . . .

The Book of Mormon is the "keystone" of our religion, and the Doctrine and Covenants is the capstone, with continuing latter-day revelation. The Lord has placed His stamp of approval on both. (Ensign, May 1987, 83.)

I have always loved the words the Lord uses to describe the Holy Bible. He calls it "the book of the Lamb of God." (1 Ne. 13:28, 38.) What a beautiful title! In its original form, "it contained the fulness of the gospel of the Lord." (1 Ne. 13:24.)

The Old Testament has a focus and purpose that is different from the New Testament. The Old Testament "contains the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel." It also preserves for us "many of the prophecies of the holy prophets." (1 Ne. 13:23.) The New Testament is the Apostles' record of the life and ministry of Jesus Christ, which record they bore "according to the truth which is in the Lamb of God." (1 Ne. 13:24.)

Brigham Young said regarding the Bible:

The doctrines contained in the Bible will lift to a superior condition all who observe them; they will impart to them knowledge, wisdom, charity, fill them with compassion and cause them to feel after the wants of those who are in distress, or in painful or degraded circumstances. They who observe the precepts contained in the Scriptures will be just and true and virtuous and peaceable at home and abroad. Follow out the doctrines of the Bible, and men will make splendid husbands, women excellent wives, and children will be obedient; they will make families happy and the nations wealthy and happy and lifted up above the things of this life. (Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1941], 125.)

The Pearl of Great Price truly is that—a pearl, a real pearl of great price. When this book of scripture was first announced in 1851, it was recommended for "all who appreciate the revelations of truth as hidden treasures of Everlasting Life." (Millennial Star 13 [15 July 1851]: 217.) Those who search its pages will indeed find hidden pearls of truth.

We emphasize the Book of Mormon as much as we do, not because it is more important than any other scripture, but because it has a different focus, which is to help us become more fully converted to the Lord. But we need all the scriptures together to give us the spiritual sustenance and blessing we need in our lives.

I am grateful for the testimony of President Gordon B. Hinckley, wherein he set forth the purposes of each of the standard works:

The standard works are all indispensable to our understanding the things of God. The Bible provides the foundation of our faith: The Old Testament gives the word of Jehovah through his ancient prophets; the New Testament sets forth, in language beautiful and moving, the matchless life and sacrifice of the Savior of mankind.

The Book of Mormon stands as an added testament of Jesus Christ. Through its pages march the testimonies of prophets of the New World. Majestic in its sweep of history, its chapters are filled with the tragedy of war, with divine warnings, and with God-given promises. It speaks as a voice from the dust to a world that needs to listen.

The Pearl of Great Price supplies fascinating details missing from the book of Genesis . . . and from Matt. 24. . . . It also contains the remarkable and moving account of early events in the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

But the Doctrine and Covenants is unique among our books of scripture. It is the constitution of the Church. . . . It is my testimony, written with solemnity and great appreciation, that this remarkable book . . . sets forth "the order and will of God" to this generation. (Ensign, Jan. 1989, 2, 5.)

What the Scriptures Are Not

As we begin to turn with more commitment to the scriptures, making them increasingly a part of our lives, it is important for us to understand what the scriptures are. At the same time, we need to know what they are not.

The scriptures are not just a book or set of books. They are not just facts or history, even though they have some of that in them. They are not just a reference volume for mingling some scriptural passages into our talks or lessons. (Some of us are pretty good at that—but the scriptures are so much more.)

The scriptures are not to be used only in crises, or for Sunday Church work, or for a quick fix. Even though they can help, that's not really what they're for.

The scriptures are not boring or uninteresting. They are not for just a select few or for those with leadership callings or for those who have been called to teach Gospel Doctrine classes. They are not only for scholars but also for the common man. They will communicate to and bless children, youth, and adults. They can reach both the uneducated and the scholars.

They are not to be read simply in response to feelings of guilt or just because you know you ought to. They are to be read because you love the Lord, because you love his words of truth and counsel, and because you love to grow closer to him.

What the Scriptures Are—A Liahona

We have listed a number of things that the scriptures are not. If we were to try to define what they are, we could do so in just one word: Liahona. By that I mean that they are an instrument by which you can receive revelation. If you knew how to work the instrument, and if you had properly prepared your heart, you could take it into your hands, open it just about anywhere, and receive customized guidance from the Lord.

How can you receive customized guidance from the scriptures? Like the Liahona, the scriptures aren't just a self-contained physical object. When we use them prayerfully and with the Spirit, they can open doors to immense spiritual realms.

Here is what Alma said as he compared the words of Christ to the Liahona:

And now, my son, I have somewhat to say concerning the thing which our fathers call a ball, or director—or our fathers called it Liahona, which is, being interpreted, a compass; and the Lord prepared it.

And behold, there cannot any man work after the manner of so curious a workmanship. And behold, it was prepared to show unto our fathers the course which they should travel in the wilderness.

And it did work for them according to their faith in God; therefore, if they had faith to believe that God could cause that those spindles should point the way they should go, behold, it was done; therefore they had this miracle, and also many other miracles wrought by the power of God, day by day.

Nevertheless, because those miracles were worked by small means it did show unto them marvelous works. They were slothful, and forgot to exercise their faith and diligence and then those marvelous works ceased, and they did not progress in their journey;

Therefore, they tarried in the wilderness, or did not travel a direct course, and were afflicted with hunger and thirst, because of their transgressions.

And now, my son, I would that ye should understand that these things are not without a shadow; for as our fathers were slothful to give heed to this compass (now these things were temporal) they did not prosper; even so it is with things which are spiritual.

For behold, it is as easy to give heed to the word of Christ, which will point to you a straight course to eternal bliss, as it was for our fathers to give heed to this compass, which would point unto them a straight course to the promised land.

And now I say, is there not a type in this thing? For just as surely as this director did bring our fathers, by following its course, to the promised land, shall the words of Christ, if we follow their course, carry us beyond this vale of sorrow into a far better land of promise.

O my son, do not let us be slothful because of the easiness of the way; for so was it with our fathers; for so was it prepared for them, that if they would look they might live; even so it is with us. The way is prepared, and if we will look we may live forever. (Alma 37:38-46; emphasis added.)

It seems clear from this passage that the words of Christ and the Liahona are comparable to each other—each guide us and teach us truth from God. Remember that the words of Christ are those words, feelings, and understandings given us by the Holy Ghost. They consist of personal revelation, inspired counsel from living prophets, and the scriptures.

Since we're trying to learn how to make the scriptures a more influential part of our lives, let's make a comparison between the Liahona and the scriptures. Each teaches us about the other.

The Liahona Prepared to show a straight course to the promised land. Worked according to the people's faith in God. Worked by small means. Would not work when the people were slothful and forgetful to use it, failing to exercise their faith and to work with diligence. Marvelous works and progress ceased when the people did not express their faith or diligence. Then they were unable to travel a direct course. People of Lehi were afflicted with hunger and thirst because of their transgressions. A great warning: "Be not slothful because of the easiness of the way." (Alma 37:46.) A caution: ". . . see that ye take care of these sacred things, yea, see that ye look to God and live." (Alma 37:47.) The Scriptures Prepared to show a straight course to the promised land of our Father's kingdom. Work for us only insofar as we have faith in God, casting out our unbelief. Work by small means. Will not work unless we exercise our faith and do so diligently. Individuals and families are often unable to follow a direct course when scriptures are ignored. Trouble both temporally and spiritually, because true principles have not been learned and assimilated. People are afflicted with various trials when they do not keep commandments they would have learned through scripture study. A great warning: "Be not slothful" just because it is so easy to own and read scriptures. Look to the words the Lord has given us in the scriptures, and then we will live.

"Do Not Let Us Be Slothful"

After speaking of the Liahona, Alma gave a vital warning to us: "Do not let us be slothful because of the easiness of the way." Of course, this warning applies to our use of scriptures fully as much as to Lehi's use of the Liahona. It's very easy to have a book in your house. It's easy to pick it up and read the words of God. In fact, it's so easy that I believe we look beyond the mark and do not realize the power that rests in the pages of our precious books of scriptures.

Some years ago I was preparing some speeches on studying the scriptures, which were to be recorded and distributed. As I struggled with the format I might use, I considered giving one talk directed to beginning scripture readers and a second talk directed to the more "advanced." But as I pondered that possibility, the Spirit almost seemed to chasten me for even having thought of such a thing. It was as though the Lord was saying to me, "The scriptures were given to all men, all women, and all children. And they don't need someone to try to divide them up into the simpler parts and the advanced parts. They're all simple."

And I knew it was true.

Now, simple doesn't mean they're always easy to understand or that you never have to give them any effort. Nor does it mean that there are not levels of understanding, because there are. But, at their core, the scriptures are simple, and they can be understood by anyone.

I believe that the way back to our Father is so easy that even a child can follow it. That's the beauty of the scriptures. And when people say, "I just can't understand," I think they don't really know what they're saying because even children can understand. (We'll illustrate that in the third section of this book, when we talk about family scripture reading.)

"A Guide to Living"

The Testimony of a Brother

"I've been asked to write concerning the force the Book of Mormon has on our lives.

"I don't keep track of when I begin or finish reading the Book of Mormon because I have been reading in it every day for a number of years. This book, along with the Pearl of Great Price and the Doctrine and Covenants, reveals to me the will of the Lord in plainness, clarity, and simplicity. My agency then allows me to choose to follow my Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.

"As I read in the Book of Mormon, I find myself cast in the history I'm reading. I find that most of the text portrays circumstances relative to life today. It is a guide to living within the parameters of the commandments and principles of the gospel. I have every desire to live those principles. I'm eternally grateful to the missionary program of the Church, which brought the missionaries and the Holy Ghost into my home to reveal the truth of the gospel message."
