Gene R. Cook, Searching the Scriptures (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1997)

Chapter 4

An Untapped Power

At one point in my Church service, before I was a General Authority, I was called to be a mission representative. This assignment required me to travel from time to time. One day I was on an airplane from the Midwest, heading home to Salt Lake City. As I often do when I board an airplane, I offered a silent prayer that the Lord would have someone sit next to me who really needed the gospel, someone I might be able to exercise a righteous influence over in the hour or two we were together. As some of the passengers came down the aisle, I saw a very handsome-looking man. I thought, "That must be the one." He passed me by. I saw a lady who looked like a very good woman, probably a mother—and she also passed me by. I kept waiting and waiting. Finally the last of the passengers boarded. One of them was a young lady in her late twenties. She was probably the most immodestly dressed, most worldly looking girl I have ever been around. You can imagine my shock when I saw that she was the one who was going to sit beside me.

I was seated on the aisle, and she sat over against the window. I thought to myself, "Well, at least it looks like she does indeed need the gospel." But, because of her immodest dress, I was a little uneasy about starting up a conversation with her.

Nevertheless, we started talking. It didn't take long for me to tell her I was a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, at which point she jumped into a tirade that lasted eight or nine minutes, nonstop, telling me of the wonderful benefits of living with a man outside the covenant of marriage. She told me she had lived with a number of different men in her life. She went on and on and on about it. Her language was crude and her manner was offensive. She even asked me some very inappropriate questions about my personal life, which I didn't feel I needed to answer.

What made it even worse is that she was saying all this loud enough for some of the people in the surrounding seats to hear it as well.

"What Do You Think about That, Mr. Cook?"

After she had talked this way for several minutes, she finally said, "Well, what do you think about all that, Mr. Cook?"

I offered a silent prayer that I'd know what I should say to her, then said, "Well, you probably wouldn't want to know what I think."

"What do you mean?"

I repeated, "I just don't think you'd want to know."

"No, you were polite and listened to me," she said. "Now I really want to know what you think about what I said. Give me your opinion."

"Well, my young friend," I said, "I'll give you better than that. I'll give you what the Lord said about it." And without any other comment I opened my Doctrine and Covenants to D&C 42 and read to her beginning with verse 22: "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else.

"And he that looketh upon a woman to lust after her shall deny the faith, and shall not have the Spirit; and if he repents not he shall be cast out.

"Thou shalt not commit adultery; and he that committeth adultery, and repenteth not, shall be cast out." (D&C 42:22-24.)

Without another word, I turned to D&C 63, verse 16, and read: "And verily I say unto you, as I have said before, he that looketh on a woman to lust after her, or if any shall commit adultery in their hearts, they shall not have the Spirit, but shall deny the faith and shall fear."

I bore my testimony to her, speaking as forthrightly as I knew how, that the word of the Lord meant just what it said, and that it was improper, incorrect, and a sin for her to pursue the lifestyle she was pursuing. (I'm not suggesting that this is how we should always respond in such circumstances. I believe we should seek and follow the Spirit in each instance.)

She immediately stopped the conversation, turned her head to the window, and started to cry—loudly. Again, I felt a little nervous about the people around me. They probably wondered, "What is that fellow doing to that poor girl?" She continued for perhaps half an hour, just sobbing against the window and refusing to say a word. I tried three different times to start the conversation again, calling her by name and apologizing that I'd upset her, but she would not talk to me.

Finally we arrived at her destination, and I stood up in the aisle for her to walk out. As she walked by she whispered, "You are right, Mr. Cook," and then moved on down the aisle.

I never heard from her again. I have no idea what became of her, but I do know, without a doubt, that the Lord spoke to her that day. I certainly could not have touched her that way. I believe those words of the Lord, as found in the scriptures, penetrated that young woman's heart, and she knew that what I had said was true.

I bear witness of the power of the Lord's words in the scriptures. If we will use them, they can powerfully affect the hearts of men. Just as surely, they can bring eternal blessings to us and our families.

Why Do We Struggle to Search the Scriptures?

If the scriptures are as powerful a blessing as we say they are (and they are), why is it so hard to consistently read them? Why do we struggle so much with ourselves and our families to be able to read as regularly as we ought to? What are some of the obstacles that stand in the way of our not being more consistent than we are?

In the fireside I mentioned before, I asked the participants to give the reasons why they struggled with scripture reading. Here are some of their responses:

"The Lord says no man can serve two masters. Jesus repeatedly submitted his will to the will of the Father, and that's what we need to do. I think a lot of times we're pitting our will against the Father's will. It's like we're constantly struggling between doing righteous works and unrighteous works."

"One reason is that it's hard to find time in the lifestyle we have now. We often feel too busy. Another is that sometimes it's hard to learn to understand what they're really saying and how they can speak to you. Some people try to read and understand, but they feel they just don't get it."

"I think sometimes we can't see the forest for the trees. Sometimes the little things get in the way, and you don't realize that that one big thing—studying the scriptures—would take care of the little things."

"I agree. We're out of focus. The scriptures have the answer to our problems, but we struggle around, as it were, in the branches of a tree instead of staying with the roots that would give us the answers we need."

"One obstacle that comes to my mind is television. Some of us are so wrapped up in watching television that there isn't time to read the scriptures. We're too busy using our time somewhere else."

"I think we're afraid of the scriptures. We don't understand their language. We hear some of those words and they seem strange and odd to us, and it scares us away. If we could learn the language of the Lord we'd be more comfortable with the scriptures."

"When you're younger, you just think, 'Well, I've heard that all before. I've read it. It says the same things over and over again, and I've heard it all.' I've even heard some people say, 'I've already read the Book of Mormon. I don't need to read it again.' Of course, those attitudes are wrong, but they still get in the way."

"Some people say the books are too long. Or that they forget everything they read, so why bother?"

Reasons or Excuses?

These concerns are fairly common to many of us. But in the end I am afraid they're more excuses than legitimate reasons. I don't suppose these excuses would sound very convincing to the Lord if we used them to explain why we did not give more time and effort to studying his holy words.

In addition, I believe the Lord has given us an answer to each of these objections. For instance, if we struggle to remember what we read, the Lord promises to quicken our memories. In John 14 he says,

"But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you." (V. 26.)

What a great promise! If we are struggling to remember the things of God, we can pray to the Lord specifically for help with our scripture reading. He will help us to learn how to better apply and internalize what we're reading—and he will help us to not forget what we're learning.

I suspect that all the excuses given before could be boiled down to just two. I found these as I searched the scriptures asking, Why is it that we have such difficulty spending more time in the scriptures?

Reason number one is unbelief. Deep down, many of us really don't believe that the scriptures will help us solve the problems we're facing. Or maybe we feel that they are not as literal as we thought. Or maybe we're not sure the scriptures are really from the Lord. If we had faith, we would be reading them more.

The second reason is pride. This attitude says, I don't want to admit to others how little I know, so I pretend I already know enough. I don't want anyone to find out how unskilled I am with the scriptures, so I say to myself (and maybe others) that I already know them enough.

Those two weaknesses, unbelief and pride, keep many of us from searching the words of the Lord. We may explain our reasons in many other ways, but I believe unbelief and pride are often at the core.

The Church under Condemnation

It is clear to me that the Lord isn't very pleased with our lack of regard for his scriptures. This is made plain in Doctrine and Covenants 84:

"And your minds in times past have been darkened . . ." Why? "Because of unbelief, and because you have treated lightly the things you have received." What have we treated lightly? What have we received? As we see in verse 57, he is talking particularly about the Book of Mormon.

The Lord then continues by saying, "Which vanity [another word for that might be pride] and unbelief have brought the whole church under condemnation. And this condemnation resteth upon the children of Zion, even all." How many of us are under condemnation? All of us.

The Lord wants us to know in no uncertain terms that he is not pleased. We are under condemnation, he says, because we have treated the Book of Mormon lightly.

"And they shall remain under this condemnation until they repent and remember the new covenant, even the Book of Mormon and the former commandments which I have given them, not only to say, but to do according to that which I have written." (D&C 84:54-57.)

As we read on, we learn the Lord's requirements for removing ourselves from the condemnation. His principal prerequisites are that we repent and remember the Book of Mormon (as we see above), that we remain steadfast in our minds, and that we open our mouths and freely testify of the truthfulness of the book and the principles it teaches. Here is what he says:

For I will forgive you of your sins with this commandment—that you remain steadfast in your minds in solemnity and the spirit of prayer, in bearing testimony to all the world of those things which are communicated unto you.

Therefore, go ye into all the world; and unto whatsoever place ye cannot go ye shall send, that the testimony may go from you into all the world unto every creature. (D&C 84:61-62.)

It is important to note that this same passage is followed by a wonderful promise: if we will respond to this invitation from the Lord, he will greatly increase the gifts of the Spirit that shall be poured out upon the entire Church. (See D&C 84:65-73.) We see, then, that if we will immerse ourselves in the scriptures, we will not only remove ourselves from the condemnation but we will also begin to grow and be blessed in many ways.

"Closer to the Spirit"

The Testimony of a Brother

"Reading the Book of Mormon these last 41 months was a welcome and needed assignment for me. At the end of many stress-filled days, I was able to feel myself pull closer to the Spirit."
