Gene R. Cook, Searching the Scriptures (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1997)

Part 2

Personal Study: A Key to Revelation and Peace

Chapter 5

Hearing the Lord's Voice through the Scriptures

One of the great blessings of the scriptures is that they enable us to hear the voice of the Lord. As I explained earlier, they guide us just like a Liahona. In fact, in my judgment the primary reason we read the scriptures is to hear the voice of the Lord speaking to us, giving us revelation and instruction and causing us to have those deep feelings of peace and love that come through the Spirit.

But what does it mean to hear the voice of the Lord through the scriptures?

A passage in the Doctrine of Covenants gives us a key. These verses tell us that the scriptures truly are the voice of the Lord:

These words are not of men nor of man, but of me; wherefore, you shall testify they are of me and not of man;

For it is my voice which speaketh them unto you; for they are given by my Spirit unto you, and by my power you can read them one to another; and save it were by my power you could not have them;

Wherefore, you can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my words. (D&C 18:34-36.)

This wonderful passage tells us that the Lord's voice not only gives the scriptures in the first place, by revelation, but also that when we read them we hear his voice anew. I bear testimony that there is not one person on earth who has read the scriptures humbly who has not heard the voice of the Lord. Let me emphasize that: Every person on earth who has read the scriptures with a humble and pure heart has heard the sweet whisperings of the Lord's voice to him.

If this is true, and I know it is, how can we receive this blessing? What do I have to do so that those spiritual impressions will come into my mind as I read, so that those feelings will come into my heart? What do I have to do so that my mind can be enlightened and my soul enlarged? How can I cause the word to become delicious to me, as Alma said in Alma 32:28?

A Pattern for Hearing the Lord's Voice

There is a pattern we can follow that will help us to hear the voice of the Lord as we read the scriptures. I don't presume that this pattern is the only way to do it, but I know it has worked for me, my family, and hundreds of other people who are trying to better hear the voice of the Lord or feel the words of the Lord while they're reading.

This pattern is so easy to understand even a child can follow it. It involves four very simple suggestions. I'll introduce them here, and then we'll spend more time on each one.

First, we need to prepare ourselves by praying in faith—not just once in awhile, but every time we read. I learned this principle from my older brother when I was twelve years old, when I first received the gift of testimony. "Gene," he said, "you ought to pray over every page." I took that literally. When I ran into a verse I didn't understand, I offered a prayer: "Heavenly Father, I don't understand this very well. Please help me understand." Many times my mind was enlightened immediately as a result of my prayer. Sometimes the answer didn't come until later. I learned that if I would keep reading, however, I would often find the answer.

Second, we need to prepare ourselves by humbling ourselves. A humble spirit can more readily be in tune with God's Spirit. We can humble ourselves by:

• Remembering how truly merciful the Lord is to us in our sins and weaknesses.

• Letting our hearts be filled with gratitude for all the Lord does for us.

• Realizing how dependent we are on the Lord for his gifts and his blessings.

Third, we need to search diligently as we're reading. Again, even a child can learn to search diligently if he is taught the skills:

• Ponder while you're reading.

• While you're reading, continually ask the Lord questions about the verses and give him a chance to answer.

• Seek to discover the patterns the Lord has given us in the scriptures. (Even this part is not too hard for children. I know because my own children have been able to learn them quite readily.)

• Mark and cross-reference the things that are important to you.

• Apply what you are reading to yourself.

Fourth, we need to obey the truths we are learning. If you learn gospel principles but do nothing with them and don't change, the Lord will be less likely to give you more. The converse of that statement is this: if you incorporate into your life the things you are learning, and repent and change, the Lord will immediately give you additional light and truth.

The Lord's response, in either case, is based on his great love for us. If he gave us too much new revelation and we couldn't live up to it, the revelation would be a burden and not a blessing. So, to protect us and at the same time to help us to grow, he gives us line upon line, precept upon precept, a little bit here and a little bit there. As quickly as we have applied a new truth in our lives, he will give us more—but not sooner, so that it won't be to our condemnation. If you want to receive more revelation from God and hear his voice much more frequently, the key is to obey what you have already received.

As part of being obedient, we need to show the Lord that we esteem his truths to be of great worth. Here are some suggestions that might help. (Again, I will give just a brief overview here, with more details later.)

• We can ponder what we've read more fully, applying it to all facets of our lives.

• We can record the truths we've learned so we won't forget them. That will show the Lord that we respect his word and take it seriously.

• We can memorize passages that are particularly important to us. As we commit a scripture to memory, repeating it over and over again as we go about the activities of our lives, the Lord will help us to apply it in our lives.

• We can share the truth with others. We have often been told that until you are able to share a truth, it is not yours. You may think you fully understand something, but if you are unable to share it with someone else you probably don't have the understanding you think you do. But as you share, trying to help someone else to understand, you will find you're able to learn much more.

When you have done the things I've just described—pray, humble yourself, search, and then obey what you learn (and I repeat that even a child can do these things)—you can know that, in the process, you will have heard the voice of the Lord speaking to you. The scriptures will have an increasing influence on you day after day. And you will begin to experience the mighty change of heart we read about in the scriptures. (See Mosiah 5:2; Alma 5:12-13.)

Is it hard to learn to hear the voice of the Lord as we read his word? I believe it is not. It is simple, but it does take discipline for us to do it.

With that introduction, let's take a more detailed look at some suggestions (a pattern) for hearing the Lord's voice.

Preparation to Receive the Word

Before we can hear the voice of the Lord through the scriptures we have to prepare ourselves. I like the expression found in Alma 32: "they were in a preparation to hear the word." (V. 6.) We must do the same thing with our hearts—let them be "in a preparation to hear the word."

An account in 3 Nephi will help us to better understand this principle. After the great earthquake at the time of the crucifixion of Christ, ". . . there were a great multitude gathered together, . . . marveling and wondering one with another, . . . And they were also conversing about this Jesus Christ, of whom the sign had been given concerning his death."

While the people were so gathered, "they heard a voice as if it came out of heaven; and they cast their eyes round about, for they understood not the voice which they heard." The voice was neither harsh nor loud, but it was a "small voice" that "did pierce them to the very soul, and did cause their hearts to burn."

Even though this voice was very impressive to them, they did not understand the words because their hearts were not prepared. This happened a second time, and still "they understood it not."

We can have this same kind of experience when the Lord tries to speak to us through the scriptures and through his Spirit; if we haven't prepared our hearts we often will not receive the message.

But when the voice came the third time they "did open their ears to hear it," and finally they understood. It was the voice of the Eternal Father bearing record of his Son: "Behold my Beloved Son," the voice said, "in whom I am well pleased, in whom I have glorified my name—hear ye him." (3 Ne. 11:1-7.)

The people heard the voice the third time because they finally took action—though it was internal and invisible, they took action just the same: they sought to hear by opening their ears. The same is true of reading the scriptures. We have to take initiative and open our hearts or we will not hear the voice.

A number of years ago I prayerfully read that passage and asked the Lord, "What do I have to do to open my ears even more than I have?" As I prayed and searched for an answer, the Lord gave me a beautiful response through another scripture, an approach he commonly takes.

In wonderfully clear words, two verses in D&C 136 describe this process of preparing your heart to hear the voice of the Lord:

"Let him that is ignorant . . ." Who is the Lord speaking to here? All of us. All of us are ignorant in comparison to the Lord.

"Let him . . . learn wisdom . . ." What does the Lord mean by wisdom? (As we'll discuss later, you've got to keep asking questions as you read.) If the world were going to tell you how to get more wisdom, they would probably say, "Get an education. Study. Learn from your experience. Read books." Interestingly, none of those is the approach the Lord recommends in this scripture. Instead, as this passage continues, it tells us how to get wisdom and how to hear the voice of the Lord:

Let him that is ignorant learn wisdom by [1] humbling himself and [2] calling upon the Lord his God, that his eyes may be opened that he may see, and his ears opened that he may hear;

For my Spirit is sent forth into the world to enlighten the humble and contrite. (D&C 136:32-33.)

What a testimony! If we want to hear the voice of the Lord, if we want to have his wisdom poured into our hearts, the Lord tells us how—we must humble ourselves, and we must call upon the Lord.

Prepare Yourself through Prayer

Once when we were having family scripture study, one of the children asked, "Why do we have to pray when we're reading the scriptures, Dad? Why can't we just read?"

We were studying the Doctrine and Covenants at that time, and that is where we found our answer: "And they shall give heed to that which is written"—meaning the scriptures—"and pretend to no other revelation; and they shall pray always that I may unfold the same to their understanding." (D&C 32:4.)

According to that verse, what will happen if you fail to pray about the scriptures? The Lord will not unfold their meaning to you. If you want to unlock the secrets of the scriptures, you have to pray about them as you read. I recommend that each day, before you open your book and start reading, you first pray for understanding.

We've tried to teach our children about these things, explaining that they ought to offer a very humble and very specific prayer to the Lord. "Father, help me to understand. Open my heart. Help me be more humble. Remove this unbelief or lack of faith that I struggle with. Please open my heart. Write upon my heart the things that thou wouldst tell me." If we will fervently pray in that manner, I bear testimony that something wonderful will happen spiritually. The Lord will begin to speak to you, just because you asked.

Some years ago, motivated by one of the Brethren, I did a study of the first thirty or forty sections of the Doctrine and Covenants, revealed when the Church was being organized. As I read, I asked one question throughout: What seemed to be the Lord's greatest concern about the people in those early days? To me, the answer is evident because it is in almost every section. To paraphrase: "My people will not ask me. They go on acting like they know the answers. They won't ask. If they would just ask, I would tell them, but few will ask."

The way we ask is to pray. If we will humbly pray, in faith, that the Lord will unfold the scriptures to our minds, the blessing will come.

In Part 3 of this book, when we discuss reading the scriptures as a family, you will find some specific suggestions on how to help your family pray with feeling together before you read. Such prayer has as much power to bring about a spiritual family scripture reading session as anything I know.

Prepare Yourself through Humility

When Alma saw that the poor among the Zoramites were prepared to hear the word of the Lord, he noted that it was their humility that had prepared them. As it says in Alma 32:6: ". . . he beheld that their afflictions had truly humbled them, and that they were in a preparation to hear the word."

We find this principle presented in another way in the book of Moroni, in the promise recorded in chapter 10. Some people have always thought of this promise as applying only to those who are seeking a witness of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon: "When I first read the Book of Mormon, here is what I had to do to get a testimony, but I already have a testimony so these verses don't apply to me any more." That is a shortsighted and limiting view.

The truth is that this promise tells all of us how to hear the voice of the Lord in scripture. We begin by humbling ourselves and praying. Here is the first part of Moroni's challenge to us:

Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall read these things, if it be wisdom in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts. (Moro. 10:3.)

When Moroni says "ponder it in your hearts," what is he referring to? What is it we are to ponder in our hearts? The answer is the Lord's mercy—how merciful he has been to each of us, to all mankind, from Adam until now.

Why would Moroni encourage us to ponder the mercies of the Lord before we ask for a testimony? Because if we do, with sincere hearts, we will begin to feel more humble. We will count our blessings, seeing how patient and merciful he has been with each of us in our sins, how quick he has been to forgive and help us along the way. When we have that kind of heart and start to pray about what we've read, a testimony will come quickly.

In the same way, if we will ponder the mercies of the Lord and humble ourselves before we study the scriptures, it will help us prepare our hearts to hear the voice of the Lord.

This is not something we should do only from time to time. As I noted, most of us think of Moroni's challenge as a one-time thing—but what if we were to ponder the Lord's mercies every time we read? "Behold, I would exhort you that when [meaning, perhaps, each time] ye shall read these things, . . . that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been . . . and ponder it in your hearts." (Moro. 10:3; emphasis added.)

If we were to do that, our hearts would be filled with gratitude, we would be humbled, and we would be in a position to receive even greater blessings from the Lord.

In the next verse Moroni tells us to pray. He begins by saying, "And when ye shall receive these things." Please note that here he changes the verb from read to receive. As I've sought to understand that verb, I feel that receive means to take something into my heart and not just my hand or my head, to say humbly, "I accept this word." It means to humble myself before the Lord and to receive his word inside myself.

And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and [now he gives some conditions to our asking] if ye shall ask [1] with a sincere heart, [2] with real intent, [3] having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you. (Moro. 10:4.)

This is not just the pattern for receiving a testimony of the Book of Mormon, though it is that. It is also the pattern for hearing the voice of the Lord each time you read. If you will humble yourself and truly pray, doing it with real intent, with faith in Christ, doubting nothing, he will speak to you and manifest by the power of the Holy Ghost that which you want to know. In other words, your Liahona will begin to work for you because, as it said in Alma 37, you have used it with much faith and exercised extreme diligence.

These, then, are the principles of preparation. Now we will move on to the actual process of hearing the Lord's voice as we read.

"Willing to Put in the Time"

The Testimony of a Sister

"I love the scriptures. I love what my Heavenly Father teaches me when I am willing to put in the time. The inspiration that comes is so special. Any problem I have can be solved through the scriptures. When I read and study them daily, my day goes well. When I happen to miss a day, nothing seems to go right. Because I love the scriptures, I know in a small way how Lehi must have felt when he wanted his family to partake of the fruit."
