Gene R. Cook, Searching the Scriptures (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1997)

Chapter 6

Search Diligently: Ponder and Question

The Lord will bless us with understandings, with answers, with impressions—with his voice—as we search his word with diligence. Perhaps the first thing we need to do as we search is to have our minds fully engaged in the reading process. As we study, we ought to be thinking deeply about what we are reading—we ought to be pondering. At the same time, we would do well to let our reading be punctuated with many questions, as we probe the true meaning of his words.

Pondering As You Read

Perhaps a good way to explain the principle of pondering is to use an example. One I like is Ether 12:27:

And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them.

How do you ponder that verse?

You could look up some of the cross-references. Maybe you are not clear on what Moroni means by the words weakness or humble or grace or sufficient. By searching cross-references, you can get a better understanding of what the verse means.

You could go to the Topical Guide. I have had people say to me, "Elder Cook, I don't even know where to look to find additional information on a verse. I don't know even one other scripture." And I answer, "Well, that's why you have that tremendous index in the back of your Triple Combination, and that's why you have the Topical Guide." If we were to look in those sources under Grace or Humility or Weakness, we'd find many scriptures that would help us to get a better grasp on what the Lord is telling us in Ether 12:27.

Another approach is to pull the verse apart into small phrases, which you can then examine in your mind. "If men come unto me . . ." How does one come unto Christ? Is it just a matter of getting baptized or making covenants? Or must we also come unto him with all our hearts? Where am I in terms of coming unto Christ? How can I do better? If we will ask such questions humbly and prayerfully, with an honest desire to know the answers, the Lord will help us to understand.

One could write a whole book on pondering, but it is really not necessary, because if we will try with honest hearts, the Lord will teach us how to ponder.

I do want to add one more important point, however. Pondering is a form of prayer. Pondering and prayer are so tightly linked that when I start to ponder I automatically offer a silent prayer: "Help me understand this, Heavenly Father. Help me to know what this means. I'm anxious to change." I have offered such a prayer many times. "I want to repent. I want to change. I want to be better. Help me understand what I should do next."

I have seen even little children do this. As you read with them in your family scripture reading time, maybe you can help them see that sometimes they are not in the Spirit or very humble and that they too can change and repent. It is a clear and simple principle. But the blessing is based on our willingness to ask.

Asking Questions As You Read

The next element of searching diligently is to ask questions as you read. We have already seen how asking questions can be a part of pondering. But it is so important that it deserves further discussion.

I have become convinced that the scriptures are mostly an answer book. Virtually every verse has one or more answers to important questions. But would you like to read a math book that has answers to multiplication problems—but no questions? Of course not. You'd be reading "forty-eight, . . . one hundred and fifty-two, . . . oh, here's a good one, thirty-six." Such a book would be neither interesting nor helpful because you wouldn't know what the original problem or question was. To get meaning you would need to combine the original question with the present answer.

One of the greatest truths I know about reading the scriptures is that you have to continually ask questions, over and over again. Why? Because that will help us to combine the Lord's answers with the right questions, to our own profit and learning.

What might be our mode of questioning? Two kinds of questions are particularly helpful: questions we ask ourselves as we read and questions we ask of the Lord.

Questions We Ask Ourselves

Let's continue with our example from Ether 12:27 to see how asking questions will help us to understand and to grow.

And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them.

What would be some questions we could ask about this verse?

" . . . if men come unto me":

What does it mean "come unto me"? How do I do it? When do I do it? What is the role of ordinances and covenants? What is the role of the heart? Where are some passages that will show me how to do it? Have I truly come unto Christ, or is there more I need to do?

" . . . I will show unto them":

How will the Lord "show unto" me? When will he "show unto" me? Why would he show something to me? Has he shown me something already and I didn't pay attention?

" . . . I give unto men weakness":

What is weakness? How can I find out? Do I have that? Have I always had that? Do I have weakness I'm not even aware of? How do I get rid of it? Why does it say weakness instead of weaknesses? Is there a difference? Why would the Lord, who loves me, give me weakness anyway?

" . . . that they may be humble":

What is humility? Why does the Lord want me to be humble? How can I know when I'm humble? What do I need to do differently to have the humility the Lord desires in me?

" . . . my grace is sufficient for all men":

What is grace? How do I obtain more of it? What does it mean to have "sufficient" grace?

I hope you can see what a powerful tool asking questions is. Without even completing the verse, we have illustrated more than twenty good questions, questions that matter—and we could do that same thing throughout the scriptures.

Learning from the Lord

I bear testimony that if we humble ourselves in preparation to hear the word, if we read prayerfully, and then if we start searching and asking questions, the Lord will give us answers.

But we must remain open to what the Spirit wants to teach us. If we ask questions and then listen carefully to the still small voice, we might learn things about the scriptures—and about ourselves—that we never had supposed.

In this learning and growing process, we can be confident that the Lord won't give us more than we can handle. If we are humbly praying to change, he will help us understand what we need to do. And he will do it in such a gentle way that we will be able to handle it. He is perfect in his wisdom, and though he may shake us, he will never completely overwhelm us with what he tells us.

I remember at one point in my mission I decided to make a list of all my sins so I could repent of everything I had ever done wrong. When I got to about sixty-seven, I felt so depressed I didn't feel like going on. I realized that my approach was wrong. We can really work on only a few things at once.

We need to be careful what we focus on. If we are always focusing on weaknesses or failures we might not be able to come to our strengths and successes. The Lord doesn't want us to put ourselves down so far that we get discouraged. Instead, as we learn from this wonderful passage in Ether 12, he wants us to come unto him, to let him reveal to us the things he would have us focus on, to be humble, to have faith in him, to receive his grace, and then, through him, to become strong.

Using the Lord's Definitions

When we ask and answer questions, we need to be sure we are defining words the way the Lord does. For example, some people feel that the word humble suggests we should view ourselves as weak or unimportant (which is a false conception), while others say humble means being teachable (which is correct, but true humility is so much more). When the Lord talks about being humble, he is talking about how we view ourselves in relation to him. Are we self-sufficient in spiritual things, or do we rely on the Lord? True humility is having an awareness of our dependence on Christ.

As we seek out answers from the scriptures, we need to be very careful not to use our own definitions for words, following preconceived notions or perhaps what we think we learned in a Primary or Sunday School class. We can't even rely on a dictionary definition. Instead, we need to find out what the Lord means. (I'll cover the idea of definitions in more detail in the chapter on scripture patterns from the Lord.)

Asking Questions—A Personal Example

Some years ago I had an experience that truly impressed upon me the power and blessing of asking questions as we read scriptures.

I was reading Ether 12:27, which we've just discussed, and asking myself, Did the Lord actually give me my weaknesses? If he did, why would he? Doesn't he want us to grow and develop and become like him? And isn't he perfect? Why, then, would he give me weaknesses?

As I travel about the Church I have heard this scripture quoted or referred to many times, and in almost every instance the person quotes it as saying that the Lord gives us weaknesses. You've probably had the same experience.

But as I began to seek an answer to my questions, one day I noticed that I had been misreading the verse. Moroni doesn't say that the Lord gives unto me weaknesses. In fact, the word weaknesses doesn't appear anywhere in the scriptures at all (it does in three chapter headings, but never in the scriptures themselves).

Instead, Ether 12:27 refers to our weakness. So what's the difference? As I began asking questions, I came to an insight that has been a great blessing to me. I came to understand how the Lord defines weakness. I believe his definition is quite different from what most of us have been taught.

I always had a hard time thinking the Lord made me impatient, for instance, which is one of my weaknesses. Why would he make me impatient—just to give me the experience of overcoming it? But certainly I'm imperfect enough without his help—why would he add to my imperfections? It just didn't make sense.

Then I discovered that I had been misreading the verse. The Lord didn't give us weaknesses (impatience, laziness, anger, lust, and so forth). But he did give us weakness. That weakness has more to do with the state of mortality than with individual character flaws. When you were a spirit you didn't have your mortal weakness. But the Lord gave us bodies in a fallen state—which is a state of weakness—because that is the only way we could become as he is.

Two other scriptures give us insight into this principle. The brother of Jared prayed:

Now behold, O Lord, and do not be angry with thy servant because of his weakness before thee; for we know that thou art holy and dwellest in the heavens, and that we are unworthy before thee; because of the fall our natures have become evil continually; nevertheless, O Lord, thou hast given us a commandment that we must call upon thee, that from thee we may receive according to our desires. (Eth. 3:2.)

The brother of Jared understood that our weakness comes "because of the fall." Still, the Lord desires to bless us.

In speaking of his "infirmities," Paul noted that he had a "thorn in the flesh," which he asked the Lord three times to remove from him. (2 Cor. 12:5, 7, 8.)

And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.

Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong. (2 Cor. 12:9-10.)

Paul understood that it was the conditions of the flesh that constitute our weakness. But he knew what Moroni knew—that the Lord has a plan for helping us, even in our weakness. That's what Moroni was talking about in Ether 12:27. In fact, Paul took a unique view of weakness, different from what we commonly hear. He said he was actually grateful for the weakness of the flesh because it provided motivation for him to draw closer to Christ, who helped him to become strong.
