Gene R. Cook, Searching the Scriptures (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1997)

Chapter 7

Search Diligently: Discover Patterns

Seeking patterns in the scriptures helps us to search them more deeply. It gives greater understanding of how the Lord speaks, and it helps us to see more clearly how the scriptures are constructed.

Scripture patterns provide models of the different ways the Lord presents his truths. If we can grasp the model, we can find it again and again—and our understanding of the scriptures will increase.

Many times when we read scriptures, it's as if we were looking at a box with sixty-four squares. We read a verse and say, "Aha! Now I understand verse 4. I finally get it." What we do not realize is that we filled in only one of the sixty-four squares.

Then what happens the next time we read that verse? "Hey, where did that concept come from? I didn't notice that before. Well, now I understand verse 4. I think I've got it now." But we still don't understand the whole thing. Instead, we've simply filled in another of the sixty-four squares.

Then what happens the next time we read? Again and again the Lord reveals truths until we finally say, after we have filled in all sixty-four squares, "I truly have mastered verse 4."

And then the Lord says, "Oh, do you think so?" And he brings out a three-dimensional cube that represents hundreds of additional squares on that one single verse. Then, finally, we understand that revelation is continual on that verse. It almost doesn't matter what the words are; if we continue to approach the verse humbly and prayerfully, the Lord will continue to give us additional revelations on it.

Scripture patterns will help us to break out of the two-dimensional way of looking at the scriptures and start to see them three-dimensionally. Here are twelve patterns that have helped me to better understand the meanings of the scriptures.

Pattern #1: The Lord's Definitions

We have already taken a brief look at this idea. Now let's see if we can understand it more completely. The Lord has his own way of speaking, and he has his own way of defining certain words. If we don't learn how he communicates, we probably won't understand what he wants to say to us.

To illustrate, let's look at D&C 63:53:

These things are the things that ye must look for; and, speaking after the manner of the Lord, they are now nigh at hand, and in a time to come, even in the day of the coming of the Son of Man.

This passage includes an interesting phrase: "speaking after the manner of the Lord, they are now nigh at hand." What does nigh mean? Ordinarily, speaking after the manner of man, it would mean very close. When I was young I once read one of those passages where the Lord says, "I am at the door; the end is nigh at hand," and I thought to myself, "Wow, he must be coming this week!" But the Lord put a condition on his words by saying, " . . . speaking after the manner of the Lord." Apparently he's defining things in a different way from how man does.

Here is another example:

Behold, now it is called today until the coming of the Son of Man. (D&C 64:23.)

What does the Lord mean by today, since again he is speaking after the manner of the Lord? The Lord defines today as "the period of time from right now until the point of the second coming of Christ."

One time, not long ago, I did a complete search of that word today in our latter-day scriptures. It's found eighteen times, and in each instance I applied the definition I just gave. In my opinion, it fits perfectly in every case. In other words, the Lord is consistent in his definition of the word.

Here is verse 24:

For after today cometh the burning—this is speaking after the manner of the Lord—for verily I say, tomor- row all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up.

What is the Lord's definition of tomorrow? Essentially, it is the day of the Second Coming, when the wicked will be burned.

Another example is the word truth. If we are reading the scriptures and we think of truth as facts or correct information, as we were taught in school, we may miss learning some great things the Lord would teach us. Here is the Lord's definition of truth:

Truth is a knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come. (D&C 93:24.)

Now every time you read the word truth in the scriptures, remember the Lord's definition, and you'll better comprehend what he has in mind.

Another example is chains of hell. Is that just a poetic way of speaking, or does it really have meaning? Here is the Lord's definition, as given in Alma 12:11:

And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell.

If you keep that definition in mind, whenever you see chains of hell you will be able to read with deeper understanding.

In one of his landmark conference talks, President Ezra Taft Benson gave us a definition of pride as it is used in the scriptures. As part of that speech, he made this very important statement: "In the scriptures there is no such thing as righteous pride—it is always considered a sin. Therefore, no matter how the world uses the term, we must understand how God uses the term so we can understand the language of holy writ and profit thereby." (Ensign, May 1989, 4.)

Our Father in Heaven was consistent in not using this term when he introduced Jesus Christ: "This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased." (See, for example, Matt. 3:17; 17:5; 3 Ne. 11:7.) He did not say "of whom I am very proud."

Some years ago I used my computer to look up pride in the scriptures. I found 198 instances of pride in the scriptures (including proud and proudly), and I patiently read them all. After hearing President Benson's testimony, I was not surprised to see that every single verse used pride in a negative or evil way.

Certainly we can use man's definitions, and we often do, but we won't if we want to speak the way the Lord does.

Of course, sometimes the Lord defines the terms he uses and sometimes he does not. What I'm recommending is that we be sensitive to the subtle ways in which the Lord helps us to know his definitions—and then to remember to use his definitions rather than our own.

Definition Indicators

I have noticed that there are three or four words that indicate a verse is going to give you a definition. One is the use of a "to be" verb (is, are, was, were, am). "Truth is a knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." (D&C 93:24; emphasis added.)

Another "definition indicator" is the word or, or when the Lord says, " . . . or, in other words." For example, the Lord says, "The glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth." (D&C 93:36.)

Another is when the Lord says "the same is . . ." For example, in 2 Sam. 5:7 it says, "Nevertheless David took the strong hold of Zion." Zion can mean many things—what is intended here? The account gives the answer by continuing: "the same is the city of David," which tells us that David took the stronghold of Jerusalem.

While we're talking about definitions, I would like to make one additional recommendation: You may also want to become familiar with the definitions of some of the archaic words used in the scriptures. For example, what does it mean to "wax"? We read in 2 Nephi, "After my father, Lehi, had spoken unto all his household, according to the feelings of his heart and the Spirit of the Lord which was in him, he waxed old. And it came to pass that he died, and was buried." (2 Ne. 4:12; emphasis added.) To "wax old" is to grow old.

What about a word like twain? The Lord said, regarding a man and woman who had married, "And they twain shall be one flesh: so then they are no more twain, but one flesh." (Mark 10:8.) What does "twain" mean? Simply "two."

There are others. What do the scriptures mean when they say "nigh unto," or the "nethermost part of the vineyard"? What does "betimes" mean? Or "straightway"? When you come to one of those words, don't just pass it by. See if there is a helpful footnote. Or seek understanding of what the word means by looking it up in a Bible dictionary or regular dictionary. This is not as important as seeking the definitions of the Lord, but it still can be valuable.

As I have taught this in some settings, I have had people come up to me afterward and say, "Elder Cook, all this sounds a little bit complicated. I don't know if I can remember all these definitions you are giving me."

My answer: "Don't you worry about it in the least. In my judgment, the only thing you need to worry about, regardless of your age, is to humble yourself and pray as you read the scriptures. If you do that, the Lord will teach you the rest."

Pattern #2: Doctrinal Lists

A good example of doctrinal lists can be found in Alma 22:16. In the previous verse, Lamoni's father asked, essentially, "How do I obtain eternal life? How do I become born again?" Then Aaron gives this answer:

If thou desirest this thing, if thou wilt bow down before God, yea, if thou wilt repent of all thy sins, and will bow down before God, and call on his name in faith, believing that ye shall receive, then shalt thou receive the hope which thou desirest.

This verse gives us an excellent list in answer to the question of Lamoni's father:

. . . then shalt thou receive the hope which thou desirest.

Doctrinal lists can be found throughout the scriptures. There are hundreds of them. The Lord seems to like to talk that way, and he often lists things in order. Sometimes they are in order of priority, from top to bottom, sometimes from bottom to top. When you find such a list, it will help you to understand both the passage and the doctrine better.

Another example can be found in 1 Ne. 17:3: "And thus we see that the commandments of God must be fulfilled. And if it so be that the children of men keep the commandments of God," the following will result:

Be aware of doctrinal lists and consider marking them in your scriptures when you find them. Not only will you be thrilled to discover new truths and new relationships, but you'll also be better able to find them again at a later time.

An Insight from a List

Once our family was reading in the wars in the Book of Mormon, and one of my sons said to me, "Dad, I'm not getting very much out of this. Why are all these chapters on the wars in here anyway?"

I struggled to answer his question. Finally I said, "Well, who knows. We may need them someday for wars that are yet to come." And I think that could very well be. There are some great strategies in there, and that could be one reason Mormon felt to include all those war chapters in the book of Alma. At the same time, I believe many verses in those pages have great spiritual lessons as well.

I gave my son the best answer I could. But then the Lord gave us all something better.

At that point in our family's experience, we had been praying very intently for a particular blessing, and we had received an answer from the Lord without realizing it. Then, that very morning, we read Alma 58:10, which not only answered my son's question but also was a powerful witness about our prayers. The words of Alma 58:10 came at a time when the Nephites were in great difficulties. They were about to lose the war, and finally they were willing to turn to the Lord.

"Therefore we did pour out our souls in prayer to God, that he would strengthen us and deliver us" (emphasis added). Again, in the left margin, I have a "1" and "2," meaning, when you're praying and asking for help, often it's for deliverance from something or for blessings of strength to bear up under a trial.

Verse 11 tells us how the Lord answered their plea: "Yea, and it came to pass that the Lord our God did visit us with assurances [I have a '1' in the margin there—that's one way he answers] that he would deliver us; yea, insomuch that [2] he did speak peace to our souls, and [3] did grant unto us great faith, and [4] did cause us that we should hope for our deliverance in him" (emphasis added).

In verse 10, then, we read what the Nephites asked the Lord for (which is what we often ask)—namely, strength and deliverance. In the next verse, we read how he helped them with assurances, peace, faith, and hope. Now, in verse 12 we discover what happens when the Lord gives us those blessings:

"And [1] we did take courage with our small force which we had received, and [2] were fixed with a determination to conquer" (emphasis added).

When the Lord breathes his peace and assurance into us, he gives us courage to act, courage that we can succeed, and a fixed determination to see it through. All this is a marvelous way of describing how his answers to prayer often work, tucked away in those war chapters. Such gems are buried all through the scriptures if we will search them out and seek understanding from the Lord.

That, then, became the answer to our family's prayers, and it became the answer to my son, who wasn't sure he was getting anything out of those chapters.

As a postscript, some years later this same boy, now in college, was having a problem, and he discovered that scripture "on his own." He didn't remember that we had all learned it together many years earlier. So he came home and gave a lesson to the whole family on it for about an hour, showing how one of his prayers was answered.

When he was finished, he said to me in private, "Dad, I'm kind of disappointed in you." He was kidding a little bit, but not too much.

I said, "Why?"

"Why didn't you ever teach me that passage?"

Then his mom and I laughed and we said, "Well, wake up, son, we did. Where were you that morning?"

That underscores another truth: many scriptures don't really come alive until you personally find them. That's why it's so important for each of us to truly seek to hear the voice of the Lord speaking to us, individually.

Pattern #3: Cause and Effect

A passage we used earlier can also be a good example of cause and effect. In 1 Ne. 17:3 the Lord is saying, in essence, "If you will do your part by keeping my commandments here's what I will do."

Another example is found in Hel. 15:7. In these verses, Samuel the Lamanite is giving an answer to the question, How were the missionaries able to convert all those thousands and thousands of Lamanites?

And behold, ye do know of yourselves, for ye have witnessed it, that as many of them as are brought to the knowledge of the truth, and to know of the wicked and abominable traditions of their fathers, and are led to believe the holy scriptures, yea, the prophecies of the holy prophets, which are written, which leadeth them to faith on the Lord, and unto repentance, which faith and repentance bringeth a change of heart unto them—

Therefore, as many as have come to this, ye know of yourselves are firm and steadfast in the faith, and in the thing wherewith they have been made free. (Hel. 15:7-8.)

According to that passage, the scriptures will lead you to faith on the Lord. Reading the scriptures is the cause; faith on the Lord is the effect. Where will faith lead you? To repentance. And where will that lead you? To a change of heart. And the next step? You continue "firm and steadfast." What a beautiful example of this principle of cause and effect!

The scriptures are full of cause and effect because the Lord operates that way, which is by law. The law is in place, and if you obey it, you'll get a positive result; if you disobey, you'll get a negative result. With the Lord, both his promises and punishments are sure.

Pattern #4: If and Then

There are hundreds of examples of this pattern. Ether 12:27 has two instances alone:

If men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness . . . if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them (emphasis added).

Another example is found in 2 Ne. 31:5:

And now, if the Lamb of God, he being holy, should have need to be baptized by water, to fulfil all righteousness, O then, how much more need have we, being unholy, to be baptized, yea, even by water! (emphasis added).

Here's another, found in D&C 104:56:

And if the properties are mine, then ye are stewards; otherwise ye are no stewards (emphasis added).

I did a computer search to find all the verses in the standard works that have a combination of the words if and then. I found 427! (Of course, some of these are not true if-then combinations, but most are.)

I understand that the Hebrew language will often have an assumed "if" or an assumed "then," without actually including both. English does the same. So if you see one or the other, (then) take a close look and see if the Lord is implying an actual if-then relationship, even if he doesn't come right out and say it.

Pattern #5: Words for Emphasis, Attention, or Focus

One of the most common Hebraisms in all the Book of Mormon is "It came to pass." That phrase occurs about thirteen hundred times in the Book of Mormon. (It occurs more than 450 times in the Bible.)

Earlier, as the book was translated into various languages, some translators took that phrase out, saying it was too repetitive. In some translations, for instance, they included the expression only the first time, then said, "Hereafter we're putting in asterisks instead of 'it came to pass,' because it's too repetitive."

Such an approach to translation is not allowed, of course, partly because "it came to pass" is an important part of the language of the Book of Mormon.

"It came to pass" is often a transitional statement. It can show the passage of time or a compression of events. In a beautiful way, I believe, it is a great testament to the modesty and humility of the Lord as well. An example will demonstrate what I mean.

If you take a young man and ask him who was responsible for his going on a mission, he might give you a variety of answers: The impressions of the Lord, the young man's parents, a priests adviser, a bishop. But is that the end of the list? Certainly not.

Who else might have influenced that young man? His grandparents, friends, a Sunday School teacher, a Scoutmaster, a girlfriend, seminary instructors, the neighbor across the street, a home teacher, a visiting teacher. We could name many, many people who have helped. What about those who have gone on through the veil? Could they also be seeking that blessing for the young man?

And how many of those people were being touched and influenced by the Lord to bless the young man in ways that would make a difference?

With all that in mind, how would we answer the question, Who is responsible for that young man going on a mission?

Perhaps the best answer, knowing that many, many people helped (especially if you were writing a record with limited space), would be to say simply: "And it came to pass that Ron went on a mission."

As I think about many of these passages in the Book of Mormon that use that simple phrase—"and it came to pass"—I stand in awe of the Lord's humility. How often he has been directly responsible for orchestrating events that have blessed people's lives—and how often he has refrained from taking credit in the scriptures!

Perhaps in the example of the missionary, the father was the one who had the greatest influence on the young man going. But a wise father would avoid drawing attention to his own efforts by saying, "And I worked hard and blessed my son over and over and finally influenced him to go on a mission." Instead, he might say, "And it came to pass that my son was influenced to go on a mission."

"And it came to pass" is a simple, powerful, modest, humble way of saying volumes. It takes the emphasis, attention, and focus from one place and puts it in another. Watch for that phrase in your reading, and you will see how effectively it serves that purpose.

Other Common Hebraisms in the Book of Mormon

The other most common Hebraisms in the Book of Mormon—as well as other scriptures—are the words yea, behold, and even. Many scriptures begin with the word, "Behold," which has the function of causing us, if we're reading thoughtfully, to slow down in our reading and pay attention. It is one of the means the Lord uses to get our attention before we race on. ("Behold" appears 3,205 times in all the scriptures.)

The word yea can serve the same purpose. It puts great focus and emphasis on the phrase that follows it, giving greater power to that scripture. ("Yea" is in the standard works a total of 1,526 times.)

Another is the word even. It is a powerful word used to capture our attention and to give focus, particularly in the Book of Mormon. Pay attention to how even directs your thinking as you read. You may be surprised at what you'll learn. ("Even" is found in the scriptures 2,405 times, but this number includes usages other than the one we are discussing here.)

And how much do all these things matter? The answer: They can be helpful, but ultimately they don't matter a great deal if you remember to pray and to be humble. Then the Lord will lead you as you go along. And then, even if you never knew the ideas in this chapter, it wouldn't matter. But if you do know these things, you will have a greater respect for the scriptures, and you will be able to gain greater insight as you read.

Pattern #6: Antecedents

The word antecedent is a term used in grammar to indicate which noun goes with which pronoun or other substitute. By understanding the antecedents of pronouns, we can understand particular passages better.

A good example is found in 1 Ne. 3:5. The speaker in this passage is Lehi:

"And now, behold thy brothers murmur, saying it is a hard thing which I have required of them; but behold I have not required it of them, but it is a commandment of the Lord." (What is the antecedent of "it" in this verse? That they have to return to Jerusalem to get the brass plates.)

In an earlier chapter we talked about Moro. 10:3, which admonishes us to "ponder it in your hearts." What was the antecedent of that "it"? How merciful the Lord has been unto us. Think what we would have missed in our understanding if we had not gone back to find out what the "it" referred to.

Sometimes it is very challenging to discover the antecedent in some passages, but when you do, you will be able to decipher the scriptures much more quickly.

Here is one final example, this one more difficult. Discovering the antecedent in D&C 84:19 uncovers a great truth. I commonly hear this verse quoted incorrectly because people have not sought out the antecedent. In speaking about the Melchizedek Priesthood, the Lord says, "and this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God." My question is, What is the key? Does the Lord tell us? He surely does as we read on:

Therefore, in the ordinances thereof, the power of godliness is manifest.

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God. (D&C 84:20-23; emphasis added.)

What is the antecedent to the word this found in verses 22 and 23? I believe it is "the power of godliness":

"Without [the power of godliness, or personal righteousness] no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

"Now this [truth about the power of godliness] Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel."

And what is the key to the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key to the knowledge of God? My understanding is that that key, again, is personal righteousness or godliness. A passage in D&C 121 helps with this understanding:

God shall give unto you knowledge by his Holy Spirit, yea, by the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost, that has not been revealed since the world was until now; . . .

A time to come in the which nothing shall be withheld, whether there be one God or many gods, they shall be manifest.

All thrones and dominions, principalities and powers, shall be revealed and set forth upon all who have endured valiantly for the gospel of Jesus Christ. (D&C 121:26, 28-29.)

This, then, is talking about the Lord's promise that he will give us the mysteries of godliness and the knowledge of God. What is the key to receiving these? The Lord gives us a clue when he says, "the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and . . . the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness." (D&C 121:36.)

Personal righteousness, personal godliness helps us to receive revelation of God's mysteries and to control or handle the powers he gives to us.

I hope we all can see that understanding antecedents can teach us great truths about the gospel and the meaning of the scriptures.

Pattern #7: Reverse Meanings

With reverse meanings, we learn by seeing the opposite of what we expected—or by seeing what's not in a passage, as well as what's there.

For example, D&C 107 contains a very significant verse that had to do with the final organization of the Quorums of Seventy of the Church. There were many reasons, of course, why the quorums were organized—not the least of which was a direction from the Lord that told President Spencer W. Kimball it was time to do it. But this verse had much to do with preparing the minds of the Brethren for that eventuality.

Here is what the Lord said in D&C 107:10:

High priests after the order of the Melchizedek Priesthood have a right to officiate in their own standing, under the direction of the presidency, in administering spiritual things, and also [these high priests can function] in the office of an elder, priest . . . , teacher, deacon, and member.

But where's the seventy in this list? This verse does not specify that a high priest can function in the office of a seventy. Why? Because the office of a seventy is an apostolic calling. (See verses 23-26.) A seventy with the apostolic calling can function as a high priest, but not the other way around.

In this instance, we learn something valuable from what's not in the verse, as well as what's there.

Here are three other examples of reverse meanings.

Now the absence of that expression ought to shout out an important lesson to us. We must begin to have a different view of agency. The Lord never does talk about "agency" as freedom to do whatever you want. Instead, he uses the word agency without a qualifier, or he says it's moral agency. (See D&C 101:78.) We have each been taught what is right, and the Lord wants us to be agents unto ourselves according to the commandments he has given. That's very different doctrine from what we have sometimes been taught—but our understanding grows when we look at what's not there.

When we note the absence of a word or concept in the scriptures, and then try to discover the meaning of its absence (or a reverse meaning), we can learn as much as we can about things that are there.

Brigham Young once made a helpful statement about this concept. He said the devil is capable of counterfeiting every true principle, and if you want to learn doubly, learn a principle in its true form, then see what the devil teaches by turning it around. When you know the devil's principles, you can better avoid them.

Or you can do the same thing in reverse. Notice in the scriptures what it tells us about what the devil teaches. If you can find the reverse of it, you may be able to learn a true principle.

If true principles are revealed from heaven to men, and if there are angels, and there is a possibility of their communicating to the human family, always look for an opposite power, and evil power, to give manifestations also: look out for the counterfeit.

There is evil in the world, and there is also good. Was there ever a counterfeit without a true coin? No. Is there communication from God? Yes. From holy angels? Yes; and we have been proclaiming these facts during nearly thirty years. Are there any communications from evil spirits? Yes; and the Devil is making the people believe very strongly in revelations from the spirit world. (Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses 7:239-40.)

I believe that's true. I believe that if we recognize Satan's counterfeits we can learn something from them. And I believe we can learn twice from the scriptures, first by looking at them frontwards, then by considering them backwards. When the Lord says, "If you keep my commandments . . ." and then makes a promise, you could very well say "and if I keep not his commandments . . ." and fill in the blank. That process teaches us far more than if we simply read what's given and don't consider any other truth.

Pattern #8: Literal Reading

The scriptures are literal. They really do mean what they say. In D&C 36:2, for example, the Lord says to Edward Partridge, "I will lay my hand upon you by the hand of my servant Sidney Rigdon, and you shall receive my Spirit, the Holy Ghost, even the Comforter, which shall teach you the peaceable things of the kingdom."

Think of what he is saying. A bishop might place his hands upon the head of a member and say, "I now lay my hands upon you, John, as your bishop, to set you apart"—and at the same time, it would be as if Jesus Christ were saying, "It will be as if I laid my own hands upon your head. I will do it through my servant, the bishop."

Does this scripture really mean that? It really means that. If you're a priesthood holder, then, and you're giving someone a blessing, you are standing in the stead of the Lord in putting your hands on his or her head. Your hands are very literally representing the hands of the Lord.

And if you're receiving that blessing, what a great thing it is to know that the person who is officiating is standing in for the Lord.

The scriptures are literal. We must always remember that.

Another example. I love the fifth Article of Faith, which says, "We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof."

Does the Lord really mean that? Is it his will that all callings to serve God are to be given by prophecy—meaning by the spirit of revelation? Should even a Primary teacher in the nursery, for example, be called by prophecy? Or can the bishop just choose according to his own judgment—or according to desperation?

This Article of Faith, which is scripture, means what it says. All callings must come by prophecy (or revelation), by those in authority. And if those in authority are acting by the spirit of revelation, which is both the pattern and the practice in the Church, then the Lord says, "Whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same." (D&C 1:38.)

It is the bishop who has the keys of the priesthood in the administration of a ward. Whether he is serving with his hands or his voice, he is representing the Lord. When we as Latter-day Saints understand that, we will begin to respond very differently to our bishops than we may have before.

I bear witness again that the scriptures are literal. They have multiple meanings. They apply across time. They apply across cultures. They apply to all people, both as groups and as individuals. They can apply to Moses' day, to Christ's day, or to our own day. That is the power of the way the Lord speaks.

Literal or Figurative?

It's true that the scriptures are literal—and it's very important that we know that. Many people, for instance (even including some ministers in other churches), don't believe that Jesus was literally born of a virgin or that he was literally the Son of God. Many people don't believe that Adam and Eve were literally the first parents of our race, or that the flood in Noah's day literally covered the whole earth.

Some critics in the Church don't believe we should take literally the scripture statements that Joseph Smith translated the Book of Mormon "by the gift and power of God." (D&C 135:3.) They say instead that Joseph Smith was the author rather than the translator of the Book of Mormon, and that what he produced is a good, uplifting book but not scripture from ancient prophets.

I disagree with such views and attitudes. I believe the scriptures are literal and, if we want to know the truth, we should read them literally. When the Lord speaks about his requirements and expectations of us, I believe we should read such scriptures literally. But I do wish to add a caution to this understanding. There is also much in the scriptures that is figurative or symbolic.

For instance, when Jesus talked of our being "born again," Nicodemus asked if we need to reenter our mother's womb. Jesus explained that we must be "born of the Spirit." (John 3:3-6.) We would be mistaken if we felt that we must literally be born again in the same way we originally were born into this world. But we would also be mistaken if we ignored the Savior's explanation: We must literally be born of the Spirit, as "new creatures." (Mosiah 27:26.) We must literally be changed in our natures from fallen, carnal men and women to Saints, men and women of God. (See Mosiah 5:2; 27:24)

Another example: In the book of Revelation, John talks about the second coming of Christ. He said, "His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns; . . . and out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword." (Rev. 19:12, 15.) Certainly fire does not literally come out of the Lord's eyes, nor are there literally many crowns on his head, nor does a sword literally come out of his mouth. But these symbolic statements do teach us some important literal truths about Christ: He is the source of light, even controlling such great powers as the sun; he is the King of kings; and he will come forth with great judgments on the earth.

I repeat, then: Let us be cautious that we do not put literal meanings on things the Lord clearly intends to be figurative. (Though there is always an important literal meaning revealed by understanding the symbolism.) But, perhaps even more importantly, let us not put figurative or symbolic meanings on things the Lord wants us to read literally.

Pattern #9: Summary Phrases

After the Lord has taught a concept, he sometimes stops to make a summary statement. These statements are often preceded by one or more "cue words" that help us spot them. Here are some key cue words or phrases that help me locate the Lord's summaries:

The first is thus we see, which is often used in the Book of Mormon. Alma 30 gives us a helpful example. After telling us about Korihor for fifty-plus verses, Mormon ends the account by saying, "And thus we see the end of him who perverteth the ways of the Lord. . . ." In one single verse he gives you a summary of fifty verses.

The phrase "and thus we see" gives us the bottom line, the moral to the story, the thing the Lord most wants us to learn and remember. When we see that phrase, we should stop and notice and ponder what we have read. ("Thus we see" occurs twenty-four times in the Book of Mormon.)

A second cue word is thus, standing alone. Mormon was most helpful in including many of these cues in his summaries, and I love him for it. His use of thus helps readers of our day to better understand the message and the meaning of the book that bears his name. (There are about 450 of these in the Book of Mormon, not counting those used in the first category.)

The last three cue words are related in their function. The first is wherefore, which shows cause and effect. (It occurs nearly a thousand times in the scriptures.) The second is therefore, which does essentially the same thing. (It occurs more than two thousand times.) And the third, which shows contrast, is nevertheless (344 occurrences). When I see those words, I stop and pay particular attention to the text, because often it will give a summary statement.

Pattern #10: Similes

We learned about similes in English class in high school. A simile is a figure of speech in which two unlike things are compared. Usually the comparison includes the word like or as. A well-known example is found in Isa. 35:1, "The desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose."

There are many wonderful similes in the scriptures—and if we are not paying attention to the comparisons the Lord makes, we might miss some insights into doctrine and truth.

In D&C 101:39, for instance, the Lord says, "When men are called unto mine everlasting gospel, and covenant with an everlasting covenant, they are accounted as [when I see one of these, I mark it heavily in my scriptures] the salt of the earth and the savor of men" (emphasis added). So the Lord is comparing men to salt. If you'll sit and ponder that, you'll see some deep meanings buried in there.

Another example. In Jacob 5 the Lord compares the house of Israel to an olive tree. The olive tree, therefore, represents the Lord's people, the people of his covenant. If you don't have that clear in your mind, you can read that whole chapter and say, "What is all this about anyway? I'm not getting very much out of this." But if you start out with a correct understanding of the comparison the Lord is making, you can read all the things he does with the branches of his trees (which are his people), and you will come up with a new understanding altogether of the allegory of the olive tree.

Another very powerful one is found in Abr. 3. I love this one because of a tremendous experience I once had with it. I was trying to hear the voice of the Lord as we've described here—praying, trying to humble myself, searching, and trying to obey—and I learned a great principle, all focused on one little word: as.

The first seventeen verses of Abr. 3 tell us about the sun, the moon, the stars, the Urim and Thummim, and how one world is above another. As I've read that passage from time to time I've thought, "Why did the Lord include these things here? Why does he want us to know these things?" I liked what I was learning, but I wasn't sure how it pertained to me. For some reason I didn't read verse 18 very carefully, and so I missed it when the Lord said, "Howbeit that he made the greater star; as [and now I know to put a big red mark on that as, because he is setting up a comparison], also, if there be two spirits, and one shall be more intelligent than the other, . . . There shall be another more intelligent than they; I am the Lord thy God, I am more intelligent than they all. . . . I rule . . . over all the intelligences thine eyes have seen." (Abr. 3:18, 19, 21.)

Suddenly I realized that perhaps the first seventeen verses of that chapter were not included just to give me an astronomy lesson. They were there to teach me about God—and about my relationship to him. Abr. 3 isn't really just about stars and planets—it is about the Creator and his children. Knowing that, I can now read that chapter with a completely different understanding.

There are scores of instances in the scriptures where the word like is used in a simile. The New Testament in particular is filled with them. It says the gospel is like a net of the sea. People are like salt that has lost its savor, or like a light on a hill. Jesus talked of the lilies and the fishes, of simple things, making comparisons. We shouldn't just read right over those, because we'll learn some powerful lessons if we'll ponder the analogies he makes, giving us tremendous understanding we otherwise would not have.

Pattern #11: Superlatives

In a way this is another example of reverse learning, because the remarkable thing about superlatives in the scriptures is that the Lord rarely uses them. About the most he typically says about his marvelous works is that "they are of great worth." (1 Ne. 13:23.)

For example, after creating this world for his children—this wonderful, beautiful world—he said simply, with great understatement, "It was good." Then, later, he said, "It was very good." (See Gen. 1:25, 31.)

When the Lord does use superlatives, we should pay close attention: "a marvelous work and a wonder" (2 Ne. 25:17) "I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great" (Gen. 12:2) "For unto us a child is born, . . . and his name shall be called Wonderful" (Isa. 9:6).

The Lord's example teaches me a valuable lesson about the way I ought to speak. I ought to take care that I don't overstate things with superlatives—tremendous, stupendous, incredible. Instead of using those kinds of descriptions, the Lord generally speaks in a very modest way, declaring the truth in simple terms and letting it stand for itself.

In one of his conference talks, President Ezra Taft Benson suggested that we ought to use the language of the Lord in our teaching (see Ensign, May 1987, 83-84)—avoiding superlatives might be part of what we should seek to do.

Pattern #12: Absolutes

Superlatives are rare in the scriptures—but the Lord uses absolutes quite frequently. Absolutes are such terms as always, never, all, none, every, and so forth.

When humans use absolutes, they are most likely guilty of exaggeration, but the Lord always speaks very precisely. If he speaks in an absolute, we can be certain he means it.

Here are a few examples:

Always retain in remembrance, the greatness of God, . . . calling on the name of the Lord daily, and standing steadfastly in the faith. . . . [I]f ye do this ye shall always rejoice, and be filled with the love of God, and always retain a remission of your sins. (Mosiah 4:11-12; emphasis added.)

I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst. (John 6:35; emphasis added.)

Charity never faileth. (1 Cor. 13:8; emphasis added.)

Wickedness never was happiness. (Alma 41:10; emphasis added.)

Feast upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do. (2 Ne. 32:3; emphasis added.)

Behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered . . . the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him. (D&C 18:11; emphasis added.)

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength: this is the first commandment. (Mark 12:30; emphasis added.)

He doeth nothing save it be plain unto the children of men; and he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, . . . and all are alike unto God. (2 Ne. 26:33; emphasis added.)

For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil. (Moro. 7:16; emphasis added.)

Why does the Lord speak in absolutes? Why does he allow no wriggle room in many of the things he says? I believe that because he is a God of law as well as a God of truth, he cannot do otherwise. Natural law is absolute—we all know how certain and infallible gravity is (things on earth always fall down, not up). Eternal law is just as certain and infallible, and God, in his love, tells the truth about that law.

It is the absolutes of eternal law that make it so necessary for us to have a Savior:

No unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of God. (Alma 40:26; emphasis added.)

All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. (Rom. 3:23; emphasis added.)

Wherefore, redemption cometh in and through the Holy Messiah; for he is full of grace and truth.

Behold, he offereth himself a sacrifice for sin, to answer the ends of the law, unto all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit; and unto none else can the ends of the law be answered. (2 Ne. 2:6-7; emphasis added.)

I thank my Father in Heaven for his absolutes—and for providing a way, in our weakness, to meet his requirements. And I'm grateful for the scriptures, which clearly tell us the truth about who God is and what he requires of us.

A Caution

I have already expressed a caution about overemphasizing the things discussed in this chapter, but I would like to repeat it here. I have given these patterns because they've been helpful to me—but what if you lived and died and didn't know anything about these patterns? Would it matter? No, it would not. Because if you will be prayerful, and if you will humble yourself, as I said before, the Lord will lead you along, and he will give you what you need to know. No one should be frustrated or troubled if they can't remember all these things.

On the other hand, I have learned with my own children (and I have eight of them) that even a little girl who is seven years old can understand these ideas. And if there are any she's unsure of, I suspect it's the fault of the teacher (meaning myself). I've had the same experience with all of my children.

These things can bless us if we will apply ourselves a little. But we shouldn't get frustrated or worried if they don't come easily.

Scripture Patterns of the Lord

Patterns help us to speak and learn after the manner of the Lord. (D&C 63:53; 64:23) They are spiritual road signs and prompts to reading. Here is a summary of the patterns presented in the text, with some additional examples and scriptures.

A. A Few of the Lord's Definitions —Nigh (D&C 63:53) —Today (D&C 64:23) —Tomorrow (D&C 64:24) —Truth, knowledge (D&C 93:24-25) —Glory (D&C 93:36) —Intelligence (D&C 93:29) —Chains of hell (Alma 12:11; D&C 138:23) —Honor/power (D&C 29:36; 76:28; Moses 4:1) —Rest (D&C 84:24) —Right way (2 Ne. 25:28-29; Moro. 6:4)

B. Archaic Definitions —Wax: grow, increase (D&C 45:27; 121:45) —Twain: two (D&C 45:48; 49:16) —Nigh unto: close, near to (D&C 104:3; Abr. 3:9) —Nethermost (Jacob 5:13, 14, 19, 38, 39, 52) —Betimes: early, timely, before too late (Gen. 26:31; Job 8:5; D&C 121:43) —Straightway: immediately, at once (D&C 76:47; 136:25)

And It Came to Pass

1 Ne. 18:25 1 Ne. 7:1

Enos 1:23 Jacob 5:4

— Keep my commandments/not keep my commandments (Alma 9:13)

— Absence of leadership (0 times in the scriptures)

— Absence of welfare (0 times in D&C)

— Absence of free agency (0 times in the scriptures)

— Absence of weaknesses (0 times in the scriptures)

— Absence of the Seventy (D&C 107:10)

— Thus we see (Alma 24:19; 30:60; Hel. 12:3)

— Therefore (1 Ne. 1:1; 3:6; 3 Ne. 13:8, 9)

— Wherefore (1 Ne. 2:16; 7:12; D&C 1:6-7)

— Nevertheless (1 Ne. 13:23; 14:12; D&C 1:32)

— As (Isa. 35:1; 2 Ne. 3:19; D&C 65:2; 101:39; Abr. 3:18)

— Like (Matt. 13:31, 44, 47; 28:3; Jacob 5:3; Mosiah 2:38)

— Great worth (1 Ne. 13:23)

— More or less (D&C 93:24-25)

— A marvelous work (2 Ne. 25:17; D&C 4:1)

— Good, very good (Moses 2:25, 31)

— Great (Gen. 12:2)

— Wonderful (Isa. 9:61)

— Always (Mosiah 4:11-12)

— Never (John 6:35; 1 Cor. 13:8; Alma 41:10)

— All (Rom. 3:23; 2 Ne. 32:3; D&C 18:11)

— All/None (Mark 12:30; 2 Ne. 2:6-7; 26:33)

— Nothing (2 Ne. 26:33)

— Every (Moro. 7:16)

— No (Alma 40:26)
