Gene R. Cook, Searching the Scriptures (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1997)

Chapter 8

Search Diligently: Mark and Cross-Reference Your Scriptures

I used to believe that marking and cross-referencing were nice but not essential. I feel differently now—I have come to believe that these skills really do make a difference in our ability to understand the scriptures. Even more, we should teach our children how to mark and cross-reference their scriptures. We can't just assume they will start doing it on their own. If we will school our children as we read scriptures with them, they'll develop skills that will bless them all their lives.

Why is this so important? Consider:

One Way to Mark Scriptures

There are many ways to mark scriptures. I would like to share with you one way that has worked for me. It's simple—even a child can do it—but of course there are many other ways that are equally valid.

If I were reading 1 Ne. 15:23-24, I might mark the words that are underlined in the example below. Rather than mark a whole verse, I like to highlight certain key words.

1 Ne. 15:23-24

23And they said unto me: What meaneth the a rod of iron which our father saw, that led to the tree?

24And I said unto them that it was the a word of God; and whoso would hearken unto the word of God, and would bhold fast unto it, they would never perish; neither could the ctemptations and the fiery d darts of the eadversary overpower them unto blindness, to lead them away to destruction.

When I come back to that verse later, I can easily pick up the meaning. I can see that the verse is about the rod of iron, which is the word of God. If you'll hold fast to it, you'll never perish. Temptation will never be able to overpower you or lead you away.

Using Brackets and Numbered Lists

Two other methods of marking I use are called "brackets and numbered lists." As an example, let me refer you to Alma 37:1-10, a sequence of ten verses about the scriptures. You could shade in all ten verses, but that much shading might be overdoing it. Instead, I have found it helpful to put a big opening bracket around the first verse and then a closing bracket around the last verse, when Alma stops talking about that theme. Then, when I open to that page in the future, I immediately know those verses are essentially all about one theme, and I can remind myself at a glance what it's about. Some people would take it a step further and write a key word at the top or in the margin, such as Scriptures.

In verse 8 I have used a second method of marking—the numbered lists we talked about in the previous chapter. That verse gives us three things the scriptures will do for us: enlarge the memory of the people, convince us of the error of our ways, and bring us to the knowledge of our God. In the margin near each one I put a number to help me remember that the Lord gives us a list there.

Here is an abbreviated example of "brackets and numbered lists":

Alma 37:1-10

1 And now, my son Helaman, I command you that ye take the a records which have been bentrusted with me; . . .

8 And now, it has hitherto been wisdom in God that these things should be preserved; for behold, a they have benlarged the memory of this people, yea, and convinced many of the error of their ways, and brought them to the cknowledge of their God unto the salvation of their souls.

10 And who knoweth but what they will be the a means of bringing many thousands of them, yea, and also many thousands of our bstiffnecked brethren, the Nephites, who are now hardening their hearts in sin and iniquities, to the knowledge of their Redeemer?

A Simple Approach to Cross-Referencing

Some people are intimidated by the idea of cross- referencing—they think it looks too hard. But there is a very simple way to do it.

Let's assume that I read 1 Ne. 15:24 (quoted above) and was impressed with the phrase "the word of God." Later, as I read 2 Ne. 32:3, I find the expression "the words of Christ." I remember having marked something about the word of God earlier, so I go back and find it in 1 Ne. 15. At that point I would mark both verses as shown below.

1 Ne. 15:23-24

23 And they said unto me: What meaneth the a rod of iron which our father saw, that led to the tree?

24 And I said unto them that it was the a word of God; and whoso would hearken unto the word of God, and would bhold fast unto it, they would never perish; neither could the ctemptations and the fiery d darts of the eadversary overpower them unto blindness, to lead them away to destruction.

2 Ne. 32:3

3 a Angels speak by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore, they speak the words of Christ. Wherefore, I said unto you, bfeast upon the cwords of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will d tell you all things what ye should do.

Later, as I read on through the book, I find two other scriptures, both in Helaman, that relate to the word of God, and I add them to my string, as shown:

2 Ne. 32:3

3 a Angels speak by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore, they speak the words of Christ. Wherefore, I said unto you, bfeast upon the cwords of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will d tell you all things what ye should do.

Hel. 3:29-30

29 Yea, we see that whosoever will may lay hold upon the a word of God, which is bquick and powerful, which shall cdivide asunder all the cunning and the snares and the wiles of the devil, and lead the man of Christ in a strait and d narrow course across that everlasting egulf of misery which is prepared to engulf the wicked—

30 And land their souls, yea, their immortal souls, at the a right hand of God in the kingdom of heaven, to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and with Jacob, and with all our holy fathers, to go no more out.

As you do this, be sure you use some standard and simple abbreviations for the names of the books. You may want to use the abbreviations noted in the contents listing of the LDS edition of the Bible, as well as those additional ones on the back of that page. (The same list is provided on the second page of the Triple Combination, right next to the copyright page. Please note that all references to these scriptures, and to footnotes and other aids in this chapter, are to the 1979 edition of the Bible and the 1981 edition of the Triple Combination, both published by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.) Or you may want to shorten your abbreviations even more, to save space—but be sure you don't confuse Moroni and Mormon by using the abbreviation "Mor.," or Philemon and Philippians by using "Phil.," or Moses and Mosiah by using "Mos."

Using the Footnotes

There is another very important way to find cross- references. Check the footnotes! For example, if I were reading 1 Ne. 15:24, I might see the superscript d right in front of the word darts.

1 Ne. 15:24

24 And I said unto them that it was the a word of God; and whoso would hearken unto the word of God, and would bhold fast unto it, they would never perish; neither could the ctemptations and the fiery d darts of the eadversary overpower them unto blindness, to lead them away to destruction.

If I glanced down at the footnotes, under 24d, I would see other scriptures I could look up—Eph. 6:16; D&C 3:8; 27:17. Note that at footnote d, verse 24 speaks of "the fiery darts of the adversary" being unable to "overpower them" and "lead them away to destruction." When I look up those cross-references, here is what I find:

Eph. 6:16

16 Above all, taking the shield of a faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery bdarts of the wicked.

D&C 3:8

8 Yet you should have been faithful; and he would have extended his arm and a supported you against all the fiery bdarts of the cadversary; and he would have been with you in every time of d trouble.

D&C 27:17

17 Taking the shield of faith wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the a fiery darts of the wicked.

When I find gems such as these in the footnotes, I mark the superscript letter in the text, then mark the item in the footnote I want to be able to find and remember.

Here is another example of the value of using footnotes, from D&C 110:12:

12 After this, a Elias appeared, and committed the bdispensation of the cgospel of Abraham . . .

Footnote a just before the word Elias refers to D&C 77:9. When we turn to that scripture we learn exactly who this Elias was and what he was doing:

9 Q. What are we to understand by the angel a ascending from the east, Revelation 7th chapter and 2nd verse?

A. We are to understand that the angel ascending from the east is he to whom is given the seal of the living God over the twelve tribes of bIsrael; wherefore, he crieth unto the four angels having the everlasting gospel, saying: Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their cforeheads. And, if you will receive it, this is d Elias which was to come to gather together the tribes of Israel and erestore all things.

Superscripts and footnotes will also show you corrections Joseph Smith made in the Bible when he did his inspired translation. Let's look at Ex. 6:3:

3 And I a appeared unto bAbraham, unto Isaac, cand unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my d name JEHOVAH was I not known to them.

This leads us to conclude what the Protestant world and the Catholic world have concluded—that no one knew the name of Jehovah until that time. Yet in the Pearl of Great Price, we learn that Abraham knew about Jehovah, by name, well before Moses' time. (See Abr. 1:16.) Which is right? Do we have an error somehow?

The superscripts and footnotes will give us the answer. If you will refer to the little c above the word and, it will trigger you to look at the bottom of the page under 3c, where we have an excerpt from the Joseph Smith translation. There we read the correct version of this account, " . . . and unto Jacob. I am the Lord, God Almighty, the Lord JEHOVAH, and was not my name known unto them?" We see then that someone, at some point, basically left a question mark out, and that changed the meaning of the verse.

The footnotes in the Bible also sometimes give another Greek or Hebrew translation of a particular word, yielding a much deeper understanding of what the word means. For example, we read in Matt. 1:16:

16 And Jacob begat a Joseph the husband of bMary, of whom was born cJesus, d who is called eChrist.

If you see the superscript e before the word Christ, then look at footnote 16e, you will read, "The Greek title 'Christ' and the Hebrew title 'Messiah' are synonymous, meaning 'Anointed One.'"

Many people have wondered what the difference is between the titles Christ and Messiah. The answer is as simple as this: The prophets in the Old Testament used the name Messiah because they spoke Hebrew. And the prophets and apostles in the New Testament used the name Christ because it was written in Greek. If you know that, you'll have a greater understanding as you're reading.

Many of these insights will pass us by if we don't look at the footnotes. But sometimes we forget to look at the bottom of the page to see what's there. Here is a simple way to remind yourself: Take some time to go through all your scriptures, quickly glancing over the footnotes at the bottom of each page. When you find one that gives an interpretation or added meaning, put a red mark on it; then put a mark on the corresponding superscript on the verse above it. This approach takes an initial investment of time, but the exercise will benefit you in your reading for years to come.

When I highlight items in my scriptures, I like to use a red pencil—it stands out and doesn't "bleed" through the page. When I'm actually writing in the margins—notes or cross- references—I use a black marking pen. It matches the print and looks nice. But some people use varying colors and like the results. Choose a method that suits your style and personality.

A Personal Experience with Footnotes

Once two or three years ago my family had an experience with using footnotes that was a real blessing to us—and it reinforced some of the approaches we have been talking about in this chapter.

We were reading in Mosiah 3:15, which says, "many signs, and wonders, and types, and shadows showed he unto them, concerning his coming."

We stopped there and asked, what does "types and shadows" mean? My wife and I tried to explain that a type and shadow is like a symbol; it is an example, often in life, of something that stands for something else. For example, the ancient Israelites sacrificed lambs unto God, and that is a type and shadow of Jesus (who is called the Lamb of God) being sacrificed for our sins.

We asked our children to help us think of all the types and shadows of Christ that we could. Without referring to any sources, we were able to compile a list of a dozen or so. Even our daughter who was seven at the time was able to help. "The bread we take in sacrament meeting is an example of Jesus' flesh," she said. "Isn't that one of them?" Of course, she was right. It is a beautiful type of Christ.

Another example is the water in the sacrament. Also, when you're baptized you're immersed in the water, symbolizing the death of man and of Christ, and then you're raised out of the water, symbolizing the resurrection.

When we ran out of ideas on our own, we turned to the Topical Guide and Bible Dictionary. The superscript in the verse told us where to look in the Topical Guide—under "Jesus Christ, Types of, in Anticipation; Passover; Symbolism."

For several mornings we searched through the Topical Guide and Bible Dictionary, looking up scriptures we thought would give us more insight into types and shadows of Jesus Christ. It was a wonderful experience, a learning experience not only about types and shadows but also about how the scriptures and scriptural helps work.

Other Study Aids

There are a few other scriptural aids I would recommend you become familiar with—they will enhance your study of the word of God.

Â Chapter headings. The headings in the chapters to the LDS editions of the scriptures have been carefully written and reviewed. One benefit of these headings is that they give us a focus before we start reading, and thus they can generate additional questions in our minds before we read.

Â The index in the Triple Combination. This index has some very valuable references that are not found in the Topical Guide.

Â The maps in the Triple Combination. In the back of the Doctrine and Covenants are four maps that help us to understand the geographical context of the revelations in our dispensation.

Â The Topical Guide, which is in the back of the Bible. We have touched on this, but it deserves another mention. This guide gives us hundreds of scriptural topics, arranged alphabetically, to help in the study of the scriptures. Entries begin with Aaron and go to Zipporah.

Â The Bible Dictionary, also in the back of the Bible. This is an alphabetical listing of many of the key persons, places, and concepts in the Bible, with discussions on each. The dictionary also includes a helpful chart on the chronology of the Bible and a harmony of the four Gospels.

Â The Joseph Smith Translation. Again, we have touched on this, but I want to reemphasize that there are scores of helpful quotations from the Joseph Smith Translation in the footnotes to the Bible; in addition, there is a section of longer quotations in the back of the Bible. (You'll find it just before the gazetteer that goes with the maps.)

Â The maps in the back of the Bible. There are twenty-two maps (with a gazetteer) of such things as "the ancient world at the time of the Patriarchs," "the empire of David and Solomon," "the Persian empire," "Jesus' Galilean ministry," and "Paul's Journey to Rome."

Â The computerized scriptures. If you have a computer, you might want to consider investing in a program that gives you the LDS scriptures in electronic form. Such programs can enable you to search a word or combination of words in the scriptures, and they will give you the result literally in an instant.

Concerning these helps—and the scriptures themselves—President Howard W. Hunter said:

We ought to have a church full of women and men who know the scriptures thoroughly, who cross-reference and mark them, who develop lessons and talks out of the Topical Guide, and who have mastered the maps, the Bible Dictionary, and the other helps that are contained in this wonderful set of standard works. . . .

Not in this dispensation, surely not in any dispensation, have the scriptures—the enduring, enlightening word of God—been so readily available and so helpfully structured for the use of every man, woman, and child who will search them. The written word of God is in the most readable and accessible form ever provided to lay members in the history of the world. Surely we will be held accountable if we do not read them. (Satellite address to religious educators, 10 Feb. 1989.)

A Note about Verses

When the original manuscript to the Book of Mormon was delivered to the printer, it was all in one paragraph—no chapters and no verses.

Since then the Church has provided both verses and chapters, and I am very grateful for it—they make the book much easier to read, and they give us common reference points, such as Alma 11:4, which we did not have before.

But sometimes we let the verses and chapters indicate our starting and stopping points—and they may not always be the best divisions. We need to look beyond verses and chapters and see the underlying thought.
