Gene R. Cook, Searching the Scriptures (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1997)

Chapter 11

Six Suggestions for a Richer Reading Experience

As we conclude this section, I would like to make six final suggestions about how we all can have a richer experience with the scriptures.

First, I would suggest that we ought to be studying the scriptures every day, and we ought to be praying as we read. Our latter-day prophets have taught that being born again is a daily process, and that the way to seek that blessing is through daily prayer and daily scripture study. Let us be faithful in not allowing the devil, who is so quick to put up obstacles and give us diversions, to entice us into failing to spend our time with the words of the Lord. Satan knows what will happen if you don't, and he knows what will happen if you do. He will do all in his power to keep you from reading in the scriptures. Don't let him succeed.

Second, let us study daily with our spouse or family members. Missionaries ought to be studying with their companions. Single people might study with a friend whenever possible. It takes added humility to study with someone else—that's one main reason why many of us don't do it—but we will often learn more when studying with someone else than by ourselves. Why? Because we can teach one another, sharing both testimony and insight.

Third, remember that the scriptures are for all people. As the Lord said through Nephi:

Know ye not that I, the Lord your God, have created all men, and that I remember those who are upon the isles of the sea; and that I rule in the heavens above and in the earth beneath; and I bring forth my word unto the children of men, yea, even upon all the nations of the earth? (2 Ne. 29:7.)

None is excepted; the Lord's word is for all.

Some Latter-day Saints say, "I just don't understand what the scriptures say." I truly believe that such people have forgotten to humble themselves and to pray before they read. The Lord's promise is that his holy word was given to all—even you—yet we must follow the process the Lord has prescribed. If you're not sure you can remember the other things we talk about in this book, don't worry about it. Just remember this: be humble and prayerful. Even children can do that. Be careful not to make it more complicated or difficult than it is.

Fourth, remember to stay focused on the most important reason the Lord invites us to study the scriptures. That reason is to receive direction from heaven and to hear the Lord's voice speaking to us, as individuals. Don't get overwhelmed with the ideas I have shared with you about patterns or cross-referencing or anything else. These are helpful skills and tools—I hope you will use them, and I hope they will be a blessing to you. But they are only means to an end, which end is to hear the voice of the Lord.

The coming of that voice may be as simple as a quiet moment when the Lord breathes peace into your heart, and you know, because of his witness, that he loves you. Or you may feel gentle stirrings to change something in your life. If you can receive those blessings, don't be too worried about these other things.

Fifth, I have found it to be of great benefit in my life, a few times a year, to seek to have a "general spiritual checkup" and find out my standing with the Lord. I like to check in with the Lord and ask, "Where am I? What ought I to be doing? Heavenly Father, dost thou have some direction for me in my calling that I am not now aware of? What is the most dominant need in my family? Help me." If you will do that, prayerfully asking for help, seeking to reestablish your bearings in life, and pondering the scriptures with those questions in mind, I bear testimony that the Lord will give you answers. Many of them will come directly through prayer, while many others will come as you read and ponder the scriptures. Through those two means, the Lord will speak to your heart, writing his will upon your soul, and you will come to understandings you did not have before.

Sixth, believe that as you do these things consistently, you will experience a miracle in your life. The scriptures will combine with your humility and your prayers to bring about the mighty change of converting you to God, with an unshakable testimony in the Lord.

I have always loved these words of Nephi:

I said unto them that it was the word of God [meaning the rod of iron]; and whoso would hearken unto the word of God, and would hold fast unto it, they would never perish; neither could the temptations and the fiery darts of the adversary overpower them unto blindness, to lead them away to destruction. (1 Ne. 15:24.)

What a tremendous promise! If we will bring the Lord's words into our lives, we will never fall away. We will be held firm in the faith and will never perish.

Here is another beautiful promise, this one from Helaman:

We see that whosoever will [you have to be willing] may lay hold upon the word of God, which is quick and powerful, which shall divide asunder all the cunning and the snares and the wiles of the devil, and lead the man of Christ in a strait and narrow course across that everlasting gulf of misery which is prepared to engulf the wicked—

And land their souls, yea, their immortal souls, at the right hand of God in the kingdom of heaven, to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and with Jacob, and with all our holy fathers, to go no more out. (Hel. 3:29-30.)

If we will hold firmly to the words of the Lord, we're assured that we'll be unshakable in the faith, and we'll be blessed to enter into the celestial kingdom.

How Will I Know How I Am Doing in Scripture Reading?

Is there a way to know if we are doing well or poorly in our scripture reading? Has Heavenly Father given us any guides to help us know if we are pleasing him? The answer to both questions is "Yes," and the keys to the answer are found in the scriptures. Here are some spiritual tests that will help (note that each one has much to do with our hearts and our minds).

One scripture that helps me know how I am doing is found in the Doctrine and Covenants. The Lord said,

These words are not of men nor of man, . . .

For it is my voice which speaketh them unto you; . . .

Wherefore, you can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my words. (D&C 18:34-36.)

I bear testimony that you have heard the voice of the Lord if you have received the words of scripture in your heart. You have heard his voice if you receive revelation, impressions, thoughts, feelings, and ideas from the Spirit, both when you're reading scripture and when you're engaged in other pursuits. Receiving the Lord's voice consistently is one measure of how well you are doing in scripture reading.

The Lord gave us a related test in the book of Luke. After Jesus was resurrected but before he would shown himself to the Apostles, he was walking on the road to Emmaus with two disciples, but they didn't know who he was. They stopped at an inn together, and he broke bread for them and blessed it, and then he disappeared from their sight.

After he was gone, they commented to one another that they should have recognized him, for the Lord had given them spiritual clues.

"Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way," they asked one another, "and while he opened to us the scriptures?" (Luke 24:32.)

This is another test we can make as we look into our hearts. We can ask ourselves: "When I read the scriptures, does my heart burn within me? Does my heart burn as I bear testimony of the scriptures, and as I use their stories and examples?" If your answer is yes, you have another indicator that you are doing well.

A third scripture that gives me a key is again found in the Doctrine and Covenants. D&C 35, verse 20, gives us an answer to an important question, but we need to supply the question. Here is how I would phrase it: Where does the Lord keep his scriptures?

The Lord's answer: "The scriptures shall be given, even as they are in mine own bosom, to the salvation of mine own elect." The Lord has his scriptures in his own bosom, as it were, deep in his own heart. The challenge is for us to get them there as well, to live the words, to teach the words, to have them burning in our hearts. As we do that, they will be in our bosoms. Then, when we stand up to speak and testify, we will speak the words of the Lord through his Spirit, as does the Lord himself.

The last scripture that helps me know how I'm doing is in the writings of Paul:

For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? But we have the mind of Christ. (1 Cor. 2:16.)

Since the scriptures come from the mind of Christ, they help us to have the Spirit, which brings us to a oneness of mind and heart with the Lord. Therefore, as you read and study and assimilate the words of the Lord through the scriptures, you are in the process of absorbing the mind of Christ. You begin to think as he thinks. You begin to feel as he feels. You begin to speak as he speaks.

How can we know how well we are doing in our scripture reading? We can know we are doing well when we hear his voice (both in the scriptures directly and through revelation), when our hearts burn within us at hearing his word, when we receive the words of Christ into our bosoms, and when we receive them into our minds (and thus we learn how to feel as he feels and think as he thinks.)

Three Testimonies

As we conclude this section, I would like to share with you three testimonies—one from a man who recounts a sweet experience with scripture reading, another from Parley P. Pratt, and finally my own.

"Every Page Testified of My Savior"

Our stake president recently gave my wife and me counsel to listen to a set of cassette tapes given by a General Authority on personal and family scripture study. We took the opportunity of a trip to the Oregon coast during the winter time to snuggle in beside a warm fire and listen to the instruction. The Spirit was very strong and we received personal revelation that our long-time tradition of reading the scriptures together daily would be an even greater blessing if we really studied them.

On a recent business trip the witness of that revelation manifest itself in the most wonderful manner. I often read the scriptures as I travel. Since my territory is the east coast and I live in Washington state, I have many hours of free time to read on each trip. On this particular trip, instead of just reading the Book of Mormon, I read it with a significant purpose. I took a new missionary copy of the Book of Mormon and my red pencil and began reading it with the express purpose of finding what it could teach me of Jesus Christ. All the way to the east coast I read and underlined, and then again all the way home.

I cannot express the feelings that grew within me as I read. Each page taught me more of my Lord and my God. It seemed as though virtually every page testified of my Savior, my Redeemer, the Lamb of God. I came to understand, through the testimony of the Spirit, that each name given him teaches something of the wonder of who Jesus Christ is: Son of God, Son of Righteousness, the Only Begotten of the Father; Maker, Creator, Lord of Hosts, the God of Nature; King of the Earth, King of Heaven, King of kings; God of Israel, the Holy One of Jacob, and Redeemer of Israel.

With my greatly deepened testimony of who He is also came a broadening depth of understanding of the wonder of his personality. Merciful, deliverer, giver of hope, Redeemer, loving, kind, friend, Father. I found other names given him, many others. I felt as if my heart would burst, for it could not contain the feelings within—feelings of testimony that seemed to be inextricably connected to each name given to my Savior.

Since my conversion in Vietnam some twenty-five years ago I have always had a strong testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith. I have loved him to the degree that I think I have felt like Brigham Young when he said, "I feel to shout Hallelujah every day to think that I ever knew the Prophet Joseph Smith." Though I have not come to know him personally like Brigham Young was blessed to know him, I have come to know him through the Spirit in a very profound way. Joseph has always seemed to be my brother and my friend.

But the Savior has always seemed to be too perfect for me to comprehend—too much beyond my reach.

I have read the New Testament and the Book of Mormon many times and have learned much about him. I think I have had a good understanding of the doctrine of the atonement. On occasion over the years, I have felt the sweet spirit of the forgiveness of my sins. I have been blessed with many spiritual witnesses of the gospel and a strong testimony of its truth.

But in all this, I have not known my Savior—at least in the sense that I knew I needed to know him.

After the experience I had on that trip, I now have a personal testimony of Jesus Christ—and it is growing. There are times when I can barely speak his name, I am so moved with feelings of love for him. My prayers now often reach out for a day when I shall enjoy his company, when I shall be worthy to be his friend.

I hope we will gain the following lessons from this account:

Â This good brother renewed his desire to study the scriptures and not just to read them.

Â He began to read the Book of Mormon with a particular purpose—to learn more about Jesus Christ.

Â He received feelings and understandings from the Spirit about our Savior.

Â The combination of scripture study and prayer has given him a choice and deep testimony of Jesus Christ—and a newly strengthened desire to be with him.

"I Preferred Reading to Sleep": An Experience of Parley P. Pratt

Parley P. Pratt had a remarkable experience in coming to a knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ and a testimony of the Book of Mormon. Here is his account in his own words:

We visited an old Baptist deacon by the name of Hamlin. After hearing of our appointment for the evening, he began to tell of a book, a STRANGE BOOK, a VERY STRANGE BOOK! in his possession, which had been just published. This book, he said, purported to have been originally written on plates either of gold or brass, by a branch of the tribes of Israel; and to have been discovered and translated by a young man near Palmyra, in the State of New York, by the aid of visions, or the ministry of angels. I inquired of him how or where the book was to be obtained. He promised me the perusal of it, at his house the next day, if I would call. I felt a strange interest in the book. . . . Next morning I called at his house, where, for the first time, my eyes beheld the "BOOK OF MORMON"—that book of books—that record which reveals the antiquities of the "New World" back to the remotest ages, and which unfolds the destiny of its people and the world for all time to come;—that Book which contains the fulness of the gospel of a crucified and risen Redeemer;—that Book which reveals a lost remnant of Joseph, and which was the principal means, in the hands of God, of directing the entire course of my future life.

I opened it with eagerness, and read its title page. I then read the testimony of several witnesses in relation to the manner of its being found and translated. After this I commenced its contents by course. I read all day; eating was a burden, I had no desire for food; sleep was a burden when the night came, for I preferred reading to sleep.

As I read, the spirit of the Lord was upon me, and I knew and comprehended that the book was true, as plainly and manifestly as a man comprehends and knows that he exists. My joy was now full, as it were, and I rejoiced sufficiently to more than pay me for all the sorrows, sacrifices and toils of my life. . . .

I esteemed the Book, or the information contained in it, more than all the riches of the world. Yes; I verily believe that I would not at that time have exchanged the knowledge I then possessed, for a legal title to all the beautiful farms, houses, villages and property which passed in review before me, on my journey through one of the most flourishing settlements of western New York. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1985], 18, 20, 22.)

What a wonderful account of discovering the Book of Mormon! Note that the book had such an influence on Elder Pratt that it "was the principal means, in the hands of God, of directing the entire course of my future life." We should all seek to be so influenced by the Lord and by his word!

Here are a few other important points from this account:

Â He approached the scriptures with "eagerness."

Â He was so desirous of receiving the Lord's word as found in the Book of Mormon that "I read all day; eating was a burden, I had no desire for food; sleep was a burden."

Â As he read, he received the Spirit of the Lord, "and I knew and comprehended that the book was true."

Â His testimony of the Book of Mormon was as strong as his testimony that he himself existed.

Â He "esteemed" the book as of great worth—"more than all the riches of the world."

"I Bear Witness": My Testimony of Personal Scripture Reading

I bear witness that the scriptures change men's lives, just as in these accounts we have just reviewed.

I bear witness that two things have helped me more in my life than any other single thing I know of—prayer and scripture reading.

I bear testimony of the importance of our truly searching the words of the Lord, of learning how to search humbly, and of treating the scriptures in such a way that they will speak to us through revelation from the Lord himself.

I pray the Lord will bless you as you go forward now, seeking and searching more intently on your own. I remind you once again that the only thing you really have to learn is to truly pray and humble yourself, and the Lord will lead you, teach you, and bring you to him.

I bear testimony that these things are true, and declare in solemnity, and in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that the scriptures are the words of God himself, one of his most priceless gifts to us, his children.
