Gene R. Cook, Searching the Scriptures (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1997)

Part 3

Family Study: Blessing Your Family with the Word of the Lord

Chapter 12

How Will Studying Together Bless My Family?

Some years ago, a parent shared with me a wonderful experience he had with his nine-year-old son, Scott. Scott had been asked to give a talk in Primary. "We had tried to teach our children that when they receive such an assignment they ought to pray to Heavenly Father to learn the topic he would have them speak about. Scott was old enough to do that, and he did. He prayed in his room for a few minutes, then came out and said, 'I can't think of a thing.'"

Scott's parents responded, "Well, go try again, Scott. Ask the Lord to help you know what subject would really help the other children in your Primary. We promise you that he'll tell you."

After a little bit he came back and said, "I think I know what I want to do. I want to talk to them about the story of David and Goliath." And then he added, "I remember something that happened in answer to one of my prayers this very last week, and so I'm also going to talk to them about praying and being close to the Lord."

Not many days later this little boy went into Primary and gave his talk. He was very much touched by the Spirit as he read a few verses from 1 Samuel, chapter 17, about David and Goliath. After Goliath had challenged David and told him, in essence, that he was going to feed him to the buzzards, David gave this great answer:

This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hand; and I will smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel.

And all this assembly shall know that the Lord saveth not with sword and spear: for the battle is the Lord's, and he will give you into our hands. (1 Sam. 17:46-47.)

Scott followed that story with a short experience of his own about how he had been praying for help with a test he had been studying for and had received an "A" on it. He then bore testimony that the Lord would help even a little boy like him to have his prayers answered.

The next morning one of the women in the ward called Scott's mother on the telephone. "I was in Primary yesterday," she said, "and I want to know what's happening in your family."

"What do you mean?" the mother asked.

The sister answered, "How is it that your young son can bear testimony with such fervor and Spirit that it reaches everybody in the whole meeting?"

Scott's mother wasn't sure how to respond. But then the sister continued. "You could tell that he really had a testimony of the scriptures by the way he read those verses," she said. "He read those passages with the Spirit of the Lord. When I saw the sweet feeling and testimony your son had of the scriptures, a deep desire settled over me. I thought, That's what I want for my children. I talked it over with my husband—and we want you to know that we had our first family scripture reading this morning. We just want to thank you for having such a good boy."

What a wonderful testimony of the blessings of family scripture reading. That's where our children also (along with thousands of other children in the Church) have learned to love the scriptures.

What Is a Family?

As we talk about family scripture study, I would first like to define what I mean by family. The obvious answer is a dad and a mom and children together, all reading aloud and discussing the scriptures. But what about a single mom or dad with one or more children? Yes, they should have family scripture study too. What about a newly married couple, or maybe an older couple whose children have gone? Yes, they too would be blessed if they were to study the scriptures together regularly. I would even expand the definition to say that roommates would receive great blessings from studying together, and certainly missionaries are counseled to study the gospel together every day.

I hope, then, that just because you are not part of a traditional family you don't feel this section of the book has no application to you. I believe it does, and I hope it is helpful to people in all circumstances.

I bear my testimony that studying with someone else has a great multiplying effect on our learning. We can learn more truth, and learn it faster, when we study with someone else.

But the key to our greatest growth is to study with someone else and at the same time to study on our own. If we will do this, we will be blessed with greater progress, greater understanding, and a greater closeness to the Lord.

As we proceed with this section, you'll see that I use a few examples from my own family, both good and bad. I hesitate to do that, because it is so personal. Unfortunately, however, I have no examples from your family to use! (I will change the names of my children to protect their privacy.)

Guidance and Direction from the Scriptures

Nephi's Testimony

The scriptures themselves are our best source of information and testimony on why families should read scriptures together. One of my favorite scriptures on the scriptures is in 2 Ne. 32, which we discussed in Part 1. Let's review it briefly here in the context of family.

Nephi wrote, "The words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do." (2 Ne. 32:3.) The scriptures, the living prophets, and personal revelation—all sources of the words of Christ—combine to guide us in all our decisions. They combine to help us know the Lord's will in everything we need to do.

That doesn't necessarily mean that every specific answer to every question is found in the pages of the four standard works. But the principles that govern the answers to those questions are. The scriptures will also guide us to those other vital sources of direction: our living prophets and revelation.

It is important to note that in the same chapter in which Nephi taught us about the words of Christ, he also said, "If ye would hearken unto the Spirit which teacheth a man to pray ye would know that ye must pray; . . . I say unto you that ye must pray always, and not faint; that ye must not perform any thing unto the Lord save in the first place ye shall pray unto the Father in the name of Christ." (2 Ne. 32:8-9.) Why is prayer so important in this context? Because it will help us receive the Holy Ghost, who, in turn, will help us receive revelation (or the words of Christ) to guide us in every part of our lives.

These truths are a great blessing for individuals—but think how blessed a family would be if each member received this kind of help! Family scripture reading will lead family members to great gospel truths that will guide them in their lives— both directly in the pages of the books and also indirectly, by teaching them about the process of prayer and revelation and by motivating them to follow the living prophets.

As they live this kind of life—one in which they are continually seeking and receiving guidance—family members will discover a most valuable additional blessing: In the very process they will be drawing closer to the Lord, strengthening their relationship with him, and finding themselves gradually but surely becoming more like him.

Becoming "Wise unto Salvation"

Paul's Testimony

In a letter to Timothy, Paul wrote this powerful explanation of why we need the scriptures:

But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them;

And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness:

That the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works. (2 Tim. 3:14-17.)

What do the scriptures do for us? They can make us "wise unto salvation," if we have faith in Jesus Christ. They give us the things God wants us to know, teaching true doctrine, reproving us for our sins, and correcting us in our errors. They teach us the ways of righteousness. If we receive the scriptures, if we have faith in Christ, if we become men and women of God, the scriptures can help us become "perfect," giving us all we need in order to perform "all good works."

In addition, the scriptures can bless us from the time of childhood, as they did Timothy. Our children, as they learn to talk and then to read, are not too young to receive great benefits from the scriptures. They can become "wise unto salvation." They can learn the doctrines of the gospel. They can be reproved, corrected, and instructed in righteousness. They can receive all they need to be able to do the good works the Lord requires of them. And they can advance more surely along the path to perfection.

Coming to a Change of Heart

Samuel's Testimony

Samuel the Lamanite gives us another testimony of the value of the scriptures:

And behold, ye do know of yourselves, for ye have witnessed it, that as many of them as are brought to the knowledge of the truth, and to know of the wicked and abominable traditions of their fathers, and are led to believe the holy scriptures, yea, the prophecies of the holy prophets, which are written, which leadeth them to faith on the Lord, and unto repentance, which faith and repentance bringeth a change of heart unto them—

Therefore, as many as have come to this, ye know of yourselves are firm and steadfast in the faith, and in the thing wherewith they have been made free. (Hel. 15:7-8.)

What wonderful promises for families! Samuel teaches us that believing in the scriptures will help us turn from false traditions. And he teaches that if we receive the scriptures, and come to believe in them, they will lead us to faith, which will lead us to repentance. Faith coupled with repentance will bring us to a change of heart. And those who receive a change of heart "are firm and steadfast in the faith."

These are blessings every righteous parent desires for his or her child: That the child will turn with an honest heart to Christ and receive the blessings of the Atonement, that the child will be "firm and steadfast in the faith" forever.

Are these blessings that families can grow in together as they read the scriptures? It is my testimony that they most assuredly are.

Use Scriptures to "Bring Our Children to Christ"

Testimonies of Modern Prophets

President Ezra Taft Benson spoke out frequently and clearly on family scripture reading. On one occasion he said: "We have not been using the Book of Mormon as we should. Our homes are not as strong unless we are using it to bring our children to Christ. Our families may be corrupted by worldly trends and teachings unless we know how to use the book to expose and combat the falsehoods in [the world]." (Ezra Taft Benson, A Witness and a Warning [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1988], 6.)

I bear testimony that if we will raise our family on the scriptures—specifically the Book of Mormon—we will bring our children to Christ. We will find the standard—the Christlike standard—we can use to help our children measure the way they dress, the music they listen to, the things they read, the movies they see. (See Ezra Taft Benson, Ensign, May 1986, 78.) The very values of the Lord are found in the scriptures. If our families will read the scriptures prayerfully, those values will begin to be found in our hearts and our homes.

"Let us not treat lightly the great things we have received from the hand of the Lord," President Benson said. "His word is one of the most valuable gifts He has given us. I urge you to recommit yourselves to a study of the scriptures. Immerse yourselves in them daily so you will have the power of the Spirit to attend you in your calling. Read them in your families and teach your children to love and treasure them." (Ensign, May 1986, 82.)

I bear witness that if you and your family will faithfully immerse yourselves in the scriptures, you will indeed love and cherish them. You, as a family, will hold them close to your heart. And you will recognize that they are the instrument by which each of you will be converted to God. All that from becoming more involved in consistent and meaningful family scripture reading.

President Gordon B. Hinckley has given us this promise concerning reading the Book of Mormon: "Brothers and sisters, without reservation I promise you that if you will prayerfully read the Book of Mormon, regardless of how many times you previously have read it, there will come into your hearts an added measure of the Spirit of the Lord. There will come a strengthened resolution to walk in obedience to his commandments, and there will come a stronger testimony of the living reality of the Son of God." (Ensign, June 1988, 6.)

What parents would not want these blessings for their children? If we will read the Book of Mormon with our children, we can help them lay claim to these promises: "An added measure of the Spirit of the Lord" in their lives, "a strengthened resolution" to be obedient, and "a stronger testimony" of Jesus Christ, our Savior.

Gospel Outcomes

There is another important reason why we should be reading scriptures as a family, and it has to do with a concept called "gospel outcomes."

Some years ago the Church did a study in which they interviewed hundreds of young men to try to discover what determined their faithfulness in the gospel. (Even though this study was directed at young men, we have every reason to think it would be equally true of young women.) The first goal of the study was to find out what parents most wanted for their young men in terms of activity in the Church. The researchers learned that there were four "gospel outcomes" that were more important than all others. Parents wanted their sons to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood, to be endowed, to go on missions, and to be sealed in the temple.

The next step of the study looked at the young men. They were placed into two categories. One category was boys who received the Melchizedek Priesthood, went on missions, and went to the temple; the other category was boys who did none of those things. The objective was to try to find out what made the difference between the two groups. Why did the boys in one category have the gospel outcomes their parents had hoped for, while the boys in the other category did not? What was the role of seminary, peers, Aaronic Priesthood quorum advisers, and family? What made a real difference in the lives of these young men?

The answer that came back was so strikingly simple that many struggled to comprehend it. The researchers learned that two basic practices had a far greater impact on gospel outcomes than any of the others: (l) Personal prayer and (2) personal scripture study, both listed under the heading "Personal Worship of God."

In their conclusion, the researchers said, in essence, you show me a boy who's having a personal prayer every day, and who combines that with daily scripture study, and I will show you a boy who goes on a mission and to the temple.

Could it be that simple, that young boys and girls who pray and read the scriptures will have the gospel outcomes we all desire? I believe in large measure that that is so.

The next question the researchers asked was this: If personal prayer and personal scripture study lead to the gospel outcomes we desire, how do you get young men and women to pray and study?

They came back with three answers, which they categorized under "Family Worship of God."

Before we leave the study on gospel outcomes, there is one more question we need to look at. The researchers asked, "What is the impact of the Church on these outcomes?" The answer was both surprising and enlightening. They learned that the Church helps and supports parents in their teaching. But the real battle is won in the home—the home is what asserts the greatest influence on our youth.

How important is family scripture reading? How important is family prayer? How important is the teaching and example of parents? These are all-important! If we are consistent in these things, our children will be much more likely to read scriptures and to pray on their own—and when they do that they will be much more likely to receive their temple endowments, go on missions, and be married in the temple.

A Prophet's Emphasis

We can marshal many excellent arguments to show why we should read scriptures together as a family—but perhaps the most compelling argument for me is that our living prophets have encouraged us to do so.

I know without a doubt that prophets speak by inspiration of the Lord and that they guide us, as directed by the Lord, in the things we should do. Let me give you a couple of examples of how the presidents of the Church have known what to emphasize, even though the future they saw so clearly might have been obscure to everyone else.

When Heber J. Grant was president of the Church, he was noted for teaching one theme over and over again. He tirelessly emphasized the Word of Wisdom, feeling impressed to do so because we had a generation of Church members who were not very obedient to that commandment. He also knew something else—that prophets teach not only their present generation but the one that's coming up.

Once a man sent a letter to President Grant saying, "President, we really appreciate all these talks on the Word of Wisdom, but don't you have some other talk?" President Grant turned to his secretary and said, "Well, it looks like someone still hasn't got it." And at the next conference he spoke on the Word of Wisdom once again.

What happened to the next generation? Everything broke loose—alcohol, tobacco, and drugs were more commonly used than ever. What would have happened to that generation of the Church's youth if President Grant had not known what to emphasize—and if the generation of his time had not been obedient to his counsel?

What did President David O. McKay teach so strongly over and over and over again?

"No other success can compensate for failure in the home." He spoke out strongly about marriage, about nurturing the love between husband and wife, about the evils of divorce.

And now what are we seeing in our generation? Single- parent families are becoming more and more the norm. Divorce has been called an epidemic. Those who did not listen to the prophet have suffered the terrible consequences.

And now we come to our own generation. The presidents in the last couple of decades have emphasized a number of things—repentance, missionary work, temple attendance, and so forth—but one thing that stands out, because of its frequency, is the continuing emphasis on strengthening families. And what is one of the best ways to accomplish that? It is through reading the scriptures as individuals, as families, and as a Church. Why is our study of scripture so important? Because it will give us a foundation in understanding and testimony that will enable us to stand firm, both individually and as families, against the winds of trials to come.

If we will build our foundation on the word of God, we will be able to stand faithfully through the many trials that are yet to be poured out upon all the earth. But if we neglect the counsel of our prophets, both we and our families may suffer.

This is a powerful convincing factor for me as a father. I want to be sure that we seek to read the scriptures every single day, to see that my children's testimonies are rooted in the holy word of the Lord, helping to make their testimonies unshakable.

A Promise from the Lord

Some years ago when I was organizing a stake I interviewed an acquaintance of mine who, if I remember correctly, was serving as a stake clerk at the time. He was a faithful man in every respect. He went to all of his meetings, paid his tithing, was praying regularly, and was diligent in keeping the commandments. His wife and most of his children were as faithful as he was.

He told me in the process of the interview, however, that he had not been reading the scriptures with his family as he should. I felt impressed to bear to him my testimony of the power of family scripture reading. In that moment, when the Spirit was strong, he confided in me that his youngest son, who was sixteen years old, had begun to stray from the Church. He was doing very poorly in school and on several occasions had threatened to leave home. The father felt helpless to make a difference in his son's life.

Again I felt impressed to tell him that if he would begin to faithfully study the scriptures with his family, the Lord would deliver his son from the bondage he was entering into. I couldn't promise that it would happen immediately—but I knew that, in time, the Lord would answer his pleas for his son.

He seemed to be touched by that promise. What I didn't know then, but learned later, was that he went into the outer office and sobbed for joy. "I felt within my heart that the Lord had spoken directly to me through you," he said later. "I knew he had given me a promise he would not break, if I would but do my part."

Later in the day when I met his wife (whom I also knew), I reaffirmed to her what I'd felt to say to her husband. She committed, as he had done, that they would begin to have family scripture study.

Because of the number of people one meets in stake conferences from week to week, I had forgotten about that promise. Some two years went by. One evening I was downtown with my wife and other family members when this good brother approached me.

He said, "I want to give you an accounting of what has happened in the last two years. I took the promise you gave to me in the name of the Lord that if I would be faithful in my family scripture study, the Lord would deliver my son. I now have a strong testimony of the power of scripture reading in a family. I am unable to say exactly how it worked. The only thing I know is that we have been reading together faithfully for the last couple of years, and my son has totally turned around. He repented of his sins and fasted and prayed and received a patriarchal blessing. He has a 4.0 grade point average at the university. This Sunday he will be ordained an elder. He's nearly prepared for his mission and is on his way to being a faithful elder in Israel. How thankful I am that that promise was given and that the Lord fulfilled it as you promised he would."

I was humbled to hear his testimony of their experience and told him I would be honored to meet his son. At the time of this writing, this wonderful young man is serving a mission.

I bear testimony that the power of family scripture reading will indeed bring our children to Christ, if we will do it in a loving, kind, patient, and consistent way.

The Blessings of Family Scripture Study

So why is it that we should be reading the scriptures with our families? Here is a summary of the reasons we have discussed in this and other chapters, plus a few other reasons for good measure:

Â Family scripture reading helps us hold onto our children—or helps us regain them if they have begun to stray, as the story just related demonstrates.

Â We have been counseled by our prophets to read together—and we should be obedient to their counsel.

Â The scriptures can help each family member know more about Christ and develop a testimony of his atonement, his love, and his power to bless us.

Â The scriptures can help each family member find answers to the problems in their lives. They help us receive direction from the Lord.

Â They help us draw closer together as a family, just because we're doing something important together. Reading scriptures together will help unify a family, cause them to pull together more, and help them be one as Latter-day Saints.

Â They help a family draw closer to the Holy Spirit because he's present testifying of the truthfulness of what we're reading.

Â They help children learn how to study. I have been amazed to hear my own children say, as they have gotten a little older, "I first learned to read in the Book of Mormon." What a blessing parents can convey to their children!

Â Reading scriptures together helps us learn how to read and speak Heavenly Father's language. Even children can begin to learn that language—both the unusual words of the scriptures and the language of the Spirit.

Â The experience of reading together engenders humility and increases love in the family. It builds our faith.

Â Reading together helps our children learn to see the Lord's servants as heroes. They want to be like Nephi going after the brass plates. They want to go forth as Ammon did, boldly venturing among the Lamanites without fear and bearing his testimony. What great heroes we find in the scriptures—and what a blessing to a family if parents will teach their children about those heroes.

Â Reading together helps a family worship together. Through that process, it helps to bring a daily focus on God and on the needs of other people—and thus it brings about repentance and a desire to change.

Â Reading together creates a wonderful opportunity for sharing, for understanding one another, for listening, for seeing the Lord speak in revelation to the hearts of each family member.

Â Family scripture reading creates a perfect opportunity for parents to bear testimony to their children, and for children to bear testimony to each other. That process of sharing testimony can truly strengthen children in their conversion to the Lord. As Paul said, "Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God." (Rom. 10:17.)

"We Feel the Love"

One Family's Experience

"Regular family scripture study has brought us some real blessings. We have experienced in a small way the promise given in 1 Ne. 15:24: 'Whoso would hearken unto the word of God, and would hold fast unto it, they would never perish; neither could the temptations and the fiery darts of the adversary overpower them.' It has indeed been a little easier for our children to withstand the temptations at school. Scripture reading has also helped us answer the questions of our nonmember neighbors and of acquaintances at school. We feel the love that our Savior and our Heavenly Father have for us as we read their words. We are closer as a family. We want to serve our fellowmen more. We are coming to know our Savior as Alma taught in Alma 32:43: 'Then, my brethren, ye shall reap the rewards of your faith, and your diligence, and patience, and long-suffering, waiting for the tree to bring forth fruit unto you.'

"We still have a long way to go, but finally we have a testimony of reading the scriptures as a family."

"We Are Grateful"— A Success Story

One Family's Experience

"Our family began a regular habit of family scripture reading and study several years ago. We tried a few different approaches; finally we settled on having each person read the Book of Mormon, a column in turn. Where appropriate, we would stop the reading and make comments, ask questions, and take advantage of teaching moments. Each time we completed the Book of Mormon, we started at First Nephi, chapter one, again the next week.

"The blessings we have received from being obedient to this counsel are more important than the mechanics of how it gets done. We know that once we became regular at this practice, peace prevailed in our home as never before. Much of the contention essentially vanished. Our youngest child even wrote a paper for school on how well our family members got along with each other.

"This youngest child was in first grade when we began our reading together. She was in a remedial reading class, reading below her grade level, and needing extra help. She sat on my lap as I pointed out the words as they were read. After a while, she started reading one verse at a time. She fairly quickly became quite good at reading, and by the time she entered second grade she was reading on the third-grade level. I attribute this success to reading the Book of Mormon.

"Our children, as well as my husband and I, have gained a deep knowledge and testimony of this great work of the ancient prophets, which Heavenly Father has preserved for us. We are grateful for the Book of Mormon and for the wisdom of our Church leaders to counsel us to read and study it as a family. We know it is true and that it truly blesses our lives."
