Gene R. Cook, Searching the Scriptures (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1997)

Chapter 13

Prime Time for Teaching and Testimony

Some years ago one of our daughters was being tempted—and pressured—by some friends to dress in inappropriate ways. It was not nearly as serious as it could have been (it mostly concerned styles of jewelry), but the styles she was being attracted to were rather worldly. Her mother and I had talked to her more than once, but we could tell we hadn't yet reached her heart. She knew what was right, but she hadn't come to a final decision about what she was going to do.

One morning, right when things were reaching a crisis point, we came to 2 Ne. 13 in our family scripture reading. In verse 16 we read: "Moreover, the Lord saith: Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched-forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go . . ." Does that sound like a worldly woman? Then we came to verse 19, where it says the women were wearing "the chains and the bracelets, and the . . . bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, . . . and the ear-rings; the rings, and nose jewels; . . . and the crisping-pins; [and] the glasses [which means transparent clothing]." (See 2 Ne. 13:16, 19-23.)

After we read those verses, I bore testimony to the whole family about the importance of being modest, of not calling too much attention to yourself by the way you dress and by the jewelry you wear. I wasn't directing my words right to this daughter because I didn't want to embarrass her, but I hoped with all my being she was listening.

At the very moment of my testimony, I saw, as it were, the words penetrate my daughter's heart. I saw the Lord say to her through the words in that scripture and through the testimony I offered, "This is correct and right, and you will be greatly blessed if you obey." And in response I saw her say in her heart, "I will do it." I saw her heart change in just those few minutes.

The issue was never brought up with this daughter again—nor did it need to be. That morning in scripture reading the Lord sent the blessing we sought—a blessing that came by the power of love, of testimony, of the scriptures, and of his words. There are few times when parents have a better opportunity to teach and to testify than during family scripture time. In fact, that is one of the major blessings of family scripture study—it gives parents a golden opportunity, day after day, to instill in their children the truths that are most important to them.

Teaching the Lord's Values

In the previous chapter we talked about "gospel outcomes." What most influences young men and young women to go on missions, receive their temple endowments, and be sealed to an eternal partner in the temple? The answer had three parts: personal prayer (which is often motivated by family prayer), personal scripture reading (which is often motivated by family scripture reading), and personally holding the Lord's values (which often stems from parental teaching of those values).

Let me give you an example of the importance of teaching the Lord's values in the home—and how the scriptures can help in that effort. Many parents have had the experience where a son or daughter comes to them and says, "Why are we the only family in the whole neighborhood who . . . ?"

There are many phrases that might fill in the blank:

" . . . has a midnight curfew?"

" . . . has to go to church every single Sunday?"

" . . . can't wear short shorts?"

" . . . has to do chores?"

(The next phrase is usually: "None of my friends has to . . .")

Suppose one of your children were to come to you and ask, "Why are we the only family in the whole neighborhood that doesn't watch television on Sunday?

You might be inclined to say, "Because I said so. That's just the way it is." Or, "That's just one of our family rules." Or, "Because it's the right thing to do."

But better than any of those responses would be to take an approach where you teach the Lord's values. Suppose you were a dad talking to his daughter. You could take her into her bedroom and sit together, opening the Doctrine and Covenants to D&C 59.

"Honey, maybe I've never really shared with you how I feel about the Sabbath, and what I've learned from the Lord. Let's look at these verses together:

"'And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day; For verily this is a day appointed unto you'—listen to this, honey, and see what two things the Lord has given us to do on his day—'to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High.' I think that's saying we should go to church and find ways to do the Lord's work—it's saying we ought to serve, pray, help others, and learn ourselves. ' . . . Remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High. . . . And on this day thou shalt do none other thing.'" (D&C 59:9-10, 12-13.)

After having shared the Lord's words in the scriptures, you might bear a fervent testimony to your daughter. "Honey, I want you to know that I know, with all my heart, that this is the word of the Lord. This is how the Lord wants us to observe his Sabbaths, and that's why your mom and I decided that watching television on Sunday just isn't a very good thing to do."

If you were to do that in great love, your child might say, "Well, you know, Dad, I guess I never understood it quite that way. I didn't realize the Lord said that so strongly. I do believe what you're saying, and I think that is the best choice for me and for our family."

By that kind of process, a value might be transferred by the Spirit from one generation to another, from a father or mother to a daughter or son. Values transfer in other ways as well—through family prayer, family scripture reading, family home evening, informal teaching and testifying moments, and, of course, example.

Ideas for Better Teaching

Mom and Dad Get Up First

To be able to do their best as teachers, I think it is crucial for Dad and Mom to get up first in the morning (if you're reading in the morning). Think of how they can bless their family if they will make sure they have the Spirit of the Lord with them before they call the children together for scripture reading. If Dad and Mom drag in at the same time as the children, barely more awake than the children and poorly prepared, they'll have a harder time bringing the Lord's Spirit into the meeting. But if they get up just a little earlier, prepare, awaken fully, and obtain the Spirit, they'll be much better teachers when the family assembles.

Prepare Your Heart

Whenever you begin to read the scriptures, it's essential that you be prepared in your heart. In Part 1 of this book we discussed how the scriptures are like a Liahona—they will speak to you through the Spirit of the Lord if you're open while you're reading. The two most important things you can do to prepare yourself for such a blessing are to pray and humble yourself. Families can receive the same blessing on the same basis.

The scriptures teach us that if you do not pray, you will not understand what you're reading. (Read D&C 32:4, below in reverse—what happens if you do not pray?) But if you do pray for understanding, the Lord will unfold the meaning of the scriptures to you. Here is the Lord's promise:

And they shall give heed to that which is written, and pretend to no other revelation; and they shall pray always that I may unfold the same to their understanding. (D&C 32:4.)

It is also crucial that we be humble. If we're not humble and teachable, we will block the Spirit and thus will find it difficult to learn from Him while we're reading the scriptures. As the Lord said in the Doctrine and Covenants,

Let him that is ignorant learn wisdom by humbling himself and calling upon the Lord his God, that his eyes may be opened that he may see, and his ears opened that he may hear;

For my Spirit is sent forth into the world to enlighten the humble and contrite, and to the condemnation of the ungodly. (D&C 136:32-33.)

Parents should teach family members to come to scripture reading time in a spirit of prayer and humility. If you do, you will truly feel the Spirit of the Lord.

Fill in the White Spaces

One valuable thing parents can do is help their children learn to "fill in the white spaces" on the page. As you look at a book of scripture, you'll see the black print, which gives us the words of the Lord. Those words are the important message the Lord is giving to all of us. But you will also notice that there are a lot of white spaces. If you're prayerfully reading scriptures, the Lord will speak to you in your heart, giving you revelation to help you know how to apply those verses to yourself—in essence, he will fill in the white spaces for you.

Parents can try to teach family members how to hear the promptings of the Spirit, how to hear the voice of the Lord when they're reading the scriptures with the family. Then, when they're reading alone, they will know how to follow that same process on their own.

Group Involvement

I once heard that there are three rules for good teaching (I know this is oversimplifying), and these certainly apply in family scripture reading time: Involve them, involve them, involve them.

Sometimes dads and moms have a tendency to just talk, talk, talk, or to preach, preach, preach. That doesn't usually make for a very good scripture reading experience. Children need to be involved. They need to help with the teaching. They need to be asking questions. The more you can involve them, the better the experience will be. (I'll talk more about how to do that in the next chapter.)

Ask Questions

Please remember this important teaching principle: It is better to ask than to tell. Ask your children about what you're reading to the family. Don't tell them all the answers. Get them to think about the meaning of what you're reading and to tell you what they think. More important, get them to tell you what they feel.

Mom and Dad, be careful not to set yourselves up as a light to your children. Let the Lord be the light, and let the Lord's Spirit be the teacher.

In the best family scripture reading experience, Mom and Dad and the children together will be seeking instruction from the Lord. Let your children ask questions of you, and then let each person ask questions, in his or her heart, of the Spirit. If parents will do that, they will be much better teachers in scripture reading.

Be Patient

Remember to be patient with your little children. Many times they genuinely don't understand, even though we may think they do.

Once not long ago I was worried about a big snowstorm that was coming—it was predicted that a full foot would fall in our area. Our yard was unprepared for winter, and I was anxious to get home from work to prepare for the snow.

When I arrived, obviously in a hurry, my eight-year-old son said, "Hey, Dad, don't worry about the snow. It's not going to bother us."

"Why not?" I said. "The weatherman said we'll have a foot of snow by morning."

He said, "No, I just heard the weather, and he said it was only going to snow on the benches." In Utah, the benches are the areas right next to the mountains, which is where we lived at the time. My son thought it was going to snow on the benches where people sit, but not on our yard.

Again, be patient with little children because sometimes they genuinely don't understand. We need to move along at a pace they can handle.

Don't Give Up

Finally, don't give up. Work out the contention that is continually sown by Satan—he will try to get family members upset at one another so you won't have the Spirit in scripture reading.

Don't give up. It's worth it to persist. And if you will, I promise you in the name of the Lord that He will sow peace and harmony in our families.

Here is a wonderful promise we find in the Book of Mormon: The writings of the scriptures shall come forth "unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions, and establishing peace." (2 Ne. 3:12.)

Testimony from a Prophet

In our teaching, we would do well to consistently testify of the truth of that which we've taught. When I was a missionary serving in South America, I had an experience that taught me as never before the great blessing of hearing a fervent testimony. I already had a testimony of the Book of Mormon. In fact, when I was twelve years old, I had read the Book of Mormon on my own and knew without any question that the Book of Mormon was the word of God. I didn't understand all the words, but I knew that the book was of the Lord.

In those days General Authorities interviewed all the missionaries when they came on their periodic tours. It was our privilege to have President Joseph Fielding Smith (then president of the Council of the Twelve) in our mission conducting meetings, giving direction to the president, and interviewing missionaries.

When it was my turn to be interviewed, he had been meeting with missionaries for many hours. I knew he was tired—after all, he was in his eighties and had talked to many missionaries that day. I thought to myself, "I'd like to ask him a question, but I won't because I'm sure he must be exhausted."

I went into the room. He had me sit across from him, with a little, rickety table between us. He put his hands on the table and said, "Elder Cook, are you faithful?"

"Yes."

"Are you keeping the commandments?"

"I am."

"Are you obeying all the mission rules?" He continued with those kinds of questions; then, when he was finished, he said, "Well, I commend you for that, Elder. Go ahead faithfully and be a wonderful missionary. We love you for keeping your life in order."

I shook hands with this wonderful man, a prophet of the Lord, told him I loved him, and got up and walked to the door. As I took hold of the door handle to leave, he said, "Elder Cook, wait a minute. You have a question, don't you?"

I turned back and said, "Well, I did have, but I know you've been here a long time, President, and it's fine. I'll work it through."

"No," he said. "You come back." He had me sit back down. "Now what's your question, Elder?"

"Well, this may sound like a silly question to you, President Smith, but I'll ask anyway. I've always known the Book of Mormon is true—I have no doubt that it is the word of God. But am I supposed to have an independent testimony that Joseph Smith was a prophet? Or is it sufficient just to believe he was because I know he couldn't have translated the Book of Mormon unless he was? Am I supposed to have a separate testimony, independent of the Book of Mormon, about Joseph Smith himself?"

This great man then did something for me that I will never forget. I've since done it with my children. In fact, I've done it in every circumstance where I've wanted to have the help of the Spirit in convincing someone else of a truth. President Smith simply said, "Elder Cook, in the year 1820 there was a young man by the name of Joseph Smith. He was confused about religion." He then recounted to me the Joseph Smith story. By that time in my life, I'm sure I had read that story many times—and he surely knew I was very familiar with it—but he recounted it to me in great detail. Near the end of the story he said, "Joseph Smith saw a light descend from heaven, brighter than the sun at noonday. It descended until it rested upon him. And in that light he saw two personages. One of them called him by name, saying 'Joseph, This is my beloved Son. Hear him.'" When he was finished, he said, "I bear witness to you, Elder Cook, in the name of Jesus Christ, that Joseph Smith is a prophet of God."

Tears were in his eyes—and in mine as well. I felt the Spirit of the Lord fill me full, as if I had been an empty tank. When I walked out of that room, I had an independent testimony of my own that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. It has been with me ever since. I have since marveled how one person with the Spirit of the Lord could so touch another to bring about such a great blessing.

Bringing Testimony into the Home

As the father of eight children, I have seen the power of testimony again and again as we have talked about observance of the Sabbath, tithing, chastity, prayer, or any of the other doctrines of the Church. A sincere, earnest testimony from Dad and Mom, borne with the Spirit of the Lord, can have the same impact on your children as President Smith's testimony had on me as a young missionary. Faith comes "by hearing the word of the Lord," as we quoted from Paul earlier. I bear witness that that is a true principle. And it again underscores how important it is that we have the Spirit with us in great abundance while we're having our scripture reading as families.

Incidentally, Joseph Smith's story gives us another reason for family scripture study. As I have thought of his experience, I've wondered, Why was Joseph Smith reading in the Bible anyway? What motivated him to be reading in James?

Some years later he recorded in his journal:

Notwithstanding the corruptions and abominations of the times, and the evil spirit manifested towards us on account of our belief in the Book of Mormon, at many places and among various persons, yet the Lord continued His watchful care and loving kindness to us day by day; and we made it a rule wherever there was an opportunity, to read a chapter in the Bible, and pray; and these seasons of worship gave us great consolation. (History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, ed. B. H. Roberts, 7 vols. [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1902-1932], 1:188.)

Where do you think he learned the blessings of scripture reading? From his father and mother in his home, in family scripture study. What an impact that teaching had on this young prophet! Because of his home training, he was prepared to go to the Bible when he had a problem, and he was able to find that impressive statement from James: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God." (James 1:5.)

We can bless our children as Joseph's parents blessed him. Of course our children may not become the founding prophets of a dispensation, but they can all become "prophets" in the sense that they will know the voice of the Spirit, seek it, and follow it. The foundation for so many of the spiritual blessings we desire for our children is family prayer, family home evening, and family scripture reading.

A Personal Blessing

Several years ago one of our sons was sick. I'll call him John to protect his privacy. His mom and I had subtly encouraged him to seek a priesthood blessing.

Despite our gentle suggestions, he didn't ever ask. His sickness lasted one day, two days, and still he didn't seek a blessing. One morning we were reading scriptures as a family, and we read a statement about good health in Alma. We then read the cross-reference in Doctrine and Covenants 42:

And whosoever among you are sick, and have not faith to be healed, but believe, shall be nourished with all tenderness, with herbs and mild food, and that not by the hand of an enemy.

And the elders of the church, two or more, shall be called, and shall pray for and lay their hands upon them in my name; and if they die they shall die unto me, and if they live they shall live unto me. . . .

And again, it shall come to pass that he that hath faith in me to be healed, and is not appointed unto death, shall be healed. (D&C 42:43-44, 48.)

We next read in the book of James, where he asks, "Is any sick among you?" Does the next phrase say "call the doctor"? No, it says, "let him call for the elders of the church." (Of course, that doesn't mean we can't utilize doctors, but we do need to start with a focus on the Lord.) Here's the whole passage:

Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord:

And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.

. . . pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much. (James 5:14-16.)

After reading those scriptures, we bore testimony to our family of the power of priesthood blessings, if we exercise faith.

Scripture reading ended. We said no more. About five minutes later John came to me in a very humble spirit. He said, rather emotionally, "Dad, would you feel okay about giving me a priesthood blessing?"

"Would you like me to, John?"

"Yes, I would. I really believe the Lord could heal me. I believe what we read this morning."

In those few moments, as we read those scriptures and shared testimony together, I saw a change of heart in that boy. I did administer to him, and by afternoon he was feeling much better. The next morning he was off to school, counting his blessings that the Lord had answered a young man's prayer. And we were counting our blessings that we had the practice of reading scriptures in our family, and that the Lord had blessed us with his Spirit.
