Gene R. Cook, Searching the Scriptures (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1997)

Chapter 14

Avoiding Pitfalls and Roadblocks

"I'm sure our family fits right in with many other families in the Church," writes one busy, typical family. "We wanted to try to find the time to have family scripture study, but there just didn't seem to be enough hours in the day. One Sunday our bishop was inspired to tell us that we needed to get our priorities in order (something we knew but needed to hear again). If we weren't having family prayer, scripture study, family home evening, and so forth, we needed to remove whatever obstacles were keeping us from them.

"At the time, our daughter was spending twenty hours a week in gymnastics, which, combined with school, left little else in her life. Not only did her gymnastics cost more money than we had, but it left us no time to read scriptures together. We felt it was an answer to prayer when she finally decided to try something else. Too bad that it wasn't that simple. Whenever we would get rid of one thing another seemed to take its place. The adversary didn't want us to have the blessings that reading the scriptures would bring.

"The time of early morning seminary also posed an obstacle. Five o'clock in the morning seemed a bit too early for scripture study. We did have family prayer then, but we could barely keep our eyes open for that. Larry's work would sometimes take him away even before that time. Both kids had paper routes that needed to be done right after school. Jazz Choir took our son away from home as many as two to three afternoons per week. We have two children—I can't imagine keeping up with ten.

"When we did have scripture study, my son seemed bored. He already knew what we were reading. On the other hand, my daughter didn't have the foggiest idea what we were talking about. Trying to keep the Spirit was a real challenge. Nothing seemed to go right. Whenever we seemed to be going in the right direction we ended up taking a few steps backwards."

Does any of this sound familiar? Sometimes the obstacles to reading scriptures as a family seem nothing less than insurmountable. But if we will persist, the rewards will come. This family concludes their account by saying, "After many trials and errors, we finally found a time that works for us all. It has taken a lot of sacrifice on the part of each of us. We are far from perfect and still miss on occasion. But our Heavenly Father is blessing us for making the effort."

Why Do We Struggle to Read?

If reading the scriptures is as important as it appears to be, then why don't we do it? What obstacles stand in our way? What are the pitfalls and roadblocks? Why do we struggle so much with this principle? As I have talked to people about this problem, they've given the following responses (some of which fit closely with the account we just shared):

"We're just not in the habit."

"Our family's schedule makes it too hard. People are going and coming so much that it's very difficult to find a time that works."

"We have other things on our minds. It never seems to be a very high priority."

"We just keep putting it off."

"It takes more energy and effort than we seem to have."

"The scriptures are too boring and too hard for our children to understand."

"We just don't have enough time."

"I guess we just don't have a strong enough testimony of reading scriptures together."

"It seems that Satan doesn't want us to read the scriptures."

"I suspect that one of the reasons we don't read is that we have too much pride."

What Gets in Our Way?

I have given those reasons without comment, but now I would like to take an individual look at each of these obstacles to family scripture reading.

"We're just not in the habit." I suppose it's not ever appropriate to blame our behavior on habit. Habits are made and broken and replaced by new habits according to our true desires. The real reason here is "We don't really want to."

"Our family's schedule makes it too hard. People are going and coming so much that it's very difficult to find a time that works." Perhaps such families need to cut back a little. Or they may need to get up earlier. Or they may need to find a time when most of the family members can be present even if all can't.

"We have other things on our minds. It never seems to be a very high priority." Often these are worldly or transitory things. We may be worried about work, school, friends, and so forth. I have found it to be a helpful mindset to be worried first about the Lord and what he would have me do. Then all other things seem to fall into place, even though sometimes it may be hard.

"We just keep putting it off." This goes back to desire. When things are truly important to us, we're able to find a way to get them into place in our lives.

"It takes more energy and effort than we seem to have." Reading the scriptures together does indeed take energy and effort. But I have learned, as have many others, that you never have a spiritual experience with your family and then regret the effort it took. And spiritual experiences are what come to us when we read scriptures as a family.

"The scriptures are too boring and too hard to understand for our children." This is a common problem in families. But, in general, I feel the problem is really the parents', not the children's. Perhaps Dad and Mom need to learn how to bring the scriptures alive, how to have more fun while they are reading. (I'll give some suggestions on this in following chapters.)

"We just don't have enough time." We all have time for the things that are most important to us. When people tell me they don't have time, I ask them, "In your home yesterday, how long was the television on?" Then they usually admit, "Well, maybe we're just using our time in the wrong way."

I like this statement from Elder Neal A. Maxwell of the Council of the Twelve:

With true perspective comes a sense of proportion about life. Proportion would help us with our priorities. For instance, clearly one would not forgo partaking of the sacrament because he is trying to lose weight, yet some neglect the scriptures because they are too busy minding the cares of the world. (Things As They Really Are [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1978], 5.)

"I guess we just don't have a strong enough testimony of reading scriptures together." This may be at the bottom of the whole problem. This fits with a very telling scripture in Mosiah: "And now because of their unbelief they could not understand the word of God; and their hearts were hardened." (Mosiah 26:3.) It also fits with this one from the Doctrine and Covenants: "And your minds in times past have been darkened because of unbelief, and because you have treated lightly the things you have received—Which vanity and unbelief have brought the whole church under condemnation." (D&C 84:54-55.)

There is a divine purpose behind our having family scripture study. If we can become convinced of that spiritually, if we can have testimonies of it, then we'll have enough strength to do it.

"It seems Satan doesn't want us to read the scriptures." He throws up obstacles in our path, and we let him. President Ezra Taft Benson said: "Children, support your parents in their efforts to have daily family scripture study. Pray for them as they pray for you. The adversary does not want scripture study to take place in our homes, and so he will create problems if he can. But we must persist." (Ensign, May 1986, 78.)

On one occasion I heard President Benson publicly say, "I don't think I've ever known a time when there was more contention in the Benson household than when we tried to get everybody together for scripture reading."

Those who have tried to read scriptures as a family know that that is all too true—which is a great witness to me that such a practice is extremely important. Otherwise, why would Satan invest that kind of effort in trying to dissuade us from doing it? (But we must also remember the promise of the prophets: if we persist, the contention will melt away and the influence of the Spirit of the Lord will increase.)

"I suspect that one of the reasons we don't read is that we have too much pride." Sometimes parents say, "Well, my children know more than I do. They've been to seminary. If we read scriptures together, I'll be embarrassed because they know twice as much as I do." My answer to that is this: I guess Dad and Mom will just have to humble themselves, admit their weakness, and learn from their children.

The Problem of Pride

There is another form of pride that keeps us from doing what's right. Surprisingly, some people don't do what the prophet or the Lord asks because they want to choose their own way without others telling them what to do. That kind of pride will keep us from the Lord's kingdom—and, unfortunately, it can hurt our families as well.

I am sobered by these words of the Lord:

And that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men, and because of the tradition of their fathers.

But I have commanded you to bring up your children in light and truth. (D&C 93:39-40.)

I am convinced that one of the prerequisites to our being able to bring up our children in light and truth is for us, as fathers and mothers, to humble ourselves. We need to turn our hearts and our minds over to God, letting him guide us in all we do. If we will humble ourselves and set aside our pride, we will then know that our own wisdom, our own judgments, our own priorities must be placed in a secondary position to those of the Lord.

"My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord." (Isa. 55:8.) Those who follow the Lord's ways, letting him establish their path and their pattern in life, are able to find success and blessings for themselves and their families.

To submit in this way is to reject pride and to walk in humility and obedience before the Lord—which is the path that will bring us to his promises.

Age-Old Excuses

The obstacles that prevent us from reading scriptures as a family are not new. In fact, families have probably been facing these issues (or variations of them) as long as there have been printed scriptures.

Nearly one hundred years ago, Elder Abraham O. Woodruff of the Council of the Twelve gave this motivating testimony of reading scriptures as a family. Note the obstacles he mentions—and the promised blessings:

We are such a busy lot of people that we do not appear to have time to serve the Lord. . . . At least, we do not take time to serve the Lord. A short time ago I went into the home of Brother Wm. H. Seegmiller, president of the Sevier Stake of Zion, and I was very much impressed with the beautiful practice he has in his home at their devotional exercises. When we got up in the morning we were invited into his parlor, and there one of his daughters played the organ, and we all sang a hymn; then one of the members of the family read a chapter from the Book of Mormon, at the close of which we engaged in prayer. Altogether it took us about twenty minutes or half an hour, and there was a beautiful spirit in that home by reason of this practice.

I thought to myself, what a glorious thing it would be if all the Saints of God would take half an hour every morning to serve Him in this way, and thus assist in setting their own houses in order. . . . The chapter read from the Book of Mormon, or from the Doctrine and Covenants, or from the Bible, would be with us during the day, and our reflections would be upon that which it contained. I believe that the men and women in Israel who take time to do this will succeed in saving their sons and daughters; for such a practice cannot help but have a remarkably good influence upon the children.

But we say we have not time, or we cannot get our families together. Where that is the case, we ought to begin to educate ourselves to carry out this plan, in order to fit and qualify ourselves for something better and greater. . . .

I wish it were the daily practice in every home of the Saints of God. If it were, we would be a much more faithful people than we are today. (Conference Report, Oct. 1901, 14.)

One Family's Success

I have some friends who for many years were sporadic in having scripture reading with their children. They would do it for a while; then they'd quit. Then they'd start, and then they'd quit again. They would let obstacles get in their way. Their older sons grew up and got married, but they still had two daughters at home. Finally they got on track and began to consistently read with their family, day in and day out, without fail. Here is a set of letters they wrote me about their success:

The mother: "After a recent general conference, my husband and I talked about how we could start, once again, to have family scripture study on a regular basis. Conference had pricked our consciences—maybe I should say pierced them—and we knew it was the thing we should do. We decided to present the idea to our two daughters, one Primary age at the time and one a teenager, at our next family home evening. I was worried about how the girls were going to accept our proposal. One wasn't too fond of scripture reading, and both hated to get up early.

"We fasted and prayed to try to invite the Spirit to witness that what we were going to say was true. We also used the scriptures and quotes from President Benson's conference talk.

"I'm pleased to say that it went beautifully. We expressed our love to the girls, to our Father in Heaven, and the Savior. We told them we needed to repent of not having more consistent scripture study in our home. The Spirit that was there touched their hearts, and ours, as we bore testimony to the truthfulness of what we had said. The girls agreed, and we're now having scripture study early in the morning each day.

"We read very slowly and discuss each verse, looking at how we can apply it in our lives. That is an important key. We're also trying very hard to have the Spirit each time we read. We realize that without the Spirit there to bear witness, real learning and doing will not take place.

"Our scripture reading has brought into our home a wonderful spirit of peace and love that was not there before. Before, our girls would often argue, talk disrespectfully, or be inconsiderate. Now they do much better. I also find myself being more patient and considerate. More importantly, our testimonies are growing, and there's a great desire and effort to live the gospel."

The younger daughter, age twelve: "The night my mom and dad gave us a lesson on how they had strong feelings we should start family scripture study, I knew immediately they were right. My eyes were all watering, and I felt warm inside. The Spirit came so strong to me that night, I was afraid if I heard one more word about it, I would burst into tears. I was eager to begin.

"Everything went smoothly the morning we began. We started at 6:00 a.m. Each morning I would be more reluctant about getting up. I liked reading the scriptures; I just hated getting up in the morning. Although I'm reluctant, I still go with the best attitude I've ever had because I know it will save our family from the outside world, and I know it is right!"

The older daughter, age fifteen: "For family home evening, my mom and dad fasted and prayed for the Spirit. They told us they wanted to repent for lacking enough spirituality in our home and family. They said they wanted to start having scripture study, so we planned to start the next week. It was hard getting up that early, but I finally got used to it.

"We read a little and discuss it. It makes me feel really good the whole day. Everything seems to go much better. I didn't think I'd be ready for school on time because the scriptures took up part of my getting-ready time, but I'm finding now that I get up a little bit earlier, and it puts me in a happy mood for the whole day.

"I went home from school that first day feeling really good about the neat thing we had started. I'm grateful for it now, and I'm thankful it has happened. It makes each day better than it would otherwise be."

The father: "We do not force anyone to attend, although strong encouragement is given. We sing a hymn promptly at 6:00 a.m. An important element of our success is that we are studying and experiencing scripture reading together—we're not simply reading the Book of Mormon. We're not attempting to complete the reading of the book or even a chapter, but instead we're attempting to have close family togetherness while we read a few pages. We're trying to relate Nephi's family to our family—their pride to the pride in our family; their murmuring to our murmuring; their family contention to ours; their faith to ours; their testimony of the importance of records to our needs and circumstance; their goodly family to what we want to have. We don't just try to know what the verses mean, or how to use the footnotes and cross-references, but more importantly we want to know how it all relates to us. What does it mean anyway? What do we observe at school, at work, in our own lives and in the lives of others, that relates to what we're reading?

"We always close with a family prayer, a hug, and a kiss. We never go over twenty minutes. It doesn't matter if we read one verse or one chapter. The most important element is spending this time together, sharing and having Heavenly Father and his words with us. So far, we feel successful and optimistic.

"We know each day and each week will offer more challenges, but we feel that we will be up to them because we are united, and all of us are now in tune to the good things that are taking place in our lives and our family relationships. What a tremendous influence the scriptures are having on us. There is surely no question that it is never too late to begin scripture reading with your family."

As this family testifies, daily family scripture reading will change your life—and it will change the lives of your children as well.

We must not let the obstacles to family scripture study get in our way. The blessings are too important. The costs of failure are potentially too great. Let us resolve to be diligent in this family responsibility and opportunity. The Lord will bless us as we do. That is his promise.

"Our Greatest Challenge"

One Family's Experience

"Our greatest challenge is not just differing family schedules but continually changing family schedules. At times we have resorted to reward systems, such as computer time in trade for participation in family scripture time, but we discovered that the need for this extra motivation was short-lived.

"At first we would not hold scripture study if everyone did not come, but we quickly found this to be a mistake. Now we hold it regardless of who shows up, and most of the time everyone participates. We now have a precise starting time, but we anticipate that this may not always be the case. We know we will always have to adapt to new phases in family life.

"We find that it is still a real challenge to keep it up. It is still not a 'given thing,' but we have had some wonderful discussions about the gospel plan and the values that we hold dear. It definitely gives us a fortifying feeling to begin our day. We also feel that it has helped to curb our ADD (Attention Deficit Disorder) son's anger outbursts, and it gives us all a greater sense of family security and solidarity. As our thirteen-year-old son says, 'It's a lot easier not to do it, but our family seems happier and has less contention when we do.'"
