Gene R. Cook, Searching the Scriptures (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1997)

Chapter 15

Making It Work

I assume that by now you are convinced you ought to be reading the scriptures as a family. But how do you get started? How do you get off dead-center and get moving?

When we had a younger family we would read faithfully for a week or two, and then we would quit for a month. Then we'd suddenly wake up and say, "What have we been doing? We forgot scripture reading." We would start again and would go for a month straight with no misses. We'd all start thinking, "Finally, we've made this a tradition." Then we would go into a nose dive again for two more months.

I think many families have had this same experience. How do we get going and stay consistent? In this chapter I hope to give you some very practical ideas, gained from our experience and that of others, that will help you make family scripture reading a lifetime tradition.

Make the Commitment

In 1976 my wife and I were deeply touched by a man who preached, by the Spirit, of the importance of holding family scripture reading. We determined that very night that we would no longer fail to have regular scripture reading in our family. We agreed that we would do whatever it took to put that tradition in place in our home. We wanted to make scripture reading, joined with family prayer, as common to our children as having breakfast in the morning.

We decided to fast and pray about it, seeking help to approach it in the right way—and seeking the Lord's help in touching the hearts of our children. We also sought the Lord's help in preparing our own hearts. When we felt all was in readiness, we gathered our children together, bore testimony to them, and told them of the spirit we'd been feeling. We told them we wanted to repent of our neglect.

When our children heard our feelings, they were touched by the Spirit as well. They agreed, and we all committed, "We will begin."

From that day until this, more than twenty years have gone by. We have not read together every single day of that period—there have been days we have missed. But I am happy to say that such times have been rare. And I bear testimony that I know of no single thing that has blessed and changed my family more. I will forever be thankful for the impression that came that day that convinced my wife and me that we must act and not hold back any longer.

Making a firm commitment—that is the first step.

When to Do It

When is the best time to read scriptures as a family? The answer to that question is actually quite simple: the best time is the time that works best for you. Of course, that varies from family to family. I have seen some families do it successfully at night. For us, mornings have worked best—in the evening too many of our older children are gone. But who's not at home at six or six-thirty in the morning?

In some areas, teenagers may have to get up very early to attend early morning seminary. If that's your situation, you may need to hold your reading in two sessions—perhaps one early, with Mom and Dad and teenagers, and another session later, with Mom and the younger kids.

Another nice thing about reading in the morning is that everyone is making a sacrifice together. You have to get up earlier than you probably otherwise would. You may all feel a little tired, and it may take a little work to get everyone going—but it starts your day off on the right foot. If you can have a spiritual experience together in the morning, and then launch the whole family off to school, to work, or wherever else they need to go, you've made a big difference in their day.

I had to smile at one of my older boys when he was getting ready to go on a mission, after years of getting up at 6:00 a.m. for family scripture reading. "I can hardly wait to get into the mission field," he said.

"Why is that?" I asked.

"So I can sleep in," he said. Arising at 6:30 a.m. was the mission rule at that time.

I think getting our children up in the morning teaches them how to get going early in the day, and the discipline of that may teach them some great lessons in addition to the actual practice of scripture reading.

But, again, there is no best time of day for all people. Choose the time that is best for you, so that you can bless and strengthen your family on a daily basis.

If you simply cannot find a time to read together, read this impressive statement by President John Taylor, and let it build in you a spirit of repentance.

We frequently think a little more of a nice span of horses, or a nice wagon, or a favorite cow, and such things, than we do of God's work, as our boys sometimes get attached to a few marbles thinking that they are everything. They do not like to leave their marbles to obey father or mother, and God finds us about the same. We get a few dollars, or a farm, and a little stock, and a few other things, and we cannot afford to neglect these. We cannot afford to take time to pray, nor to listen to the voice of Father, we are so busy playing marbles. . . . We are here to build up Zion, and to establish the kingdom of God. (Journal of Discourses, 22:219-20.)

Getting the Children to Come

If you're reading in the morning, how do you get the children up? We have tried all sorts of things. We've tried waking them by singing to them. We've tried tickling them. (Not always the best idea, to tickle a sleeping child who doesn't want to be disturbed.) We've tried dragging them. (Not ever a good idea—it just causes resentment, and it doesn't work anyway.) We've tried rewarding them. (Usually doesn't work in the long term.) We've tried punishing them. (More resentment.) We've tried the guilt routine, saying at breakfast, "Well, where were you? We sure missed you this morning." (This makes the parent the sheriff or the enforcer, and it doesn't work in the long run.)

If those things don't work, what does?

We have used one approach for some time that has worked quite well with our younger children. This was suggested by our eleven-year-old daughter. "Dad, I know what you should do if the other kids don't come to scripture reading. If they can't get up they must be too tired. So they must be getting to bed too late. Maybe if they miss scriptures in the morning they should have to go to bed an hour earlier that night. That will help them be ready to go the next morning."

It was a simple approach, but it has helped us motivate our younger children to get up and join us for our early morning reading.

Motivation from Within

One problem with that approach, and with all the others that don't work, is that they provide a motivation that is external to the children. Much better is to come up with a motivation that works from inside the child.

One way to do that is to have a private interview with each child. Take him or her off alone with Dad and Mom and have a little talk. "How are you feeling about our scripture reading? How could we do better? What would you do differently?" Encourage your child to share his or her true feelings and to give honest suggestions.

Sometimes you will need to fast and pray for solutions. Once, early on, my wife fasted rather fervently for one of our daughters, who was struggling to join us consistently for scripture reading. But that wasn't all—she convinced the daughter to join her in the fast. That made all the difference.

"Why Don't We Pray Together?"

It can also help to have a private prayer of a parent with a child. Many times if you will pray to the Lord with your child, kneeling side by side and asking for strength and help in behalf of the struggling child, that experience alone will be enough to motivate the child to do better.

Once one of our teenage sons skipped two or three mornings in a row, and my wife and I were anxious about what to do. One morning when he wasn't there I had something very important I needed to talk to the family about. I remember feeling a little angry. "Why isn't he here? Let's go get him." I was tempted to march down the stairs, wake him up, and get him on his way to our scripture reading. Fortunately, I contained myself and didn't do it.

When he came up for breakfast, I felt touched spiritually to take him off alone to visit with him for a moment. (I'll just call him John.) I took him by the arm and we went together into the bedroom. I said, "John, I know you must really be concerned about something. You're worried aren't you?"

"Well, I am kind of worried about some things at school, Dad," he said.

"Why don't we pray together before you go?" We knelt down together, and I offered a prayer asking the Lord to bless my son and asking that he would remove his doubts and fears, replacing them with faith. I prayed that my son would really begin to pray without ceasing through the day, that he would pray for the Lord to bless him that things would work out in his life.

After we finished, he offered a prayer. When we stood up, there was a great feeling of love between us. I told him I loved him and hoped he would have a good day. He took off for school. Not a word was mentioned about scripture study.

His mother reported that when he came back that afternoon, the first thing he said was, "Mom, what can I do to help you?" He worked for her most of that afternoon. All evening he was in great spirits, getting along with the rest of the family very well. The next morning he was with us promptly at six o'clock for our scripture reading.

Again, not a single word had been said about his nonattendance, but something else more powerful had been done in showing love to him and in helping him feel the Spirit of the Lord. He knew what he was supposed to be doing. He didn't need to be told. And I was fortunate that at least on that occasion I had followed the impressions the Lord had given me.

Sharing Responsibility

Another solution we've tried that has worked very well was to simply place on the children the responsibility to be there at six o'clock in the morning. We bought every single child an alarm clock. One morning we bore testimony to them of the importance of scripture reading and of the Lord's desire that they join us. We said, "From here on out, Dad and Mom will not come to wake you up. We won't come down making noise or stirring around to wake you up. Whether you come or not will be up to you. You each have your clock. You'll need to be independent enough to set it for the right time and to get up and get going when it rings."

Some of the children have tested us by missing a day or two to see if we were going to intervene. When they saw that they truly were on their own, they have decided that they wanted to be there, and they have come.

Perhaps this approach would not work for all families, but it certainly has worked for us.

Finally, if we want our children to be self-motivated in attending scripture reading, we need to make sure it's good enough that they will want to be there. We need to make sure that we bring the Spirit into our homes for those minutes. We need to create a setting where they can come and bask in the love they feel there, where they won't want to miss the fun and the learning experience.

All of that is primarily the responsibility of the father and the mother. And if the parents can accomplish that, the children will want to come—and when they miss, they will feel sorry they missed. I bear testimony that that's true.

Caution: Don't Let the Gospel Be a Bargaining Chip

Sometimes parents are so intent on doing what's right with their children that they are unwise in their methods. I would like to issue a caution to parents: be careful that you never let the gospel or the Church be a source of conflict between you and your child. Don't let the Church or the gospel become some kind of a bargaining chip. If you do, it could do great damage to your child's testimony. Let me illustrate.

Once one of our sons began to miss scripture reading from time to time. Then he became upset at his dad and mom about something, and he announced, "I'm not even going to church." He was baiting us to say, "Well, son, you know you should go to church. You know better than that." We could have given him that talk, but would it have made any difference? No. He was trying to set up a power struggle with the Church in the middle. (Sometimes children will pick something that is sacred to you or means a lot to you and use it as a lever in the relationship, hoping to get their way in something. They know that they will thereby get your attention.)

We simply said, "You'll have to decide that, John. That's between you and the Lord."

"Okay, but I'm telling you, I'm not going to church."

"You'll just have to decide that, son. We're not discussing it. That's between you and the Lord. You go resolve it with him. You know what's right as well as we do. It's between you and him."

He stuck with his resolve for two consecutive Sundays, skipping out the first hour of the meeting to see what Dad and Mom would do. We did nothing. We just ignored his behavior and went on our way. When he saw that the gospel was not a bargaining chip, something he could use as a lever to get his way with us, he dropped it and returned to attending his meetings.

I repeat, do not let a gospel principle or the Church get between you and a child in some kind of a conflict. And that applies to scripture reading. Parents, be wise with how you deal with recalcitrant children.

Where to Read Together

Where is the best place to hold family scripture reading? Some families have done it around the parents' bed; some have done it on the floor; some have done it at the breakfast table or perhaps the supper table. Some have done it at the table before any food has been served. Some have done it on the couch, snuggled in a blanket.

In our family, we've found it difficult to have a good study time if we're eating. It's hard to concentrate. You can't mark your books. You might get them dirty.

We have also found it difficult to have a good study time if family members are lounging on the floor or the bed—it's too hard to stay alert (especially at 6:00 a.m.)!

The key is to find a place that's conducive to learning, a place where everybody can be alert. Use the same place every day, and let it become sacred to you, a place where the Lord's Spirit can always be found. If you will do that, perhaps it doesn't matter where you are when you read.

What to Read

What should you read in scripture reading? Where should you start?

I strongly recommend that all families, particularly those with children, begin by reading the Book of Mormon. For the past twenty years we've spent most of our time in the Book of Mormon. Sometimes we've read the Doctrine and Covenants for a while, or the Bible, but we always end up in the Book of Mormon, because it was given as the instrument of conversion. If your objective is to try to convert your children to the Lord through the Spirit, I believe the Book of Mormon is by far the best way to do it. In addition, the Book of Mormon is usually easier for the littler ones to understand.

When we've read with children who are too young to read well, we've used the illustrated versions of the Book of Mormon.

Once when one of our boys was about five, I was holding him on my knee as I read to him from an illustrated Book of Mormon. After I had read the story about Nephi going into Jerusalem to get the brass plates, I thought I'd better check to see how well he understood it. "Son," I said, "tell me why you think Nephi had to go back into Jerusalem to get the plates."

He thought a minute, then said, "Well, Dad, I guess they didn't have anything else to eat on."

Oh no, I thought, what kind of a teacher are you? Here I had been talking about plates without even thinking that he was familiar with only one kind of plates!

Should We Read Through or Read by Topic?

Should we start at the beginning of the book and then read all the way through, or should we read by topics?

It's probably a good idea to do both. Perhaps you will want to begin at the beginning and start reading—and then when you come across a topic that's particularly interesting to your family, spend one or more days or weeks searching out that subject.

Over the years we have been reading, we've repeatedly come upon passages about the last days, and the children have sometimes said, "Dad and Mom, what's really going to happen in the last days before the Lord comes?"

Our response: "Shall we stop what we're reading and spend a number of sessions really studying the last days?"

"Yes, that's what we should do."

They have always been excited to do a topical study of things they are deeply interested in.

Whether you are reading in order or by topic, be sure to use the footnotes as you go along. They will help you teach the children how to use the footnotes, the Topical Guide, and the Bible Dictionary.

Applying the Scriptures to Your Family

I once had a man tell me, "Hey, I've always read for mileage." It was his goal to read ten pages every night, no matter what. Some families have a goal to read a whole chapter a day, no matter what.

In our home, we have taken a different approach. It's our plan to read for a given time, usually twenty-five or thirty minutes, and not worry about the number of pages. Usually we will read and discuss two or three or four or seven verses—and that's all. We are not reading for mileage.

We are also not very interested in whether or not our children know the names of the sons of Alma or the details of the wars. Instead, we're interested that they start having deep feelings in their hearts about Alma. And the best way we have found to do that (while also keeping it interesting, so they will want to come) is to read only a few verses, then stop. Tell a story about the verses. Bear your testimony about the principles. Apply the verses to your family.

I can't say that it is never appropriate to read through the scriptures as fast as you can. But it has never seemed appropriate for our family. If you are going to try to hear the voice of the Lord and have a spiritual experience, you need to ponder every word and every phrase while you're reading. Those who take such an approach learn much more than those who do not.

This, then, is the process that works for us: Read slowly, stop, apply the verses to your family. Use a lot of examples and illustrations your children will understand. If you do that, you won't cover a lot of pages per week, but you will probably touch hearts a lot more consistently.

Another valuable way to apply the scriptures is to bring personal problems and family problems to family scripture reading. I am not talking about making reading time a "gripe session." Instead, remind family members of the problem and say, "Children, how are we going to solve this difficulty in our family? What do the scriptures say?" Then spend some time looking up and sharing pertinent passages. This approach will breathe life into your scripture reading because everyone will be interested and concerned about the common problem, and you can search together for a common solution.

Having Variety in Family Scripture Reading

Variety in scripture reading is important, especially for younger children. We have tried a number of things to bring more variety to the experience, and I think each one has been valuable.

One thing we've tried is called "two-minute talks." In a two-minute talk, Dad or Mom can call on somebody and say, "John, please give us a two-minute talk on repentance." John will have a minute to collect his thoughts; then he has to stand up and bear his testimony and talk about repentance. "Okay, Mom, your turn. Humility, please. Two minutes." She has a minute to think, and then stands and begins to talk. Our two-minute talks are fun, and they put more life into our scripture reading experience.

Sometimes we have spent the whole time in a testimony meeting. That has been both fun and inspiring.

Sometimes we've had scripture chases to teach the children how to find things quickly in the various books of scripture. A nice side-effect: scripture chases wake everybody up in the morning.

Sometimes we spend our time memorizing. We have memorized the names of the books in the Bible, and we've memorized specific scriptures. This adds some variety to what we're doing, helps the children to be more alert, and at the same time teaches them some important things.

Sometimes we have spent the time sharing stories we like or sharing personal experiences, even if they are not directly related to the scriptures. Sometimes when I have come home from one of my trips the children will say, "Dad, tell us about what happened on the weekend." So I will give them a report of a special experience I had, or maybe I'll share with them the essence of a talk I gave. We may spend our entire scripture study time on such a report, with testimony, love, and some stories mingled into it.

Sometimes after the conference issue of the Ensign comes out, we stop reading the scriptures for a few weeks and read key general conference talks out loud to one another. Sometimes we assign one of the children to prepare a report on one of the talks. This enables us to hear the words of the living prophets as well as the ancient prophets.

Sometimes we have talked about other articles from the Church magazines, reviewing things that we feel are particularly pertinent or useful.

Sometimes when we have been pressed with a difficult day ahead, we've used our scripture study time to plan or schedule the day, or to listen to music. When the children were younger, on occasion we would even spend time marching around the house to loud music, just to wake everybody up.

Sometimes we will spend the time talking about important current events, which we will then relate to the gospel.

But even though we try to put some variety into our time together, we still spend most of the time (probably 90 percent) studying the scriptures. The variety helps to keep everyone interested—especially when children are younger—but don't forget to keep your focus on the scriptures.

Using Tapes and Picture Books

Another way to add variety to your reading, if you have younger children, is to use picture books and tapes. Here is one family's experience with these helpful tools:

Several years ago we were vacationing with friends who were living in Mexico. We were quite impressed when we witnessed first hand what they were able to accomplish spiritually with their children.

We participated with this sweet family every morning for a week in their early morning devotional and scripture study. They began with a song and ended with a family prayer. Because their children were young, their scripture study utilized Book of Mormon Stories and the accompanying tapes published and produced by the Church. Everyone listened to the tape and followed along with the pictures in the book. Sometimes they stopped the tape to have a discussion. Other times they had a discussion at the end of the "chapter." The pictures allowed the scriptures to come alive for the children. I think the discussion led by the parents was of the greatest value. The spirit that was in their home was so incredibly strong that we wanted that same spirit in our home.

When we returned home to our three young children, we dedicated ourselves to trying to duplicate what we had seen our friends do. Since our children were also very young, we purchased the audiocassettes and a separate copy of the scripture reader book for each member of the family, including Mom and Dad. We started with Book of Mormon Stories, then went to New Testament Stories and the others in the series. We did this for several years, rotating through each book of scripture stories.

Sometimes we would stop the tape in the middle and discuss what was happening. We would express our feelings about the faith of Nephi or the courage of Abinadi. Or we would bear our testimony about how we felt as we listened to the tape. Because each picture was referenced to a scripture, whenever we wanted to we could easily look up a verse or two in the actual text of the scriptures. We could then read and comment on it or underline it in our scriptures.

We found that by using the cassettes and pictures our small children were able to get a lot from the scriptures. We sometimes even discovered our children going over the pictures in the book on their own later in the day. Our years with the picture books made it easier for our children to start reading the actual text when they grew older.

Our youngest child, Andrew, is eight years younger than the rest of the children. By the time he began to participate with us in scripture reading, we were reading the actual text of the scriptures. But, for Andrew's sake, we went back to the pictures and cassette tapes. The older children didn't seem to mind that the content was directed to a younger set. They were able to participate in sharing their feelings with us and their younger brother.

We feel that understanding is more important than just getting done, so we have always spent time discussing what we read or listened to. Children need to hear how Mom and Dad feel about the scriptures and the gospel. Also, encouraging the children to ask questions helps them clarify and understand things on their own level.

Over the years we've had several Primary and Sunday School teachers comment to us that our children seemed to know the gospel and the scripture stories quite well. We attributed this to our family scripture study. More important, I feel our children love the Lord and feel the scriptures are a blessing in their lives.

Every family appears to have its ups and downs. It seems easier to have family scripture study during the school year when there is a daily routine in the kids' lives. But we have learned to take the scriptures on family vacations and read together then.

We can testify that the best times in our family, the times when we have felt the Spirit the most, are when we have been having family scripture study and family home evening. It has greatly influenced our family and our testimonies of the Savior.

"Our Rough Edges Are Smoothed"—A Success Story

As I have talked with people about family scripture reading, many have shared their successes with me. Here is an experience written by one sister whose family persisted through special challenges and succeeded in their efforts to be consistent in their scripture reading.

I believe that regular scripture study is one of the best things we can do for our families, even though it might be a struggle each time! An additional challenge our family has is that my husband is not a member of the Church and does not join us for scripture study or family prayer. Because of this, it has always been up to me to call our three daughters together for scripture study. (However, my husband has occasionally nudged us along. Since we have found the best time for our family is just before bedtime, if he wants to hurry everyone to bed he sometimes reminds us to get started, which I do appreciate!)

Even though I have always recognized the importance of scripture reading as a family, taking the time for it has always been my biggest challenge. Until the girls were ages seven, four, and three, our scripture study consisted mainly of occasionally telling scripture stories on Sunday and Wednesday nights. We were pretty successful with this for awhile.

Then President Benson gave us a challenge to read the Book of Mormon together on a regular basis. This really had an impact on me, and I felt we should follow the prophet. I talked to the girls, and they agreed to read the Book of Mormon together as a family during the year. Since they were not old enough to read along with me, at least not well, I would read to them each night. I must admit to sometimes putting the scriptures into my own words, occasionally leaving out "And it came to pass" and replacing it with "Then," and generally trying to make it more understandable. It was slow going, and with the girls misbehaving at times it was often discouraging, but luckily the Lord provided some immediate blessings to encourage us.

Blessings from the Lord

First, on the days we read scriptures, we noticed that the contention level around the house decreased dramatically. Even my girls noticed the difference. Another positive aspect of scripture reading was that it brought our day-to-day living to a more spiritual level. It gave us eternal perspective. It was interesting to see how much more often we would talk about spiritual things, even if it was just looking at a beautiful sunset or a rainbow and expressing how grateful we were to Heavenly Father for this beautiful world. There were also moments when we felt the Spirit very strongly as we read. With all these blessings, we reached our goal of reading the entire Book of Mormon that year and felt we had really accomplished something!

After that first year, we all had a stronger testimony of scripture reading. And with that experience as a foundation, I wish I could say that it became easier and less discouraging and that we have faithfully read the scriptures on a regular basis ever since. But, unfortunately, we still sometimes went for months on end without reading. It's amazing how quickly a few nights of not reading the scriptures turns into weeks and months. Usually, though, after listening to a conference talk or a speaker in sacrament meeting, we would get motivated and start again. How grateful I am that the Lord has patience and doesn't give up on us!

During the last four or five years we have been fairly regular in our studying, coupled with a family prayer at the end. We've missed a week or two here or there, but instead of making excuses or feeling guilty, we jump right back into it. Even though we rarely make our goal of reading seven nights a week, we do read the scriptures at least three to five times a week.

What Has Worked for Us

We have found that reading straight through the scriptures has worked best for us. Sometimes we read only a few verses. Other times we read several chapters. When my oldest daughter began seminary a few years ago, we decided to read the Doctrine and Covenants, which is what her class was studying. Later, however, we heard a conference talk that said we should be reading the Book of Mormon with our families every day. So we decided we would do both.

Unfortunately, it didn't work. The girls complained they couldn't keep the books straight. So we went back to reading the Book of Mormon. As a result, we haven't done much family reading in other books of scripture, but I'm holding fast to the prophet's promise that our family will be blessed as we continue to read the Book of Mormon.

We've also discovered that our daughters are too competitive to take turns reading in the same night. Trying to go around in a circle only made the girl who was reading complain that her verse was too long or two short, or it made her sisters complain that she was reading too slow or too fast. In addition, they were so busy trying to keep track of their next scripture that they weren't listening to what was being read.

About a year ago they asked if I would read while they listened and followed along. They said that when they read aloud they were so busy concentrating on pronouncing words correctly that they didn't understand what they had just read. So that is what we do now. They seem to understand it better, and we've had some wonderful gospel discussions relating to what we're reading. They've asked great questions, which shows they are listening. Sometimes the best moments come when I ask them to relate how the passage can apply to their lives, or to share a personal experience with the gospel principle we are studying.

Sometimes as we are reading, the girls will ask a gospel question that doesn't relate to what we are reading. Depending on the question, I ask them to wait until we are finished reading to discuss it, or if it seems particularly important, we stop and discuss it right then. Of course, those wonderful gospel discussions don't happen often.

More commonly, I'm afraid, one of the girls asks us to hurry, saying she has to finish her homework or make a phone call, and her barely concealed impatience makes it hard to have a quality scripture time. But I have to keep reminding myself that the good experiences would never have happened if we hadn't been reading, so we keep trying.

Is It Worth It?

When the girls are especially giggly or are pretending to sleep or are reluctant to take the time to read, I sometimes ask myself: "Is it worth the effort?" The answer is YES! I feel that each time we read the scriptures it has a positive effect on my children, whether they are aware of it or not. A couple of my daughters have even started reading scriptures on their own each night, in addition to our family scripture study. Each one has told me privately, "Mom, I just can't sleep until I've done my reading." How grateful I am that the habit of regular study has influenced their lives! I've seen it in the choices they've made, the friends they have, and the sincere repenting they've done when mistakes have been made.

Regular scripture reading reminds me of the beautifully rounded, smooth stones that can be found in the Northwest, where we have many streams, rivers, and ocean beaches. As a child, I loved picking them up and collecting them. I marveled at how, through eons of time, the gentle, constant action of the waves could take away the rough edges and make them so beautifully rounded and smooth. That is how I feel the scriptures work on us. It is my testimony that through the constant, gentle action of reading and studying them, our rough edges are smoothed away, we become well-rounded in the gospel, and our souls become more beautiful, more like our Savior, Jesus Christ.

"They Learned the Language of the Scriptures"

One Family's Experience

"Our desire for our children was to instill within them the same love for the scriptures we have and to teach them how to go to the scriptures for answers to life's questions.

"We started studying as a family when our children were babies. We used illustrated versions of the standard works and told them the stories as we explained the pictures. By the time they were three or four, they each had their own set of scriptures. They would sit on our laps and, when it was their turn, we would read a verse while they repeated after us. In this way they learned the language of the scriptures and learned to relate them to the stories they heard in Primary. We had a goal that both our children would complete the Book of Mormon before their baptisms, which they both accomplished.

"Later, we changed our format. We would have one child read a few verses, then would ask another family member to explain it or 'liken it unto us.' We also tried taking turns reading and explaining favorite verses instead of reading verse by verse. Another approach we tried was having each person choose a scripture hero and use the scriptures to explain that hero's qualities. For even more variety, we have followed the footnote trails and have studied by subjects, marking as we've gone along. At other times we simply read verse by verse. We have found that occasional variety is a key to keeping our children excited about family scripture study. Our next phase of study will be to search during the week for scriptures that relate to our family home evening lesson."
