Gene R. Cook, Searching the Scriptures (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1997)

Chapter 17

Bringing the Spirit to Your Time Together

One of a parent's greatest challenges in scripture reading is to make sure that the Spirit is present in abundance. But we don't have to just hope. There are things we can do that will help us to consistently have the Spirit of the Lord in our homes, especially during scripture reading time. And if we have that Spirit, both the parents and children can be touched, blessed, and changed—and each family member can be strengthened every day we read the words of the Lord together.

This chapter, then, focuses on seven scriptural performances (see Alma 31:10) that, if humbly employed, will immediately invite the Spirit into your heart and the hearts of your children. We have talked about many of these in another context elsewhere in the book, but share them here in the context of bringing the Spirit into your home.

Pray for the Spirit. Pray in the beginning of your scripture reading; pray at the end of your scripture reading; and ask each family member to maintain a prayerful heart while you are reading together.

I remember once while we were reading together there was a spirit of contention in the room. After putting up with it for about five minutes, my wife and I finally said, "Hey, this isn't working. Come on, family, let's kneel down again, and this time let's really pray to the Lord." Just that simple act of humbling ourselves and asking for the Spirit brought it into our home—and brought a blessing that otherwise would have been lost.

All your prayers don't have to be formal, kneeling prayers, of course. If one of your children creates problems during scripture reading, pray silently in your heart for him or her. That has real power, and the results will be readily apparent.

At the same time, pray for understanding. As the Lord said to the Nephites:

I perceive that ye are weak, that ye cannot understand all my words which I am commanded of the Father to speak unto you at this time.

Therefore, go ye unto your homes, and ponder upon the things which I have said, and ask of the Father, in my name, that ye may understand, and prepare your minds for the morrow, and I come unto you again. (3 Ne. 17:2-3.)

As we have emphasized, the scriptures are the words of the Lord to us, and the Spirit of the Lord will speak through them to all, young and old. (See 2 Ne. 32:3; Alma 31:5; D&C 32:4.) If you want to have the Spirit of the Lord in your family gathering to read the scriptures, use the scriptures. That is not as paradoxical as it sounds. If a problem comes up, specifically relate it to a passage in the scriptures. It is always a blessing if you can apply a particular passage to a specific difficulty or to something that is happening at that very moment in your family.

This suggestion falls under the category of "When all else fails, read the instructions." The scriptures truly are the Lord's instructions to us, and he will bless us as we seek to use them in specific ways to bless our families.

I find the account in Alma to be a great motivation to use this principle:

And now, as the preaching of the word had a great tendency to lead the people to do that which was just—yea, it had had more powerful effect upon the minds of the people than the sword, or anything else, which had happened unto them—therefore Alma thought it was expedient that they should try the virtue of the word of God. (Alma 31:5.)

I don't believe we have ever read the scriptures together without sharing testimony. Parents, testify constantly. Teach and then testify. Testimony is what will carry your words to the hearts of your children. (See 2 Ne. 33:1.) Remember the experience I had with President Joseph Fielding Smith—his testimony blessed me that day, and it continues to bless me to this day. You can provide such a blessing to your children as well.

When Alma left the judgment seat, he went forth to teach and to reclaim his people.

And this he did that he himself might go forth among his people, or among the people of Nephi, that he might preach the word of God unto them, to stir them up in remembrance of their duty, and that he might pull down, by the word of God, all the pride and craftiness and all the contentions which were among his people, seeing no way that he might reclaim them save it were in bearing down in pure testimony against them. (Alma 4:19.)

In the chapter that follows, we have the words he taught and testified among the people on that occasion. His testimony is itself a profound witness of the power of testifying:

I am commanded to stand and testify unto this people the things which have been spoken by our fathers concerning the things which are to come.

And this is not all. Do ye not suppose that I know of these things myself? Behold, I testify unto you that I do know that these things whereof I have spoken are true. And how do ye suppose that I know of their surety?

Behold, I say unto you they are made known unto me by the Holy Spirit of God. Behold, I have fasted and prayed many days that I might know these things of myself. And now I do know of myself that they are true; for the Lord God hath made them manifest unto me by his Holy Spirit; and this is the spirit of revelation which is in me.

And moreover, I say unto you that it has thus been revealed unto me, that the words which have been spoken by our fathers are true, even so according to the spirit of prophecy which is in me, which is also by the manifestation of the Spirit of God.

I say unto you, that I know of myself that whatsoever I shall say unto you, concerning that which is to come, is true; and I say unto you, that I know that Jesus Christ shall come, yea, the Son, the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace, and mercy, and truth. And behold, it is he that cometh to take away the sins of the world, yea, the sins of every man who steadfastly believeth on his name. (Alma 5:44-48.)

Music will bring the Spirit of the Lord very quickly. Sometimes early in the mornings we play some beautiful music on a cassette and let it resound through our home at scripture reading time, and that has worked wonderfully well. In addition, as a matter of course, we sing the hymns of Zion and Primary songs. These things do much to help bring the Spirit of the Lord.

As we get ready for family prayer, we have found that the Primary songs are particularly powerful—they're easy, they're short, and they have a clear and important message. Plus, little children usually know them (and adults can learn)!

Paul wrote in counsel to the Colossians,

Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. (Col. 3:16.)

And in our day the Lord said,

For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads. (D&C 25:12.)

If you want to bring the Spirit into your scripture study, express love to God, in front of your family, and to man, meaning to your wife and your children. Do it humbly and sincerely, and the Spirit of the Lord will immediately come.

When Nephi was experiencing his wonderful vision of the tree of life, the angel explained that the tree "is the love of God, which sheddeth itself abroad in the hearts of the children of men; wherefore, it is the most desirable above all things. . . . Yea, and the most joyous to the soul." (1 Ne. 11:22-23.) (And what led to that love, represented by the tree? The word of God, which was represented by the rod of iron!)

When we can sincerely offer love to our children, they will be drawn to us, and the Spirit of the Lord will be present. After all, we are offering something that, in its perfect form, "is the most desirable above all things" and "the most joyous to the soul."

As appropriate, be quick to share a spiritual experience that applies to something you have just read. If you use spiritual examples from your own life, you will invite the Spirit into your home and will help bring about the conversion of all present.

We see a classic example of this principle—and its power—in Paul's testimony to King Agrippa:

My manner of life from my youth, which was at the first among mine own nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews;

Which knew me from the beginning, if they would testify, that after the most straitest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee. . . .

I verily thought with myself, that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.

Which thing I also did in Jerusalem: and many of the saints did I shut up in prison, having received authority from the chief priests; and when they were put to death, I gave my voice against them. . . .

Whereupon as I went to Damascus with authority and commission from the chief priests,

At midday, O king, I saw in the way a light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun, shining round about me and them which journeyed with me.

And when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking unto me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.

And I said, Who art thou, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.

But rise, and stand upon thy feet: for I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness both of these things which thou hast seen, and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee. . . .

Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things than those which the prophets and Moses did say should come:

That Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead, and should shew light unto the people, and to the Gentiles. . . .

King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou believest.

Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian. (Acts 26:4-5, 9-10, 12-16, 22-23, 27-28.)

It may be that one or more members of your family is earnestly struggling to understand. Maybe his faith is a little weak. Maybe she doesn't like getting up in the morning. Whatever the problem, it may be appropriate to provide a priesthood blessing to that individual. As you do, it will help him or her receive the Spirit of the Lord—which will bless the family as a whole and enrich your scripture reading experience.

"In the ordinances" of the priesthood, the Lord said, "the power of godliness is manifest." (D&C 84:20.)

A Pattern for Hearing the Voice of the Lord, Applied to Families

In Part 2 we discussed a pattern for hearing the voice of the Lord, applied to our individual scripture studies. How might a family work together to try to apply that pattern? Let's review it here to see how it can work in a family setting:

As I said earlier, this process is simple. A child can do every one of these things. And once he learns how, he will then begin to follow this pattern in his own reading, and he'll begin to more frequently hear the voice of the Lord giving instruction to him.

I testify again that one of the primary purposes of the scriptures is to help us learn to hear the voice of the Lord. What a blessing to our children if we will help them in this process! If we will let this be one of the major goals of our family scripture reading, we will reap great rewards—and our children will be blessed every day of their lives.

"Why We Love the Scriptures"— One Family's Testimony

We have shared a number of encouraging success stories and testimonies in this book. Each one gives yet another witness of the blessings that come from family scripture study. Here is one final story as we conclude:

We knew for years we should be having regular family scripture study. But we have been thrilled and amazed at the blessings that began to come once we decided that we would be absolutely consistent—and followed through.

When we truly became serious about scripture reading, our youngest daughter, Amy, was five years old and in kindergarten. Although she was just learning how to read, she always wanted to read at least one verse. Generally we would give her an easy verse—but still the older children groaned at the mispronunciations and frustrating pace. Finally she began to privately study the "Scripture Reader" Doctrine and Covenants. Amy greatly enjoyed reading the few lines of text and looking at the pictures, and she would come into our bedroom almost nightly to read her "Doctor and Covenants," as she called it.

As she read the "Doctor and Covenants," she developed a love for the Prophet Joseph Smith and felt genuinely hurt when she read about the mean things people did to him. She couldn't imagine anyone not loving the prophet as much as she did. Naturally, her comprehension and reading skills vastly improved as she read her now well-used scripture book. We were amazed at how quickly she caught on and was reading big words like Nauvoo, priesthood, and Melchizedek. She soon did not require help with very many words and became an outstanding reader in her kindergarten class.

Now, as a second grader, she is way ahead of her class in reading. She prizes her leather quad (a hand-me-down from Dad). She is anxious to look up scriptures (with a little help) and read along with the speakers in sacrament meeting. Her testimony is growing without "compulsory means."

The next older daughter, Allison, really surprised us with her dedication to the scriptures. Unbeknown to us, Allison (age eleven) had set a goal for the "Gospel in Action" award to read the scriptures daily for a month. In the summer of 1994 we went backpacking with two other families. Considering Allison's size and age, we thought she could carry her "needed" clothing, sleeping bag, sleeping pad, and maybe a few light things like packages of oatmeal, hot cocoa, and trail mix. The first evening, after supper, we decided to have a little program. Someone asked, "Did anyone remember to bring your scriptures?" Allison said, "I did!" and she ran to get them out of her pack. When she returned with her quad, we were all very surprised—but she was determined to keep her goal of reading the scriptures daily, even while backpacking. We were grateful Allison had remembered to bring her scriptures, and we used them every evening for our programs.

Our oldest child, Brian, is now in high school. In spite of his heavy load of homework, we often "catch him" reading scriptures late at night. It is a great comfort to know that the children look to the scriptures as a source of strength and guidance.

When Brian was a freshman, he resolved to reach the goal of Master Scriptorian in seminary. He constantly carried his scripture cards with him and worked on memorizing the twenty-five scriptures required for the program. He took advantage of the commute to and from school, memorizing scriptures on the bus. He carried his cards with him as he delivered newspapers and memorized as he worked. When the Varsity Scouts went on a horseback riding trip, Brian carried his scripture cards with him on the horse and memorized as they were riding along. As our family watched general conference that October, Brian recognized many of the scriptures the General Authorities were quoting in their talks and recited them along with the speaker. He reached his goal that year and has every year since.

It hasn't been easy. We have to get up at 5:45 a.m. so we can read before Brian leaves for seminary. But it is a nice way to start the day—we're together as a family, we read the Book of Mormon, and we have the blessing of a family prayer before we all go our separate ways for the day. Something important seems missing when we don't start our days this way. We are so grateful for the scriptures and the opportunities they give us to grow as a family.

"I Got a Warm Feeling"

The Testimony of a Young Boy

"My name is Michael. I am eight years old. I read the Book of Mormon with my family. We read the promise. I prayed one night and I woke up in the night and remembered the Book of Mormon and I got a warm feeling about it that it was true."

Preparing to Receive and Teach by the Spirit

The following is a summary of the suggestions in this chapter that will help you prepare yourself to teach by the Spirit—and at the same time prepare your family members to receive by that same Spirit.
