Gene R. Cook, Searching the Scriptures (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1997)

Chapter 18

A Challenge and a Testimony

In this book we have shared many ideas and many testimonies about reading the scriptures. Now what ought we to do?

First, if you, as parents, are not consistently having family scripture study, I strongly recommend that you decide now to make regular scripture study a tradition in your family. If you are having regular family study, I recommend that you resolve today to make it an experience that's even better, even more consistent, even more meaningful, even more spiritual.

Next, talk to your family in a spirit of humility, and touch each one spiritually so that they all commit to join you in that new tradition. (Remember the discussion in chapter 16 about how to invite the Spirit into your family meetings.)

Third, make the spiritual sacrifice to invite and maintain the Spirit of the Lord in your family meetings. Be sure to create a spiritual setting that will drive all contention from your scripture reading experience.

If you do these things, I bear testimony to you that you will receive the fruits of the Spirit in your home—namely, peace, joy, harmony, love, kindness, and the other fruits we all so much desire.

Many years ago we had a lot of little boys in our family. When they asked their mom what she wanted for her birthday or Christmas, she always answered the same: "Peace and harmony." One Christmas we gave her some peas and hominy.

I wondered if we would ever see the day when we would have the real thing on a consistent basis, when we would have true peace and harmony. But I bear testimony that it did come, and it came through our practice of having family scripture reading and family prayer. As you persist in this endeavor, you will enjoy the same blessing. You will gradually remove all contention from your home, and the Spirit of the Lord will reside there.

The Testimony of Prophets

I am so grateful for the Lord's promises as they are given us through his prophets. Here are some most valuable promises given to us through our latter-day prophets:

President Ezra Taft Benson

Now in the authority of the sacred priesthood in me vested, I invoke my blessing upon the Latter-day Saints. . . . I bless you with increased understanding of the Book of Mormon. I promise you that from this moment forward, if we will daily sup from its pages and abide by its precepts, God will pour out upon each child of Zion and the Church a blessing hitherto unknown. (Ensign, May 1986, 78.)

Elder Marion G. Romney

I feel certain that if in our homes, parents will read from the Book of Mormon prayerfully and regularly, both by themselves and with their children, the spirit of that great book will come to permeate our homes and all who dwell therein. The spirit of reverence will increase. Mutual respect and consideration for each other will grow. The spirit of contention will depart. Parents will counsel their children in greater love and wisdom. Children will be more responsive and submissive to that counsel. Righteousness will increase. Faith, hope, and charity, the pure love of Christ will abound in our homes and in our lives, bringing in their wake, peace, joy, and happiness. (Conference Report, April 1960, 112-13.)

President Spencer W. Kimball

Our children may learn the lessons of life through the perseverance and personal strength of Nephi; the godliness of the three Nephites; the faith of Abraham; the power of Moses; the deception and perfidy of Ananias; the courage even to death of the unresisting Ammonites; the unassailable faith of the Lamanite mothers transmitted down through their sons, so powerful that it saved Helaman's striplings. . . . One would surely be blind who could not learn to live life properly by such reading. . . .

Scripture study as individuals and as a family is most fundamental to learning the gospel. Daily reading of the scriptures and discussing them together has long been suggested as a powerful tool against ignorance and the temptations of Satan. This practice will produce great happiness and will help family members love the Lord and his goodness. (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 132-33, 129.)

President Howard W. Hunter

Scriptures contain the record of the self-revelation of God, and through them God speaks to man. . . . To understand requires more than casual reading or perusal—there must be concentrated study. It is certain that one who studies the scriptures every day accomplishes far more than one who devotes considerable time one day then lets days go by before continuing. . . .

There is nothing more helpful than prayer to open our understanding of the scriptures. Through prayer we can attune our minds to seek the answers to our searchings. . . . [I]f we will ask, seek, and knock, the Holy Spirit will guide our understanding if we are ready and eager to receive.

Families are greatly blessed when wise fathers and mothers bring their children about them, read from the pages of the scriptural library together, and then discuss freely the beautiful stories and thoughts according to the understanding of all. (Ensign, Nov. 1979, 64.)

President Gordon B. Hinckley

I love our scriptures. I love these wonderful volumes, which set forth the word of the Lord . . . for the guidance of our Father's sons and daughters. I love to read the scriptures, and I try to do so consistently and repeatedly. I like to quote from them. . . . For me, the reading of the scriptures is not the pursuit of scholarship. Rather, it is a love affair with the word of the Lord and that of his prophets. They contain so much for each of us. . . .

Through reading the scriptures, we can gain the assurance of the Spirit that that which we read has come of God for the enlightenment, blessing, and joy of his children.

I urge our people everywhere to read the scriptures more—to study all of them together . . . for a harmony of understanding in order to bring their precepts into our lives.

May the Lord bless each of us to feast upon his holy word and to draw from it that strength, that peace, that knowledge "which passeth all understanding" (Philip. 4:7), as he has promised. (Ensign, Dec. 1985, 44, 45.)

My Testimony

I add my testimony to that of these great prophets. I declare to you that what they have said is true. I bear witness of the great benefits that come from searching the words of the Lord. I pray that you will have a righteous influence over every single one of your children and that you may have great joy in seeing them read their scriptures on their own each day. They will come to do this not because you've told them to, but because they have found for themselves the great power in the word of God. They will also have come to love his holy scriptures.

I bear witness that as we search and live by the words of God, in humility and in the spirit of prayer, we will come to hear the voice of the Lord, and we will receive the guidance, peace, revelation, and blessings we so much need in our lives.

I love the Lord's words. As I conclude my testimony and this book, I would like to leave you with twenty-five reasons why that is so. These put in capsule form why the scriptures mean so much to me.

Why I Love the Scriptures (25 Personal Reasons)

The Scriptures Give Revelation and Direction

The scriptures have:

The Scriptures Bring the Fruits of the Spirit

The scriptures have:

The Scriptures Are the Words of the Lord

The scriptures have:
