Monte S. Nyman, Farres H. Nyman, Words of the Twelve Prophets ( 1990)

2

The Eighth-Century Prophets

The kingdom of Northern Israel, also known as Ephraim, came to an end in the year 721 b.c. Hoshea, their last king, had become the puppet king of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, the world power. Because Hoshea failed to pay his tribute money and had conspired with So, the king of Egypt, Shalmaneser imprisoned Hoshea and besieged Samaria, the capital of Israel, for three years. Many of the surviving Israelites were carried back into Assyria (2 Kings 17:2-6). Shalmaneser then brought people from Babylon and other Gentile nations to inhabit the land (2 Kings 17:24). This was the beginning of the nation of the Samaritans.

The historical background of Israel's fall is recorded in 1 and 2 Kings. The actual fall is recorded in 2 Kings 17. While these chapters contain other incidents of historical or doctrinal interest, we will examine only those pertaining to Israel's downfall. Because these chapters are an abridgment of a more extensive record (see 2 Kings 10:34; 13:8, 12; 14:28; 15:11, 15, 21, 26, 31), they do not contain many details. However, they do lay the groundwork for an understanding of the Lord's involvement in Israel's fall. They illustrate the positive answer to the Lord's question to modern-day Israel, the Latter-day Saints: "Do I not hold the destinies of all the armies of the nations of the earth?" (D&C 17:6.) They further give the setting of the words or messages of the prophets of this time period.

The messages of the prophets are based upon principles determined by the Lord. Since the brief record of 1 and 2 Kings does not outline these principles, we must turn elsewhere to learn them. The Book of Mormon teaches three great principles that are applicable to the work and messages of the prophets of this time period. They are: (1) the Lord destroys a nation when it is ripened in iniquity; (2) the Lord never destroys a nation unless he first warns it by the prophets; and (3) the Lord leads the more righteous out before he destroys the nations of the wicked. These three principles warrant a close look in order to appreciate their value in relation to the prophets discussed in this book.

A Nation Ripened in Iniquity

In speaking of the inhabitants of the land of Canaan before the Lord brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, Nephi declared: "Behold, the Lord esteemeth all flesh in one; he that is righteous is favored of God. But behold, this people had rejected every word of God, and they were ripe in iniquity; and the fulness of the wrath of God was upon them; and the Lord did curse the land against them, and bless it unto our fathers; yea, he did curse it against them unto their destruction, and he did bless it unto our fathers unto their obtaining power over it" (1 Nephi 17:35).

The Bible confirms this principle. The Lord told Abram (Abraham) that the Amorites would not be driven out of the land that the Lord had given him until four hundred years hence because their iniquity was "not yet full" (Genesis 15:13-16). When Joshua entered the land of Canaan, the four hundred years' waiting time was fulfilled.

In the eighth century b.c., the nation of Israel was also ripe in iniquity and thus ready for destruction at the hands of the Lord. This is verified by the description in scripture of the leadership of the people. The record of 1 and 2 Kings lists nineteen kings of Israel. The abridger labels all nineteen of them as evil in the sight of the Lord. These kings ruled about two hundred and fifty years in total. By contrast, most of the kings of Judah during this same period were designated as doing right in the sight of the Lord (see the chart at the end of this chapter). The Lord has revealed that "when the wicked rule the people mourn" (D&C 98:9; Proverbs 29:2). Further, in the words of Mosiah, "the sins of many people have been caused by the iniquities of their kings" (Mosiah 29:31; see also 29:17 and 23:9).

That the people followed the examples of their evil kings is testified of in the summation in 2 Kings 17 of why Israel fell: the children of Israel sinned against the Lord their God. They walked in the statutes of the heathens, whom the Lord cast out before the children of Israel. Furthermore, they secretly built high places for worship in all their cities and set up "images and groves in every high hill, and under every green tree." They "burnt incense in all the high places, as did the heathen whom the Lord carried away before them." Therefore they "served idols," which the Lord had said they should not do (2 Kings 17:7-12). These abominations and iniquities of the kings and the people faced the prophets as they testified to Israel.

The Lord Warns by the Prophets

Speaking concerning the Jews, Nephi testified: "As one generation hath been destroyed among the Jews because of iniquity, even so have they been destroyed from generation to generation according to their iniquities; and never hath any of them been destroyed save it were foretold them by the prophets of the Lord" (2 Nephi 25:9).

The Lord followed this principle in dealing with the nations of Israel and Judah. The book of Kings records: "Yet the Lord testified against Israel, and against Judah, by all the prophets, and by all the seers, saying, Turn ye from your evil ways, and keep my command- ments and my statutes, according to all the law which I commanded your fathers, and which I sent to you by my servants the prophets" (2 Kings 17:13).

The text continues that Israel "would not hear, but hardened their necks," like "their fathers, that did not believe in the Lord their God. And they rejected his statutes, and his covenants that he made with their fathers, and his testimonies [of the prophets] which he testified against them" (2 Kings 17:14-15). They worshiped all the host of heaven and served the pagan god Baal, which included images of golden calves, temple prostitution in the groves, sacrifice of their children to the god Molech, divination, and enchantments. For these grievous sins, the nation of Israel was moved out of the Lord's sight. She was allowed to be afflicted and spoiled by the hand of Assyria. She had followed the sins of idolatry and priestcraft established by their first king, Jeroboam (2 Kings 17:20-24; compare 1 Kings 12:25-33). The Lord followed the principle taught by Mormon (Mormon 4:5)—the wicked (Israel) were punished by the wicked (Assyria). Only the nation of Judah was left in the promised land (2 Kings 17:14-18). Although she did not keep the commandments of the Lord as she should, she did keep the statutes or covenants she had made (2 Kings 17:19). She had not rejected the prophets as had Israel.

The book of 2 Kings mentions only one of the prophets whose writings have been preserved, that of Jonah, the son of Amittai (2 Kings 14:25; Jonah 1:1). The chronology chart in the Bible Dictionary contained in the LDS version of the King James edition of the Bible (1979) shows the traditional dating of the other prophets whose writings have been preserved. These would include Hosea, Joel, Amos, Isaiah, and Micah. Obadiah probably testified during this time also. There may have been others as well. Earlier chapters of 1 and 2 Kings refer to several prophets who testified to Israel but whose writings we do not have. Chief among these were Elijah (1 Kings 17 - 2 Kings 2) and Elisha (1 Kings 19:15-21; 2 Kings 2-13). Others mentioned include Ahijah, Iddo, and Shemaiah (1 Kings 11:29-39; 12:15; 14:2-16; 15:29; 2 Chronicles 9:29; 12:15). Either these prophets did not record their messages or through the loss of "plain and precious parts" they are no longer in our Bible (1 Nephi 13:23-29).

The Lord warned the people of Israel before they were destroyed. Many of the people were undoubtedly killed, but the Lord preserved others by removing them to another land (2 Kings 17:18, 23).

The Righteous Led into Precious Lands

Returning to Nephi's prophecy of the inhabitants of the land of Canaan at the time the Lord led Israel out of Egypt, we learn the third great principle concerning the destruction of the nation of Israel: "He raiseth up a righteous nation, and destroyeth the nations of the wicked. And he leadeth away the righteous into precious lands, and the wicked he destroyeth, and curseth the land unto them for their sakes" (1 Nephi 17:37-38).

The Lord led Israel into the land of Assyria and later took them into the land of the North. He also scattered them among all the nations of the earth. The prophets of the Old Testament not only foretold these events but also gave the reasons for this scattering and the promises of their latter-day gathering.

The removal of Israel had been prophesied "by all [the Lord's] servants the prophets" (2 Kings 17:23). There are two parts of those prophecies. First, the prophet Amos foretold that the Lord would not destroy all the house of Israel but would scatter them "among all nations" (Amos 9:8-9). This was apparently fulfilled at least partially as the ten tribes were taken into Assyria and the North. The other part of the prophecy was their going as a body into the North. In the Apocrypha, we read this interesting account of

the ten tribes which were led away from their own land into captivity in the days of King Hoshea, whom Shalmaneser the king of the Assyrians led captive; he took them across the river, and they were taken into another land. But they formed this plan for themselves, that they would leave the multitude of the nations and go to a more distant region, where mankind had never lived, that there at least they might keep their statutes which they had not kept in their own land. And they went in by the narrow passages of the Euphrates river. For at that time the Most High performed signs for them, and stopped the channels of the river until they had passed over. Through that region there was a long way to go, a journey of a year and a half; and that country is called Arzareth.

Then they dwelt there until the last times; and now, when they are about to come again, the Most High will stop the channels of the river again, so that they may be able to pass over. Therefore, you saw the multitude gathered together in peace. But those who are left of your people, who are found within my holy borders, shall be saved (2 Esdras 14:40-48).

The first part of the prophecies, their being scattered among all nations, is being constantly verified today through patriarchal blessings given to members of the Church as they are converted to the gospel from the many nations of the world. The second part of the prophecy, their going as a body into the North, is evidenced by the Savior's declaration to the Nephites that he was going to visit them in the meridian of time (3 Nephi 15:15; 16:1-3; 17:4).

Although it was among the plain and precious parts that were lost from the Old Testament, another prophecy was fulfilled when Assyria captured Northern Israel. The allegory of Zenos, retained for us in the Book of Mormon (Jacob 5), foretold the grafting of the Gentile branches into the trunk of the olive tree representing the house of Israel. This grafting was accomplished when the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon and other nations into Israel (2 Kings 17:24). These men intermarried with a remnant of Israel that was left behind, culminating this Gentile graft. The interesting account of the trouble these grafted nations had with lions sent by the Lord—which resulted in one of the priests being sent back from Assyria to teach them "how they should fear the Lord" (2 Kings 17:25-28)—shows how this merger was affected to produce the good fruit as prophesied in the allegory (Jacob 5:17- 8; compare John 4:27-42). The Lord works in mysterious ways to accomplish his design for his children.

That those taken into Assyria by the king were of the more righteous people of the northern Israelites is evidenced by the quotation from 2 Esdras above. These people were one of the branches of Israel planted in a nethermost part of the vineyard (Jacob 5:20). From them came the basis of the latter-day gathering.

Many of the prophets foretold the Lord's promise to restore a remnant of Israel in the latter days (for example, see Isaiah 1:9; 6:13; 10:20-22). This promise is being fulfilled today in the gathering of the blood of Israel from among the Gentiles and will be completed with the return of the ten tribes (2 Nephi 29:11-14; D&C 133:26-34). [^1] The righteous of Northern Israel were preserved so that the Lord may set his hand a second time to restore the preserved of Israel (Isaiah 11:11-12).

Conclusion

The eternal principles of the Lord are seen in his work with the nation of Israel in the eighth century b.c. When a nation is ripe in iniquity, the Lord will allow other nations of the earth to destroy even his covenant people. However, he will not allow this to happen unless he first forewarns them by his servants the prophets. Being destroyed as a nation does not imply the destruction of the entire population. The Lord will preserve the more righteous of the nation by leading them out of their wicked environment and scattering them or establishing them in another land. After this scattering, the Lord will gather their posterity and renew his covenant with them. Thus, the Lord does "hold the destinies of all the armies of the nations of the earth" (D&C 117:6).

Kings of Israel

Saul

David

Solomon

Kings of Label of the Label of the Northern Israel Book of Kings Kings of Judah Book of Kings Jeroboam (22)* Evil Rehoboam (17) Evil Abijam (3) Evil Asa (41) Right Nadab (2) Evil Baasha (24) Evil Elah (2) Evil Zimri (7 days) Omri (12) Evil Jehosophat (25) Right Ahab (22) Evil Ahaziah (2) Evil Jehoram or Joran (12) Evil Jehoram or Joram (8) Evil Ahaziah (1) Evil Athaliah (6) ? Jehu (28) Evil Joash or Jehoash (40) Right Jehoahaz (17) Evil Jehoash (16) Evil Amaziah (29) Right Jeroboam II (41) Evil Azariah (Uzziah) (52) Right Zachariah (6 months) Evil Menahem (10) EvilPekahiah (2) EvilPekah (20) Evil Jotham (16) Right Hoshea (9) Evil Ahaz (16) Evil Hezekiah (29) RightManasseh (55) EvilAmon (2) Evil Josiah (31) RightJehoahaz (3 months) ? Jehoiakim (11) Evil Jehoiachin (3 months) Evil Zedekiah (11) Evil722 - Assyrian Captivity 589 - Babylonian Captivity*number in brackets = years reigned based on biblical text

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The story is an allegory or parable symbolizing the relation existing between Jehovah and his people, Israel. This title, taken from The Voice of Israel's Prophets, by Dr. Sidney B. Sperry (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1952), is typical of the various books and chapters on Hosea.
