Monte S. Nyman, Farres H. Nyman, Words of the Twelve Prophets ( 1990)

3

Hosea—The Prophet of the Scattering and Gathering of Ephraim

The interest and the analysis of the book of Hosea has almost always focused on the strange marriage or marriages that it records. While the marriages are an interesting problem, to focus on them is to miss, in my opinion, the book's major message. For this reason, the title of this chapter focuses on the overall message rather than on such usual titles as "Hosea, Prophet of Love." [^1] An understanding of the message is enhanced by knowing the historical setting of the prophet's life.

The book's introduction or superscription [^2] indicates that Hosea lived "in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam, the son of Joash, king of Israel" (Hosea 1:1). The last year of Uzziah's reign is now fairly well agreed upon as being 740 b.c. Uzziah was appointed king of Israel in the twenty-seventh year of Jeroboam's forty-one year reign; therefore, Uzziah reigned only about fifteen years of his fifty-two- year reign while Jeroboam was king of Israel and about thirty-seven years after Jeroboam died. Since Hosea prophesied during Jeroboam's reign, we can determine that his ministry likely began by 777 b.c. by adding these thirty-seven years of Uzziah's reign following Jeroboam's death to 740 b.c. Since Hosea began his ministry during the fifteen years that Uzziah and Jeroboam both reigned, we can date the beginning of Hosea's ministry between 777 and 791 b.c. He therefore preceded but overlapped Isaiah's ministry, which began in the last year of Uzziah's reign and extended until the death of Hezekiah.

Hosea prophesied until during Hezekiah's reign as king of Judah. The death of Hezekiah is traditionally accepted as 697 b.c. Since Hezekiah reigned for twenty-nine years, he began about 726 b.c. Hosea would therefore have prophesied until after 726 b.c. From before 777 b.c. until after 726 b.c. totals more than fifty years. All of this fifty-year period was the era of great wickedness before the downfall of Northern Israel, to whom Hosea's message seems to be addressed. His account begins with his being commanded to marry a wife of whoredoms.

Hosea's Marriages and Children

The various interpretations of the marriage described in Hosea 1:2-3 have been well summarized by Dr. Sidney B. Sperry:

Views of capable commentators have been very diverse, but for convenience we may classify them under four heads:

Regardless of whether this is a literal account of Hosea's marriage, it is symbolic of the marriage of Jehovah to Israel, as an analysis of the text regarding the children of the marriage will illustrate. Perhaps it was both literal and symbolic, Hosea's marriage serving as an object lesson to Israel.

The first son born to Gomer and Hosea was named Jezreel by the Lord. The meaning of the name was to "avenge the blood of Jezreel" (Hosea 1:4) and symbolizes the destruction of Northern Israel, the ten and one-half tribes taken into captivity by Assyria. Jezreel was the prominent valley of Northern Israel where Jehu had killed the sons of Ahab, the wicked king of Israel (2 Kings 10:11).

While Ahab had served the pagan god Baal, God had used Jehu to punish him and his house for their wicked practices, but Jehu had not walked "in the law of the Lord God of Israel" and "departed not from the sins of Jeroboam" [^3] in worshiping Baal (2 Kings 10:30-31).

The worship of Baal included the sacrifice of little children, as well as other atrocities. The prophecy of Hosea represented in the first child of this marriage was, therefore, that Northern Israel was ripening in iniquity and would soon be destroyed.

This prophecy is Hosea's first prophecy of the scattering of Ephraim, another name for the Northern Kingdom of Israel. The downfall to the Assyrians (721 b.c.) was to take place in the famous valley of Jezreel (Hosea 1:5). The blood that had been previously shed there in wickedness was apparently crying unto the Lord for justice (see 2 Nephi 28:10; D&C 136:36; Genesis 4:10). But Ephraim's doom was more involved.

The second child born to Hosea and Gomer was a daughter (Hosea 1:6-7). God commanded that she be named Lo-ruhamah. The name means, as the text states, that God will no longer extend mercy to the nation of Israel but will take them away. The first name-prophecy had foretold their downfall as a nation, and this name-prophecy adds the dimension of some of them being taken into captivity. The prophecy also extends mercy to the nation of Judah, who is not in the state of wickedness that her sister nation is.

The third child of the prophet and his wife was a boy. The child's name was to be Lo-ammi, which signifies that Israel is no longer recognized as the Lord's people (Hosea 1:8-9). He will no longer be their God. Jehovah had promised Moses in Egypt that Israel would be his people and that he would be their God (Exodus 6:7). He was now rescinding that covenant because Israel had not lived up to its conditional agreements (Deuteronomy 4:25-28; see also D&C 56:3-4). The Lord had destroyed them as a nation, taken them into captivity, and rejected them as his people, but, as Moses had also foretold, the Lord would yet extend them mercy (Deuteronomy 4:29-31).

The Message of Hope—A Latter-day Gathering

In the typical Old Testament prophets' pattern, the Lord gives Hosea a message of hope following a message of doom. This message introduces the concept of Israel's future gathering. God's covenant with Abraham was that his offspring would be as numberless as the sand of the sea (Genesis 22:17). The Lord here affirms, through Hosea, that this promise to Abraham is still in effect and will yet be fulfilled in spite of their destruction and captivity (Hosea 1:10). Israel, who were told that they are not God's people, will again be gathered and told they are the sons of the living God. This promise constitutes a restoration of the gospel and the authority to perform ordinances. Becoming the son or daughter of the living God comes through the ordinance of water baptism and the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, or spiritual adoption (Mosiah 5:7).

The prophecy also expands to include Judah. When Israel is gathered again, Judah will be likewise gathered, and the kingdom will be divided no longer. They will be under one head or government, the kingdom of God (Hosea 1:11). Paul recognized this as a prophecy to the Gentiles as well (Romans 9:26). Since Israel was to be scattered among the Gentiles, they would eventually be gathered out. The gathering from other lands will be a great day for Jezreel, or the nation of Israel.

Having foretold the scattering and promised gathering in chapter 1, chapter 2 describes this gathering from their scattered conditions among the Gentiles. The children are now designated as Ammi and Ruhamah. The Lo, which means "no" in Hebrew, is dropped. The Lord is saying that the children of Israel are once again to be his people and obtain mercy. Those who are called his people and have obtained mercy are to plead with their mother (Hosea 2:2).

This seems to refer to those of Israel who are gathered and then given the responsibility to gather the rest of the house of Israel. It is the same message recorded in Isaiah 52:11, the calling of Israel from among the Gentiles: "Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the Lord."

It also carries the same message as another prophecy of Isaiah (49:3, 6). The people of Israel, as the gathered servant, are to raise up the tribes of Jacob and restore the preserved of Israel (among the Gentiles). As they are gathering the preserved of Israel, they will also give the Gentiles an opportunity to be numbered with Israel and further fulfill the Lord's covenant to Abraham that his seed would bless the nations of the Gentiles (Genesis 12:3). Thus, in the context of Hosea, Ammi and Ruhamah represent the small gathered remnant children who are to plead with the mother of Israel, representing the vast number of the body of Israel.

Mother Israel is invited by the Lord to forsake her unfaithful practices that labeled her a harlot—the worshiping of other gods or symbolically having an affair with someone other than her husband, Jehovah (Hosea 2:2-5). Because Israel has followed other gods, she will not prosper and shall fail to find satisfaction in spiritual endeavors of these other gods. This will cause her to turn to her first husband, Jehovah, but she will have a period in which she will not prosper (Hosea 1:6-13).

Following this unprosperous period, the Lord will bring Israel into the wilderness and speak to her or gather her and give her revelation. At that day, Israel will recognize the Lord as her husband ("Ishi," see footnote to Hosea 2:16) and not call upon the names of Baalim (Hosea 2:14-17). The Lord will bless Israel and reinstate his marriage, and she shall know the Lord. God will again have mercy on Israel and be her God, and Israel will recognize him as her God (Hosea 2:18-23).

The gathering of Israel following the scattering is thus foretold through Hosea. This interpretation is strengthened through Paul's quoting of Hosea 2:23 as a promise to be fulfilled to the Gentiles (Romans 9:25). But the Lord has still more to say through Hosea concerning his marriage to Israel.

Chapter 3 is considered by many as a second marriage that Hosea is commanded to enter. In my opinion, it is not a second marriage but the lesson given to Hosea concerning the first marriage. It is the symbolic representation or application he is to follow. Hosea's command to love an adulteress who looks to other gods is an admonition for him to love Israel and teach the people as long as anyone will listen to him (Hosea 3:1). The purchase of the woman for certain amounts of silver and barley is symbolic of the Lord's taking his people out of their adulterous situation and placing them in another environment, not with him but away from Baal where they could not play the harlot by false worship (Hosea 3:2). The value of the silver and barley has been explained in various ways, but none of the explanations, to my knowledge, has been confirmed by revelation. There is undoubtedly some significance attached to the total price that will someday be understood and probably relates to the cost of redeeming Israel.

Since Israel has been purchased by the Lord, it is now his prerogative to do with her as he sees appropriate. Her punishment is set. She is to be taken away where she cannot worship Baal (Hosea 3:3). This was fulfilled by her being taken into captivity by Assyria and then allowed to go into the North (2 Esdras 14:40-48).

In this scattered condition, Israel would abide many days without a king, a prince, a sacrifice, an image, an ephod, and a teraphim (Hosea 3:4). This is another way of saying that the people will have no priesthood or political leadership from Christ, no ordinances or spiritual leadership of the church, and no revelation. The ephod and teraphim were instruments associated with revelation. In other words, Israel would be in a state of apostasy for many days.

Again, the prophecy ends with a message of hope. After some time, Israel shall "return and seek the Lord their God, and David their king." This will be fulfilled in the latter days (Hosea 3:5). "The Lord their God" and "David their king" refer to the same person, Jesus the Christ. There will be a spiritual and a political restoration to Israel, bringing about the full kingdom of God.

The reference to Jesus as David is one of many among the Old Testament prophets. [^4] Thus, Hosea chapter 3 describes, as does chapter 2, Northern Israel's captivity, dispersion, and subsequent restoration. Having proclaimed his punishment, the Lord justifies his actions.

Why Israel Was Rejected

After prophesying of the scattering and gathering of Ephraim, the Lord through Hosea explains the cause of Israel's downfall. In general, the Lord said there was no truth, mercy, or knowledge of God in the land (Hosea 4:1). Specifically, the Lord gives four reasons for their rejection. The first is actually a multitude of reasons but can be summarized as wicked living: swearing, lying, killing, committing adultery. As a result of these conditions, the land would mourn, the people would be taken away, the prophet would fall with them, and the nation (mother) would be destroyed (Hosea 4:2-5).

The second reason for the downfall was a lack of knowledge. The Israelites were not just guilty of illiteracy or lack of intellectual knowledge but rather of a rejection of knowledge given them of the Lord, the law of God. In short, they had sinned against the Lord (Hosea 4:6-7). The priest as well as the people were guilty, resulting in an inability to satisfy their hunger, probably both physically and spiritually. They committed whoredoms, implying the act of procreation, but failing to increase (Hosea 4:8-11).

The third reason for Israel's destruction was their worship of false gods. The description of their worship suggests Baalism along with other types of idol worship. The result of this worship was immorality by their wives and daughters (Hosea 4:12-18). The Lord suggests leniency in his judgment for their spouses and daughters individually because of their environment, but nonetheless the people would fall collectively (Hosea 4:14). Immorality destroys a nation (compare Jacob 3:6). The fourth chapter ends with a warning to Judah not to follow Israel's bad example of harlotry and idolatry (Hosea 4:15-19). Having warned Judah, the Lord returns to his chastisement of Israel or Ephraim.

The Destiny of Ephraim

That Hosea is addressing Ephraim as a nation is evidenced by the many references to her. Seven of the first fourteen verses in chapter 5 refer to Ephraim, and they refer to her nine times. Some of these references are used in negative similitudes, a pattern followed in future chapters that is often very picturesque. The message is primarily a description of Ephraim's wickedness and predicted fall. Hosea also prophesies that Judah will fall (Hosea 5:5), a seeming contradiction to Hosea 1:7. However, based on historical sequences, the fall of Judah was later; although the text doesn't clarify the time of her fall, it was probably understood by Hosea.

The fifth chapter concludes with the Lord declaring that he will return to his place until Ephraim acknowledges her sins and seeks him (Hosea 5:15). The Lord does not dwell in unholy temples of individuals or nations (Alma 7:21). However, he always extends an invitation for that nation to return to him (Isaiah 55:7; Malachi 3:7).

The sixth chapter begins with Israel saying "Come, and let us return unto the Lord" (Hosea 6:1). The rest of the verse implies that Israel's statement is made after a lengthy period of her being smitten or punished. The following verse gives a time frame for Israel's return: "After two days will he revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight" (Hosea 6:2).

While some look upon this verse as a prophecy of Christ's resurrection, and, of course, all things have their likeness and bear record of him (Moses 6:63), the context suggests that the verse is speaking of the nation of Israel. A day with the Lord is a thousand years with man (Psalm 90:4; 2 Peter 3:8; Abraham 5:13; see also Abraham facs. #2, fig. 1).

Therefore, in the Lord's time, "after two days" equals 2,000 years. "In the third day" could be any part of the next thousand years. Israel was taken away in 721 b.c. It was about 2,550 years from the time of Israel's destruction and scattering until the restoration in 1830, a period of two days and in the third day of the Lord's time.

Furthermore, two thousand years from 721 b.c. would be about the end of the thirteenth century a.d. (1279). This date is approximately the ending of the dark ages and the beginning of the Age of Enlightenment. The Enlightenment is possibly the Lord beginning to revive Israel, but he would not raise her up for part of another day, after the Renaissance and the Reformation. They shall again "live in his sight" (Hosea 6:2). [^5] Other Old Testament prophets have foretold these sequential events (Isaiah 28:23-29).

The next verse describes the time when Israel comes to know the Lord (Hosea 6:3). This verse fits the period following the restoration of the Church and encompasses the Church's growth in the knowledge of the Lord.

In the rest of chapter 6, the Lord laments over Israel and Judah's transgressions of the covenant they had made with him. In this lamentation, one of the more well-known verses in Hosea is recorded: "For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings" (Hosea 6:6). The Savior quotes it twice during his ministry to refute the self-righteous Pharisees (Matthew 9:13; 12:7). The Lord is more interested in how people relate to each other and come to a knowledge of him than he is in their going through ritual in an attempt to worship him (compare 1 Samuel 15:22-23). This verse also demonstrates that Jehovah, the God of the Old Testament, is a God of mercy as well as justice, something not always understood by readers and teachers of the Old Testament.

Chapters 7 through 10 give many more negative similitudes in describing the downfall of Ephraim. The fall of Judah is also periodically mentioned. A verse-by-verse analysis is not necessary here to understand the main concept of Ephraim being mixed among the Gentiles after she is taken captive (Hosea 8:8).

In the negative similitudes, Ephraim's scattering is compared to a cake not turned (Hosea 7:8). A pancake cooked on only one side is not edible; because Ephraim's wickedness leaves her undesirable to the Lord, she was scattered. Ephraim is compared to "a silly dove without heart: they call to Egypt, they go to Assyria" (Hosea 7:11). A dove is to return or call to her master, but Ephraim looks elsewhere rather than to the Lord. The Lord will deal with them in their Assyrian conquest. Following other comparisons and descriptions of their wickedness (Hosea chapters 8-10), they are prophesied to be "swallowed up" "among the Gentiles," "wanderers among the nations" (Hosea 8:8; 9:17). Thus, today as people are gathered into the Church or as the remnants of Israel are gathered, we should not be surprised to find patriarchal blessings declaring these people to be of the blood of Ephraim.

Miscellaneous Prophecies

The Lord declares that when Israel was a child (as a nation), he loved him and called him out of Egypt (Hosea 11:1). The house of Israel was in bondage in Egypt until the Lord raised up Moses and called him to lead them back to their land of promise. This, of course, is a similitude of Jesus being in Egypt as a child until the death of Herod (Matthew 2:12-15). The Lord used this prophecy to teach Ephraim that they were not to return to Egypt but were to go into Assyria (Hosea 11:5). At the time of Hosea, Ephraim was seeking an alliance with Egypt. Nonetheless, the Lord promised to gather Ephraim.

Joseph Smith made only one change in the book of Hosea in his translation of the Bible; however, we should not assume that the rest of the book is intact or correct. Actually, the text of Hosea is one of the more corrupt, and Joseph Smith apparently did not have time to work extensively on it (Sperry, p. 278). The change Joseph did make is an important one. It again depicts a message of hope. The Lord's "heart is turned toward [Ephraim], and [his] mercies are extended to gather [her]" (JST, Hosea 11:8). In spite of the people's wickedness, the Lord will not destroy them (Hosea 11:9). He will take them into captivity, scatter them, and later gather them as he has covenanted and as the rest of Hosea testifies. After declaring that Ephraim is not to be totally destroyed, the Lord again affirms that Judah is still faithful at this time (Hosea 11:10-12). The Lord then returns to the time of his original covenant with Jacob, the father of Israel.

Some have interpreted Hosea 12:3-4—in which the birth of Jacob, the father of the house of Israel, and his subsequent wrestle with an angel (Genesis 32:24-29) are described—to be a declaration of Jacob's deceptive nature or the beginning of Israel's waywardness. There is another interpretation of this passage. It shows that Jacob was strong from the beginning and prevailed in his mortal probation. However, Jacob's strength will not save his posterity. Each person and each nation will be judged individually (Hosea 12:2). Ephraim as a nation has departed from the Lord, in spite of the Lord's guidance through visions and prophets and his taking Jacob out of the wicked land of Canaan and sending him to Syria to obtain a wife of the covenant (Hosea 12:7-12). The Lord also raised up a prophet to lead Israel out of Egypt, but Ephraim has now provoked the Lord to anger (Hosea 12:13-14).

Hosea 13 declares Ephraim's demise. Ephraim prospered when she followed the Lord but died when she followed Baal. Ephraim is now sinning more and more (Hosea 13:1-2). The Lord is the God who delivered Israel out of Egypt, and there is no savior beside him (Hosea 13:4). Because of Ephraim's sins, she has destroyed herself, and none can help her but the Lord (Hosea 13:9- 3). Using the principle of the resurrection as a teaching symbol, [^6] the Lord promises to redeem Ephraim from death that is coming upon her (Hosea 13:14). She will be destroyed or die as a nation but will be resurrected or restored. The Lord will destroy her, but he also has the power to take her back up. The Lord concludes the chapter with a declaration of desolation upon Samaria, Ephraim's capital city (Hosea 13:15-16).

Conclusion

The last chapter of Hosea ends with an invitation for latter-day Israel to return to the Lord through repentance (Hosea 14:1-3). If Israel will accept the invitation, the Lord promises to heal her of her sins and love her freely (Hosea 14:4). In a positive similitude, the Lord compares latter-day Israel to a lily whose branches shall spread, whose beauty shall be as the olive tree, and whose smell shall be as Lebanon. Those that dwell under this shadow shall be revived (Hosea 14:5-7). That Ephraim is the chief tribe of this return is shown through the response in Hosea 14:8. Ephraim is to acknowledge that she has forsaken her idols, come unto the Lord, and restored his branch.

The prophet Hosea foretold the scattering and gathering of Ephraim, the birthright holder of Israel. While the lily has been planted and the branches have spread much, there is still much growth to come. For those already in the spreading branches or to those who are invited to come and be part of the future growth, the last verse of the book is a fitting conclusion: "Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and he shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them: but the transgressors shall fall therein" (Hosea 14:9).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] An interpretation, as used here, is what the prophet meant when he uttered the prophecy. An application is the reading of a scripture and applying it to the present-day situation even though the prophet meant something else. Nephi told his readers that he did liken the scriptures unto the Nephites for their profit and learning (1 Nephi 19:23). Jacob refines the process by justifying his application because his people were of the house of Israel (2 Nephi 6:5). These quotations from the Book of Mormon seem to justify the use of applications but suggest that they should be used with some caution.
[^2] There are different forms of Hebrew parallelism, but the one used here is synonymous parallelism, in which the first phrase is repeated in the second phrase with slightly different wording but giving the same message.
[^3] See the exact wording in the Bible footnote published by the Church (1979). Joel 2:13-14 are two of the three verses changed by the Prophet Joseph Smith in his translation of the book of Joel. The other one, Joel 1:6, is cited in the body of this chapter.
[^4] For a more complete analysis of this, see Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, vol. 1, pp. 172- 83.
[^5] Many of Joseph Smith's ancestors were given dreams or other types of revelation to prepare them to accept the revelations of their foreordained son and grandson. See Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith by his Mother, pp. 64-66; B. H. Roberts, CHC 1, chapter 1. These preparatory revelations were not limited to Joseph Smith's family but are cited here merely as an example. Of course, as the Restoration commenced and was added upon, the membership of the Church had great revelations (see HC 1:101). Another example of many, the missionary work of Wilford Woodruff in England is atypical. Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff: History of His Life and Labors, chapter 23.
[^6] Some feel that Joel 2:28-32 is a dual prophecy, but I do not believe this can be substantiated. While dual prophecies exist throughout the Old Testament, neither the context of Joel nor Peter supports that thesis.
