Monte S. Nyman, Farres H. Nyman, Words of the Twelve Prophets ( 1990)

5

Amos—The House of Israel among All Nations

The superscription of the book of Amos (Amos 1:1) dates his prophecy in the days of Uzziah or Azariah king of Judah (2 Kings 15:1-2) and Jeroboam king of Israel (2 Kings 14:23-24). Uzziah began his reign in the twenty-seventh year of Jeroboam's reign, and Jeroboam reigned for forty-one years. The most probable date of the beginning of Uzziah's reign is about 791 b.c. He ruled for about fifteen years while Jeroboam was still king; therefore the date of the prophecy is between about 791 and 777 b.c. The superscription also dates the prophecy as two years before the earthquake.

There is no account of the earthquake in the historical books of Kings or Chronicles. The prophet Zechariah does refer to this catastrophic event in the days of Uzziah (Zechariah 14:5) but gives no more specific date. Therefore, Amos can only be dated somewhere within the fifteen-year period between 791 and 777 b.c. The book is traditionally placed third in the canon of the Twelve Prophets, implying that he followed Hosea and Joel but preceded Obadiah, Jonah, and Micah. Although this placement is chronologically controversial, the superscriptions of Hosea and Micah support this theory. Following this reasoning, Amos would have preceded the prophet Isaiah by some thirty-five to fifty years.

It is also possible that Amos gave more prophecies than the one recorded in the Bible. Chapters 1 through 7 seem to be a continuous prophecy given to Northern Israel in Jeroboam's day. Chapters 8 and 9 may have been given on another occasion, or they may be a continuation of the same prophecy. Amos's mission was to warn of Northern Israel's coming downfall if they did not repent. His message was that although Israel was to be destroyed, it would not be utterly destroyed but would be sifted or scattered among all the nations of the earth (Amos 9:8-9). All aspects of his written text relate to that central theme.

The Law of Retaliation

One of the most unusual approaches of the Old Testament prophets is used by Amos. Upon entering the city of Bethel (Amos 7:10), the site of their temple, he announced that "the Lord will roar from Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem," causing the land of Israel to suffer (Amos 1:2). He then began a scathing pronouncement of the Lord's judgments forthcoming upon the seven nations surrounding Israel (Amos 1:3-2:5). The first three nations were Gentile nations: Syria, of which Damascus was the capital; Gaza, the nation of the Philistines; and Tyrus, the nation of the Phoenicians. The next three nations were the blood relatives of Israel: Edom, the descendants of Esau, brother of Jacob (Genesis 36); and Ammon and Moab, the descendants of Lot and his two daughters (Genesis 19). The seventh nation rebuked was Israel's counterpart, Judah. These chastisements were undoubtedly pleasing to the people and leaders of Israel.

The reasons for the rebukes can readily be found in the text (Amos 1:3-2:5). And an important principle of the gospel is confirmed in Amos's pronouncements. Each nation is informed that the Lord's judgment is coming upon them "for three trans- gressions . . . and for four." In 1833, the Lord revealed the "law of retaliation" and the "law of war" to the Prophet Joseph Smith regarding the persecution that had come upon the Saints in Missouri. The essence of these laws was that individuals or nations were to lift up a standard of peace three times to those who offended them. If their enemy came upon them the fourth time after having been warned, the Lord would deliver the enemy into their hands, and the Lord himself would fight their battles for them. These laws, the Lord proclaimed, he had given to his ancient prophets (D&C 98:23-38). Each of the seven surrounding nations had sinned against the Lord three times and a fourth. The Lord was therefore bringing his judgments upon them. Thus Amos verifies what the Lord revealed in the Doctrine and Covenants.

Israel's Transgressions

Having gotten Israel's attention, Amos turns to the sins of which they were guilty that were to bring the Lord's judgments upon them. Israel also had four transgressions against them. Israel's first sin enumerated by Amos was the selling of the poor people into slavery. In Amos's words, "They sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes" (Amos 2:6). Not only was Israel neglecting the poor, but they were also using them and the righteous to further their own financial gain.

Israel's second sin was one of immorality. However, it was immorality carried on in the name of religion, of which Israel had been repeatedly warned. The pagan worship of Baal included the practice of temple prostitution. Israel, who knew better, was profaning the name of Jehovah by a man and his father going in to the same maid under the guise of religion (Amos 2:7).

The third sin of Israel was a failure to care for the poor among them (Amos 2:8). The Lord places a high priority on the care of the poor (Alma 34:28; D&C 104:18). Under the law, a person's outer clothing could be taken as a pledge for indebtedness, but it was to be returned to the person by evening because it was used as a cover for sleeping. The rich oppressors were failing to return these pledges and were using the pledged garments for their own comfort and satisfaction.

The fourth sin of Israel was one of failing to keep their covenants. The Lord, through Amos, reminded Israel that he had destroyed the Amorites out of this land and brought Israel out of Egypt to occupy it. The Lord had intended that Israel's sons be prophets and enter covenants to be Nazarites, who pledged to abstain from wine and other things. However, their fathers were encouraging these young sons to drink wine and discouraging them from honoring their priesthood or becoming prophets (Amos 2:9-12). This is the equivalent of encouraging the breaking of the Word of Wisdom and discouraging young men to go on missions in our day.

Because of these four sins, the Lord proclaims that the nation shall fall. Their flight shall fail them; their strength shall fail them; their armies shall not be able to defend the nation; and those who are swift of foot or even ride horses shall not be delivered from the enemy. Even the most courageous will be driven before the onslaught of the invading army (Amos 2:13-16). This army is undoubtedly the Assyrian conquest in 721 b.c.

The Covenant with Israel

Amos relayed the Lord's overall complaint against Israel. The Lord reminded them that Israel was the only family of all the families of the earth with whom he had made a covenant (Amos 3:2). However, a covenant involves two people, and the Lord asks Israel, "Can two walk together unless they are agreed?" (Amos 3:3). The Lord then asks several other questions concerning things that are obvious (Amos 3:4-6). Turning some of those questions into statements, the Lord says that the roaring of a lion is evidence that he has found a prey; the blowing of a trumpet (of warning) in a city makes people afraid; and, finally, when there is evil in a city, the Lord knows it (JST, Amos 3:6). The Lord then puts forth one of his rules of action: "Surely the Lord God will do nothing until he revealeth the secret unto his servants the prophets" (JST, Amos 3:7; italics added). [^1] The Lord then declares that the lion has roared and the Lord has prophesied (Amos 3:8). The lion probably represents the nation of Assyria, who would come upon the prey, the nation of Israel. The nation of Northern Israel is warned by the Lord's servants, the prophets, that she is facing a judgment upon her.

One of the better known Old Testament scriptures to Latter-day Saints is Amos 3:7. It has been quoted repeatedly by modern-day prophets. Joseph Smith called Amos 3:7 "the grand rule of heaven . . . that nothing should ever be done on earth without revealing the secret to his servants the prophets" (TPJS, p. 265). He also quoted it as evidence that the sign of the Son of Man had not been given because the Lord had not shown the sign to him, the prophet (TPJS, p. 280).

Various other General Authorities have quoted Amos 3:7 to show the necessity of a prophet in these latter days. Elder LeGrand Richards stated: "No one can look for a work here upon this earth that isn't headed by a prophet. The Lord has never done a work that he has recognized without a prophet at its head." [^2] Elder Mark E. Petersen taught, "When there are no prophets, there is no divine direction, and without such direction the people walk in darkness. It is an infallible sign of the true church that it has in it divinely chosen, living prophets to guide them, men who receive current revelation from God and whose recorded work becomes new scripture." [^3] He also testified of Joseph Smith through quoting Revelation 14:6-7, the prophecy of another angel restoring the everlasting gospel, and Amos 3:7, and reasoning:

Then what would God do about the angel bringing the gospel back to earth in modern times? There were no prophets on earth to whom he could come. The world no longer even believed in them. If the Lord would do nothing—not even send his angel to earth to restore the gospel—without the services of a living prophet, how could He accomplish his divine purpose? How could the angelic visitation predicted for the latter days be consummated if there were no prophets to receive it.

God could only do one thing, and that was to raise up a new prophet for this particular purpose, and this he did in the person of Joseph Smith Jr., who lived near Palmyra, New York, in 1823. It was this young man to whom the angel Moroni came. [^4]

In the text of Amos, the Lord invites the neighboring countries of Egypt and Ashdad (Philistia) to observe the great tumults and oppression in the land of Israel (Amos 3:9-10). Because of these conditions, an adversary is going to destroy their strength and palaces. The coming destruction is compared to the shepherd who takes two legs or the piece of an ear (Israel and Syria) out of the mouth of a lion (Assyria) [^5] (Amos 3:11-12). The Lord is saying that there will be a remnant of Israel saved; they will not all be destroyed. While a remnant will be saved, the sacred altar of Bethel where both Abraham and Jacob had great visions will be destroyed (Genesis 12:8; 28:10-22). The horns of the altar were a protection to those who innocently took someone's life (1 Kings 1:50). Since Israel was not innocently sinning, the horns would be cut off and not be a place of refuge (Amos 3:14). The rich palaces that were built through violence and robbing of the poor were also to come to an end (Amos 3:15). The Lord had warned them through the prophet Amos.

Amos addresses the kine (women) of Bashan as the instigators of the poor being oppressed. Their rich social customs and habits are supported by the encouragement they give to their husbands. The day will come when the Lord will take "every one before his enemy, and ye shall be cast out of your palaces" (JST, Amos 4:1-3; italics added). The hypocrisy of Israel is proclaimed in their transgressions at the same time as they make sacrifices and offerings (Amos 4:4-5).

The Lord has tried repeatedly to bring Israel to repentance through the elements. These include famine, the withholding of rain, no drinking water, and mildew. They had also experienced war and destruction, but to no avail. Therefore, their destruction was imminent, and they were invited to meet their God (Amos 4:6-13).

The destruction was not to be total. A tenth of the fallen virgin, she who has been immoral with other gods, would remain (Amos 5:1-3). This could have reference to the number who would be taken into Assyria as captives or to the number who would be left behind to intermarry with the men from Babylon and other nations whom the Assyrians brought in after they conquered Israel (2 Kings 17:24). [^6] The latter seems the more probable because of the verses that follow. Those of the house of Israel are invited to seek the Lord and live. They are further warned to avoid various areas of the country that will not escape the captivity (Amos 5:4-5). The next several verses repeat the invitation to seek the Lord and also describe him, his past accomplishments, the people's sins, and the conditions for the remnant of Joseph to receive the graciousness of the Lord (Amos 5:6-15). The coming destruction is announced as a day of darkness (Amos 5:16-20). While the wording may suggest the day of the Lord to be the Second Coming, the context does not support such an interpretation. If it is a Second Coming prophecy, it has to be in the form of a dual prophecy, the Second Coming being after the pattern of the coming destruction upon Northern Israel.

The Lord now turns to his distaste for the hypocritical rituals of sacrifice that the people have apparently been performing and the captivity that is to come (Amos 5:21-27). A warning to those who are at ease in Zion follows. Their ease comes from trust in the greatness of their nation (Amos 6:1-2). The Zion spoken of here must refer to the false concept of a Zion people, not the geographical location, because it fits neither the city of Zion on Mt. Moriah in Jerusalem nor the definition of North and South America given by the Prophet Joseph Smith (TPJS, p. 362). To show the disparity of their being at ease, the Lord cites the fall of other surrounding nations (Amos 6:2). Their trust in the mountain of Samaria identifies them as the people of Northern Israel. A description of their casual living and lack of concern for the welfare of the people of Joseph is part of this final warning of this section of the book (Amos 6:3-6). Again the Lord declares their coming captivity and the completeness of the destruction (Amos 6:7-14).

The Visions of Amos

In what appears to be another section of the book, perhaps given at a different time, Amos relates three visions he has seen. All three visions have the same message—the coming destruction—and two of the three have the same conclusion.

The first vision is of grasshoppers destroying the grass of the land. In response to Amos's plea for mercy so that the promises previously extended to Jacob or the house of Israel could be fulfilled, "the Lord said, concerning Jacob, Jacob shall repent for this, therefore I will not utterly destroy him" (JST, Amos 7:1-3). The second vision is of a destruction by fire with a similar plea by Amos and an almost identical response from the Lord—Jacob will not be utterly destroyed (JST, Amos 7:4-6). The original wording of the KJV in both verses 3 and 6, "The Lord repented of this," exemplifies a false principle that has been added to the original text and thus shows the need for the JST. The Lord's nature is one of total righteousness (Helaman 13:38); he does not need to repent.

The third vision shown to Jacob is of the Lord standing on a wall with a "plumbline" in his hand. The Lord told Amos that he would set a "plumbline" in the midst of his people Israel and would not pass by them more. Their places of worship and sanctuaries would be destroyed, and the house of Jeroboam would have the sword come against it (Amos 7:7-9). A plumb line is a device used to square a wall or a building. The Lord is therefore declaring that Israel is out of alignment, and he will no longer ignore it but will correct its defectiveness. The correction will include the removal of Jeroboam the king, a major cause of Israel's being out of line.

The Call of Amos

The last of the three visions of Amos that he related to the people, and perhaps all three, caused Amaziah, the priest of Bethel, to send word to King Jeroboam that Amos was conspiring against him and creating problems in the midst of Israel. Amaziah then directed Amos to flee to Judah and prophesy, but to not prophesy to Bethel anymore (Amos 7:10-13). Amos's response to Amaziah's rebuke gives us information about Amos's call to be a prophet.

Amos declared that he was not a prophet or the son of a prophet but was a herdsman and a picker of "sycomore" fruit, [^7] and that the Lord called him to go to Israel and to prophesy to the Lord's covenant people (Amos 7:14-15). That Amos was not a prophet is telling the reader that he was not called as such prior to this calling. Furthermore, he was not in line to become a prophet because of his lineage or heredity. He was a common, everyday herdsman and fruit laborer when the call came to him. Here is a lesson to the world and a confirmation to the members of the Church today. The Lord does not have a professional clergy but calls people from ordinary walks of life to fulfill his ministerial needs.

Having defended his calling, Amos refuted Amaziah by further prophesying against Amaziah the priest. He pronounced that Amaziah's wife will become a harlot in the city, his sons and daughters will fall by the sword, his land will be divided, and he himself will go into captivity in a polluted land, the land of Israel's captor (Amos 7:16-17). Such was the prophesied fate of him who raised his hand against the Lord's anointed.

Amos Again Prophesies

The last two chapters of Amos are four prophecies given without any historical setting. Two of these prophecies are prophecies of doom, containing messages of Israel's downfall. The other two are prophecies of hope, things that will bring some blessings to them. The first of each type of prophecy is in the form of a vision, and the second is apparently associated with the vision.

The first vision is a basket of summer fruit. The interpretation of the fruit basket is that the end had come upon the people of the nation of Israel (Amos 8:1-3). The summer fruit indicates that the harvest is over, the fruit has been picked, and the season is ended. Israel's destruction is once more announced. The causes for the destruction are then enumerated. The primary reason seems to be the neglect and the subjugation of the poor. The many ways that this is done include making the ephah small (inaccurate measures), the shekel great (overcharging), and falsifying balances (weights). None of these dishonest acts will be forgotten by the Lord (Amos 8:1-7). Because of such practices, the land will tremble, the earth will be darkened, and mourning will be prevalent (Amos 8:8-10).

Following this vision, Amos records a prophecy of the future. The Lord designates a famine in the days to come. This famine is not one "of bread, nor a thirst for water but of hearing the words of the Lord." Amos further prophesies that people will "wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east" seeking the word of the Lord but being unable to find it (Amos 8:11-12). To Latter-day Saints, this is clearly a description of the apostasy, that period when the gospel became perverted and the authority to administer the ordinances of salvation was taken from the earth. Those in this time, as in other times, who follow false gods as did the people in Dan and Beersheba "shall fall, never to rise again" (Amos 8:14). There is no way to raise them from their fall in this life because there is no source of help. Of course there will be a full opportunity for all in the spirit world following their mortal deaths. [^8]

The above prophecy of Amos (8:11-12) has oft been quoted by the General Authorities, either to announce the end of the spiritual drought through the restoration of the gospel, [^9] or to show how aptly it describes the people and the conditions of today. [^10]

The third prophecy of the last section of the book is another vision shown to Amos. He sees the Lord standing upon an altar and smiting the inhabitants of the land. He proclaims that wherever the people go, they will not be able to escape the wrath that the Lord is sending upon them (Amos 9:1-4).

After rehearsing a few of the things he has done in the earth (Amos 9:5-7), the Lord pronounces one of the great prophecies of the book of Amos and of the whole Old Testament and the theme of the entire book. He declares that his eyes are upon the sinful kingdom of Northern Israel and that it will be destroyed from off the face of the earth. Although the nation will be removed, the people will not all be eliminated. As previously prophesied (JST, Amos 7:3, 6), the house of Jacob was not to be utterly destroyed. They were, however, to be sifted among all nations, as corn (grain) is sifted in a sieve, but every kernel of that corn will be accounted for by the Lord, who knows all things (Amos 9:8-9).

President Spencer W. Kimball quoted this passage with a slightly modified ending that verified this interpretation. Said he: "Yet the Lord has not forgotten Israel, for though Israel was to be sifted among all nations, the Lord nevertheless said, 'Yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth' and be lost" (Amos 9:9). [^11] Just as one sparrow shall not fall to the ground without the knowledge of God (Matthew 10:29-31), the house of Israel, who were numbered in the days of the separation of the sons of Adam (Deuteronomy 32:8), are of more value to the Father than a sparrow.

His program of scattering Israel among all the nations of the earth was for two purposes: for the benefit of Israel, and for the benefit of all the nations among whom they were to be scattered. In their wickedness, the children of Israel needed to be separated from each other and purged of their iniquities through living among other peoples. While the other people did not have the gospel in its fulness, they did possess teachings of moral value to help make Israel a more honorable people. As subsequent generations came into the world, the time or times would come when the gospel would be preached again upon the earth, and those of the house of Israel who lived among the Gentiles would be able to accept the gospel and become a part of fulfilling the covenant made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Those who were valiant in their premortal life would recognize the message of the gospel on earth because it is a part of their previous beliefs. As Jesus said in his mortal ministry, "My sheep hear my voice and I know them, and they follow me" (John 10:27; compare D&C 29:7).

As a restoration takes place, those to whom the keys and authority are given are commissioned to teach the gospel to those around them. As they go among the various nations of the earth, those of the blood of Israel are gathered. Those who are not of the blood of Israel are given the opportunity to come in and be adopted or numbered with Israel (3 Nephi 30:1-2). Through this procedure, the covenant made to Abraham is fulfilled—that through him would "all families of the earth be blessed" (Genesis 12:3; Abraham 2:9-10). Thus the scattering of the ten tribes in the days of Amos was a blessing to all peoples of the earth, as eventually all nations will have the gospel preached to them to gather out Israel and give the other inhabitants an opportunity to be part of the covenant people.

It is often assumed that those who are members of the Church today have been adopted into the house of Israel. This is not a correct assumption. The majority of the members, whether born into the Church or converted, are literal descendants of Jacob. This is confirmed by revelation, patriarchal blessings, and modern-day prophets (D&C 86:8-10; 113:8). [^12] The Lord has also declared that few Gentiles would join the Church in spite of the opportunity to do so (D&C 45:28-29; Isaiah 41:11-12; TPJS, p. 15). Therefore, we are living today in the age of the gathering together of the house of Israel from among all the nations of the earth.

The last prophecy recorded in Amos is concerning the eventual result of the gathering out of the house of Israel from among the nations. In the day of the gathering, the Lord will "raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen . . . and . . . build it as in the days of old" (Amos 9:11). This has reference to the establishment of the full kingdom of God among the original twelve tribes ofJacob. The twelve tribes will be reunited with one king rulingover them all. That king will be Christ, "THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS" (Jeremiah 23:5-6). He will be the descendant of David, who was promised that his seed would reign forever, or eternally (2 Samuel 7:16). [^13] He is the "KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS" (Revelation 19:16).

The kingdom will engulf the Edomites, descendants of Esau the brother of Jacob, and the heathen nations who will be called by the name of the Lord (Amos 9:12). The earth will continually bear crops for the benefit of the people (Amos 9:13). Amos concludes with the declaration that Israel will come out of captivity and build and inhabit the waste cities. They will be prosperous agriculturally and be permanently established in their land of promise (Amos 9:14-15). The covenant to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob or Israel, Joseph, Judah, and Ephraim will be fulfilled.

Conclusion

The southern herdsman from Tekoa, the little town outside of Jerusalem, fulfilled a successful mission to the neighboring sister Israelite country to the north. In spite of political pressure, he fearlessly delivered the message the Lord sent him to proclaim. The fall of Israel was soon to come, but the Lord showed him the glorious future of Israel as well. She would not be utterly destroyed but would be scattered among all the nations of the earth. In the last days her people were to again be gathered. Today we are living in the day of which he prophesied.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Author of the prophecy that bears the name of Obadiah. Announcement of doom or destruction for Edom (vv. 1-9). Buttrick, The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible.
[^2] The governor of Ahab's house, described as a man who feared Jehovah greatly (1 Kings 18:3). The reasons for this indictment (vv. 10-14). Funk and Wagnall Dictionary.
[^3] A son of Azel, of the family of Saul (1 Chronicles 8:38). The judgments of God and retribution among the nations (vv. 15-16). John Kitton, ed., The Cyclopaedia of Biblical Literature, 10th edition, 2 volumes (New York: Ivison & Newman & Co., 1853).
[^4] A son of Izrahiah of Issachar (1 Chronicles 7:3). The restoration and exaltation of Israel and the coming of the Saviour on Mount Zion (vv. 17-21). See also Moses 7:52. The Prophet Joseph asked "how righteousness and truth are going to sweep the earth as with a flood." He answered, "Men and angels are to be co-workers in bringing to pass this great work" (TPJS, p. 84). President Ezra Taft Benson has urged a massive flooding of the earth with the Book of Mormon (CR, October 1988, p. 4).
[^5] A Gadite who joined David at Ziklag (1 Chronicles 12:9). John Taylor,JD, 21:97.
[^6] The father of Ishmaiah (1 Chronicles 27:19). Theodore M. Burton, CR, October 1970, p. 35.
[^7] A son of Hananiah and grandson of Zerubbabel (1 Chronicles 3:21).
[^8] A Merarite Levite (2 Chronicles 34:12).
[^9] A son of Shemaiah of Jeduthun (1 Chronicles 9:16 but in Nehemiah 11:17 Abda).
[^10] An officer of Jehoshaphat (2 Chronicles 17:7).
[^11] A son of Jehiel (Ezra 8:9).
[^12] One who sealed the covenant with Nehemiah (Nehemiah 10:5).
[^13] The head of a family of doorkeepers (Nehemiah 12:25).
