Monte S. Nyman, Farres H. Nyman, Words of the Twelve Prophets ( 1990)

6

The Vision of Obadiah Concerning Edom

The book of Obadiah is the smallest book of the prophets and also the smallest book in the Old Testament. The superscription, now incorporated in verse 1, calls the book "the vision of Obadiah. Thus saith the Lord God concerning Edom."

Edom is the homeland of Esau's posterity that dwelt in Mount Seir (Genesis 36:1, 8). Esau is the son of Isaac and the twin brother of Jacob. The Lord told their mother, Rebekah, "Two nations are in thy womb" (Genesis 25:23).

Why do we know so little of the nation of Esau and so much about Jacob or Israel? Notwithstanding the fact that Jacob sired the covenant people, the chosen people, there is seemingly more said about every other "noncovenant" nation than there is about Esau (Edom). The prophecy of Obadiah is thus somewhat unusual.

Another point of conjecture and curiosity are the pointed references in Obadiah to such terms as Mount Zion, saviors, house of Jacob and Joseph, and others, which have become common expressions in the Church. Nearly all of the world's scholars completely avoid the questions and use many words to say very little. However, an analysis of the whole book shows that these phrases are the essence of the book's message. The nation of Esau will be blessed through those of the house of Joseph, who will thus become their saviors.

Esau-Edom

Basic to any investigation of the book of Obadiah is a brief review of Esau as the originator of the nation of Edom, upon which Obadiah appears to call down the wrath of God.

Esau can be interpreted as "actor or agent." The Bible also suggests that the name means "red and covered with hair" (Genesis 25:25), and further implies a connection with the name "Edom" coming from the "red pottage" Esau asked of Jacob (Genesis 25:30).

The history of this people—neighbors of the Israelites on the east and south—is very vague. As a typical commentary states:, "All the monuments and written records of the Edomites have perished, so what information we have concerning them comes from the writings of their neighbors and enemies—the Israelites, Egyptians, Assyrians and Babylonians—and from archaeological exploration." [^1]

Obadiah

Another foundation stone for understanding the book of Obadiah is knowledge of the author. Obadiah is a fairly common name in the Bible. There are over twelve references to an Obadiah, in addition to the author of the short prophecy that bears the name of Obadiah. Some of these references are:

The name Obadiah means "a servant or worshiper of Jehovah." Whether the author of the prophecy is connected with any of the other Obadiahs is not known. Such a connection would possibly shed light on the message as well as the dating of the book.

Book of Obadiah

Obadiah is the fourth of the twelve minor prophets according to the Hebrew Bible and fifth according to the Greek. Most writers classify him as living in the eighth century according to chronological arrangement, although there are great differences of opinion on this particular point. The dates usually fall into three possible periods: 872-700 b.c.; 620-585 b.c.; or 380-312 b.c. "The ancient Jews believed the author of the book of Obadiah was the governor in the house of Ahab." [^3] This would favor the earlier period. There is also something to be said about a chronological order being followed in the Twelve Prophets that would favor this early date.

There are many citations that indicate several marked similarities between Obadiah and Jeremiah. Such similarities may suggest the second date mentioned above:

Obadiah Jeremiah verses 1-4 49:14-16verse 6 49:9-10verse 8 49:7Much controversy has raged over these resemblances, with three possible solutions being offered: (1) Jeremiah copied from Obadiah; (2) Obadiah copied from Jeremiah; (3) both copied from another original source. A fourth possible solution would be that the Lord revealed the same information to both of them.

There are also some prophecies in Amos 1:11, Jeremiah 49:22, Ezekiel 25:12-14, and Psalm 137:7, which are similar to Obadiah's prophecies against Edom. These prophecies may help in the interpretation of the book. One might also compare D&C 1:36.

The Book's Message

The prophecy of Obadiah may be divided into four convenient parts:

The Doom of Edom

The first nine verses prophesy of Edom's downfall and are undoubtedly dual prophecies. They refer to the days of Obadiah and to the destruction of the wicked in the latter days. In the preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord equates his judgment upon the wicked as being upon Idumea, or the world (D&C 1:36). Idumea is another designation of the geographical area of Edom. The ambassador sent among the heathen (Obadiah 1:1) could be those heathens or non-Israelite nations who have looked down upon the nation of the Edomites and verbally and physically brought her down. In the dual aspect of the latter days, it could be the prophets and missionaries who have taught the gospel to the Gentiles and destroyed the wicked of the world through conversion. These converts have thus despised the world's philosophy (Obadiah 1:2; compare Isaiah 13:1-5). Teman was once known for its worldly philosophy (see Job 2:11; 4), but lost this designation, as will also happen to the wisdom of the world at the time of the destruction of the wicked (Obadiah 1:8-9).

The Reasons for Destruction

In verses 10 through 14, the Lord reveals three reasons for Edom's destruction: (1) violence against Jacob, (2) spoiling the cities of Israel when opportunity came, and (3) delivering those of Israel who escaped from their oppressors back into their hands. According to Obadiah's vision, since the days of Jacob and Esau, the Edomites have not only warred against the covenant people of Jacob but have also rejoiced when Gentile countries have conquered and scattered them (Obadiah 1:10-12). Following the various defeats of the Israelites by other nations, the Edomites were quick to enter those fallen cities and take hold of the Israelites' possessions for their own (Obadiah 1:13). Last of all, in the various conquests of Jacob's children, the people of Esau, probably being very familiar with escape routes, were quick to block the escape of any who had survived the destruction and return them to the conquering armies (Obadiah 1:14). For these reasons, Edom was going to experience similar things at the hands of their enemies.

Retribution among the Nations

In an apparent projection into the destruction of the world in the last days or in "the day of the Lord," Edom, the wickedness of the world, was going to have the same things happen to her that she had seen and had helped promulgate upon Israel (Obadiah 1:15). The conquest of Edom would come from all the nations of the heathens or the Gentiles (v. 16). The Lord again teaches a concept found in the Book of Mormon that "the judgments of God will overtake the wicked; and it is by the wicked that the wicked are punished; for it is the wicked who stir up the hearts of the children of men unto bloodshed" (Mormon 4:5). This will not totally destroy Edom, for that will be done at the second coming of the Lord, "the end of the world or the destruction of the wicked, which is the end of the [telestial] world" (JS-M 1:4).

The Restoration upon Mount Zion

Having pronounced this terrible message of doom, the Lord, through Obadiah, now turns, in a typical fashion revealed to other prophets, to a message of hope. While Edom and its symbolic representation, the world, will be destroyed, those who respond to the message of the Restoration can be saved. This salvation opportunity will come from Mount Zion, which are the Americas as defined by the Prophet Joseph Smith: "The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land" (TPJS, p. 362). Through the deliverance furnished upon Mount Zion, Israel will again possess their promised lands, the Americas will be given to Joseph (3 Nephi 15:12-13), and Jerusalem or Palestine will be given to Judah and other tribes of Israel (Obadiah 1:17).

Obadiah describes the house of Jacob as a fire and the house of Joseph as a flame, with the house of Esau being as stubble (Obadiah 1:18). The house of Jacob through the tribe of Joseph will consume the nation of Esau as fire destroys a field of grain stubble. This unusual analogy probably refers to the absorption of the house of Esau into the house of Israel by means of the ambassadors sent among them to teach the gospel, as mentioned in verse 1. This interpretation is consistent with Isaiah's prophecy of Babylon's destruction in a similar way. Spiritual Babylon, representing the wickedness of the world (D&C 1:14), will be destroyed by lifting up an ensign (the Book of Mormon) and by a great people in the mountains (Saints) combining with the Lord's hosts (angels) coming from heaven [^4] (Isaiah 13:1-5). Those who are not converted will be destroyed at Christ's second coming. Although Obadiah doesn't mention this phase as does the Isaiah prophecy, it is implied in the rest of verse 18: "There shall not be any remaining of the house of Esau." Verses 19 and 20 discuss the house of Israel possessing various surrounding nations. What happens to Edom as a nation will happen to all other nations of the heathen or gentiles. When it is remembered that father Abraham was given all of these lands, it is logical that this occupation describes the fulfillment of the covenant made with Abraham. Those who are destroyed and didn't hear the gospel will have such an opportunity elsewhere.

Saviors on Mount Zion

One of the well-known phrases among Latter-day Saints is taken from the last verse of Obadiah—"saviors upon mount Zion." The term was used by the Prophet Joseph Smith, which accounts for its use among members of the Church today. Although most Church members could not justify its use in the context of Obadiah, Joseph did give a valid interpretation. First of all, let us examine Joseph Smith's statements.

In May 1841, Joseph spoke on the subject of election in the flesh of Abraham's seed. In relation to this subject he said, "The election of the promised seed still continues, and in the last day, they shall have the Priesthood restored unto them, and they shall be the 'saviors on Mount Zion,' the ministers of our God; if it were not for the remnant which was left, then might men now be as Sodom and Gomorrah" (TPJS, p. 189).

In October 1841, Joseph "presented baptism for the dead as the only way that man can appear as saviors on Mount Zion" (TPJS, p. 191). In April 1842, as he preached on the subject of baptism for the dead, he declared: "We are commanded to be baptized for our dead, thus fulfilling the words of Obadiah, when speaking of the glory of the latter-day: And saviors shall come upon Mount Zion to judge the remnant of Esau, and the kingdom shall be the Lord's" (TPJS, p. 223).

In January 1844, the Prophet gave a discourse on the sealing power of the priesthood. He again referred to the Saints as being saviors on Mount Zion and asked: "But how are they to become saviors on Mount Zion? By building their temples, erecting their baptismal fonts, and going forth and receiving all the ordinances, baptisms, confirmations, washings, anointings, ordinations and sealing powers upon their heads, in behalf of all their progenitors who are dead, and redeem them that they may come forth in the first resurrection and be exalted to thrones of glory with them" (TPJS, p. 330).

In the context of Obadiah, work for the dead ancestors of Edom will also be done in the temples established through the restoration of the gospel to the house of Joseph in America. Those millions of people of the lineage of Edom, and other surrounding nations who have not had opportunity to hear the gospel in this life, will hear it in the spirit world and will then be saved through the ordinances performed in the temples built in the latter days. President John Taylor said that those who administer in the temples of God "become saviors of their own nation; they administer and operate in their interests of their fathers and their friends and associates." [^5] This interpretation of Obadiah and those of Joseph Smith have been repeated throughout the history of the Church. Typical of many such interpretations is the following by Elder Theodore M. Burton:

Thus, those living today must perform the physical ordinance work on the earth that will qualify persons in the spirit world to receive that proxy work done for them, even as we living today receive the proxy work done for us by Jesus Christ. In other words, we work in partnership here on the earth with those missionaries in the spirit world who preach the gospel of Jesus Christ to those persons living in the spirit world, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh. This combination effort can free them from their spiritual prison and heal their bruised souls through Jesus Christ. This is why the members of the Church who can qualify through righteous living must go to the temple in ever-increasing numbers and why they must attend the temple more frequently than they have ever done in the past. [^6]

Obviously other Old Testament prophets knew of this great work of the latter days, but it is to Obadiah that we turn for biblical confirmation of the concept of the descendants of Joseph, son of Jacob, becoming saviors on Mount Zion through vicarious work for the dead in the latter-day temples. This smallest of biblical writers will be more appreciated by the posterity of Edom as they recognize the contribution he made to an understanding of their future and final message of hope.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Lehi prophesied that the "plates of brass should go forth unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and peoples who were of his seed" (1 Nephi 5:18). These plates contained much more information about the Old Testament than does our present Bible, the record being larger than the combined Old and New Testaments, even though it ended at 600 b.c. (1 Nephi 13:23). The book of Kings that mentions the prophet Jonah (2 Kings 14:25) is an abridgment of other records (2 Kings 14:28); therefore more about Jonah might have been contained in the unabridged account. An unabridged account may also have been in the plates of brass.
[^3] Other experiences of rebirth similar to Jonah's and Alma's are those of Jacob, father of the house of Israel; and Enos, the son of Jacob, brother of Nephi, as recorded in the Book of Mormon. Jacob's wrestle is recorded in Genesis 32:24-28, but the interpretation is alluded to in Genesis 48:16. Enos's experience is recorded in the Book of Mormon, Enos 1:2-8. A careful study of these two accounts would further support the interpretation that Jonah experienced a spiritual rebirth.
[^4] A son of Izrahiah of Issachar (1 Chronicles 7:3). The restoration and exaltation of Israel and the coming of the Saviour on Mount Zion (vv. 17-21). See also Moses 7:52. The Prophet Joseph asked "how righteousness and truth are going to sweep the earth as with a flood." He answered, "Men and angels are to be co-workers in bringing to pass this great work" (TPJS, p. 84). President Ezra Taft Benson has urged a massive flooding of the earth with the Book of Mormon (CR, October 1988, p. 4).
[^5] A Gadite who joined David at Ziklag (1 Chronicles 12:9). John Taylor,JD, 21:97.
[^6] The father of Ishmaiah (1 Chronicles 27:19). Theodore M. Burton, CR, October 1970, p. 35.
