Monte S. Nyman, Farres H. Nyman, Words of the Twelve Prophets ( 1990)

7

Jonah—Prophet of Redemption

Jonah is one of the more controversial books of the Bible. Some accept it as an actual account of a real person, while others label it as a myth or allegory.

The arguments over the literalness of the book of Jonah have gone on for hundreds of years and will no doubt continue until the time of the restoration of other records that will shed light on the issue. [^1]

Jonah's overall message is that God (Jesus Christ) is the control-ling power of the earth. He knows the intents of our hearts and the extent of our travels. Although we have our agency, the Lord has a program to give all the inhabitants of the earth an opportunity to fulfill the measure of their creation. This message is the same whether the book is accepted as literal or allegorical.

Those who look upon the story of Jonah as a figurative or symbolic allegory do so with scriptural justification. In the book of Jeremiah we read, "Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath devoured me [Judah], he hath crushed me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up like a dragon, he hath filled his belly with my delicates, he hath cast me out (Jeremiah 51:34). Allegorically the great fish that swallowed Jonah would represent Babylon, and Jonah would be the nation of Judah. Judah was taken captive by Babylon in about 607 b.c. and was in bondage for seventy years, until about 538 b.c., as prophesied by the prophet Jeremiah (Jeremiah 25:11). At the end of this time, Cyrus, the new ruler of the world as king of Persia, issued a proclamation allowing the Jewish people to return from Babylon (Ezra 1:1). This return would be symbolic of the fish vomiting up Jonah (Jonah 2:10). This later interpretation is also given in the book of Jeremiah: "I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I will bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath swallowed up: and the nations shall not flow together any more unto him: yea, the wall of Babylon shall fall.

"My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of the Lord" (Jeremiah 51:44-45).

Further support of this symbolic interpretation is cited in the apocryphal book of Tobit. Although this reference may be to another prophecy of Jonah's about Nineveh that is not in our present biblical text, the basic element of the prophecy in the book of Jonah is implied:

Go to Media, my son, for I fully believe what Jonah the prophet said about Nineveh, that it will be overthrown. But in Media there will be peace for a time. Our brethren will be scattered over the earth from the good land, and Jerusalem will be desolate. The house of God in it will be burned down and will be in ruins for a time.

But God will again have mercy on them, and bring them back into their land; and they will rebuild the house of God, though it will not be like the former one until the times of the age are completed. After this they will return from the places of their captivity, and will rebuild Jerusalem in splendor. And the house of God will be rebuilt there with a glorious building for all generations for ever, just as the prophets said of it.

Then all the Gentiles will turn to fear the Lord God in truth, and will bury their idols.

All the Gentiles will praise the Lord, and his people will give thanks to God, and the Lord will exalt his people. And all who love the Lord God in truth and righteousness will rejoice, showing mercy to our brethren.

So now, my son, leave Nineveh, because what the prophet Jonah said will surely happen (Tobit 14:4-8).

Using such evidence, many scholars and laymen dismiss the book of Jonah as a historical account and Jonah as a historical person.

Those who hold to the literalness of the text and the personage of Jonah likewise give scriptural support. On two different occasions, Jesus referred to the teachings of the prophet Jonah as a sign of the Messiah's being killed and buried in the heart of the earth for three days and nights (Matthew 12:38- 1; 16:1-4). The account of Jonah thus becomes a type and shadow of Jesus' death and resurrection. It also bears record of Jesus Christ, as the Lord taught Adam that "all things are created and made to bear record of [Him]" (Moses 6:63). Those who believe in the literalness of Jonah further argue that the Son of God would not use mythology to support the literalness of his death and resurrection.

Both of the above arguments have scriptural support. There is no reason to discard one or the other. The symbolism of Judah being swallowed up by Nebuchadnezzar, or earlier of Israel being swallowed up by Assyria, which would fit the time period of Jonah as a prophet in the time of Jeroboam 2, could certainly have been a message of the book of Jonah. It was also a type and shadow of the Savior's death and resurrection. Scriptures do not have to be limited to a single interpretation. But a prophet named Jonah, son of Amittai, did prophesy during this time period, as verified in 2 Kings 14:25. The superscription of Jonah (1:1) identifies him as the prophet who wrote the Old Testament book called by his name. Therefore, Jonah's authorship of the biblical text is supported by scripture, although it is not yet proven. Someday that proof will undoubtedly come.

The first message of the book of Jonah is taken from the account in chapter 1. Jonah's attempt to flee from his calling of preaching to the people of Nineveh by catching a ship to Tarshish is a clear declaration that a person cannot flee from or hide from God. The whereabouts and activities of every person are always known by the omniscient God. The Lord caused a great wind upon the sea to bring fear upon the mariners. Apparently, he also took advantage of the superstitions of the seamen to get Jonah thrown overboard, and he had prepared a great fish to swallow Jonah. As Alma said, "The Lord worketh in many ways to the salvation of his people" (Alma 24:27).

The second message to be learned from Jonah again centers around the textual problems of the book. Arguments are given against the ability of a whale to swallow a person whole or for someone to be able to live for three days in the stomach of a whale. In response to these questions, the text of Jonah does not say that the fish was a whale but that it was a great fish that God had prepared. The New Testament translations have rendered the fish as a whale. However, there are certain types of whales that can and have swallowed people alive, and there are people who have been swallowed and lived for several days in the belly of a whale. [^2] Therefore, it is defensible that Jonah was literally swallowed by a fish, but there are further considerations.

The book of Jonah is written in prose except for Jonah 2:2-9, which is a poem. Much of the criticism leveled against this book is about the improbabilities of the occurrences within a fish's belly as described in these verses. Again, to accept the literalness of the story does not obligate one to accept all of the details of the poem. Could the poem be symbolic of Jonah's experience? Jonah says that he "cried out of the belly of hell" (Jonah 2:2). Could this poem be reflecting the experience of Jonah's spiritual rebirth that actually took place while he was incarcerated in the stomach of the fish? The account is similar to that of Alma, the son of Alma, as related to his own sons (Alma 36:4-26). Jonah looked to the Lord, as did Alma, to escape from the depths of hell (Jonah 2:4-9; Alma 36:17-23). While Jonah's experience took place within the fish's stomach, Alma's experience was in a state of mortal unconsciousness but in the presence of an angel. [^3] Both lives were dramatically changed. The text being poetic only in this instance lends support to this interpretation. Following the poem, the fish's regurgitation of Jonah is recorded in prose (v. 10).

The third chapter reveals a second call for Jonah to go to Nineveh. This time he responded to the call and journeyed the great distance to Nineveh. The text records that "Nineveh was an exceeding great city of three days' journey" (Jonah 3:3). This is interpreted to mean that the city was so large that it took three days to journey from one side of it to the other. Again critics have questioned the validity of the book because excavations by archaeologists have failed to support the existence of such an extensive city. Regardless, let us consider the message of the account. Jonah's message was that within "forty days . . . Nineveh shall be overthrown" (Jonah 3:4). This was apparently a conditional prophecy, although the text does not say it was. The people of Nineveh repented, and a fast was proclaimed in hopes that by their repenting and turning to God, "he [would] turn away from us his fierce anger" (JST, Jonah 3:9). God saw their works and observed that they "repented; and God turned away the evil that he had said he would bring upon them" (JST, Jonah 3:10). This message is repeated in the Book of Mormon: God never destroys a nation unless he first warns them by his prophets (see 2 Nephi 25:9). Jonah was the prophet the Lord had sent to warn Nineveh.

A fourth message of the book is based upon Jonah's reaction to the people's repentance. In spite of acknowledging that God was merciful and gracious, Jonah was angry and asked that God take his life. Perhaps Jonah was fearful of the people since his prophecy had not been fulfilled, or perhaps he was embarrassed because of this. The latter seems more probable. All the text says is that God questioned Jonah about his anger. Jonah left the city in his anger and went outside the city, where he built a booth to provide some shade and waited to see what would become of the city (Jonah 4:5). The average temperature today in Nineveh is extremely hot; it is likely that it was anciently as well. To help Jonah learn another great lesson, God caused a gourd to grow, providing shade for Jonah, which he greatly appreciated (Jonah 4:6). Then God prepared a worm that destroyed the gourd and took away Jonah's shade. He then caused a vehement east wind (from off the hot desert) in addition to the already unbearable heat. This resulted in Jonah's fainting and again wishing he would die (John 4:7-8).

Using this very uncomfortable condition, God gave Jonah a combination of lessons. He asked Jonah if he was justified in being angry for the gourd withering up, something that he had had nothing to do with—its planting, growing, or dying. The lesson then came. If Jonah was so concerned over a plant, why wasn't he concerned over the people and the animals in the great city of Nineveh. Jonah had had nothing to do with their being there or their condition either. They were God's concern, and he had sent Jonah to try to rectify the wicked situation that existed there. Rather than rejoice over their repentance, he had pouted over his own pride being hurt because his prophecy was not fulfilled. As a servant of God, he should follow God's will, not his own.

God reminded him of the number of people in the city—one hundred twenty thousand. These people were Gentiles and had not had an opportunity to hear the gospel and did not know the difference between good and evil (could not discern between their right hand and their left hand). Where there was no law, there was no transgression (Romans 4:15). God further reminded Jonah of his concern for the cattle, who were also God's creation. God has a love for all his creations—men and animals—and gives all an opportunity to be saved.

Jonah was a prophet of the Lord Jesus Christ. The Lord used him to bring a great city of thousands of people to repentance. In fulfilling his mission, Jonah was also used as an allegory of the coming death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, as well as of the future destiny of the nation of Judah. We should emphasize and learn from this important message rather than argue over the reality of the story or the prophet.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Actually, Jotham reigned for several years while his father had leprosy, but the exact time is not known.
[^2] For a fuller treatise of the Isaiah prophecy, see Monte Nyman, Great are the Words of Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), pp. 26-31.
[^3] This interpretation was given at the dedication of the Idaho Falls Temple (Improvement Era, October 1945; Ensign, November 1971, p. 15, as quoted by Harold B. Lee). Dedicatory prayers are given by revelation (see the preface to section 109 in the Doctrine and Covenants).
