Monte S. Nyman, Farres H. Nyman, Words of the Twelve Prophets ( 1990)

8

Micah: A Second Witness with Isaiah

The superscription of the book of Micah (Micah 1:1) dates Micah's prophecies in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. A comparison with Isaiah's superscription shows that these two prophets were contemporaries. Isaiah's ministry spanned the last year of Uzziah, the king of Judah who preceded Jotham. [^1] How long Micah prophesied during Jotham's reign is not known, but it is safe to assume that Micah's ministry was a little shorter than Isaiah's. Since tradition labels Isaiah as the leading prophet of the time, we can also assume that Micah was under Isaiah's jurisdiction. The time period is around 740 b.c. to 700 b.c.

The superscription also states that Micah "saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem." Isaiah also prophesied to Jerusalem and Samaria. While Isaiah's superscription mentions only Judah, the context of Isaiah chapter 1, the preface to his book, shows that Isaiah's call was to Samaria, or Northern Israel, also. Although the book of Micah is much shorter than the book of Isaiah, the con-text of Micah's prophecies are similar and sometimes identical to Isaiah's.

The first prophecy of Micah, recorded in chapter 1, is undoubtedly a dual prophecy, typical of many of Isaiah's prophecies. The two separate time periods for the prophecy are the Assyrian conquest of Samaria in 722 b.c. and the Second Coming of Christ. The Assyrian conquest left "Samaria as an heap of the field, and as plantings of a vineyard" (Micah 1:6). The iniquities of Samaria were "incurable" and had spread over into Jerusalem (Micah 1:5, 9). The same declaration had been made by Isaiah (Isaiah 1:5-8; 8:5-8). However, on this occasion, the mountains were not "molten under [the Lord], and the valleys [were not] cleft, as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are poured down a steep place" (Micah 1:4). While the description of the Lord coming down and treading upon the earth (Micah 1:3) may be symbolic of the Samarian conquest and not a literal treading down, it will be literally fulfilled at the second coming of Christ (see Isaiah 40:3-5 and JST, Luke 3:4-11). Therefore, the dual prophecy seems the most probable explanation of its fulfillment.

The majority of chapter 2 is a more specific pronouncement of Israel's sins: immorality, loss of freedoms, oppression of the poor, and acceptance of false prophets rather than the Lord's prophets. These sins were also enumerated by Isaiah (Isaiah 5:8-24; 9:8-10:4).

A Remnant Shall Return

In manner similar to Isaiah's prophesying, Micah follows his message of doom with a message of hope. Thus, in spite of Israel's destruction, the Lord, through Micah, promises that he will again assemble all of Jacob, or "gather the remnant of Israel" (Micah 2:12). This is a constant theme of Isaiah's writing (see, for example, Isaiah 6:13; 10:20-21, 27). While Micah later enlarges on the gathering prophecy, at this time he continues his analysis of why the destruction was imminent. The first reason was that, as Isaiah had also said, their leaders "caused them to err" (Micah 3:5; Isaiah 9:11). The Lord further declares through Micah that there will be no answer to the leaders' prayers, there will be no vision to the false prophets, "the seers [shall] be ashamed, and the diviners confounded . . . for there is no answer from God" (Micah 3:6-7). Continuing the chastisement, the Lord says that the leaders "judge for reward," "teach for hire," and the prophets "divine for money" and yet claim that the Lord is with them. Under such circumstances, the Lord announces that it is for the people's sake, to rid them of such corrupt leadership, that the Lord is going to plow Zion as a field and leave Jerusalem as a heap (Micah 3:11-12). The corruption has brought destruction, but a remnant will be preserved.

The Last Days

Having foretold the downfall of Samaria and Jerusalem, Micah now turns to several prophecies that will not be fulfilled until the last days. This makes a natural division in the book of Micah. The first three chapters basically refer to the days of Micah, Isaiah, and other prophets, while the last four foretell the Lord's doings in the latter days. Since these prophecies are now being fulfilled, it seems that these chapters are more relevant to us. Of course, the others are important also to give us the background of the prophecies.

The Temple in the Top of the Mountains

The first prophecy of the latter days is one almost identical to Isaiah's prophecy of the building of a temple in the top of the mountains. The difference in the two prophecies is that Isaiah uses it as a time frame for the work of God to commence among the people of Judah in Jerusalem, [^2] while Micah uses it as an event to precede the great gathering to Zion from among the Gentiles in the latter days. Of course both usages are related.

As referred to by both Micah and Isaiah, the temple to be built in the top of the mountains has reference to the temple to be built in Independence, Jackson County, Missouri (preface to Doctrine and Covenants 57; 3 Nephi 21:11-23). The top of the mountains is undoubtedly a synonym for "the everlasting hills," as prophesied by Jacob, father of the twelve tribes (Genesis 49:26; see also Deuteronomy 33:13-17). This conclusion is drawn from Jacob's knowledge of the New Jerusalem being built upon this continent, which knowledge he obtained through a covenant with the Lord (3 Nephi 20:22). The law going forth from Zion, stated by both prophets, was identified by President George Albert Smith as the principles of freedom established under the United States Constitution. [^3] The word of the Lord coming from Jerusalem is a prophetic declaration that the gospel will someday be preached in Jerusalem. [^4] The following verses of the Micah prophecy (4:3-5) describe the ushering in of the Millennium, which will follow shortly after the building of the New Jerusalem. Joseph Smith paraphrased part of verse 4 in support of the gathering of Israel and the Mil-lennium, "when every man may sit under his own vine and fig tree, and there will be none to molest or make afraid" (TPJS, p. 93). Isaiah's prophecy also includes the millennial description in almost verbatim language (Isaiah 2:4). In the "Second General Epistle of the Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, from the Great Salt Lake Valley, to the Saints Scattered Throughout the Earth," the First Presidency refers to "the dawning of the day when the children of the Kingdom can sit under their own vines and fig-tree and inhabit their own houses, having none to make them afraid." [^5] Both Isaiah and Micah then treat the gathering of Israel, but Micah's account is quite different than Isaiah's.

The Gathering to Zion

The temple being built in Jackson County, Missouri, is used in Micah as a time signal that the gathering to that location is under way. This is concluded from the familiar Old Testament phrase "in that day" (Micah 4:6). In the day when the temple is built, the Lord will gather in from all nations those Israelites who had previously been "driven out" of their promised lands and assemble them in "mount Zion," where he will personally "reign over them" (Micah 4:6-7).

From the Prophet Joseph Smith we learn that the Zion spoken of by the Old Testament prophets is the whole of North and South America (TPJS, p. 362). Mount Zion would indicate the height, or the central place, of North and South America, which is designated by revelation as Independence, Missouri (D&C 57:3).

The "strong nation" (Micah 4:7) over which the Lord will reign and which will be made strong by him is the restored nation of Israel. Again Micah supports the concept spoken of in more detail by the prophet Isaiah (Isaiah 55). Christ, "whose right it is to reign," will be there, in Zion, as king (D&C 58:22). His kingdom will first have "dominion" in Zion and then "shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem" (Micah 4:8), the political kingdom that was delivered by the woman (church) in the meridian of time to rule all nations with a rod of iron (word of God), but was caught up to God. The woman (church), driven into the wilderness because of the great red dragon (the devil), will now be delivered from the hands of her enemies and be established (see Revelation 12:1-6 and Micah 4:9-10).

Isaiah likewise predicts the birth of this man-child, the political kingdom of God (Isaiah 66:5-10). Although the kingdom is born, it is born in Babylon, or among the wickedness of the world (D&C 133:14) and will thus be opposed by the world. However, the world knows "not the thoughts of the Lord" (Micah 4:12; compare Isaiah 55:8), and the Lord will gather his people, the house of Israel, out of the world as a thresher in the ancient world gathered the grain "sheaves into the floor" and brought forth the seed of grain from the straw and chaff (Micah 4:13).

The Savior, by the Father's commandment, taught this same concept to the Nephites when he quoted the prophecy of Micah (or Isaiah) [^6] in the context of the gathering of Israel from the Gentiles to establish the New Jerusalem in the Americas in fulfillment of the covenant to his people (3 Nephi 20:12-22). The two witnesses—Micah and Isaiah—of this gathering are thus interpreted and confirmed by the Book of Mormon. The Lord gives a third witness in the appendix to the Doctrine and Covenants and also adds another dimension. In explaining why he restored the fulness of the gospel, the Lord used the terminology of Micah 4:13, "And by the weak things of the earth the Lord shall thrash the nations by the power of his Spirit" (D&C 133:59). The power of the Lord's Spirit will be the major factor in the gathering.

Out of Bethlehem Comes the Ruler in Israel

One of the favorite scriptures from Micah is the prophecy that Christ would be born in Bethlehem. However, most of the people who are familiar with this prophecy fail to put the prophecy into its proper context and thus fail to analyze the entire prophecy. The context of the prophecy is still in the last days, and the subject is still the gathering of the remnant of Israel.

The first verse of the prophecy speaks of the gathering of troops: "O daughter of troops." The "daughter of troops" seems to be the gathering of Israel to Zion and her stakes, similar to the Gentiles who have gathered against Zion. The mother nations (Babylon) gathering against Zion have set the pattern for the daughter (Israel), who has been scattered among them, to gather as a refuge from the threatened Gentile storm (see Isaiah 4:5-6; D&C 115:6). The nations of Babylon will lay siege against Zion and smite the judge of Israel (Christ) with a rod upon the cheek (Micah 5:1). The rod here seems to be symbolic of a verbal barrage against the people of Zion who are gathering under the direction of the Lord or judge of Israel.

In an apparent explanation of why this will happen in the last days, the Lord, through Micah, refers back to the humble beginning of the "ruler in Israel" in the little town of Bethlehem. He then quickly confirms that this was not the beginning of his rulership, for he had been administering the affairs of the house of Israel "from of old, from everlasting" (Micah 5:2). That this prophecy speaks of Christ's birth is confirmed by two of the New Testament apostles (Matthew 2:6; John 7:42). However, that this is also a prophecy of the last days is clear, for Micah explains that the Lord would give Judah up "until the time that she which travaileth hath brought forth" (Micah 5:3). This refers back to the travailing of Zion to establish the kingdom as prophesied earlier (Micah 4:10). Not until this kingdom is established will the tribe of Judah, "the remnant of his [Christ's] brethren," return unto the children of Israel (Micah 5:3). In other words, the conversions of Judah will not happen until after the building of the New Jerusalem in Missouri (3 Nephi 21:23-29).

Micah then explains how Christ will be Judah's strength against the Gentile nations gathered against her and shall deliver Judah from her oppressors represented as the Assyrians and the land of Nimrod (Micah 5:4-6). Micah concludes his prophecy about Judah with the declaration that a remnant of Jacob shall be among many people, not just the Jewish gathering (Micah 5:7). This declaration sets the stage for the last prophecy recorded in the book of Micah.

The Remnant of Jacob among the Gentiles

The last prophecy of Micah (and Isaiah, see note on p. 82) is quoted in its entirety by the Savior to the Nephites and earlier referred to or partially quoted by him twice more (3 Nephi 21:12-21; 16:13-14; 20:16-17). Much understanding of this prophecy is gained through the Savior's commentary on these three occasions.

The remnant of Jacob who have been scattered among the Gentiles are prophesied to go forth as a lion among a flock of sheep and tread down the Gentiles, who will be their enemies at this time (Micah 5:8-9). The first two times the Savior quotes this prophecy to the Nephites, he makes it a conditional prophecy based upon whether the Gentiles repent. If the Gentiles do repent, they will be numbered among the house of Israel and thus escape being trodden down (3 Nephi 16:13-15; 20:15-17). The Savior's second quotation qualifies the conditional treading down as being caused by the Gentiles' failure to repent after the blessings of the knowledge of the Lord have been revealed to them after they have scattered the house of Israel before them (3 Nephi 16:13-15; 20:15-17). In other words, the Lord will forgive the Gentiles for their treatment of the house of Israel if the Gentiles accept the gospel, which will be restored among them. However, if they reject the gospel, then the mercy of the Father will be withdrawn and justice will take its course.

The third time Christ quotes this prophecy, he quotes it in its entirety, describing the things that will occur among the Gentiles. He also qualifies the condition a little further. Those who do not repent and accept the gospel will be cut off from among the house of Israel and will then be trodden down by the house of Israel. Those who do repent will have the Church established among them, be numbered among the remnant of Jacob to whom this land was given (see 3 Nephi 15:12-13), and assist the remnant of Jacob in building the New Jerusalem (3 Nephi 21:11-12). Thus, the house of Israel will eventually tread down the rebellious Gentiles, but those who repent can escape this treading down if they accept the gospel and are numbered with Israel. This concept is sustained by the modern-day prophecy on war revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith: "And it shall come to pass also that the remnants who are left of the land will marshal themselves, and shall become exceedingly angry, and shall vex the Gentiles with a sore vexation" (D&C 87:5).

The conditions that will bring about the treading down of the Gentiles by the house of Israel are symbolically represented by Micah. Recognizing that there are other possible interpretations, the following are offered. The Father will cut off from the Gentiles their horses and destroy their chariots (Micah 5:12). This may have reference to the transportation system among the Gentiles. Such things as gasoline shortages or truckers' strikes could certainly cripple a nation that so heavily relies upon transportation.

The cutting off of the cities and throwing down of strongholds suggests a possible breakdown of law enforcement (Micah 5:11). Cities not having help from state or federal sources could bring such a condition.

The Lord will also cut off witchcrafts and soothsayers from the Gentile lands (Micah 5:12). This could suggest the reliance of the Gentiles upon their philosophers, economists, educators, and scientists instead of relying upon the Lord, as well as the literal practice of witchcraft. These factions are certainly among the Gentiles today.

Micah next lists the graven images and other images—the worship of the work of the Gentile hands that will be cut off (Micah 5:13). While the literalness of this type of image worship does exist, only a small percentage of the Gentile population so worship. Therefore, this could more fully refer to the clothes, money, positions, and other worldly things worshiped in our society today.

Last of all, Micah says that the Lord will pluck up the groves out of their midst and destroy their cities (Micah 5:14). Worshipping the pagan god Baal included gathering together in groves to participate in temple prostitution, child sacrifice, and other degenerative rituals. In our societies today, the communes, especially in large cities, where various immoral practices are conducted certainly fit this symbolism.

In the Book of Mormon account, the Savior adds a general description of "all lyings and deceivings, and envyings, and strifes, and priestcrafts, and whoredoms, [that] shall be done away" (3 Nephi 21:19). Perhaps this was originally a part of the text; regardless, it shows that the Lord will cleanse from the Gentiles those things the Gentiles would not cleanse from themselves through repenting and accepting the gospel when it was restored among them.

The Book of Mormon commentary by the Savior also adds another important element to the prophecy—that of a time period. According to the Book of Mormon, the majority of the house of Israel will not be taught the gospel until after the New Jerusalem is built by the house of Israel, assisted by the repentant Gentiles (3 Nephi 21:24-29). Therefore, the treading down of the Gentiles by the house of Israel will be in the times when the Gentiles are fulfilled but before the gospel is fully taken to Israel. [^7] The times of the Gentiles being fulfilled is when the Gentiles have rejected the fulness of the gospel and the gospel is brought from them (3 Nephi 16:10; see alsoJST Luke 21:24-32; D&C 45:28-33). This also suggests that the house of Israel who are doing the treading down will be those who are not yet taught the gospel and are not the members of the Church. Thus it will be a political or temporal movement by those in rebellion against the mistreatment of the Gentiles who have ruled over them for hundreds of years. This seems consistent also with Joseph Smith's prophecy on war (D&C 85:7). This movement will probably fulfill the promise to Joseph of Egypt that his seed would be brought "out of captivity unto freedom" (2 Nephi 3:5). It may further fulfill a prophecy of father Lehi that one mighty among the seed of his son Joseph would be "an instrument in the hands of God, with exceeding faith, to work mighty wonders, and do that thing which is great in the sight of God, unto the bringing to pass much restoration unto the house of Israel, and unto the seed of thy brethren" (2 Nephi 3:24). That this would be a prophet raised up in the latter days among the Lamanites has been taught by modern-day apostles. [^8]

There is one more caution or observation about this prophecy: it should not be limited to the Lamanites or to any one group of the house of Israel. [^9] As typical of Isaiah's prophecies (see 3 Nephi 16:17-20; 3 Nephi 20:32-35), this prophecy could have fulfillment among the Lamanites, again among the Jews, and also among others of the house of Israel. Nonetheless, it will be fulfilled, and the Lord "will execute vengeance in anger and fury upon the heathen, such as they have not heard" (Micah 5:15). The Book of Mormon again renders this passage a little plainer. The Lord will "execute vengeance and fury upon them [the Gentile], even as upon the heathen, such as they have not heard" (3 Nephi 21:21). Vengeance is the Lord's and he will repay (see Mormon 3:15).

Although this prophecy has no direct parallel in Isaiah, as noted above, it was probably in the original Isaiah's text (see footnote 6).

The Lord's Controversy with His People Israel

Having foretold the events of the last days, the Lord now turns back to Israel to admonish them of their requirements to be his people. Whether this refers to Israel of the last days or of Micah's day is not certain; perhaps it is both—a dual prophecy. However, the context of chapters 4 and 5 is the last days, and there is no indication of a change of context. Furthermore, the admonition to the mountains also implies that the context is the last days and refers to the land of Joseph, the Americas. Even if it were addressed to ancient Israel, the endless nature of the principles of the gospel make it applicable to our day.

After a review of what the Lord has done for Israel in past times (leading them out of Egypt by Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, and the account of Balaam in the wilderness), the Lord reminds Israel that it is not the ritual of the law that pleases him but rather his requirement "to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God" (Micah 6:8). This again reminds us of Isaiah's similar chastisement of Israel in his days (Isaiah 1:10-14). It further refutes the false concept in much of the Christian world that the Old Testament God is a God of justice and the New Testament God is a God of mercy. While the law of Moses was to teach justice, it was also to bring Israel to Christ so that they might receive of his mercy (see Mosiah 13:27-32; Galatians 3:23-29). The gospel in its fulness was taught in Old Testament times, except for the last several hundred years when the law of Moses was added to the gospel (Galatians 3:8). [^10] The concepts of justice and mercy are eternal principles of the gospel and are to be properly balanced (see Alma 34:15-16; 42:11-31).

As a continuation of the concept of justice and mercy, the Lord reminds his people how they will know to properly follow these principles: "The Lord's voice crieth unto the city, and the man of wisdom shall see thy name: hear ye the rod, and who hath appointed it" (Micah 6:9). The rod spoken of here seems to be the same servant spoken of in Isaiah 11. Moroni testified that the prophecies in Isaiah 11 would soon be fulfilled (JS-H 1:40). Joseph Smith interpreted the rod as a servant in the hands of God (D&C 113:1-6). The traditional interpretation of Joseph Smith's explanation has been that it refers to Joseph himself or to the prophet of the Church. Thus, in another parallel of Isaiah, Micah teaches us to look to the president of the Church, who was appointed by the Lord for our guidance. Following this positive admonition, the Lord warns of several injustices such as wicked balances and violence of the rich, which will bring desolation and reproach upon his people.

Chapter 7 provides a further description of evil society. This description includes the absence of an upright person, seeking for blood, great evil, lack of trust, and dishonor in the family. The Savior cites some of these verses from Micah (Micah 7:6-7) in warning his apostles of what awaited them in their ministry (Matthew 10:35-36; Luke 12:53). The conclusion drawn by Micah, in light of these conditions, is to "look unto the Lord; I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God will hear me" (Micah 7:7). The message is that in spite of these conditions, the Lord will sustain Israel.

The conclusion of the book of Micah is that Israel should trust in the Lord to plead her cause and deliver her from her enemies. The Lord will show marvelous things, as when he brought Israel out of Egypt. The nations will lick the dust from Israel's feet, another tie-in with Isaiah (see Micah 7:17 and Isaiah 49:23). After praising the Lord's mercy, Micah assures the fulfillment of the covenant made to Jacob and Abraham (Micah 7:19-20). The fulfillment of this covenant is also a constant theme of Isaiah (see Isaiah 10:27; 11:12-15; 27:12-13).

Micah the Morasthite has added his testimony to the great words of Isaiah. The two together, along with others such as Amos and Hosea, fulfill the Lord's law of witnesses that "at the mouth of two witnesses or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be established" (Deuteronomy 19:15). The acceptance of these witnesses can bring us the blessings of the covenant of Israel and Abraham or the curses of the rebellious Gentiles.

Micah, the Second Witness to Isaiah The Lord's Law of Witnesses (Deuteronomy 19:15)

Concept Micah Isaiah Other Scriptures

Superscription 1:1 1:1 Samaria Destroyed 1:5-6, 9 1:5-8; 8:58 Mountains, Valleys 1:4 40:3-5 JST, Luke 3:4-11Sins of Israel 2:1-13 5:8-24; 9:8-10:4 Remnant Return 2:12 6:13; 10:20-21, 27 Leaders Err 3:59:11 Temple in the Mountains 4:1-3 2:2-4 D&C 57:3; 3 Ne. 21:11-23; 20:22 Strong Nation 4:7 55:1-5 Political Kingdom 4:9-10 66:5-10 Rev. 12:1-6 Lord's Thoughts 4:12 55:8 Sheaves into the Floor 4:133 Ne. 20:12-22 Gatherer to Zion 5:1 4:5-6 D&C 115:6 Ruler in Israel 5:2 Matt. 2:6; John 7:42 Judah's Return 5:3 3 Ne. 21:23-29 As a Lion among Sheep5:8-15 3 Ne. 16:13-15; 20:16-17; 21:12-21; D&C 87:5 Ritual vs. Justice and Mercy 6:6-8 1:10-14 Mosiah 13:27-32; Gal. 3:23-29 The Rod 6:9 11:1 D&C 113:6 Evil Society 7:6-7 Matt. 10:35-36; Luke 12:53 Lick the Dust 7:17 49:23 Abraham's Covenant 7:19-20 10:27; 11:12-15; 27:12-13

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The 589 b.c. date for the fall of Judah is based on its occurrence in the eleventh year of Zedekiah's reign (2 Kings 25:1-2) and the commencing of the Book of Mormon record in the first year of the reign of Zedekiah (1 Nephi 1:4). Lehi left Jerusalem 600 years before the birth of Christ (1 Nephi 10:4; 19:8; 2 Nephi 25:19). Although the Book of Mormon does not specify how long Lehi prophesied before he left Jerusalem, we generally assume that his teachings in Jerusalem were during the same year (1 Nephi 1:18-19). The traditional date of the fall of Jerusalem is 586 b.c.
[^2] For an analysis of Isaiah 36-39, see Monte S. Nyman, Great are the Words of Isaiah (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), pp. 129-39.
[^3] This interpretation was given at the dedication of the Idaho Falls Temple (Improvement Era, October 1945; Ensign, November 1971, p. 15, as quoted by Harold B. Lee). Dedicatory prayers are given by revelation (see the preface to section 109 in the Doctrine and Covenants).
[^4] At present (1990), The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has made a commitment not to preach the gospel or proselyte in Jerusalem. When the gospel is preached, it will be by invitation of that Jewish nation (see Isaiah 26:1-2).
[^5] James R. Clark, Messages of the First Presidency, 2:32 (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965).
[^6] This prophecy was probably originally in the book of Isaiah as well as in the book of Micah. This conclusion is drawn from the fact that Christ speaks repeatedly of the fulfillment of Isaiah's prophecies and never mentions Micah (see 3 Nephi 20:11-12; 23:1-2). Other prophecies of Isaiah are interspersed in the Savior's commentary (see 3 Nephi 16:7-20; 20:32-45; 21:29; 22:1-17). Although the Savior does make general references to the other prophets (3 Nephi 23:5), when he specifically quotes Malachi, he does identify Malachi's writings. With the loss of many plain and precious parts from the record of the Jews (1 Nephi 13:26-29), this theory seems highly plausible.
[^7] Elder Bruce R. McConkie labels the prophecy as millennial and as a part of the second coming of Christ. See Mortal Messiah, 4:335-37; 356-57.
[^8] Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, compiled by Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954), 2:251, and Elder Spencer W. Kimball, CR, October 1947, p. 22, have both taught that this is a future Lamanite prophet.
[^9] This caution was given by Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:249-50.
[^10] See the Prophet Joseph Smith's enlightening commentary on the concept of the law being added to the gospel and other insights on Galatians 3:8 in TPJS, p. 60.
