Monte S. Nyman, Farres H. Nyman, Words of the Twelve Prophets ( 1990)

9

Seventh-Century Prophets

Judah existed as a nation for over one hundred and thirty years after the fall of Northern Israel, 721 b.c. to 589 b.c. [^1] During this period, eight different kings reigned over the nation. Six of these eight kings were labeled as evil by the writers of Kings and Chronicles. After the first king, Hezekiah, only Josiah, the fourth king, gave Judah good leadership. Thus, Judah followed the pattern of her sister nation Israel by ripening in iniquity, which brought the wrath of God upon her unto destruction (1 Nephi 17:35). A brief analysis of each king's reign illustrates Judah's gradual downfall.

The abbreviated account of Hezekiah's reign (2 Kings 18-20) is also given in Isaiah 36-39 and belongs to a study of the prophet Isaiah. [^2] Hezekiah's years finished out the eighth century. His son Manasseh succeeded him and reigned for fifty-five years. Manasseh followed the abominations of the heathen and rebuilt the worship places and altars of Baal that his father had destroyed. These practices led the nation of Judah to do more evil than the nations that occupied the land of Canaan before Israel was brought out of Egypt (2 Kings 21:1-9). Manasseh was also guilty of shedding much innocent blood (2 Kings 21:16). The Lord warned Manasseh and the people of Judah through "his servants the prophets" (2 Kings 21:10-16; 2 Chronicles 33:18), but they would not hearken. The Lord therefore brought the captains of the king of Assyria upon Manasseh and carried him captive into Babylon. The afflictions under captivity humbled him; when he repented, the Lord returned him to Jerusalem (2 Chronicles 33:10-19). His repentance probably temporarily preserved the nation from destruction. Amon, the son of Manasseh, replaced his father as king but did evil in the sight of the Lord. After two years he was killed by a conspiracy of his own servants (2 Kings 21:19-24). The land was again ripening for destruction.

The ripening of Judah was sent into recession by an eight-year-old boy king, Josiah, son of Amon. His righteous reign of thirty-one years was highlighted by several significant events. In the eighth year of his reign (age sixteen), "he began to seek after the God of David his father: and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem" of Baalism (2 Chronicles 34:1-7). In the thirteenth year, the Lord called Jeremiah to be a prophet and to assist the young king in his reformation (Jeremiah 1:1-2). Zephaniah also prophesied during Josiah's ministry, but the Bible gives no dates of the beginning or end of his ministry (Zephaniah 1:1). Through these two prophets, and probably others, the Lord was establishing his word in the mouth of two or more witnesses (see Deuteronomy 19:15).

In the eighteenth year of Josiah's reign (age twenty-six), Josiah authorized a repair of the temple, the house of the Lord (2 Kings 22:3-7). In gathering the money for temple repair, "Hilkiah the priest found a book of the law of the Lord given to Moses" (2 Kings 22:8; 2 Chronicles 34:14). The book was delivered to Shaphan, Josiah's scribe, who delivered it to the king. Upon reading the book, Josiah recognized the failure of his people to live by what was revealed to Moses, and he was greatly troubled. He sent messengers to Huldah, a prophetess of whom little else is known, to inquire of the Lord concerning Judah's status in the eyes of the Lord. The prophetess inquired and learned of the impending destruction upon Judah but gave comfort to king Josiah that it would not come in his day (2 Kings 22:9-20). Obviously encouraged by the messengers' report, the king gathered his people together, read all the words of the newly found book to his people, and made a personal covenant "to walk after the Lord, and keep his commandments" as they were written in the book (2 Kings 23:1-3). He then caused all of Judah and Benjamin (the inhabitants of the nation of Judah) to enter into the same covenant (2 Chronicles 34:32). Josiah followed through on his covenant by removing everything from the land that pertained to the worship of Baal (2 Kings 23:4-20; 2 Chronicles 34:33).

Much speculation has arisen over the account of the discovery of the book of the law of the Lord revealed to Moses. What was that book? Was this the origin of scripture canonization? These and other similar questions, while interesting, are not within the scope of this work. They will be left to another's discussion or analysis of Bible content. The emphasis here is the reformation brought about by Josiah, king of Judah.

There was one more event initiated by Josiah. The passover was kept "as it was written in the book of this covenant." How diligent Israel had been in keeping the passover is not known, but Josiah instituted the keeping of the passover as it had not been kept since the days of Samuel the prophet (2 Kings 23:21-23; 2 Chronicles 35:1-19).

The author of 2 Kings states that there was "no king before [Josiah], that turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses; neither after him arose there any like him" (2 Kings 23:25). In spite of his leadership, the seeds of sin sown by Manasseh were deeply entrenched in the people of Judah: "And the Lord said, I will remove Judah also out of my sight, as I have removed Israel, and will cast off this city Jerusalem which I have chosen, and the house of which I said, My name shall be there" (2 Kings 23:27).

Josiah was killed in battle against Necho, king of Egypt. This probably hastened the time of the Lord's threatened destruction. His death brought great sorrow and lamentation to the prophet Jeremiah (2 Chronicles 35:20-25). The Lord had raised them both up to give Judah an opportunity to repent. Although they were effective to some degree, the ripening in iniquity would continue under the next four kings.

Two of the last four kings reigned for only three months each. The other two coincidentally reigned for eleven years each. Jehoahaz the son of Josiah was the first to reign for three months. There is no record of what he did in his short tenure other than evil as his fathers had done. This implies Baalism. He was captured and taken to Egypt and was replaced by another son of Josiah, Eliakim, who reigned for eleven years. His name was changed to Jehoiakim by the king of Egypt, whose servant or puppet king he became. After three years Jehoiakim rebelled against Egypt but was taken captive by Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon and was his puppet king. The Babylonian captivity resulted in many of Judah's people being carried into captivity there. Among the first group of captives was a young man named Daniel, whom the Lord raised up as a prophet to the people of exile (Daniel 1:1).

Jehoiakim was replaced as puppet king by his son Jehoiachin but after three months was taken to Babylon with other Jewish captives. Among this group of ten thousand was another young man named Ezekiel, who was, like Daniel, called to be a prophet to the exiled people (Ezekiel 1:1-3). Another son of Josiah, Mattaniah, whose name was changed to Zedekiah, became the puppet king for the next eleven years. After eleven years, the prophecies of Jeremiah were fulfilled, and Judah as a nation was destroyed and taken captive into Babylon (Jeremiah 25:1-7). The long prophesied event had taken place. Judah had become ripe in iniquity, and the Lord removed her out of his sight as the prophets had warned.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] There is one slight change in the 1944 edition of the JST in Nahum 1:8. The source of this change is questionable and is insignificant.
[^2] As prophesied by Amos, the Lord was to sift the house of Israel among all the nations of the earth (Amos 9:8-9).
