Monte S. Nyman, Farres H. Nyman, Words of the Twelve Prophets ( 1990)

10

The Vision of Nahum Concerning Nineveh

The prophet Nahum has received little attention from The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, either by its members or its prophets. The Prophet Joseph Smith made no changes to Nahum's writings in his translation of the Bible. [^1] Nahum is rarely, if ever, quoted in the conferences of the Church. The brevity of the book may be a factor. It contains only three short chapters covering less than three pages. We know little of Nahum or the historical setting in which he prophesied.

Nineveh, the city to whom this message of doom and destruction is delivered, was the capital city of the ancient Assyrian empire. The destruction of the city is traditionally dated as 712 b.c. and came at the hands of Nabopolassar, the father of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylonia. The dating of the book of Nahum is therefore placed somewhere prior to this captivity. The prophet is called an Elkoshite in the superscription of the book (Nahum 1:1), but nothing more is known about the writer and his background.

There is no religious theme or message to the book except the pronounced downfall of the city, although it is considered to be very good poetic literature. Some commentators see the book in the role of dual prophecy, the first destruction being symbolic of the destruction of the Gentiles in the latter days. The first chapter is a praise to God's destructive attributes that will soon come upon Nineveh and to his merciful deliverance of his people. The second chapter describes the city's downfall, and the third chapter tells why it was destroyed. The specifics of each chapter will follow.

The first six verses of chapter 1 describe the Lord's justice and his ability to bring destruction. Although he is slow to anger, the implied cause of the coming destruction is that his patience has run out and he cannot "acquit the wicked" for their sinful nature (Nahum 1:3). There are none of those wicked who can stand before his indignation when he decrees what is to happen (Nahum 1:6).

The next five verses (Nahum 1:7-11) give some comfort to the righteous who are among the wicked (see 1 Nephi 17:37). Nahum says that God is good and knows those who trust in him (Nahum 1:7). In spite of these good people, the majority of the people are evil (Nahum compares them to thorns) and drunkards and will be devoured as stubble (Nahum 1:10). The people also have a very wicked leader who is fighting against the Lord (Nahum 1:11). This wickedness could be described as being "ripened in iniquity" because it is the cause of a people being destroyed (Genesis 15:16; 1 Nephi 17:35). Nineveh's doom has been sealed.

In typical fashion, the Lord reveals to Nahum the message of hope that always follows the message of doom (Nahum 1:12-14). To whom this message is addressed is not clear, but since chapter 2 refers to Jacob and Israel, the message may be addressed to those Israelites who were taken into captivity by Assyria in 721 b.c.

A possible interpretation of Nahum 1:12 is that the italicized words "they be," which were added by the King James translators, had reference to those captive Israelites. The description of their being quiet describes their captivity. Though their captors are many, yet they will be cut down by the invading Nabopolassar. However, the captured Israelites will not be further afflicted. The Assyrian yoke is to be broken off from captive Israel, and no more of her people are to be sown among the Gentiles. [^2] The Lord had commanded that Israel was now to be taken as a group into the North, as recorded in 2 Esdras. There they would have the worship of false gods removed from them and there they would eventually go into spiritual death or oblivion because of a yet future apostasy. [^3] The lost tribes of Israel would then remain in their apostate condition until God again sent his prophets to publish the good tidings of the restored gospel and to bring peace to them wherever they were at that time. Also in typical Old Testament fashion, Nahum adds a message of hope for Judah, the other place of the latter-day gathering of the house of Israel. As Judah returns to her original solemn feasts (righteous living) and performs her vows (keeps the covenants she would again enter), the wicked will no longer tread her down but will be utterly cut off (Nahum 1:15). Thus, the Lord's long-range plans were revealed through Nahum.

The second chapter describes the destruction of Nineveh and is a type of the destruction to take place in the last days. This conclusion is drawn from the descriptions of chariots with flaming torches that rage in the streets and jostle one against another. The chariot combat of ancient times is supposedly used to describe the tanks and other armored vehicles with modern lighting systems (Nahum 2:3-4). While this is all plausible, verse 2 also has an important message. In the days of the Nineveh captivity, the Lord had taken away the excellency of Jacob, at least from the northern kingdom of Israel. The "emptiers" having "emptied them out" seems to refer to their being taken not only out of the habitat of their promised land but also out of Assyria and into the North, as suggested above. That the verse is primarily a prophecy of the latter days is supported by the last phrase of the verse: the branches of the vine have been marred (Nahum 2:2). If this is a sequential prophecy, the marring following the emptying out would be the apostasy following Christ's visit in the meridian of time. This interpretation would allow the chariots with lights and jostling in the streets to be a description of the Gentiles warring among themselves after the times of their opportunity to hear the gospel, as described by the prophet Isaiah (Isaiah 49:25-26; compare 1 Nephi 22:13-14). Thus the Ninevites represent the latter-day Gentiles, and the destruction described also symbolizes the destruction of the Gentiles in the times of their fulness, when they reject the fulness of the gospel and the gospel is taken from them. The Spirit thus withdraws, and they are left to war among themselves (see 3 Nephi 16:10; D&C 45:29-31).

The "worthies" that are recounted in Nahum 2:5 are the leaders. The Lord holds the destinies of all nations in his hand (D&C 117:6), and the wicked leaders of the Gentiles will be removed. The next several verses describe the literal destruction of ancient Nineveh. Huzzab is the queen of Nineveh. The lions probably represent the royalty of Assyria—the king and the princes. All of these leaders and the city were to be ravaged and spoiled in ancient fashion (2:6-12).

The chapter concludes with a declaration that the Lord has decreed this terrible destruction and that he has also withdrawn his messengers, the prophets (Nahum 2:13). The same will be true of the latter-day destruction and withdrawal of the missionaries from among the Gentiles as they reject the gospel (see 3 Nephi 16:10).

The causes of the forthcoming destruction are outlined in chapter 3. The first cause is the lies and the robbery that flourish in the bloody city (Nahum 3:1-3). The second cause is immorality (Nahum 1:4). This is more than sexual immorality, which, of course, will itself destroy a nation (Jacob 3:3, 6). Nineveh's immorality extends to the worship of witchcrafts or false gods (Nahum 3:4). Assyria had apparently been offered the gospel through the captive Israelites, a possible Gentile graft (Jacob 5:7). This offer would symbolically represent a marriage with Jehovah, but she chose to worship the false gods of her various witchcrafts. The Lord announces that he will disclose her immoral practices to the nations and kingdoms of the world. This disclosure is probably the evidence that Nineveh's false gods cannot save her against the only true and living God, Jehovah (Nahum 3:5-7). The Lord uses the ancient Egyptian city of No as an example of what will happen to Nineveh, thus illustrating how fruitless her efforts to prevent the destruction will be (Nahum 3:8-18).

The final decree may also have dual meaning. Nineveh will be scattered, never to be gathered again. The bruise will not heal, the wound will be grievous (Nahum 3:19). While a modern-day city, Mosul, has been built nearby, the ancient Nineveh is still a desolate ruin in the desert. Likewise, when the Gentiles reject the gospel, the Lord will take the gospel to Israel (3 Nephi 16:11- 2). The Lord will have fulfilled his promise that the first to receive the gospel in the meridian of time (Israel) will be last to receive it in the latter days; and the last to receive the gospel in the meridian of time (the Gentiles) will be the first to receive it in the last days. While the book of Nahum has been ignored by most Latter-day Saints, there is an important message in its brief record.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith made no corrections in his inspired translation of the Bible in the book of Habakkuk. Because there are differences between Habakkuk 1:5 and the Savior's quotation of it in 3 Nephi 21:9, Joseph apparently did not have sufficient time to carefully review the book of Habakkuk in his translation work.
[^2] Theodor H. Gaster, The Dead Sea Scriptures, p. 244.
[^3] Gaster, pp. 247-48.
