Monte S. Nyman, Farres H. Nyman, Words of the Twelve Prophets ( 1990)

11

Habakkuk: The Lord Is in His Holy Temple

Everyone at some time wonders whether God is aware of and concerned with his or her life. As a person is given more respon- sibility for the lives of other people, that question enlarges to one of how involved God is or will become in the lives of those over whom he or she has jurisdiction.

The book of Habakkuk answers that question with a declaration that "the Lord is in his holy temple": he is on the job and in full control. Therefore the inhabitants of the earth should "keep silence before [God]." They should listen to and obey his voice rather than question his involvement (Habakkuk 2:20). The historical setting for this great teaching illustrates when and why Habakkuk posed this question and how it was answered.

The book of Habakkuk has no time period given in its superscription. It merely states that it is "the burden [message of doom] which Habakkuk the prophet did see" (Habakkuk 1:1). It is generally assumed that Habakkuk is writing about the conquest of Judah by Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon. This took place about the seventh year of the reign of Jehoiakim, king of Judah. Egypt under Pharaoh-nechoh had captured Judah after the death of Josiah, king of Judah. The pharaoh carried Jehoahaz captive into Egypt and appointed Jehoahaz's brother Jehoiakim as puppet king (2 Kings 23:31-35). In the fourth year of Jehoiakim's reign, Nebuchadnezzar defeated Egypt and conquered Judah. Jehoiakim became the puppet king to Nebuchadnezzar for three years and then rebelled against him (2 Kings 24:1; Jeremiah 25:1). Nebuchadnezzar then sent bands of Chaldeans, Syrians, Moabites, and Ammonites against Judah to destroy it (2 Kings 24:2).

The traditional dating of this conquest is around 605 b.c. Habakkuk, along with Jeremiah, could possibly be one of the prophets God raised up to warn against the conquest of Babylon (2 Kings 24:2-4; Jeremiah 25:1-2).

A second dating of Habakkuk's warning message could be Nebuchadnezzar's conquest and destruction of Jerusalem in the eleventh year of Zedekiah about nineteen years later (589 b.c. Book of Mormon dating or 586 b.c. traditional dating). The content of Jeremiah 25 would suggest this later date. Either date is drawn from the Lord's reference to his raising up the Chaldeans in answer to a question posed by Habakkuk (Habakkuk 1:1-6). Either date also makes Habakkuk a second witness with Jeremiah to the prophesied conquest of Jerusalem.

That Habakkuk has been prophesying for some time is implied by his opening statement, "O Lord, how long shall I cry, and thou wilt not hear" (Habakkuk 1:2). Habakkuk is apparently perplexed. He has observed the wickedness of the people. He has repeatedly warned them, and yet the Lord has as yet done nothing about it (Habakkuk 1:2-4). Jeremiah had had similar feelings (Jeremiah 20:7-13).

The Prophet Joseph Smith also cried out in like manner against the suffering of the Saints in Missouri (D&C 121:1-6). From the Prophet Joseph's writings, we learn that "when the heart is sufficiently contrite, then the voice of inspiration" comes in answer to the prophet's query (HC 3:293). We therefore assume that as Habakkuk humbled himself, he received the Lord's response to his question.

The Lord revealed to Habakkuk: "Behold ye among the heathen, and regard, and wonder marvelously: for I will work a work in your days, which ye will not believe, though it be told you" (Habakkuk 1:5). Although the Prophet Joseph Smith made no changes in this passage as he translated the Bible, [^1] "your days" does not refer to Habakkuk's day alone. The work that the Lord referred to was to be fulfilled in the latter days among the heathen or Gentile nations, as shown in the Book of Mormon. The Lord is obviously quoting or paraphrasing Habakkuk, or another prophet who taught the same principle, to the Nephites when he stated: "For in that day, for my sake shall the Father work a work, which shall be a great and a marvelous work among them; and there shall be among them those who will not believe it, although a man shall declare it unto them" (3 Nephi 21:9). The context of the Savior's quotation to the Nephites shows this marvelous work to be the bringing forth of the Book of Mormon by the Prophet Joseph Smith (3 Nephi 21:1-11).

Paul also quoted this verse in the synagogue at Antioch as evidence that Christ and the higher law would not be believed and as a warning against their rejecting him (Acts 13:40-41). Paul did not, however, say that the events of his day fulfilled the prophecy.

From the inspired Book of Mormon text, we can see that the Lord is revealing to Habakkuk that even in the last days there will be those who refuse to listen to the Lord's word revealed through his prophets. From this interpretation can also be drawn some insight in the first phrase of the Lord's answer to Habakkuk, "Behold ye among the heathen." The Lord seems to be saying that evil will not be limited to Habakkuk's day, but that there will be evil in the world as long as Israel lives among the heathens or the Gentiles. The balance between justice and mercy will not be attained until the end of this mortal probation. That the Lord was covering such a broad concept of time is supported by the translation of a commentary on Habakkuk found among the Dead Sea Scrolls. The commentator gave his interpretation that the verse had reference to Habakkuk's own day and to future times, even to the last days or the final age when God would appoint a priest to interpret the words of the prophets. This latter-day interpreter we know today to be Joseph Smith:

This refers to the traitors who have aligned themselves with the man of lies. For they did not believe what he who expounded the Law aright told them on the authority of God. It refers also to those who betrayed the new covenant, for [the word rendered "believe" also means "keep faith" and therefore alludes to the fact that] they have not kept faith with the Covenant of God, but have profaned His holy name. Again, it refers to future traitors—that is, to the lawless men who will betray the Covenant and not believe when they hear all the things that are to come upon the final age duly related by the priest whom God appoints to interpret in those days all the words of His servants the prophets by whom He has told of that impending disaster. [^2]

Following the long-range answer to the question of why the Lord allows evil to continue, the Lord then revealed to Habakkuk what he is going to do about the present situation. He will raise up the Chaldeans (Babylonians) and allow them to march through the breadth of the land of Judah and possess it. The Lord then further describes the terribleness of the Chaldeans and their earthly power (Habakkuk 1:5-11). Thus the present evil of such great concern to Habakkuk will be put to an end.

The Lord's answer, however, raises another serious question in the mind of Habakkuk. The prophet begins his question by asking about the eternal nature of God: "Art thou not from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine Holy One?" He then adds the comment that "we shall not die," which seems to be a declaration that the people will not be utterly destroyed but that the Lord is using the Chaldeans to bring judgment and correction upon the nation (Habakkuk 1:12). Using Hebrew parallelism, the same thought is repeated in the second line. Habakkuk acknowledged that God's eyes are "purer than to behold evil, and canst not look on iniquity" and then asks his second major question, "Wherefore lookest thou upon them that deal treacherously, and holdest thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he?" (Habakkuk 1:13). To paraphrase the question, Habakkuk is asking why God is using a people who are more wicked than the people of Judah to destroy the nation of Judah? He continued by comparing the people of Judah to fish being caught by men who are representative of the Babylonians (Habakkuk 1:14-17). Showing a determination to receive an answer to his question, even if he is chastised, Habakkuk declares: "I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will watch to see what [God] will say unto me, and what I shall answer when I am reproved" (Habakkuk 2:1). It is not recorded how long he had to wait, but it is unlikely that he waited long before the Lord answered.

The Lord, in his answer, first commanded Habakkuk to "write the vision, and make it plain upon tables, that he may run that readeth it" (Habakkuk 2:2). The interpretation of this passage seems to be that what Habakkuk is about to have revealed to him is to be recorded for future readers and recorded in a manner that the reader will be able to speedily read and understand the message. The Dead Sea Scrolls have another interesting commentary: "God told Habakkuk to write down the things that were to come upon the latter age, but He did not inform him when that moment would come to fulfillment." [^3] Although this commentary is not scripture, it is consistent with the text.

The following verse also implies that the "vision" has reference to a future time. The verse reads, "For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry" (Habakkuk 2:3). The scroll gives this commentary: "This refers to the fact that the final moment may be protracted beyond anything which the prophets have foretold, for God moves in a mysterious way His wonders to perform. . . . This is addressed to the men of truth, the men who carry out the Law [Torah], who do not relax from serving the Truth, even though the final moment be long drawn out. Assuredly, all the times appointed by God will come in due course, even as He has determined in His inscrutable wisdom." [^4] Again, this commentary seems to suggest the truth that justice is not always observable or immediate or perhaps not even met in this life, but in the end justice will take its course and the results will be according to the eternal truths of the eternal God.

The Lord reassured Habakkuk that "his soul which is lifted up is not upright in him: but the just shall live by his faith" (Habakkuk 2:4). To again paraphrase, a person who pretends to be upright but is not upright in the Lord will have his day of reckoning before the Lord. It is basically the same teaching as given by Jesus that "every one who exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted" (Luke 18:14). The last concept is usually attributed to Paul but is probably quoted from Habakkuk by Paul in his writings, "but the just shall live by his faith" (Habakkuk 2:4; see Romans 1:17; Galatians 3:11; Hebrews 10:3-4). The Lord is telling Habakkuk to not worry about justice in this life, for those who will be justified in the end are those who live by the faith that in the eternal end justice will be met. Salvation is an individual matter, and each person will be judged by how he or she deals with trials and tribulations in this life. As Paul wrote to the Romans, salvation comes to Jew and Gentile as they believe and grows from faith to faith (Romans 1:16-18). To the Galatians, Paul taught that people were not justified by the law (of Moses), that is, by the external meeting of physical commandments, but that salvation came through faith in what the law of Moses represented, the type and shadow of Christ as taught in the law (Galatians 3:10-12, 24). In Hebrews, he [^5] uses both verses 3 and 4 to illustrate living by faith until the time of Christ's coming. When properly understood, the gospel as taught in the Old Testament is the same as that taught in the New Testament.

The Lord follows his profound teachings to Habakkuk with several examples and warnings of how justice will eventually be exercised upon those who appear to be prospering in this life. The first example is of a man who is fond of alcohol and neglects his home yet gathers to himself much from all nations and subjects many people to him. The Lord declares that all these things will witness against him in the end (Habakkuk 2:5-8). The second example is of a man who covets earthly possessions and trusts in these riches to keep him from the evils of the world. These things he has acquired at the expense of other people, and these possessions will testify against him at the last day (Habakkuk 2:9-11). The third example is of a man who builds himself a political empire through blood and iniquity and involves many other people in his empire. The conclusion is that knowledge of the Lord is the most prized possession, "for the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea" (Habakkuk 2:12- 4). This message was also given by Isaiah as a millennial condition (Isaiah 11:9). [^6] The fourth example is a warning to the man who influences his neighbors to indulge in wickedness so that he may take advantage of them. The Lord's wrath will come upon him (Habakkuk 2:15-17). The final warning is to the man who makes or worships graven images. The revelation then concludes: "But the Lord is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before him" (Habakkuk 2:20).

The Lord does not operate through graven images. The Lord dwells in his holy temple and is an all-knowing and perfectly just God. All earthly philosophies and powers will someday acknowledge his omniscience and his power and keep silent in awe of him. Those who will learn to do so now will be justified in the day of judgment.

The final chapter of Habakkuk is written as a prayer upon Shigionoth. "Shigionoth is a musical instruction meaning perhaps 'free,' 'diverse'; it would have implications to the performer like 'ad lib.' Selah (vv. 3, 9, 13) is thought to make places where the chanting could make certain liturgical breaks. In any case, the subject and purpose of the song is to praise the Lord." [^7] The prayer basically acknowledges that God is a just God.

Habakkuk begins his prayer with a declaration that upon hearing the Lord's answer to his question he was afraid. Probably this fear came because of his realization of the greatness of God and his own weakness. The word afraid might better be translated as "awed" or "overcome." He pleads for the Lord to remember or show forth some mercy in the midst of the forthcoming justice of wrath upon Judah. He acknowledges the Lord's involvement in his dealings with the people of Israel in the past and his power over the earth and the elements of the earth (Habakkuk 3:3-12). He further acknowledges that the Lord's actions have always been for the salvation of his children (Habakkuk 3:13-15). Habakkuk again describes his reactions to the Lord's speech and pleads for the Lord's blessings when the prophesied conquest comes upon his people (Habakkuk 3:15). He further declares that no matter what happens—whether the crops fail or the animals are lost—he will rejoice in the Lord, the God of his salvation. He knows that the Lord God is his strength and the source of his blessings. He wants the chief singer to proclaim these thoughts on his stringed instruments (Habakkuk 3:17-19).

The Lord's message to Habakkuk is one that all people must learn. Just as everyone asks questions about God's involvement in his or her life, all will someday learn or be forced to acknowledge that God is in his temple and is in command and controlling the final outcome of the earth and its inhabitants. This answer he has periodically revealed to other servants. Through the Psalmist he said, "Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the heathen, I will be exalted in the earth" (Psalm 46:10). To Joseph Smith's question of why the Saints suffered in Missouri, he responded, "My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; and then if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes" (D&C 121:7-8). Earlier he had revealed to Joseph in the form of a question, "Do I not hold the destinies of all the armies of the nations of the earth?" (D&C 117:6). It is better that we learn this lesson from the experience of Habakkuk and others than from the sadness of our own pride and conceit.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The prophecy of the people of Judah occupying the seacoasts does not state to what extent they will occupy it. Today the Gaza Strip that occupies much of the area described is part of the Palestinian territory occupied by the modern nation of Israel, and much trouble is brewing. Nor does prophecy always indicate that what will happen is the Lord's will. It merely states that it will happen. This specific prophecy does say the Lord will visit them (Judah) and turn away their captivity (Zephaniah 1:7).
[^2] Violence to the law of Moses probably has reference to the multiplication of interpretation by the elders and rabbis through the years, having lost the true meaning of the law as a schoolmaster to bring them to Christ (Galatians 3:24).
[^3] The Father covenanted to give the Americas to Joseph's descendants as declared by the Savior to the Nephites when he ministered to them (3 Nephi 15:12-13). This covenant was part of the covenant made with Jacob, father of the twelve tribes (3 Nephi 20:22; Genesis 49:22-26).
[^4] The footnote in the LDS edition of the King James Version of the Bible gives "in" as the meaning of the Hebrew word.
[^5] The Prophet Joseph Smith identified the Zion spoken of by the Old Testament prophets as North and South America (TPJS, p. 362).
[^6] The knowledge that will fill the earth with the glory of the Lord is his records of eternal truths that he has periodically revealed to mankind. The primary record will be the sealed portion of the records delivered by Moroni to Joseph Smith that were not translated into the Book of Mormon (D&C 5:4-9). For a more complete account of various records that will be available in the Millennium, see Nyman, Great are the Words of Isaiah, (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980), p. 73.
[^7] Ellis T. Rasmussen, An Introduction to the Old Testament and Its Teachings, part 2, Brigham Young University Press, 1967.
