Monte S. Nyman, Farres H. Nyman, Words of the Twelve Prophets ( 1990)

12

Zephaniah: A Second Witness with Jeremiah

The Book of Mormon promises that in the last days the Jews will begin to gather to Jerusalem as they begin to believe in Christ. As they fully believe in Christ, they will complete their gathering and become a delightsome people (2 Nephi 30:7; 3 Nephi 20:29-42). The book of Zephaniah teaches these same promises and outlines the sequence of these happenings from Zephaniah's time until those promises are fulfilled, which will be sometime in the Millennium. Other Old Testament prophets bear testimony of various parts of Zephaniah's prophecy, but he it is who provides a brief overview of the main movements.

Zephaniah prophesied in the days of Josiah, king of Judah. Josiah reigned thirty-one years in Jerusalem and was a good king, the last of the good kings before the downfall of Jerusalem in 589 b.c. (Book of Mormon dating). The next four kings—Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah—are all labeled as evil in the sight of the Lord (2 Kings 23:17-24:19). Jeremiah began his ministry in the thirteenth year of Josiah's reign and prophesied also during the reigns of the four evil kings. He is considered to be the chief prophet of that period (Jeremiah 1:2-3). During which years of Josiah's reign Zephaniah prophesied is not stated, although his ministry apparently ended before Jeremiah's because no other kings are mentioned in Zephaniah's records.

Josiah began to seek the Lord in the eighth year of his reign, and he began to purge Judah of her wickedness in the twelfth year (2 Chronicles 34:3-6). The Lord apparently raised up Jeremiah to assist Josiah in this reformation, and since the Lord always establishes his word in the mouth of two or three witnesses, Zephaniah and Habakkuk were called to serve as those other witnesses. There may have been others as well.

Zephaniah is considered by some to be of royal lineage since the superscription traces his genealogy to Hizkiah (Hezekiah). Whether this Hezekiah is the previous king of Judah is an assumption that has not been proven. Another priest by the name of Zephaniah mentioned in 2 Kings 25:18 see also Jeremiah21:1; 37:3) is not the same as the prophet. The prophet's message is more important than his genealogy.

The opening statement of Zephaniah's prophecy is "I will utterly consume all things from off the land, saith the Lord" (Zephaniah 1:2).

Perhaps Zephaniah was one of the many prophets who were warning Judah in the days prior to Lehi's departure (1 Nephi 1:4; 2 Chronicles 36:15-16). Zephaniah is often associated with the invasion of the Scythians, a barbarous group from southern Russia who had affiliated with Assyria just prior to her downfall as the world power and her conquest by the Babylonians. His ministry should not be limited to this invasion, however. The opening prophecy sounds more like the coming Babylonian destruction than the Scythian threat that never materialized. It also suggests more than the Babylonian conquest in verse 3, which speaks of the consumption of man and beast. This wording has led some to suggest that it is a description of the Second Coming. The chapter heading to Zephaniah 1 in the LDS version of the King James Bible indicates that "the destruction of Judah is a type of the second coming." The wording of verse 4, "I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem," suggests another possibility. Zephaniah is using the already known prophesied destruction that will occur at Christ's second coming as an attention getter before delivering his message of destruction to Judah. Although the setting for the opening prophecy is uncertain, the message to Judah is more specific concerning the cause of their destruction—the worship of Baal and other false gods, and the forsaking and ignoring of the Lord (Zephaniah 1:4-6).

Zephaniah then returns to the Second Coming prophecies and uses them as an example of a similar destruction upon Judah as he speaks of the day of the Lord being at hand (Zephaniah 1:7). In this verse, the bidding of guests to the sacrifice the Lord has prepared is similar to the parable of the great supper (Luke 14:15-24) or the parable of the marriage of the king's son (Matthew 22:1-4), both referring to the Second Coming. Assuming these verses have reference to the Second Coming, the following verses (8-10), introduced with phrases such as "in the same day," are bringing the present audience of Zephaniah back to their own day. Verse 8 speaks of those clothed with strange apparel (Zephaniah 1:8). This is similar to the Matthew parable. Perhaps there were other similar parables at one time in the Old Testament before the plain and precious parts were removed (1 Nephi 13:24-29), and Zephaniah is thus merely referring to things that already had been taught. He again becomes more specific geographically about the destruction that is pending. He warns those who do not acknowledge the hand of the Lord in their lives, saying that "the Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil" (Zephaniah 1:9-12).

Once more Zephaniah uses latter-day prophecies to illustrate the coming destruction of the goods and houses of his own people. As Isaiah had prophesied that in the Millennium people would build houses and inhabit them and plant vineyards and eat the fruit of them (Isaiah 65:22), so Zephaniah specifies that just the opposite was to occur with the people of Judah (Zephaniah 1:13). The great day of the Lord was near for the people of Judah. It would be a day of wrath, trouble, distress, and darkness for them just as the Second Coming will be for the people in the last days (Zephaniah 1:14-16). These conditions would come because the people had sinned against the Lord, and their silver and gold would not be able to deliver them (Zephaniah 1:17-18). Thus Zephaniah is using the prophecies of the destruction of the wicked at the Lord's second coming to warn his present generation of their nation's coming destruction because of their collective wickedness.

Having foretold of the coming destruction, Zephaniah invites those who had been and will be scattered at the time of the destruction to now gather: "Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together, O nation not desired" (Zephaniah 2:1). The "nation not desired" apparently refers to the nation of Judah but may in the broader sense refer to all the house of Israel. Both gatherings will be "before the day of the Lord's anger come upon you" (Zephaniah 2:2). Those who are meek and seek the Lord may "be hid in the day of the Lord's anger" (Zephaniah 2:3). As Isaiah had foretold, the Lord will gather his people together and protect them from the destruction of the wicked (Isaiah 4:5-6). Clearly Zephaniah is again speaking of the Second Coming and the time immediately preceding this advent.

Continuing a description of the period prior to the Second Coming, Zephaniah prophesies about the land surrounding Judah. He first foretells of the cities and peoples of the seacoast: Gaza, Askelon, Ashdod, and Ekron, the land of the Philistines. He prophesies that a remnant of Judah will be freed from their captivity and occupy this land (Zephaniah 1:4-7). [^1]

The next prophecy is about Moab and Ammon, the countries traditionally settled by Lot's daughters and lying east of the Jordan River, the present-day nation of Jordan. These two countries were to have destruction and perpetual desolation because they had reproached and magnified themselves against the people of the Lord (Zephaniah 2:8-11). The time of the prophecy is not stated, but the same time period as those against the seacoast is implied by the reference to the residue of the people of Judah who were to be gathered before the great day of the Lord.

The Lord through Zephaniah then proclaims the fate of the Ethiopians and Assyrians, specifically singling out the ancient city of Nineveh, capital of Assyria. Ethiopia was to be slain by the sword and Assyria destroyed (Zephaniah 2:12-15).

Following his messages of doom to the nations surrounding Judah, the Lord turns to Judah in a similar manner as he did to Israel through the prophet Amos (Amos 1:3-2:5). He describes her rejection of the Lord through following corrupt princes and judges, treacherous prophets, and priests who polluted the sanctuary (temple) and did violence to the law of Moses [^2] (Zephaniah 3:1- 4). The Lord is just and punished other nations for their iniquity; Judah should have learned from that and received instruction from the Lord, but she also corrupted herself (Zephaniah 3:5-7; compare Jeremiah 3:7-10). The time of Judah's corruption is not specified but is probably a general description of her whole history since the rest of the chapter speaks of the last days. Although Judah had gathered, she had not accepted the gospel.

The book of Zephaniah concludes, as do most of the other Old Testament prophets, with a message of hope. The doom of Judah and surrounding nations had been sounded. The hope is far into the future, in the latter days. There are six parts to this prophetic hope. The Lord will gather all the nations and kingdoms of the world against Judah to pour out his indignation upon them, even to being devoured by his fire (Zephaniah 3:8). This seems to be the same prophecy as Joel's prophecy of all nations gathering into the valley of Jehoshaphat or the valley of decision (Joel 3).

The second part of Zephaniah's prophecy will then be fulfilled—the Lord will restore unto his gathered people a pure language (Zephaniah 3:9). This was interpreted by the Prophet Joseph Smith as the time of the gathering and restoration of Israel, "when he will turn to them a pure language, and the earth will be filled with sacred knowledge" (TPJS, p. 93). This language will probably be that of Adam or the language as it was before the Lord confounded the language of all the earth at the time of the building of the tower of Babel (Genesis 11:1-9; see also Moses 6:5-6). The return of this language will better enable the Lord's people to call upon him and serve him with one consent (Zephaniah 1:9). To serve with one consent is probably the law of common consent, the receiving of revelation from the Lord and sustaining the revelation by the voice of the people (D&C 26:2).

Zephaniah's third point is that the Lord's suppliants (messengers) will come from beyond the rivers of Ethiopia to bring the Lord's offering (the gospel). These messengers would be the daughter of Israel's dispersed, the descendants of Israel who had been scattered among the Gentiles but were previously gathered out and the gospel restored to them (Zephaniah 3:10). "Beyond the rivers of Ethiopia" therefore refers to the Americas. This is the same prophecy as given by Isaiah previously (Isaiah 18). The Lord establishes his word in the mouth of two or more witnesses (Deuteronomy 19:15).

In the day that the messengers come to Judah, Judah was to not be ashamed for her transgressions against the Lord and was to lose her pride and haughtiness. This condition was to be brought about because of the holy mountain or temple that would be built among the people of Judah (Zephaniah 3:11). Joseph Smith taught that Judah must return and the temple be rebuilt before the Son of Man would make his appearance (TPJS, pp. 286-87). Thus, to interpret Zephaniah in this manner would sustain the prophecy of Joseph Smith. Those people who are left following the deliverance of Judah from the gentile nations would trust in the Lord even though they were an afflicted and poor people (Zephaniah 3:12). They would also be an honest and fearless people (Zephaniah 3:13). This people would then be as the Book of Mormon teaches, a city built up as a holy city whose inhabitants have been washed in the blood of the Lamb and are partakers of the fulfilling of the covenant that God made to their father Abraham (Ether 13:5, 11).

Old Testament prophecies often refer to more than one people or group. Jacob, son of Lehi, said that "Isaiah spake concerning all the house of Israel" (2 Nephi 6:5). As an example, Jesus quoted Isaiah 52:8-10 as being fulfilled through the latter-day Lamanites. Later he quoted the same verses as being fulfilled through the latter-day Jews.

Therefore, Zephaniah's prophecy may also refer to the people from whom these messengers would come. In the day when these messengers were sent, the people from whom they came—the gathered remnants of Israel in the land of Joseph (the Americas) [^3]—will be stripped of their pride and haughtiness. This will be "because" of the Lord's holy mountain (Zephaniah 3:11). The holy mountain may have reference to the temples that will be established among them (Isaiah 2:2-3) or may have a broader interpretation of being "in" the Lord's holy mountain. [^4] This latter interpretation would suggest the holy mountain to be the land of America. It would have the same connotation as Jacob's blessing to Joseph concerning a branch of his people extending to the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills, the Americas (Genesis 49:22-26; compare Deuteronomy 33:13-17). This remnant of Israel, although an afflicted and poor people, will trust in the name of the Lord. They will not speak lies nor do iniquity (Zephaniah 3:12-13). The "poor and afflicted people" probably refers to their being persecuted and driven across the United States to settle in the Rocky Mountains.

The daughter of Zion (the remnant in America) [^5] is invited by the Lord to sing and to shout. Jerusalem is invited to be glad and rejoice (Zephaniah 3:14). They are to do so because the Lord has cast out their enemy, and he is in the midst of them (Zephaniah 3:15). The two nations, originally Israel in the North and Judah in the South, are united again, and one king, the Lord Jesus Christ, will be over them. Jerusalem is not to fear, and Zion is not to slacken her efforts. The Lord will save them and rejoice over them (Zephaniah 3:16-17). Ezekiel foretold the same restoration (Ezekiel 37:15-28).

The last of the six points of Zephaniah's conclusion is regarding the gathering of all the people of Israel and establishing them as a great people in the eyes of all the earth (Zephaniah 3:18-20). Those gathered will be "of thee" (Israel), who have been under the burden of the Gentiles. Those who were driven out will be gathered, and whereas they have been put to shame previously, they will now be praised and become famous. Again Isaiah had foretold the same destiny of scattered Israel when they were gathered (Isaiah 49:7, 23). All of these blessings were to follow Judah's going into captivity.

The book of Zephaniah describes the fall of Jerusalem and the scattering of Judah among the nations. It further describes the eventual gathering of the people of Judah in the last days and a restoration of their blessings as a tribe of the house of Israel. Jesus Christ will become their Lord, their promised Messiah, and their king as they accept and believe in him. They will build a temple and become a Zion people and a holy city. Joseph Smith did not make any changes in the text of Zephaniah as he translated the Bible. Perhaps he did not have time to adequately examine the book. Perhaps it was because most of what Zephaniah prophesied was also foretold by other prophets, but there are important messages within the pages of his record. With Jeremiah he stood as a witness to the nation of Judah and the people of Jerusalem.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Paul quoted Haggai 2:6 as a Second Coming occurrence. Therefore, it seems to be a dual prophecy.
[^2] Violence to the law of Moses probably has reference to the multiplication of interpretation by the elders and rabbis through the years, having lost the true meaning of the law as a schoolmaster to bring them to Christ (Galatians 3:24).
[^3] The Father covenanted to give the Americas to Joseph's descendants as declared by the Savior to the Nephites when he ministered to them (3 Nephi 15:12-13). This covenant was part of the covenant made with Jacob, father of the twelve tribes (3 Nephi 20:22; Genesis 49:22-26).
[^4] The footnote in the LDS edition of the King James Version of the Bible gives "in" as the meaning of the Hebrew word.
[^5] The Prophet Joseph Smith identified the Zion spoken of by the Old Testament prophets as North and South America (TPJS, p. 362).
