Monte S. Nyman, Farres H. Nyman, Words of the Twelve Prophets ( 1990)

13

Haggai: The Prophet of the Second Temple

The whole purpose of the gathering of the Jews or of any of the house of Israel at any time is to build a temple unto the Lord so that he may reveal his sacred and saving ordinances to his people (TPJS, 307-8). Haggai's prophecies illustrate how the Lord works to bring about that purpose.

The Jewish people had gone into Babylon as captives in 607 b.c. (traditional dating). As Jeremiah prophesied, this captivity was to be for seventy years (Jeremiah 25:8-11). At the end of the seventy years (538 b.c. traditional dating), the Lord raised up Cyrus, king of Media and Persia, and inspired him to allow the Jews to return out of captivity to Jerusalem, as prophesied by Isaiah (Isaiah 44:28-45:4; Ezra 1:1-4). Many of the Jews were content in Babylon or did not want to return to Jerusalem. Those Jews who returned found opposition to their rebuilding of the temple from the surrounding inhabitants of the land, the Samaritans (Ezra 4). During the reign of Darius, third king following Cyrus, another group of Jews returned, and the Lord raised up two prophets to inspire the men of Judah to go forward with their work on the rebuilding of the temple. The two prophets were Haggai and Zechariah (Ezra 5:1-2; 6:14). The books of Ezra and Nehemiah give further details of the historical setting for Haggai. The revelations to Haggai as now recorded in the Bible came in the second year of the reign of Darius, two months before the first recorded revelation to Zechariah (Haggai 1:1; Zechariah 1:1). The traditional date of these two writings is 520 b.c. There are four prophecies in the book of Haggai, all of which deal with the time period for rebuilding the temple.

The people in Haggai's day were excusing their inaction by rationalizing that it was not yet time to build the temple (Haggai 1:2). Haggai's first prophecy was in response to this rationalization. "Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your ceiled houses and this house [the temple or the Lord's house] lie waste?" (Haggai 1:4). Although they were not building the Lord's house, they were apparently not sparing any efforts to build their own houses. The Lord then reminds them that their unprosperous conditions are the result of their failure to build the temple. Their food, drink, clothing, and wages are all lacking (Haggai 1:5-6). He then invites them to consider their ways and conditions and to know that the drought they are experiencing is due to his withholding the dew from the earth (Haggai 1:7-11). When people do not respond to the Lord's commandments, the Lord has no obligation to bless them (D&C 82:10). In an attempt to teach them the importance of keeping his commandments, he visits them with afflictions, famine, and pestilence (Helaman 12:3). Haggai's message was effective: Zerubbabel, the governor; Joshua, the high priest; and the remnant of the people of Judah who had returned were stirred up by the prophets of the Lord and commenced working once more on the temple (Haggai 1:12-15).

About a month later, the Lord gave Haggai a second revelation for the people of Judah. He asked them to remember the glory of the first temple and compare it with what they were presently building. Apparently, their efforts were not producing a very impressive building, for the Lord answered his own question by saying the comparison was as nothing (Haggai 2:1-3). He encouraged them to be strong and to beautify the building and promised that he would be with them if they would respond (Haggai 2:4-5). The Lord then gave them a reason for the house to be beautified. In a little while (in the Lord's time), he would shake the heavens and the earth, the sea, the dry land, and all the nations; and desire of all nations (the Messiah) would then come. When he came, the temple would be filled with glory (Haggai 2:6-7). This is the only specific Messianic prophecy in the book of Haggai. The shaking of the heaven and earth has reference to the catastrophic signs that occurred at the time of Christ's birth (3 Nephi 1:15-21; Luke 2:8-15; Matthew 2:1-2). [^1] While the gospel testaments do not record the temple being filled with glory at his birth, it probably was, and these were manifestations given to faithful people (Luke 2:25-38). All the prophets had foretold this glorious birth—because all nations would be blessed by his advent into mortality, "the desire of all nations" would thus come. The beautiful LDS hymn "Come, O Thou King of Kings" was based upon this inspired verse. [^2] The Lord then reminds the people that the silver and the gold of the earth are his, that this second temple will be greater than the former, and that there will be peace in the land when it is completed (Haggai 2:8-9). The Lord would furnish the gold and silver if the people would do their part. This was a great promise: consider that Solomon's building of the first temple was famous among all nations for its beauty! Unfortunately, the Bible does not record the fulfillment of the superior beauty of the second temple; therefore, we do not know if this challenge was met. Someday fuller records may reveal that information.

In another two months, the prophet Haggai received another revelation (Haggai 2:10). Apparently the people lacked righteousness. The Lord through Haggai asked several questions regarding a person's cleanliness under the law of Moses, and the priests responded. Based upon the priest's response, Haggai pronounced that this people and this nation were unclean before the Lord (Haggai 2:11-14). An unclean people cannot build a temple that is holy in the Lord's eyes. The Lord then promised that he would bless the people from that day forward if they would cleanse themselves and follow him (Haggai 2:15-19). Latter-day revelation teaches that all blessings are predicated upon righteousness (D&C 130:20-21). The people apparently responded to the Lord's promise because they completed the temple.

On the same day that Haggai's third recorded prophecy was given, the Lord revealed the last recorded instructions (Haggai 2:20). This revelation was addressed to the governor Zerubbabel. The Lord told Haggai to tell him not to worry about the threats of surrounding nations and kings because the Lord would overthrow the throne of the heathen kingdoms and destroy their strength. He further promised to make him as a signet, a ring showing that one has authority, because the Lord had chosen him (Haggai 2:21-23). This promise exemplifies the adage that two people can do anything if one of them is the Lord. This promise may also have Messianic overtones—as Zerubbabel appears in the genealogy of Christ, who was the real governor of Judah (Matthew 1:12-13; Luke 3:27).

No more is known about the prophet Haggai. His mission was fruitful. Through him, the Jews who had returned from Babylon were motivated to work on the temple. The temple was completed a few years hence (516 b.c., traditional date). Many faithful people received the sacred blessings of the temple because of Haggai's faith and diligence. He probably had many other revelations, but these four regarding the temple are all that are recorded. They serve as a motivation to the Latter-day Saints who are, as the Lord's covenant people always are, a temple-building people.

Footnotes

2.Hymns, no. 59.

---
Notas:
[^1] Paul quoted Haggai 2:6 as a Second Coming occurrence. Therefore, it seems to be a dual prophecy.
[^2] Violence to the law of Moses probably has reference to the multiplication of interpretation by the elders and rabbis through the years, having lost the true meaning of the law as a schoolmaster to bring them to Christ (Galatians 3:24).
