Monte S. Nyman, Farres H. Nyman, Words of the Twelve Prophets ( 1990)

14

Zechariah: Prophet of the Latter-day Judah

The prophet Zechariah was raised up as a second witness to accompany Haggai in encouraging the Jews to rebuild the temple in Jerusalem about 520 b.c. Compared to Haggai's first witness, Zechariah's writings are extensive and cover subjects beyond the building of the temple. In fact, the primary subject of his message is Jesus Christ. His prophecies about Christ relate to both his ministry in the meridian of time and his second coming. The Jews' confusion over these two periods was probably a major reason for many of them rejecting Jesus as the Christ. Jacob, brother of Nephi, said: "But behold, the Jews were a stiffnecked people; and they despised the words of plainness, and killed the prophets, and sought for things that they could not understand. Wherefore, because of their blindness, which blindness came by looking beyond the mark, they must needs fall; for God hath taken away his plainness from them, and delivered unto them many things which they cannot understand, because they desired it. And because they desired it God hath done it, that they may stumble" (Jacob 4:14).

The book of Zechariah is readily separated into two divisions. The first eight chapters cover the return of the Jews to Jerusalem from Babylon and their rebuilding of the city and the temple. Although there are allusions to future events, the basic message is about Zechariah's time. The last six chapters (9-14) are prophecies of both appearances of Jesus Christ—his ministry in the flesh and his coming in glory in the last days.

Zechariah's first two prophecies come in the second year of Darius (Zechariah 1:1, 7). His first was recorded in the middle of Haggai's four prophecies; his second, two months after Haggai's last prophecy. His next prophecy is dated in the fourth year of Darius, two years later than Haggai's last recorded prophecy (Zechariah 7:1). The rest of his prophecies are not dated. Bible scholars do not agree whether Zechariah was the author of the last six chapters or even which Zechariah of the many mentioned in the Bible is the author. I accept Zechariah as the author of the whole book and will not analyze in this work the authorship problems or questions. There is a seeming contradiction between the superscription, which states that Zechariah is the son of Berechiah (Zechariah 1:1), the son of Iddo, and Ezra 5:1 and 6:14, which states that he is the son of Iddo. Some scholars believe that Zechariah was the grandson of Iddo and that Ezra merely skips the father in his genealogy. This is the position I will assume in this work since it has no effect upon the message.

Some believe that this Zechariah was the person Jesus referred to as being slain between the temple and the altar and whose blood would be upon the generation of the Jews (Matthew 23:35). However, the Prophet Joseph Smith identified the slain Zacharias as the father of John the Baptist (TPJS, p. 261). Again, the arguments on this issue will not be considered in this work.

The Rebuilding of the Temple

Zechariah begins his writing with a call to repentance to his Jewish brothers and a reminder that the warnings of the former prophets to their fathers had been fulfilled (Zechariah 1:2-6). There is no mention of the building of the temple in this warning but it is obviously connected with it because, three months later, the Lord gave Zechariah a series of eight visions, all of which are related to the building of the temple. The Lord also gave him the interpretation of these visions, at least in part. This reminds us of a point of doctrine taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith. In speaking of the prophecies of Daniel, he said: "I make this broad declaration, that whenever God gives a vision of an image, or beast, or figure of any kind, He always holds Himself responsible to give a revelation or interpretation of the meaning thereof, otherwise we are not responsible or accountable for our belief in it. Don't be afraid of being damned for not knowing the meaning of a vision or figure, if God has not given a revelation or interpretation of the subject" (TPJS, p. 291).

The Prophet's declaration must also apply to Zechariah; therefore I will concentrate on those things revealed to Zechariah and given through other scriptures but will not speculate on other interpretations unless clearly labeled as an opinion.

The first vision that Zechariah saw was of a man riding on a red horse among the myrtle trees, with other horses behind him (Zechariah 1:8). Although the text does not say that men were riding the other horses, it implies that they were. An angel gave Zechariah the meaning of the dream. These men had been sent to the earth by the Lord (Zechariah 1:9-11). Although the angel does not state their mission, from the conversation that follows between the angel and the Lord they appear to be angelic watchmen that the Lord had set upon the city of Jerusalem (see Isaiah 62:6). The angel inquired of the Lord regarding the seventy years of Judah's captivity and was told good and comfortable words. The Lord was jealous for Jerusalem and displeased with the heathen; therefore the Lord would return to Jerusalem and build his house (Zechariah 1:12-16). The Lord's displeasure with the heathen was probably because they had rejected their opportunity to hear the gospel from the Jewish captives. The Lord had a dual purpose in grafting this natural branch of Israel in another part of his vineyard (Jacob 5:8, 14): he was going to preserve that branch for grafting it back in the future, and also he would give the heathen in that area of his vineyard an invitation to be numbered with the house of Israel. While these overall truths were shown or told to Zechariah, the main message was that the Lord desired to build the temple and Zechariah was called to assist in that endeavor. As an afterthought or reminder, the Lord declared that "my cities through prosperity shall yet be spread abroad; and the Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem" (Zechariah 1:17). This was not to be the last gathering to Jerusalem. They would once more be settled among the nations, but in the final outcome there would be two gathering places for the house of Israel—Zion and Jerusalem (2 Nephi 15:10-19). This is also a prevalent theme of the prophet Isaiah (for example, see Isaiah 40:9; 52:1-2).

The second vision shown to Zechariah was of four horns and four carpenters. The four horns were interpreted by the angel to be those who had scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem. The four carpenters were to come and cast out the Gentile who had come to scatter Judah (Zechariah 1:18-21). Whether the four horns were four nations of the past history or four present-day forces upon Judah is not stated, but the latter is more likely. In any case, they represent the Gentile influence among them. The four carpenters might well be the four representatives raised up by the Lord to rebuild his city and his temple. These four would probably be Zerubbabel, the governor; Joshua, the high priest; and the two prophets, Haggai and Zechariah (Ezra 5:1-2). The Lord was once more assuring Zechariah that he was on the Lord's errand.

The third vision, constituting the entire second chapter of Zechariah, is of a man with a measuring line measuring Jerusalem. The man is apparently determining the size of the city. The angel sends another angel to tell the man with the measuring line that Jerusalem shall be inhabited again with many more people and the Lord will be in her midst (Zechariah 2:1-5). The Lord then invites those he has scattered, and particularly those in Babylon, to return and promises to dwell in their midst in Jerusalem (Zechariah 2:6-12). The future of Jerusalem is thus shown to Zechariah.

Zechariah's fourth vision is of Joshua, the high priest, and Satan before the angel. Joshua is clothed in filthy garments, and Satan is there at Joshua's right hand to resist him. The Lord rebukes Satan for his efforts and clothes Joshua in clean garments (Zechariah 3:1-5). Satan's presence is one of the few such occurrences presently recorded in the Old Testament. (He shows up in Job 1 and 2 and in 1 Chronicles 21.) There were probably many other references originally, but they were among the loss of plain and precious truths from the Bible (1 Nephi 13:23-29). Satan, who was responsible for those losses (1 Nephi 13:6, 26), would like us to believe that there is no hell and no devil (2 Nephi 28:22). His reality and his resistance to the Lord's work were shown to Zechariah and may be compared to Moses or Joseph Smith being made aware of Satan's opposition (Moses 1:12-23; JS—H 1:15-16, 20ff). Zechariah was also made aware that Joshua had been cleansed of his sins and was the Lord's anointed servant.

Although Joshua was called by the Lord, the angel admonishes him that he must still meet certain conditions for his eternal salvation and his presence with the heavenly beings (Zechariah 3:6-7). Thus Joshua has his agency to meet or reject these conditions. One's agency is an eternal principle that must always be considered. The angel then seems to speak by divine investiture of authority for the Father, declaring that his servant "the BRANCH" will be brought forth (Zechariah 3:8). The capitalization of the servant's name implies that it is a messianic prophecy. The prophet Jeremiah also identifies the servant as "the BRANCH" (Jeremiah 23:5-6; 33:15). The angel next calls attention to a stone with seven eyes that was laid before Joshua. The interpretation of this stone is not given except that in the Joseph Smith Translation, the Prophet changed references to the seven eyes in later chapters to seven "servants." This reference would probably also have been changed had the Prophet completed his translation work. However, the identity of those seven servants and their mission and time period has not been revealed. They do appear to be angelic beings working upon the earth but beyond the veil. Their work is implied to be in the future because the next comment of the angel, still speaking by divine investiture, is that "I will remove the iniquity of that land in one day" (Zechariah 3:9). This undoubtedly has reference to the Second Coming and is further supported by the following verse's description of all people being neighbors, a millennial concept (Zechariah 3:10).

The fifth vision shown to Zechariah is a little more complicated than the previous four. He sees a golden candlestick with a bowl upon the top of it and seven lamps with seven pipes to the lamps on top of the bowl. There are two olive trees by the configuration, one on the right side and one on the left (Zechariah 4:1-3). The interpretation given by the angel is that Zerubbabel has laid the foundation of the temple and will finish it. However, it will not be by his might nor his power but by the Lord's spirit. The seven eyes or servants that ran through the whole earth will apparently provide that spiritual power or at least assist in it. Therefore, the candlestick may represent either the Lord himself or perhaps Zerubbabel, and the bowl represents the temple to be built. The seven lamps are the seven angelic servants who receive their power (pipes) from the Lord.

The angel also answers Zechariah's question about the two olive trees by the structure. They are further described as having two golden pipes that enable them to empty oil out of themselves. The angel identifies these olive trees as "the two anointed ones, that stand before the Lord of the whole earth" (JST, Zechariah 4:14; italics added). Thus these olive trees represent the two prophets whom the Lord has raised up to assist Zerubbabel in building the temple. They are Haggai and Zechariah. They are also symbolic of the two prophets who will be raised up in the last days to assist the people of Judah in their battle against the Gentile nations (the battle of Armageddon) (Isaiah 51:18-20; Revelation 11:3-12; D&C 77:15). Remember that all things have their likeness and bear record of Christ (Moses 6:63).

Zechariah's sixth vision was of a flying roll whose length was twenty cubits and whose breadth was ten cubits. The angel interp-reted it as a curse that was going over the face of the whole earth. Those guilty of stealing or of swearing were particularly singled out (Zechariah 5:1-4). Nothing else was stated regarding the curse. Perhaps it was symbolic of the apostasy between the time of Malachi, the last prophet, and the coming of Christ. If it was the apostasy, the specific cutting off might represent the loss of the blessings of the prophets, Malachi being the last.

The next vision, the seventh, was of an ephah, a woman in the midst of the ephah, and a talent of lead on the balance scale. The angel interpreted this as wickedness. Two women then lifted up the ephah between the earth and heaven and took it to the land of Shinar (Zechariah 5:6-11). Again no further interpretation is given. If the curse in the fifth vision was the apostasy, perhaps the ephah of wickedness represented the cause of the apostasy.

The last of the eight visions was of four chariots coming out between two mountains of brass. Each of the chariots was drawn by a different color of horse—red, black, white, and grisled and bay (Zechariah 6:1-3). According to the angel, the chariots represented "the four servants of the heavens which go forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth" (JST, Zechariah 6:5). The black horses went into the north and were followed by the white horses. This quieted the Lord's Spirit in the north country. There is no mention of the red horses unless they are "the bay" referred to in the following verse, but the grisled horses went into the south country. The bay horses walked to and fro through the earth, but no effect of their walking is recorded in the text. The following verses seem to be a part of this vision; if they are, the servant's travels probably represent the gathering of the Jews from the various parts of the earth (Zechariah 6:9-10).

Zechariah is instructed to take silver and gold and make crowns, one for the head of Joshua the high priest (Zechariah 6:11). This crowning apparently symbolized Christ as the King of kings, the BRANCH (Zechariah 6:12-13). The text seems to represent both Joshua as the present-day high priest who shall be the presiding authority in the temple, and Jesus Christ, who shall sit upon the throne of David forever (compare 2 Samuel 7:16). The other crowns were for four others who have returned from captivity as a memorial for the temple of the Lord. These were to come and help build the temple (Zechariah 7:14-15). The message to Zechariah is that the temple will be built and Joshua will serve, which is symbolic of Christ reigning through eternity. Through this series of eight visions, the Lord makes plain to Zechariah that the temple will be built. He also outlines the roles of the various individuals in its building.

The next recorded revelation to Zechariah is given two years later but still seems to be on the subject of the Jews returning and building the temple. While in their seventy-year captivity, apparently the Jews had fasted every fifth month for deliverance. There was now a delegation sent to the priests to see if this practice was to continue. In response, the Lord reminded them that they did not fast unto him nor eat unto him in those seventy years but rather did so unto themselves. Nor had they hearkened to the prophets among them (Zechariah 7:1-7). The Lord reminded them that Zechariah had instructed them to "execute true judgment, and show mercy and compassions every man to his brother; and to oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor; and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart" (Zechariah 7:9-10). These instructions are comparable to the definition of true religion given in the New Testament by James (James 1:26-27). The Jews in captivity had not hearkened to these admonitions of the former prophets, so the Lord had scattered them as a whirlwind and left the land desolate (Zechariah 7:11-14). The Lord was warning them to not follow the pattern of their fathers while in captivity.

Following this gentle reminder, the Lord held out a message of hope to his returnees. He promised to dwell in the midst of Jerusalem; the city should be called a city of trust, and the mountain of the Lord of hosts should be called the holy mountain (Zechariah 8:1-3). This may be a promise of his holy temple being in their midst. He further proclaimed that there shall yet be old men and old women dwelling in the streets of Jerusalem as well as boys and girls (Zechariah 8:4-5). These verses are still used as a theme for the present-day returning Jews. Although it was an incentive for the people of Zechariah's day, it may well have been meant as a prophecy intended for the latter days as well. The prophecy continues with a promise to gather the people from the east and the west to Jerusalem, where they would be the Lord's people and he would be their God in truth and righteousness (JST, Zechariah 8:7-8). The Lord then admonished them to hearken to the prophets' words that were given when they laid the foundation of the temple. He promised them that they would prosper and that they would no longer be a curse among the heathen; rather, he would gather both the house of Jacob and Israel, and they would be a blessing (JST, Zechariah 8:9-13). He again reminded them of their duties to be a religious people as outlined by Zechariah previously (Zechariah 8:16-17; compare 7:9-10). The Lord next answered the original question. The fast of the fifth, seventh, and tenth months should be fasts of joy and gladness (Zechariah 8:18-29; compare D&C 59:13-15). The Lord again prophesied that many would return from many cities and many languages because they had heard that God was with the Jews (Zechariah 8:20-23). The Jews did return, although they were scattered again. Today they are experiencing a similar return. Once more, this may have been a dual prophecy.

The Messiah Ministers on Earth

As stated earlier, the book of Zechariah is easily divided into two sections. The second section begins with chapter 9 and introduces a new time period. The first eight verses speak of the burden or message of doom against the various nations surrounding Judah. This message of doom probably refers to the time period from Zechariah's prophecies regarding the rebuilding of the temple around 520 b.c. to the birth of the Messiah. It acts as a buffer between the two time periods spoken of in the first eight chapters and the chapters following.

Following the message of doom in chapter 9, there are three prophecies about the ministry of Christ. Jesus' riding of a colt into the city at the beginning of the last week of his ministry was foretold by Zechariah. Jerusalem was to shout because "thy King cometh to thee: he is just and having salvation; lowly and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt, the foal of an ass" (Zechariah 9:9). As he rode down from Bethphage on the Mount of Olives, the people laid their garments in his path or cut palm branches and laid them before him, proclaiming that he was the Son of David, King of Israel. Both Matthew and John quote Zechariah as being fulfilled with this incident (Matthew 21:1-9; John 12:12-15). The Christian world today celebrates Palm Sunday commemorating this event.

The second prophecy is about the chariot of Ephraim and the horse from Jerusalem being cut off. The King was to speak peace to the heathen, and his dominion was to extend to the ends of the earth (Zechariah 9:10). This prophecy was another way of foretelling that the gospel would be taken from the Jews to the Gentiles. Jesus proclaimed this concept during his ministry (Matthew 19:30; 21:43), and it was fulfilled when Peter received the revelation to take the gospel to the Gentiles (Acts 10). Christ's dominion going to the ends of the earth was in fulfillment of the covenant made to Abraham to bless all nations of the earth (Abraham 2:11; 1 Nephi 22:9; 3 Nephi 20:25).

The third prophecy of Christ's ministry was his opening of the spirit world to the preaching of the gospel and the performing of ordinances for those spirits in prison. Through the blood of his covenant, Christ visited the spirit world and organized the forces of righteous departed spirits to preach the gospel to those in spirit prison and perform the ordinances to bring the "prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water" (Zechariah 9:11; compare D&C 138:18-30). The lack of water is reminiscent of the parable of Lazarus and the rich man taught by Jesus during his ministry. The rich man desired that Lazarus dip his finger in water and cool the rich man's tongue, but the gulf between them made that impossible (Luke 16:19-31). The lack of water probably represents the absence of the living water of Christ and his gospel among the wicked. Christ had not yet bridged the gulf that enabled the gospel to be taught. The rest of the verses in the chapter are addressed to the "prisoners of hope" and seem to be an invitation for those in the spirit prison to accept the gospel: "The Lord their God shall save them in that day" when they shall receive the gospel and be exalted (Zechariah 9:12-17).

In chapter 10 the Lord reflects upon his covenant with Judah and how he will bless the Gentiles when Judah breaks that covenant. He is willing to bless his people (give them rain), but their leaders have pursued vanity and false dreams and left the people without guidance. The Lord was angry with the shepherds (leaders), and the goats (people) were punished. The cornerstone (RSV Christ) came out of Judah, and the political leadership through others; but they shall be overcome by mighty men (the Romans) because the Lord will be with them (Zechariah 10:1-5). The Lord will punish the wicked with the wicked (Mormon 4:5). Although Judah will be overcome, she will be strengthened or gathered again. The Lord will also save and gather the house of Joseph, making them as though they had never been cast off (scattered). Although they were sown among the people (scattered), he shall gather them from the various countries and make them strong in the Lord (Zechariah 10:6-12). Perhaps the Lord turns to Joseph (Ephraim) as his subject because it is through him that Judah will be blessed.

The Lord returns to prophesy of the howling of the shepherds of Judah who will be delivered into their neighbor's hands (Zechariah 11:1-7). Because the rulers of Judah really did know that Jesus was the Christ and yet made a covenant with hell (see Isaiah 28:14-15; compare John 7:26), the Lord let the Romans destroy them. He then comments on the whole house of Israel again. He speaks of his two staves or nations of divided Israel (Judah and Ephraim). Calling northern Israel "Beauty," he speaks of feeding his flock, but they also were led by false shepherds. He speaks of cutting off three shepherds in one month (three kings of Israel, two of whom ruled for only a short period because of their wickedness, probably Jeroboam II, Zechariah, and Shallum, and the one month was really one year—2 Kings 15:8-15). The Lord refused to feed his people in their wickedness and cut Beauty asunder. He broke his covenant with Northern Israel, which the people knew was the Lord's doing as they were taken captive by Assyria in 721 b.c. (Zechariah 11:7-11).

The prophecy once more shifts to Judah and the Lord's breaking of the covenant with them. He foretells that Judas would betray the Christ for thirty pieces of silver and cast the money into the potter's field (Zechariah 11:12-13). Credit for this prophecy is given to Jeremiah in the New Testament (Matthew 27:1-10). Perhaps Jeremiah made the same or a similar prophecy; regardless, it was fulfilled by Judas. The other stave or nation of Judah called "Bands" was also cut asunder, and the brotherhood between Judah and Israel was broken (Zechariah 11:14).

The Lord through Zechariah follows this prophecy with a prophecy of how he will cut Judah asunder. A foolish shepherd will be raised up who will have no concern for his sheep (Judah). He will not care for his lambs (Zechariah 11:15-16). This prophecy may refer to the conquest by Rome or to the ruler Constantine and others. Constantine adopted Christianity as his state religion but brought about the apostasy through not shepherding the flock. The Lord utters a warning to this foolish shepherd who leaves his flock (RSV, Zechariah 11:17). This suggests Constantine, who brought pagans into the fold instead of the Lord's people. The fate of his arm being dried up and his eye darkened may also suggest Constantine, who would lose his power and darken the gospel message. The times of the Gentiles was there, and Israel was delegated to receive the gospel again after the Gentiles had rejected it in the latter days. The first shall be last and the last shall be first (see Matthew 19:30).

The Messiah's Second Coming

The last three chapters may be yet a third distinct section of the text of Zechariah. These chapters refer to still a third time period—the coming of the Lord in the last days or his second coming. The chronology given is not consistent with itself or with latter-day scripture, but the teachings are confirmed by modern revelation.

A burden or message of doom to Israel opens this last section of Zechariah. The Lord promises to make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all the people round about when they lay siege against Judah and Jerusalem. All of the people of the earth will be gathered against Jerusalem. The governors or leaders of Judah are to devour the people round about, and the Lord will defend Jerusalem (Zechariah 12:1-8). This is another description of the Battle of Armageddon (Revelation 16:16) or the valley of decision (Joel 3). At the conclusion of the battle, the Lord will appear to his people, the embattled Jews; they will recognize him as their messiah and "will look upon me whom they have pierced" (Zechariah 12:10). There is a dual fulfillment or application of this prophecy. It was quoted by John in his gospel as being fulfilled while Christ was on the cross (John 19:37). However, the same author spoke of his coming in the clouds of heaven when "every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him" (Revelation 1:7). The context of Zechariah supports the latter fulfillment. The text continues with a declaration that there would be great mourning in Jerusalem in that day (Zechariah 12:11-14).

The following chapter also speaks of a day of restoration among Judah. It speaks of a fountain that would be "opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness" (Zechariah 13:1). This has reference to the ordinance of baptism for the remission of individual sins and is supported by the prophet Isaiah's declarations of Judah opening the gate of baptism as well as a political invitation to the nation that "keepeth the truth" (see Isaiah 26:2). Thus the gospel will be preached in the Jewish homeland to the Jews.

Zechariah continues with a prophecy of idols and false prophets being cut off in the land (Zechariah 13:2-5). This prophecy must be read in its context carefully to note that it is speaking of false prophets. The text returns to an extension of Zechariah 12:10. As they look upon him whom they have pierced, one shall say to the Savior, "What are these wounds in thine hands?" Then he shall answer, "Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends" (Zechariah 13:6). The Doctrine and Covenants records these same words as given by Jesus on the Mount of Olives to his disciples prior to his crucifixion regarding the events of the last days. It further equates it with the mourning mentioned in the previous chapter of Zechariah (D&C 45:51-53). The chapter is concluded with a prophecy that two-thirds of the Jewish people will be killed in the battle of Armageddon but the third that survive will be refined and made the people of the Lord (Zechariah 13:7-9).

The final chapter of Zechariah speaks of the coming of the "day of the Lord." It is the day when all nations shall gather against Jerusalem to battle and the Lord will fight against those nations (Zechariah 14:1-3). When the Lord appears, his feet shall stand upon the mount of Olives, and it shall cleave in the midst toward the east and the west with the mount being moved half to the north and half to the south (Zechariah 14:4). The Lord also referred to this catastrophic event in the appendix of the Doctrine and Covenants (D&C 133:18-20; see also D&C 45:48). He compared the fleeing of the people at this time to the earthquake in the days of Uzziah (Zechariah 14:5). There is no record of an earthquake in Uzziah's day, but there must have been one. This earthquake is a pattern or type of the earthquake that was to come in the last days (compare Moses 6:63).

Another sign apparently to be repeated is the day and a night and a day of no darkness given to the Nephites at the birth of Christ happening again at the Second Coming (3 Nephi 1:15-19). In Zechariah's words, the light shall not be clear nor light but at evening time it shall be light (Zechariah 14:6-7). The wording of this prophecy is a bit nebulous, but it seems similar to the Nephite sign.

The earthquake was to accompany the coming of the Lord and all the Saints with him (Zechariah 14:5). The Savior's instructions to his disciples on the mount of Olives qualifies the Saints coming with him as the Jewish Saints who have slept or died being resurrected at his coming (D&C 45:43-46). This was to happen before the arm of the Lord fell upon the surrounding nations (D&C 45:45).

Zechariah next speaks of living water coming out from Jerusalem, half toward the former sea (Mediterranean) and half toward the hinder sea (Dead Sea). This water was to run in the winter as well as the summer (Zechariah 14:8). The living water is symbolic of Christ (compare John 4:10-15; 7:37). However, the Prophet Joseph Smith spoke of the actual water that would come from under the temple that was to be built in Jerusalem (TPJS, pp. 286-87; Joel 3:18). Following the above events, the Lord will be king over all the earth, and Jerusalem shall be inhabited safely (Zechariah 14:9-11). The Doctrine and Covenants repeatedly speaks of Jesus' reign as the king (D&C 38:21; 41:4; 45:59; 58:22; 65:5-6). Other Old Testament prophets have also prophesied of his role as king (Jeremiah 23:5; Ezekiel 34:23-24; 37:24-27).

Zechariah next speaks of the plague that will come upon those who fight against Jerusalem. Flesh, eyes, and tongues shall fall away (Zechariah 14:12). This sounds like the same plagues mentioned in D&C 29:18-20 that will come before the great day of the Lord. Zechariah speaks further of those who will not come up to Jerusalem to worship (Zechariah 14:16-19). Although the feast of the tabernacles (a festival under the law of Moses) is mentioned, it is probably symbolic of the higher law that will be followed in the Millennium.

The text concludes with an announcement that even the bells of the horses, as well as pots and other items, will have engraved upon them "Holiness to the Lord." There will be no more Canaanites or Gentiles in the house of the Lord (Zechariah 14:20-21). The Prophet Joseph reaffirmed this as a latter-day practice (TPJS, p. 93). It is another way of describing Jerusalem as a holy city unto the Lord, occupied by a holy or sanctified people (Ether 13:5, 11).

The prophet Zechariah was a second witness with Haggai to motivate the rebuilding of the Lord's temple in 520 b.c. He also saw the meridian of time and the mission of the Lord Jesus Christ. His prophecies extended to the final winding-up scenes in Jerusalem and the coming of the great day of the Lord. Just as the Jews looked beyond the mark and confused the prophecies of the Second Coming with those of the first coming, we must carefully study the writings of Zechariah so that we do not confuse the two time periods. Zechariah has left us a challenging text to study, and the Lord has confirmed his prophecies in the Doctrine and Covenants.
