Monte S. Nyman, Farres H. Nyman, Words of the Twelve Prophets ( 1990)

15

Malachi: Prophet of the Everlasting Covenant

The prophecies of Malachi are of great interest to the Latter-day Saints. They speak of things that must happen before the second coming of Christ and of how one must prepare for that great event. They clearly proclaim that the everlasting covenant, or the gospel of Jesus Christ, must be restored upon the earth in preparation for the great and dreadful day of the Lord—great for those who are prepared, and dreadful for those who are not prepared.

The importance and relevance of the last two chapters of the book of Malachi were confirmed on two different occasions. When the Savior visited the Nephites following his resurrection, "he commanded them that they should write the words which the Father had given unto Malachi, which he should tell them" (3 Nephi 24:1). The words that he told them to write were the third and fourth chapters of Malachi as we know them today (3 Nephi 24-25). After they were written, he expanded them, but what he said was not recorded (3 Nephi 26:1).

The second confirming occasion of Malachi's words was the appearance of Moroni to Joseph Smith on the morning of 22 September 1823. The angel "quoted part of the third chapter . . . also the fourth or last chapter of the prophecy, though with a little variation from the way it reads in our Bible" (JS—H 1:36). That the third and fourth chapters were quoted on both occasions is evidence that these two are the most significant of the entire book. This is probably because the first two chapters deal primarily with Malachi's day, while the last two pertain to the restoration of the gospel in the latter days. While the emphasis of this work will be on the last two chapters, the first two do set the stage for the latter ones and need some clarification.

The superscription gives no historical setting, merely labeling Malachi's words as "the burden of the word of the Lord to Israel" (Malachi 1:1). As previously stated, the burden has reference to a message of doom. Its being addressed to Israel and the context of the restoration chapters that follow suggest that the Lord is outlining why the gospel was taken from Israel for a time and given to the Gentiles.

The Lord begins his message by declaring that he has loved Israel, but Israel questions whether he really has. The Lord then responds, "Was not Esau Jacob's brother? . . . yet I loved Jacob. And I hated Esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage waste for the dragons of the wilderness" (Malachi 1:2-3). Some have misinterpreted this passage to reflect that God is a respecter of persons, but Paul answered such accusations in his epistle to the Romans by showing that election in the flesh does not assure salvation (Romans 9:4-18). Brigham Young and Willard Richards shed further light on the issue:

"As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated." Where is it written? (Mal. i:1,2). When was it written? About 397 years before Christ, and Esau and Jacob were born about 1,773 years before Christ, (according to the computation of time in Scripture margin), so Esau and Jacob lived about 1,376 years before the Lord spoke by Malachi, saying, "Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated," as quoted by Paul. This text is often brought forward to prove that God loved Jacob and hated Esau before they were born, or before they had done good or evil; but if God did love one and hate the other before they had done good or evil, He has not seen fit to tell us of it, either in the Old or New Testament, or any other revelation: but this only we learn that 1,376 years after Esau and Jacob were born, God said by Malachi—"Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated;" and surely that was time sufficient to prove their works, and ascertain whether they were worthy to be loved or hated.

And why did He love the one and hate the other? For the same reason that He accepted the offering of Abel and rejected Cain's offering. Because Jacob's works had been righteous, and Esau's wicked, and where is there a righteous father who would not do the same thing? Who would not love an affectionate and obedient son more than one who was disobedient, and sought to injure Him and overthrow the order of His house? (HC 4:262.)

The Lord then affirms that his blessings are upon Israel (Jacob) and not on Edom (Esau) (Malachi 1:4-5).

The Lord's first complaint against Israel is that the people have despised his name by offering polluted and inferior sacrifices. Because of this condition, the Lord said that he would turn from Israel to the Gentiles, and his name would be great among them (Malachi 1:6-14).

The Lord next addresses the priests, threatening a curse upon them if they do not hearken to his words. The Lord had extended his priesthood covenant to the sons of Levi because of their love of truth and dedication to service. By Malachi's day, the priests of Israel had broken that covenant of Levi (Malachi 2:1-10).

The third complaint is against Judah in general. Judah has profaned the holiness of the Lord and married the daughter of a strange God. The wife of Judah's youth has been dealt with treacherously (Malachi 2:11-16). The symbolism used here is unusual compared with the typical marriage symbolism of Christ as the bridegroom and Israel as the bride. This symbolism seems to identify the church as the bride of Judah's youth, as it also does in the book of Revelation (Revelation 12:1-6). Judah has desecrated the church and has been affiliating with the religion (daughter) of a pagan (strange) god.

The Lord then announces that Israel has wearied him with their words. In response to their supposed innocence, he accuses them of justifying the evil that they do as being good in the sight of the Lord because the Lord has not brought judgment against them (Malachi 2:17). This is similar to Noah's day when the people claimed that God could not be angry with them because they were eating and drinking and marrying and giving in marriage and being successful, therefore the Lord could not be displeased with them or he would have punished them (Moses 8:21). The Lord allows mankind their agency and, after warning them by the prophets, brings destruction upon them if they become ripened in iniquity and do not repent (1 Nephi 17:35-38; Genesis 15:16). The people of Noah's day were eventually destroyed. The people of Malachi's day were being warned by the prophets. This succinct announcement concluded the Lord's complaints against the people of Judah in the days of Malachi.

After recognizing the evil conditions that exist in Judah and Jerusalem, the Lord reveals through Malachi how he will correct the situation. The plan disclosed in the last two chapters, quoted to the Nephites and to Joseph Smith, seems to be an explanation of how the Lord's name will be great among the Gentiles. As previously recognized, it will take place before and in preparation for the second coming of the Lord.

The Lord promises to send his messenger to prepare the way before his coming (Malachi 3:1). A surface reading and cross-referencing to the New Testament suggest this to be fulfilled through the mission of John the Baptist (Matthew 11:10; Mark 1:2; Luke 7:27). Although we are dealing with dual prophecy, the ultimate fulfillment will be in the latter days. This is obvious because the Savior quoted this passage to the Nephites following his resurrection and in the context of future fulfillment, and the angel Moroni quoted it among other prophecies soon to be fulfilled; finally, the Savior revealed it again to Joseph Smith in March 1831, this time in the past tense: "And even so I have sent mine everlasting covenant into the world, to be a light to the world, and to be a standard for my people, and for the Gentiles to seek to it, and to be a messenger before my face to prepare the way before me" (D&C 45:9).

The messenger to prepare the way before the second coming of the Lord is therefore the restoration of the everlasting covenant, or the fulness of the gospel. The rest of verse 1 of Malachi 3 further confirms the latter-day fulfillment.

Malachi prophesied that the Lord would come suddenly to his temple (Malachi 3:1). Following the restoration of the new and everlasting covenant, the Lord reaffirmed his future sudden appearance in his temple (D&C 36:4; 132:2). He could not make this appearance until a temple had been built. The first temple was the Kirtland Temple, completed and dedicated on 3 April 1836. The Lord came to the Kirtland Temple suddenly. Following the prayer of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, the veil was taken from their minds and eyes, and they saw him (D&C 110:1). Through his atoning blood, he had made the covenant to bring mankind to immortality and eternal life (Hebrews 13:20; Moses 1:39). His appearance fulfilled the promise made through Malachi and established that covenant again in preparation for his second coming.

That Malachi's prophecy is about the second coming of Christ and not the Lord's first ministry is further attested to by the declaration, "But who may abide the day of his coming, and who shall stand when he appeareth? For he is like a refiner's fire and like fuller's soap" (Malachi 3:2). There is no evidence that people could not abide his first coming. His second coming, however, will constitute a cleansing of the earth; thus the analogy of a refiner's fire, in which the impurities are cleansed from ores to make metals. In latter-day revelation, the Lord has declared that "every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed" (D&C 101:24). The fuller's soap of ancient days was also a purifier often used to whiten cloth.

Malachi's prophecy of the purifying of the sons of Levi that they may offer an offering in righteousness (Malachi 3:3) was also a promise given by John the Baptist when the Aaronic Priesthood was restored to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on 15 May 1829 (D&C 13). This prophecy has a dual fulfillment. First, after Moses descended the mount and found his people worshiping the golden calf, the tribe of Levi was given the responsibility of carrying out the priesthood ordinances for all of the tribes of Israel (Exodus 32:19-29; Numbers 18:1-8). This assignment continued until the ten tribes were taken away and probably after they went into the North. It was also among the people of Judah until their apostasy. When the ten tribes return, as a part of the restoration of all things in the dispensation of the fulness of time (Ephesians 1:10), they will again offer a literal sacrifice in righteousness. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained:

These sacrifices, as well as every ordinance belonging to the Priesthood, will, when the Temple of the Lord shall be built, and the sons of Levi be purified, be fully restored and attended to in all their powers, ramifications, and blessings. This ever did and ever will exist when the powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood are sufficiently manifest; else how can the restitution of all things spoken of by the Holy Prophets be brought to pass. It is not to be understood that the law of Moses will be established again with all its rites and variety of ceremonies; this has never been spoken of by the prophets; but those things which existed prior to Moses' day, namely, sacrifice, will be continued.

It may be asked by some, what necessity for sacrifice, since the Great Sacrifice was offered? In answer to which, if repentance, baptism, and faith existed prior to the days of Christ, what necessity for them since that time? The Priesthood has descended in a regular line from father to son, through their succeeding generations (TPJS, p. 173).

A second fulfillment of this prophecy of Malachi is established through the latter-day temple work for the dead. In an epistle to the Saints upon this subject on 6 September 1842, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote that the great day of the Lord was at hand and, after quoting Malachi 3:2-3, declared, "Let us therefore as a church and a people, and as Latter-day Saints, offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness; and let us present in his holy temple, when it is finished, a book containing the records of our dead, which shall be worthy of all acceptation" (D&C 128:24). This spiritual inter-pretation is probably based upon the fact that genealogical research must be done at the sacrifice of time and personal interests. It is not something that is scheduled in the Church but must be done on our own initiative.

The offering of Judah and Jerusalem is to be pleasant to the Lord at this time (Malachi 3:4). Judah rejected the higher law of Christ and continued in the law of Moses (Isaiah 29:1-2). Therefore, her sacrifices through the years have not been pleasant to the Lord. As the ten tribes return, the Jewish people will already have begun to accept the gospel (Jacob 5:63), and thus the Lord will accept their sacrifices. The judgments of God will come upon the wicked at this time also (Malachi 3:5). Since the Lord is unchanging, he will not consume the sons of Jacob (Malachi 3:6). He has covenanted to gather them, and he will do so.

There are several things of which the modern-day sons of Jacob must repent before their salvation can be obtained. Like their fathers of old, they have strayed. In the typical style of the previous chapters, the Lord through Malachi states the problem, the sons of Jacob ask how they are guilty, and the Lord gives the answer (Malachi 3:7). The first problem is the robbing of God through withholding tithes and offerings (Malachi 3:8). This refers to latter-day sons of Jacob, members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Those of the Church who do not pay tithing will not survive the judgment to come upon the world (D&C 64:23-24). Failure to comply has brought a curse upon the whole nation (Malachi 3:9). The Lord then challenges the sons of Jacob to bring all their tithes to him, not just some of it or by some of the people, and test him to see if he "will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room enough to receive it" (Malachi 3:10). This oft-quoted scripture has been equated with rain coming upon the crops, becoming rich through tithe paying, and undoubtedly several other blessings. While these are sometimes the fulfillment, the principle involved was taught by President Harold B. Lee in this way: "The promise following obedience to this principle is that the windows of heaven would be open and blessings would be poured out that we would hardly be able to contain. The opening of the windows of heaven, of course, means revelations from God to him who is willing thus to sacrifice" (Ensign, November 1971, p. 16).

President Gordon B. Hinckley reminded the Church that the Lord would open the windows of heaven according to their need and not according to their greed (see CR, April 1982).

A second promise to the tithe payer was that the Lord would rebuke the devourer and not cause the fruits to be destroyed or not be productive (Malachi 3:11). This problem relates more to the weather. The elements that destroy crops include such things as frost, drought, insects, and hail. The Lord promises to control such for his people if they are faithful. Such blessings upon the sons of Jacob will bring the recognition of surrounding nations upon them (Malachi 3:12).

A second sin that the latter-day sons of Jacob must repent of is speaking against the Lord. Again the sons say they are not guilty, but the Lord specifies that they say it is vain to serve God (Malachi 3:13-15). How many members of the latter-day Church fail to recognize the Lord's hand in the weather, in spite of many scriptures that proclaim that he does in fact use the weather to chasten or bless his people (Helaman 12:1-3; D&C 43:25; Amos 4:6-10).

Not all the sons of Jacob are guilty of these sins. Those who fear or love the Lord will have their names recorded in the Lord's book of remembrance. These will be the Lord's people in the day that he makes up his jewels; they will be spared the destructive judgment that comes upon the world (Malachi 3:16-18). The Lord confirmed this promise to the Latter-day Saints in December 1833 (D&C 101:3). A jewel reflects light, and the Lord's people will reflect his light as they have been commanded (3 Nephi 18:24). These people will be prepared for the Lord's second coming.

In Malachi 4, the Lord speaks of the day when the proud and wicked would burn as stubble. In September 1830 the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith that this day (in the Lord's time) was soon at hand (D&C 29:9). The Book of Mormon bears similar testimony (1 Nephi 22:15; 2 Nephi 26:4). [^1] The angel Moroni quoted this passage in Malachi a little differently than it is recorded in the Bible or the Book of Mormon. This was probably to clarify its meaning rather than to correct the text. As time passes, the usage and understanding of words and passages change. The two texts are duplicated here to illustrate the differences:

For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch (Malachi 4:1).

For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble; for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root not branch" (JS-H 1:37; italics added).

The message is the same, but Moroni stated it more clearly. The wicked shall burn, and those who come under the Lord's direction (destroying angels) shall supervise or cause the burning. Those who escape the burning will be the tithepayers (D&C 64:23-24). Those who are burned will be left without root or branch, or, in the words of Elder Theodore M. Burton: "What is meant by the expression 'that it shall leave them neither root nor branch'? This expression simply means that wicked and indifferent persons who reject the gospel of Jesus Christ will have no family inheritance or patriarchal lineage—neither root (ancestors or progenitors) nor branch (children or posterity). Such persons cannot be received into the celestial kingdom of glory of resurrected beings, but must be content with a lesser blessing" (CR, September 1967, p. 81).

The Lord once more holds out hope to those who fear his name. The Son of Righteousness will arise with healing in his wings (Malachi 4:2; 3 Nephi 25:2). The Book of Mormon text changes the word Sun to Son, referring to the Son of God (2 Nephi 25:13; 26:9). Those who are left after the judgment of the Second Coming will be able to raise up their children as calves are raised in a stall. The calf is protected from the elements, and his environment is controlled (Malachi 4:2; 1 Nephi 22:24). The children in the Millennium will similarly "grow up without sin unto salvation" (D&C 45:58). The telestial element will be removed, and with Satan being bound (Revelation 20:1-3; 1 Nephi 22:26; D&C 101:28), the environment will be more controlled. The wicked who are destroyed, the telestial people, will have their ashes walked upon by those who survive the burning (Malachi 4:3).

The law of Moses that was first given in Mount Horeb or Sinai will by this time be restored to the earth (Malachi 4:4). This is sometimes confusing to the reader, as it appears to be a return to the law of Moses. But when we remember that the Lord took away the Melchizedek Priesthood and the higher law, leaving the Aaronic Priesthood and the lesser law of Moses, it makes sense (see D&C 84:25-27;JST Exodus 34:1-2; JST, Deuteronomy 10:1-2). In support of the fuller law of Moses being restored, Joseph Smith said, "The law revealed to Moses in Horeb never was revealed to the children of Israel as a nation" (TPJS, p. 323).

The coming of Elijah before the great and dreadful day of the Lord, an event still looked forward to by the Jewish nation, was the last great doctrine taught by Malachi (Malachi 4:5-6; D&C 138:46-47; D&C 35:4). The angel Moroni also quoted these last two verses differently. Again, the differences were to clarify the meaning. After quoting these two verses in an epistle to the Saints in 1842, precisely as they are in the Book of Mormon and the Bible, Joseph commented: "I might have rendered a plainer translation to this, but it is sufficiently plain to suit my purpose as it stands" (D&C 128:17-18). A comparison of the two texts illustrates the difference:

Behold I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord: And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to the fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse (Malachi 4:5-6).

Behold, I will reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

He also quoted the next verse differently: And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers. If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming (JS—H 1:38-39; italics added).

The priesthood that was to be revealed by Elijah was not the Aaronic or the Melchizedek, because they were both restored before Elijah's appearance on 3 April 1836. Insight into the priesthood that Elijah restored can be gained from the Prophet Joseph Smith:

Elijah was the last Prophet that held the keys of the Priesthood, and who will, before the last dispensation, restore the authority and deliver the keys of the Priesthood, in order that all the ordinances may be attended to in righteousness. It is true that the Savior had authority and power to bestow this blessing: but the sons of Levi were too prejudiced. "And I will send Elijah the Prophet before the great and terrible day of the Lord," etc., etc. Why send Elijah? Because he holds the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without the authority is given, the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness (TPJS, p. 172).

Joseph Smith also taught that the whole purpose of the gathering of Israel in any age of the world "was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house and the glories of His kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation" (TPJS, pp. 307-8). This concept helps explain why Elijah did not come until the temple in Kirtland, the first in this dispensation, was completed.

Although all priesthood is Melchizedek, Joseph Smith later referred to the three grand orders of the priesthood: the Melchizedek, the Patriarchal, and the Levitical. He instructed the Saints to "go to and finish the temple, and God will fill it with power, and you will then receive more knowledge concerning this priesthood" (TPJS, pp. 322-23). The priesthood restored by Elijah, as stated by the angel Moroni, was evidently the patriarchal order of the priesthood, the power to seal the living and the dead as eternal families.

The promises made to the fathers were the promises of the Restoration and the work for the dead. Enos and his fathers were promised that the Book of Mormon would come forth (Enos 1:15-18; D&C 10:46-52). Abraham rejoiced to see the day of the Savior (John 8:56). The founding fathers were given promise of their work being done for them (JD, 19:229). The ancestors of the present-day Latter-day Saints were also given promises, and these promises were planted in the Saints' hearts (Malachi 4:6; D&C 2). The keys of the power of turning the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, were committed to Elijah (D&C 27:9). Joseph Smith said that Elijah would "reveal the covenants of the fathers in relation to the children, and the covenants of the children in relation to the fathers" (TPJS, p. 321).

The hearts of the children were to turn to their fathers (Malachi 4:6); that is, the spirit of Elijah was to move upon them. The Saints were admonished to seek diligently to accomplish this command-ment (D&C 98:16-17). Joseph Smith said regarding this:

Now, the word turn here should be translated bind, or seal. But what is the object of this important mission? or how is it to be fulfilled? The keys are to be delivered, the spirit of Elijah is to come, the Gospel to be established, the Saints of God gathered, Zion built up, and the Saints to come up as saviors on Mount Zion.

But how are they to become saviors on Mount Zion? By building their temples, erecting their baptismal fonts, and going forth and receiving all the ordinances, baptisms, confirmations, washings, anointings, ordinations and sealing powers upon their heads, in behalf of all their progenitors who are dead, and redeem them that they may come forth in the first resurrection and be exalted to thrones of glory with them; and herein is the chain that binds the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, which fulfills the mission of Elijah. And I would to God that this temple was now done, that we might go into it, and go to work and improve our time, and make use of the seals while they are on earth (TPJS, p. 330).

Joseph also said that God would rescue this generation by sending Elijah the prophet. Elijah would reveal the covenants to seal the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers (TPJS, p. 323). After testifying that the signs of the coming of the Son of Man had already commenced, Joseph declared that "the hearts of the children of men will have to be turned to the fathers, and the fathers to the children, living or dead, to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. If Elijah did not come, the whole earth would be smitten" (TPJS, p. 160). The angel Moroni reworded the ending statement of the book of Malachi to read: "If it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his coming" (D&C 2:3). God is a just God, and through the work of Elijah he has provided an opportunity for all to have an opportunity to receive the ordinances for salvation. Anything short of complete justice would result in God being partial, and the earth would not fulfill the purpose of its creation, namely, for his children to possess it and have the opportunity to keep his commandments (1 Nephi 17:36; Jacob 2:21). The curse of the earth was removed when the Lord provided a welding link between the fathers and the children through baptism and other work for the dead (D&C 128:18).

Another statement of the Prophet Joseph is a good summary of the mission of Elijah:

Now for Elijah. The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is that ye have power to hold the key of the revelations, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earth; and to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God, even unto the children, and the hearts of the children unto the fathers, even those who are in heaven.

Now comes the point. What is this office and work of Elijah? It is one of the greatest and most important subjects that God has revealed. He should send Elijah to seal the children to the fathers, and the fathers to the children (TPJS, p. 337).

This summary statement of Joseph's helps us understand why he later said, "The greatest responsibility in this world that God has laid upon us is to seek after our dead" (TPJS, p. 356). The prophet Elijah has come; he restored the keys for his work in the Kirtland Temple on 3 April 1836 (D&C 110:14-16). The work that he restored is under way, and the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord is much nearer. [^2]

The quotations in the Book of Mormon, being drawn from the plates of brass that did not include Malachi, show that other prophets had foretold of this burning and that Malachi was quoting from an earlier source.

---
Notas:
[^1] Paul quoted Haggai 2:6 as a Second Coming occurrence. Therefore, it seems to be a dual prophecy.
[^2] Violence to the law of Moses probably has reference to the multiplication of interpretation by the elders and rabbis through the years, having lost the true meaning of the law as a schoolmaster to bring them to Christ (Galatians 3:24).
