“I now turn the key in your behalf in the name of the Lord, and this Society shall rejoice, and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time henceforth.” (History of the Church 4:607.) So said the Prophet Joseph Smith as he spoke to the sisters gathered at a meeting of the Relief Society soon after it was organized. It is our responsibility to place ourselves in a position to receive that “knowledge and intelligence” that the Prophet promised would be the right and blessing of every worthy sister.

Each of us comes to earth with a natural thirst to continually learn and progress. This is a trait we inherited from our heavenly parents. Our Heavenly Father is waiting to bless us with knowledge. “As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints.” (D&C 121:33.)

Outlining blessings the Lord has given to Latter-day Saint women, President Gordon B. Hinckley of the First Presidency noted that women have the opportunity to “educate [their] minds and hands, to refine [their] talents, and to so qualify [themselves] to work in the society in which [they] will live.” He then reminded us, “You are as entitled as are men to the Spirit of Christ, which enlightens every man and woman who comes into the world. (D&C 84:46.)” (In General Conference, Oct. 1986.) President Hinckley counsels us to set our priorities on marriage and family and then to “pursue educational programs” and also “enhance [their] appreciation of the arts and culture.”

Whatever our current situations, we can seek to increase our knowledge and enlighten our understanding. We can each make our home a house of learning. We can surround ourselves with the scriptures, good books, uplifting music, and healthful activities. (See D&C 88:118–19.) We can study our Sunday School and Relief Society lessons weekly, even if we have other callings that prevent us from attending every meeting.

President Spencer W. Kimball said, “We do not desire the women of the Church to be uninformed or ineffective. You will be better mothers and wives, both in this life and in eternity, if you sharpen the skills you have been given and use the talents with which God has blessed you.” He also emphasized the need each woman has to study the scriptures, adding, “We want our homes to be blessed with sister scriptorians—whether you are single or married, young or old, widowed or living in a family.” (In General Conference, Oct. 1979.)

Some of us may choose formal education. Some will make contributions in science, medicine, or business. Some of us will create art. But all of us have the potential to have a righteous influence in the lives of our families, friends, or students.

As we choose our path through life, we can know if that path is acceptable to God.

“If thou shalt ask, thou shalt receive revelation upon revelation, knowledge upon knowledge, that thou mayest know the mysteries and peaceable things—that which bringeth joy, that which bringeth life eternal.” (D&C 42:61.)

1. What can you do to make your home a “house of learning”?

2. Discuss how the Relief Society lessons and associations with other sisters strengthen a woman’s love of learning and her ability to influence those around her.
