We were born heavenly parents in a premortal sphere, where we were spiritually nurtured and taught the plan of salvation. As we looked forward to the next step in our progression, we “shouted for joy” (Job 38:7). Doctrine and Covenants 138:56 states that we “received our first lessons in the world of spirits and were prepared to come forth in the due time of the Lord to labor in his vineyard for the salvation of the souls of men.” [D&C 138:56]

Wisely, our Heavenly Father did not call us all to the same tasks in mortality or give us the same personal gifts. We came to earth where and when we could progress and bless the lives of others. The life and work of each woman are unique and are of inestimable worth.

How does understanding your premortal life help you to appreciate your mission as a woman in today’s world?

In explaining the importance of each individual’s life and mission, Elder H. Burke Peterson said, “Do you think for a moment that Heavenly Father would have sent one of His children to this earth by accident, without the possibility of a significant work to perform? …

“You were preserved to come to the earth in this time for a special purpose. Not just a few of you, but all of you. There are things for each of you to do that no one else can do as well as you. … If you will let Him, I testify that our Father in Heaven will walk with you through the journey of life and inspire you to know your special purpose here” ( “Your Life Has a Purpose,” Tambuli, June 1980).

How have your challenges helped you to be aware of the Lord’s direction in your life?

How can we best find guidance for our individual paths in this life? One of the best places to find direction is the scriptures. As the psalmist says, “Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path” (Ps. 119:105). Searching the scriptures daily helps us understand the Lord’s word and feel assured that we are doing the things he would have us do.

How has a favorite scripture guided your life?

When Abish, a woman servant in King Lamoni’s court, saw Ammon, Lamoni, the queen, and all the other servants fallen to the earth, she knew they had been overcome by the power of God. Supposing that people would believe in the Lord if they viewed this scene, Abish ran from house to house to tell them about it. (See Alma 19:16–17.)

Hannah grieved because she had no children. She prayed to the Lord and vowed that if He would give her a son, she would dedicate the child to the Lord to serve Him in the tabernacle. The Lord answered Hannah’s prayer, and she fulfilled her promise. (See 1 Sam. 1.)

Just as Hannah’s mission differed from Abish’s, so none of us is called to serve exactly as anyone else serves. That is how God intends it to be; our diversity makes his kingdom stronger. But the examples of others can motivate us to do our best and to feel valued as individuals. Let us rejoice, then, in the unique life and mission we each have been given and value the contributions of others.

How has someone’s good example helped you feel valued as a woman?
