Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Preface

This volume, The Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, represents many years of preparation and research, combined with over fifteen years of teaching the Doctrine and Covenants at Brigham Young University. Its 55 chapters were written and published singly over a number of years. Since then some of these chapters have undergone revisions, but not extensively. As to the revelations covered in this volume, in addition to material relating to the origin and development of the Doctrine and Covenants, there are discussions on Sections 1 through 72. This division of the Doctrine and Covenants at Section 72 covers slightly over one-half of the total sections in that standard work of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The second volume will contain discussions on the remaining sections through 136, received on January 14, 1847.

The Doctrine and Covenants holds a unique place among the books of scripture in this Church, the other scriptures being the Bible, The Book of Mormon, and the Pearl of Great Price. It is a modern book revealing eternal truths for the people of this generation. If these truths are followed, they will lead the Saints to the highest blessings that the Lord bestows upon his children—eternal life or exaltation. It contains the message the Lord would have this generation understand that repentance may take hold of the hearts of people throughout the world that they, too, may receive the greater blessings in store for the obedient. It is declared that the Lord's Word is to go to all people; in fact, none will escape that message, for every person's heart will be penetrated either in this life or in the world to come. (D&C 1:1-4.)

The Doctrine and Covenants begins with the revelations which brought The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints into existence and carries into the period of the Church's infancy up to and including a section on the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum. Section 136 is the revelation given to Brigham Young.

To us of this year, the Lord has provided in his book of revelations: (1) the counsel of the all-wise Father whose object is to bring joy into the lives of his children today by their following instructions given to individuals, groups of persons, and the Church over a century ago; (2) a knowledge of how to live in this present world of uncertainty and insecurity; (3) the meaning of world conditions and events; (4) a philosophy of life that enables one to see God's justice and purposes for mankind; (5) a spirit of conversion to the truth-seeker which bears witness that Jesus is the Christ and of the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

The Doctrine and Covenants breathes the spirit of truth with the divine promise:

And if your eye be single to my glory, your whole bodies shall be filled with light, and there shall be no darkness in you; and that body which is filled with light comprehendeth all things.

Therefore, sanctify yourselves that your minds become single to God, and the days will come that you shall see him; for he will unveil his face unto you, and it shall be in his own time, and in his own way, according to his own will. (D&C 88:67-68.)

A more detailed study of what one should expect from a study of The Doctrine and Covenants is found in chapter 3 of The Doctrine and Covenants Speaks.

Although the chapters in this book present a section-by-section discussion of The Doctrine and Covenants, one section only is not always discussed in one chapter, but one revelation may make up several chapters. An example is the material in Section 42 which contributes to five chapters. On the other hand, one chapter is written about one verse in Section 11 although the remainder of Section 11 is included with another Section to make up a chapter. Generally, however, the chapters consist of only one section or possibly two. The arrangement of sections just noted was used to accommodate a central thesis of subject matter. Notwithstanding a theme is carried forward in each chapter, other phases of the revelations are also discussed.

In order to locate the material on each section, the reader should consult "Index by Sections of the Doctrine and Covenants" on page 565.

As to the specific contents of this book, a quick reading of chapter headings and subtitles in each chapter will provide a brief knowledge of the contents.

Although quotations appear in this book from the prophets, seers, and revelators of the dispensation, they are relatively few. If the reader desires to learn more about the teachings of the Doctrine and Covenants from the inspired men who constitute the members of the First Presidency, the Twelve Apostles, and the Patriarchs to the Church, who have the special right to teach and to declare the mind and will of the Lord, under the direction of the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, reference is made to the author's four-volume commentary, The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants.

The revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants witness the truth that Joseph Smith is a true prophet. There is a spirit about the revelations that evidences their truth. Joseph Smith was enlightened by the Holy Ghost and the imprint of that Spirit is upon the revelations. It is significantly true that the person who desires sincerely to know may understand by that same Spirit. So the Lord declares; so also the faithful have learned.

Therefore, why is it that ye cannot understand and know, that he that receiveth the word by the Spirit of truth receiveth it as it is preached by the Spirit of truth?

Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together.

And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness. (Ibid., 50:21-28.)

The Doctrine and Covenants is a monument to the fact that Joseph Smith was chosen by the Lord to usher in the last and greatest dispensation of the gospel of Jesus Christ—the fulness of times!

It is the author's hope that The Doctrine and Covenants Speaks will serve to encourage more people, Latter-day Saints and others, although it is written for the Latter-day Saint especially, to become acquainted with this marvelous book of scripture—The Doctrine and Covenants.

—Roy W. Doxey

Brigham Young University

Provo, Utah

September, 1964
