Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 2

Origin of the Doctrine and Covenants

(The Doctrine and Covenants: Explanatory Introduction)

The prophesied Dispensation of the Fulness of Times opened in the spring of 1820 with the glorious revelation known as the first vision. Although this revelation is not included in the one hundred and thirty-six sections of The Doctrine and Covenants, reference to it is found in the first three paragraphs of the "Explanatory Introduction." The full account of the first vision is printed in the Pearl of Great Price. (Writings of Joseph Smith, 2:5-26.)

Value of the First Vision

As we begin a study of the revelations given to Joseph Smith, it seems most appropriate to ask ourselves this question: of what importance is the first vision in the opening of the new dispensation? In answering this question, we should keep in mind that all revelations and commandments given to men are for their salvation. What then, does the first vision contribute to the salvation of men? Here are some ideas:

First, it proved the actual existence of God our Father as a personal being. Joseph Smith saw God! "I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. . . ." (P. of G.P., Writings of Joseph Smith, 2:17.) No longer could men say that God does not exist because he had not revealed himself to man. A correct knowledge of God was revealed. Without this knowledge, man could not receive life eternal. (John 17:3.)

Second, it proved that Jesus is a resurrected Personage, separate and distinct from the Father.

One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him! (P. of G.P., Writings of Joseph Smith, 2:17.)

Jesus Christ is declared to be divine—the Son of God. Doubt concerning his divinity and of his resurrection is removed. Men have a firm basis for faith in Jesus as the Savior of mankind.

Third, it proved that there was an universal apostasy from the Church established by Jesus in the Meridian of Time; that no existing church was the true Church.

My object in going to inquire of the Lord was to know which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be able to speak, than I asked the Personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was right—and which I should join.

I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof."

He again forbade me to join with any of them; and many other things did he say unto me, which I cannot write at this time. When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my back, looking up into heaven. When the light had departed, I had no strength; but soon recovering in some degree, I went home. And as I leaned up to the fireplace, mother inquired what the matter was. I replied, "Never mind, all is well—I am well enough off." I then said to my mother, "I have learned for myself that Presbyterianism is not true." It seems as though the adversary was aware, at a very early period of my life, that I was destined to prove a disturber and an annoyer of his kingdom; else why should the powers of darkness combine against me? Why the opposition and persecutions that arose against me, almost in my infancy? (Ibid., 2:18-20.)

Fourth, it proved that men may have the assurance that sincere prayer is answered.

While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible.

At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to "ask of God," concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture. . . .

I had now got my mind satisfied so far as the sectarian world was concerned—that it was not my duty to join with any of them, but to continue as I was until further directed. I had found the testimony of James to be true—that a man who lacked wisdom might ask of God, and obtain, and not be upbraided. (Ibid., 2:11-13, 26.)

In order to achieve salvation, men must "ask of God" for knowledge by which they may walk uprightly before him. (Moroni 10:3-7.) Joseph Smith's testimony concerning prayer and the reality of the future life furnish further reasons for faith in the efficacy of prayer in leading one to salvation. There is no promise that all men will receive a visitation of God the Father or of his Son Jesus Christ. These holy Personages have been seen only on a few occasions and at those times to their chosen prophets. (John 1:18; Acts 7:55-56.)

Compiling of the Revelations

The many visits of the Angel Moroni with Joseph Smith, beginning in September 1823, brought forth revelations in connection with The Book of Mormon to be studied later. This coming of the resurrected Moroni was the next step in the events which led up to the compiling of the many revelations into a volume of scripture. As also pointed out in the "Explanatory Introduction," many other revelations were received by the summer of 1830, when, "acting under Divine commandment," the Prophet "was engaged in copying and arranging the revelations received up to that time. . . ." In this work he was assisted by John Whitmer, who later became the Church historian by divine appointment. (DHC I:104; D&C 47:1.)

The Book of Commandments

The special priesthood conference which convened on November 1, 1831, at Hiram, Ohio, authorized the printing of 10,000 copies of the compilation of revelations to be known as the Book of Commandments. However, on May 1, 1832, a general council of the Church decided that 3,000 copies should be printed, and "that William W. Phelps, Oliver Cowdery, and John Whitmer, be appointed to review and prepare such revelations for the press as shall be deemed proper for publication, and print them as soon as possible at Independence, Missouri; the announcement to be made that they are 'Published by W. W. Phelps & Co. . . ."' (DHC I:270.) Before this (November 1831), Oliver Cowdery was appointed to "carry the commandments to Independence, Missouri, for printing. . . ." Inasmuch as he was also to take "moneys" with him, a traveling companion, John Whitmer, was to accompany him because of the protection which seemed necessary in traveling in an area where frontier conditions existed. (Ibid., I:229; D&C 69.)

Destruction of the Printing Press

On the 20th of July, 1833, a mob consisting of from three to five hundred, "demanded the discontinuance of the Church printing establishment in Jackson county, the closing of the store, and the cessation of all mechanical labors. The brethren refused compliance, and the consequence was that the house of W. W. Phelps, which contained the printing establishment, was thrown down, the materials taken possession of by the mob, many papers destroyed, and the family and furniture thrown out of doors." (Ibid., I:390.)

Fortunately, a few incomplete copies of the Book of Commandments survived the destruction. This book was reprinted at different times. It contains sixty-five chapters.

Approval of Doctrine and Covenants

The next date of significance in this brief history of the Doctrine and Covenants is September 24, 1834, when a committee with Joseph Smith as its head was appointed to publish the revelations. Upon the completion of its work, a General Assembly of the Church convened on August 17, 1835, at Kirtland, Ohio, "to see whether the book be approved or not by the authorities of the Church: that it may, if approved, become a law and a rule of faith and practice to the Church. . . ." The two High Councils (Kirtland and Missouri) and the quorum of the priesthood accepted and acknowledged the book as the doctrine and covenants of their faith, by a unanimous vote, and the written testimony of the Twelve Apostles was read. (Ibid., II:243-246.)

Meaning of Doctrine and Covenants

This volume of revelations was printed with the title Doctrine and Covenants. It seems appropriate that the new name was given it with an increase in the number of sections from 65 to 102. The comprehensiveness of the title is indicated in the "Introduction" to the Doctrine and Covenants Comentary, where we learn that "'Doctrine' means 'teaching, instruction!' . . . The word 'covenant' is a term by which God indicates the settled arrangement between Him and His people. . . . This covenant concerning the salvation of the human race, entered into in eternity, was made known to Adam, Noah, Abraham, and others, and, finally, through the Prophet Joseph, to the people of God in our day. It is the 'everlasting' covenant, because it is from eternity to eternity. The new and everlasting covenant is the Gospel of Jesus Christ." (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, page xiv.)

Other Editions of The Doctrine and Covenants

Before his death, the Prophet Joseph Smith worked on another edition of The Doctrine and Covenants. (DHC V:264, 273.) It was printed in 1844 with 111 sections one of which was the historical account of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. (It is numbered Section 135 in the current edition.)

The next important edition was the revision of 1876 when the number of sections was increased to 136. The 1921 edition is the one in current use. It contains double-column pages, with section headings, footnote references, and an index. The "Lectures on Faith" which were included in the 1835 edition are not printed in the currently used edition. In the Doctrine and Covenants Comentary, page xvii, one finds this statement in a footnote concerning these lectures: "These lectures were removed from the Doctrine and Covenants in the edition of 1921, not because they were called in question, for they are excellent lectures of great value on the principle of faith, but because they were not revelations. When they were received and ordered printed in the Doctrine and Covenants, it was with the understanding as expressed by Elder John Smith, 'that the lectures were judiciously arranged and compiled, and were profitable for doctrine. . .' (DHC II:244.) The Prophet Joseph Smith revised and prepared these Lectures himself, and they are still 'profitable for doctrine."' The Lectures on Faith are available for purchase in separate form.

It should be kept in mind that not all of the revelations received by the Prophet are found in The Doctrine and Covenants.

Witnesses to The Doctrine and Covenants

Latter-day Saints are generally familiar with the testimony of the Three Witnesses and also the Eight Witnesses to The Book of Mormon. It is not so well known, however that witnesses have attested to the truth of The Doctrine and Covenants. Their testimony does not include the actual appearance of an angel, the seeing of ancient instruments and records, or having a voice declare that the record is true. But it is no less conclusive.

"The Lord has borne record to our souls, through the Holy Ghost, shed forth upon us, that these commandments were given by inspiration of God, and are profitable for all men, and are verily true . . ." (ibid., I:226), was the testimony given concerning the "Book of Commandments" by the elders present at the time it was approved during the conference of the Church in November 1831. These same words appear in the "Explanatory Introduction" to each copy of The Doctrine and Covenants as the Testimony of the Twelve Apostles of the truth of this book of modern scripture.

The Holy Ghost speaks to man's spirit, and, thereby, becomes the powerful influence of conversion which is even stronger than the visible manifestation so often thought to be the convincing sign of truth. Examples of the strength of this kind of testimony are found in the experiences of the apostles of the Lord in the meridian dispensation. While with the Savior they saw him heal the sick (Matt. 15:28), cast out devils (Luke 8:29), and even raise the dead (John 11:44), and perform other mighty works. (Matt. 15:30-31.) Later, however, Peter denied being a disciple of Christ. (John 18:17, 25.) However, following Jesus' ascension and after the Holy Ghost rested upon the apostles (Acts 2), they labored in the gospel, and were imprisoned, and "many . . . were slain." (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, page 41.)

As long as the recipient of the Holy Ghost abides by the commandments, that power will continue with him as a lasting possession that will not require outward manifestations to keep him in the Church.

Joseph Smith's Intregrity

The origin of The Doctrine and Covenants involves the honesty of the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Prophet well understood the great responsibility devolving upon him in speaking for the Lord in the revelations he received. One time he wrote that "it was an awful responsibility to write in the name of the Lord. . ." (DHC I:226.) The assurance with which he "wrote for the Lord" is well illustrated by an incident in the early history of this dispensation.

Not long after the Church was organized, the Prophet received a letter from Oliver Cowdery in which he commanded the Prophet "to erase those words," meaning a part of verse thirty-seven of Section twenty. Joseph Smith immediately wrote to Oliver Cowdery and asked:

. . . by what authority he took upon him to command me to alter or erase, to add to or diminish from, a revelation or commandment from Almighty God. (Ibid., I:105.)

In a Church which had just been organized and with so few members, if the leader had been an impostor, he could easily have compromised and changed this document to satisfy the one man and his friends who had done so much for him. For the Whitmer family had also been influenced by Oliver Cowdery to agree with him on this command to Joseph. This meant that three members of the original six who organized the Church were opposed to the Prophet Joseph Smith on this matter. But the Prophet was not an impostor. He knew he had received the will of the Lord and, although a calamity of this magnitude might conceivably have destroyed the work, it did not deter the Prophet from his course, and Oliver Cowdery and the Whitmer family soon repented of their error. (Ibid., I:104, 105.)
