Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 3

What to Expect From a Study of the Doctrine and Covenants

(Section 1)

The title of this chapter might be changed to form a question to be answered by every reader—"What do I expect to gain from my study of The Doctrine and Covenants?" A reply to this question would undoubtedly bring many ideas. If one is thinking of subject matter or knowledge of contents alone, the reader would learn from his study that a great number of ideas are found in these revelations. The whole experience of man's earth-life is largely covered. Instruction is found, as one might expect, in how to attain spiritual salvation (sometimes called by us "entering the celestial kingdom or exaltation"). But one also discovers that these revelations are concerned with what man might consider the "temporal" things of life. From this volume of scripture, it is learned that the Lord looks upon all phases of man's earth existence as a necessary part of his journey to eternal life, or exaltation. (D&C 29:34-35.) This is very well expressed by President Joseph F. Smith in these words:

It has always been a cardinal teaching with the Latter-day Saints that a religion that has not the power to save people temporally and make them prosperous and happy here cannot be depended upon to save them spiritually and to exalt them in the life to come. (Quoted by Albert E. Bowen, The Church Welfare Plan, p. 36.)

One will, therefore, find emphasis given to one's health (what one should or should not eat, as well as to the amount of sleep one should have). We discover that knowledge saves, and the value one should place upon different types of knowledge. The need to incorporate the gospel truths into one's life, in addition to the acquisition of knowledge, is emphasized so well that we are never in doubt as to the necessity of doing so. Counsel is given on what the Latter-day Saint is to do to prevent being deceived by the adversary; he learns that Satan is a personal being and also of his purposes. Above all, the student of The Doctrine and Covenants learns of the true nature of Jesus as the Savior of mankind, of his justice and mercy, and of his relationship to the inhabitants of the earth.

The Spirit of the Doctrine and Covenants

The ideas suggested thus far are only a very few of the truths to be learned as one examines the revelations section-by-section. There is almost no narrative in this book—a fact which makes it different from the other Standard Works, such as The Book of Mormon. Great truths are found on every page. To become acquainted with this volume of scripture can be one of the richest experiences of a Latter-day Saint's life. There is a spirit about a book of scripture which is readily discernible. It is the spirit of truth; the spirit that brings assurance of things divine. It comes from the Holy Ghost to bear witness of the truth. It is this spirit that the author hopes will be received by the reader. The promise is given that all may receive this blessing by their diligence. (D&C 11:22-27; 6:5-7; Alma 12:9-11.)

A Unique Book

As we study this book of scripture, we should remember that we are studying the message of the Lord Jesus Christ. This message is addressed to the people who make up the last greatest dispensation of the gospel—the fulness of times. There are many things which make The Doctrine and Covenants a unique book, but, primarily, its uniqueness arises out of the facts that it is (1) the word of Jesus Christ the Lord, and (2) it is a modern book.

A study of what the Lord himself has said concerning his message is found in Section 1. From there we shall find the Lord's answer to "What do I expect to gain from a study of The Doctrine and Covenants?"

The Superscription

As in all revelations, a knowledge of the historical background and context provides the student with essential information to understand what is intended to be obtained from the message or messages of the revelation. For purposes of this study, the reader should become familiar with the introductory material (called the "superscription" in this work) at the head of each section. Sometimes a reference to the History of the Church by Joseph Smith, known and cited in this book as the Documentary History of the Church (DHC) is given for further study about the context of the section.

The Lord's Preface

The superscription of Section 1 informs us that this revelation is known as "the Lord's Preface." (Also v. 6 in Section 1.) This revelation was given at the conference of the Church convened November 1, 1831, when the "Book of Commandments" was adopted by the priesthood assembled on that occasion. A "preface" is intended to prepare the reader with an explanation of the purpose the author had in writing the volume. It should concern itself with matters contained in the book or connected with it.

To Whom the Message Is Directed

Appropriately, the Lord introduces Section 1 with the announcement that it is he who is addressing "ye people of my church. . . ." (D&C 1:1.) But his message is not only for the Church but also "unto all men, and there is none to escape. . . ." (D&C 1:2.) Immediately one is made aware that the message of this dispensation is for everyone. In fact:

. . . the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days. (D&C 1:4.)

and the revelations are to be published:

. . . unto you, O inhabitants of the earth. (Ibid., 1:6.)

A Voice of Warning

What has already been given as a principal purpose of the Lord's establishing his Church upon the earth? What should we expect to gain from a study of The Doctrine and Covenants? It is a "voice of warning" unto all people. This fact was indelibly impressed upon the mind of the Prophet Joseph Smith by the Angel Moroni, who quoted several Bible prophecies indicating that certain judgments were to come in the last days and that these predictions were not yet fulfilled, but were soon to be. (P. of G.P., Writings of Joseph Smith 2:40-41.) Following this, he informed Joseph Smith "of great judgments which were coming upon the earth, with great desolations by famine, sword, and pestilence; and that these grievous judgments would come on the earth in this generation. . . ." (Ibid., 2:45.)

Later on, as the Prophet received additional revelations, the Lord made it known that the faithful of his people would be aware of the signs of the times and look forward in righteousness to Jesus' second coming. (D&C 39:21-23; 45:39-44.)

Power of Sealing the Wicked

In the performance of their duties, the Lord's servants are to possess the power to seal both on earth and in heaven. Notice that those who are sealed by this power are those who reject the gospel, and also those who rebel against the servants of the Lord after having accepted his message. (Ibid., 1:8-9.) When the Lord comes he shall "recompense unto every man according to his work and measure to every man according to the measure which he has measured to his fellow man." (Ibid., 1:10.)

Why This Message?

Why is the Lord's message of warning directed to the people of this generation or dispensation? The answer to this question is found in Section 1, verses 11 to 16, inclusive:

Wherefore the voice of the Lord is unto the ends of the earth, that all that will hear may hear:

Prepare ye, prepare ye for that which is to come, for the Lord is nigh;

And the anger of the Lord is kindled, and his sword is bathed in heaven, and it shall fall upon the inhabitants of the earth.

And the arm of the Lord shall be revealed; and the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people;

For they have strayed from mine ordinances, and have broken mine everlasting covenant;

They seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own God, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall.

Three reasons why this message is directed to the people of this dispensation may be found in these verses; namely, (1) to prepare the way of the Lord (Ibid., 1:11), (2) because of the apostate condition of the world (Ibid., 1:15), and (3) because men have set up their own gods. (Ibid., 1:16.)

The God of Today

What are these gods after which men walk? Do we not know of men today who seek unrighteous dominion over their fellow men; men directed by false theories that lead people away from God's truth; the gods of vanity, greed, lust, and the whole list of vices that keep men in bondage? The word "Babylon" has come to symbolize the wickedness of the world. (Section 133:14.) Out of the world the people have been charged to come that they may not be partakers of her plagues. Eventually, the wicked world will fall, but, in preparation for that day of the Lord, there was to be a restoration of the gospel.

Results of the Lord's Message

What follows in verses 17 through 23 tells through whom the gospel was to be restored, and what could result from this great event. As you read these verses, keep in mind what the Lord promised would result from the call of Joseph Smith as the head of this dispensation. Two questions emerge from this thought: (1) does the history of the Church verify these promises of the Lord; and (2) in what part of this program have I participated?

Wherefore, I the Lord, knowing the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants of the earth, called upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake unto him from heaven, and gave him commandments;

And also gave commandments to others, that they should proclaim these things unto the world; and all this that it might be fulfilled, which was written by the prophets—

The weak things of the world shall come forth and break down the mighty and strong ones, that man should not counsel his fellow man, neither trust in the arm of flesh—

But that every man might speak in the name of God the Lord, even the Savior of the world;

That faith also might increase in the earth;

That mine everlasting covenant might be established;

That the fulness of my gospel might be proclaimed by the weak and the simple unto the ends of the world, and before kings and rulers. (Ibid., 1:17-23.)

It is worthy of observation at this point to indicate that the "others" in verse 18, unto whom the Lord "gave commandments" are those persons who were to assist the Prophet Joseph Smith in this dispensation. Many of these had already been called and received commandments by revelation. Such men as Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, and many others make up the number.

Blessings to Those Called

We discover in verses 24 through 28 what had already been accomplished and what would yet be realized in the lives of individuals who receive a call into the Lord's service. Some of these blessings are: they come to understanding; their errors are corrected; wisdom sought for is obtained; as they sin they may be chastened and repent; and strength and knowledge come through their humility. Might we today who have embarked upon a study of The Doctrine and Covenants also expect that similar blessings will accrue to us by our diligence?

Only One True Church

In continuation of the message that Joseph Smith was divinely called and others were appointed to assist him, the Lord sets forth the important fact that his Prophet has received power to translate The Book of Mormon and to bring forth "the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth. . . ." (Ibid., 1:30.) There was to be no question in the minds of the members of the Church or of the inhabitants of the world as to the position The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints holds in the world. This proclamation by the Lord gives added confirmation to the first vision and also to the many revelations which had already specified that there is only one way to eternal life.

Sin Is Condemned

It is further indicated that the Lord was pleased with his Church collectively, but the individual members of his Church had much to do in perfecting their lives. (Matt. 5:48.) It is evident that the Lord wanted the members of the Church to understand that membership in his kingdom does not give license to sin for he "cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance." (D&C 1:31), but he will forgive the repentant. (v. 32.) On the other hand, that person who does not repent, having received the light, is under the penalty of losing the Spirit of the Lord "for my Spirit shall not always strive with man. . . ." (Ibid., 1:33.)

The Concluding Message

Toward the end of this great revelation which opened with the principal message of the Lord to the Church and to the inhabitants of the earth, there is a return to this fundamental purpose—the Lord desires that all men shall know of his "voice of warning" of judgments to come and that eternal life may be won by living the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. Notice how this message is reiterated in Section 1, verses 34 to 36:

. . . I the Lord am willing to make these things known unto all flesh;

For I am no respecter of persons, and will that all men shall know that the day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion.

And also the Lord shall have power over his saints, and shall reign in their midst, and shall come down in judgment upon Idumea, or the world. (Ibid., 1:34-36.)

(Notice the term "Idumea" is defined in the revelation as "the world." It is synonymous with "Babylon" in verse 16 which symbolizes the wicked world. Idumea was known as the country of Edom whose inhabitants held an inveterate enmity toward Israel.)

As one studies The Doctrine and Covenants, he knows that the gospel message brings joy into the lives of those who live its principles, while wickedness brings unhappiness. One also discovers that judgments do await the world and that one of these judgments—war—with its present-day potential for great destruction is prophesied for this dispensation. The question of whether or not the prediction that "peace shall be taken from the earth," as stated in 1831, should now be phrased "peace has been taken from the earth" is one which every Latter-day Saint should consider in the light of present conditions in the world.

Section 1, the Lord's preface to his revelations, is concluded with the definite assurance that what has been given will all be fulfilled and that the Spirit of God bears witness that "the record is true, and the truth abideth forever and ever. Amen." (Ibid., 1:39.)

The Doctrine and Covenants confirms ancient truths and gives more enlightenment about the events of the immediate future and man's destiny than do other books of scripture. It contains some of the most glorious principles ever revealed to the world.
