Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 7

The Three Special Book of Mormon Witnesses

(Sections 5, 6, 8, 9, 17)

Sections 8 and 9 of The Doctrine and Covenants are directed to Oliver Cowdery, whose acquaintanceship with the Prophet Joseph Smith began April 5, 1829. It is interesting to notice that Section 6, as also Section 3 and others, was received through the Urim and Thummim. This fact points up a use of these sacred instruments other than for the translation of ancient writings.

Oliver Cowdery Meets Joseph Smith

Oliver Cowdery had been teaching school in the New York Manchester township area where the Prophet's father's family resided. As was customary in those times, the schoolteacher lived with the families in the school district "who sent to the school," and, by this means Oliver became acquainted with the Smith family. Before this he had heard from David Whitmer, a friend, about the Prophet having received The Book of Mormon plates.

Two days after the arrival of Oliver Cowdery in Harmony township, Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania, where the Prophet was residing, the Prophet "commenced to translate the Book of Mormon, and he [Oliver] began to write for me." (P. of G.P., Writings of Joseph Smith 2:67.) Sometime during this same month of April 1829, Joseph inquired of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim and received Section 6.

Joseph Smith Received Divine Revelation

The principal value of this revelation in our study is to learn wherein the testimony given to Oliver contributes to the fact that Joseph Smith received divine revelations. The Lord herein reveals only that which Oliver Cowdery knew before meeting Joseph, but this same information was revealed to Joseph and thus the Lord sustained him as a prophet in the eyes of Oliver.

With the foregoing facts in mind, let us turn to verses 14-18 of Section 6:

Verily, verily, I say unto thee, blessed art thou for what thou hast done; for thou hast inquired of me, and behold, as often as thou hast inquired thou hast received instruction of my Spirit. If it had not been so, thou wouldst not have come to the place where thou art at this time.

Behold, thou knowest that thou hast inquired of me and I did enlighten thy mind; and now I tell thee these things that thou mayest know that thou hast been enlightened by the Spirit of truth;

Yea, I tell thee, that thou mayest know that there is none else save God that knowest thy thoughts and the intents of thy heart.

I tell thee these things as a witness unto thee—that the words or the work which thou hast been writing are true.

Therefore be diligent; stand by my servant Joseph, faithfully, in whatsoever difficult circumstances he may be for the word's sake. (D&C 6:14-18.)

Notice from this scripture that Oliver would not have come to visit Joseph, if it were not for the fact that his prayers had been answered. The Lord here makes known that the thoughts and intents of the heart are known to him, and that, in this case, Oliver Cowdery had received a witness that the work of translating the plates of The Book of Mormon in which Joseph Smith was employed, was of the Lord. Consequently, he is admonished to diligence in assisting Joseph.

In order that Oliver might not lose sight of the witness that had been given to him, and also that he might understand more fully that he was, in fact, helping a true prophet of the Lord, this revelation continues in verses 22 to 24 inclusive, with further confirmation:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, if you desire a further witness, cast your mind upon the night that you cried unto me in your heart, that you might know concerning the truth of these things.

Did I not speak peace to your mind concerning the matter? What greater witness can you have than from God?

And now, behold, you have received a witness; for if I have told you things which no man knoweth have you not received a witness? (Ibid., 6:22-24.)

In this way, the Lord confirmed the witness Oliver had received. Notice the significant words: "If I have told you things which no man knoweth, have you not received a witness?" Joseph Smith, by revelation, now knew what only the Lord and Oliver had known previously.

In the prophet's history, we find this record of the witness given to Oliver:

After we had received this revelation, Oliver Cowdery stated to me that after he had gone to my father's to board, and after the family had communicated to him concerning my having obtained the plates, that one night after he had retired to bed he called upon the Lord to know if these things were so, and the Lord manifested to him that they were true, but he had kept the circumstance entirely secret, and had mentioned it to no one; so that after this revelation was given, he knew that the work was true, because no being living knew of the thing alluded to in the revelation, but God and himself. (DHC I:35.)

In addition to the testimony of Joseph Smith regarding this incident, David Whitmer, one of the three special witnesses to The Book of Mormon and while outside of the Church testified the following to Elders Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith:

Before I knew Joseph, I had heard about him and the plates from persons who declared they knew he had them, and swore they would get them from him. When Oliver Cowdery went to Pennsylvania, he promised to write me what he should learn about these matters, which he did. He wrote me that Joseph had told him his (Oliver's) secret thoughts, and all he had meditated about going to see him, which no man on earth knew, as he supposed, but himself, and so he stopped to write for Joseph. (Historical Record 6:208, May 1887.)

This circumstance resulted in the Prophet obtaining secretarial assistance which was much needed in the translation of The Book of Mormon plates. Oliver Cowdery did not return to school teaching, but remained with the Prophet to participate with him in many of the great spiritual blessings of this dispensation.

If you had the same experience as Oliver Cowdery in regard to Section 6, how would you have felt toward the Prophet and his work?

Oliver was promised that he might have the gift to translate even as Joseph Smith. (D&C 6:25.) It is further revealed that "in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established" (Ibid., 6:28), and that if the world accepts the word of the Lord given by the testimony of witnesses they shall be blessed. (Ibid., 6:28-31.)

Martin Harris and Section 5

We shall now turn our attention to what the Lord has said concerning the witnesses who would testify with the Prophet Joseph Smith to the truth of the gospel message. In Chapter 5 we learned that Martin Harris had received evidence of the existence of The Book of Mormon plates by receiving a translated portion of the plates which he had lost. He was still desirous to obtain further evidence, notwithstanding he had received confirmation from Professor Charles Anthon that the copied characters from the plates were true hieroglyphics. (DHC I:20.) As a result of this desire of Martin, the revelation now known as Section 5 was given. (Ibid., 5:1.)

The Prophet was under covenant to show the plates only to those whom the Lord would designate. (Ibid., 5:3.) Many times today nonmembers of the Church suggest that if they could see the gold plates, they would be convinced that Joseph Smith actually had an ancient set of records. It seems that many believe, if the plates were put on exhibit, this would be sufficient evidence to them. In this revelation the Lord does not concur with such a thought. He says:

Behold, if they will not believe my words, they would not believe you, my servant Joseph, if it were possible that you should show them all these things which I have committed unto you. (Ibid., 5:7.)

The world is to have the word of the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smith. (Ibid., 5:10.) The Lord speaks through his divinely appointed servants. What he reveals does not always agree with what man thinks is true. The prophet Isaiah revealed concerning the workings of the Lord that the Lord's thoughts are not the thoughts of men, "neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts." (Isa. 55:8-9.) Rather than the plates being put on exhibit for everyone to see, there were to be three special witnesses. (D&C 5:11-15.) Joseph was not to be the only testator of the existence of the gold plates, but in this way others would also bear witness of The Book of Mormon.

And their testimony shall also go forth unto the condemnation of this generation if they harden their hearts against them. (Ibid., 5:18.)

The rejection of their testimony would result in "a desolating scourge" to be poured out from time to time unless the people of the world would repent. (Ibid., 5:19.) To emphasize the fact that the Lord's word is always fulfilled, he refers to the destruction of Jerusalem anciently as an example. (Ibid., 5:20.)

Martin Harris was promised that he should be one of the three special witnesses to view the plates, but only on condition of humility. If he did see the plates, it was necessary that he should make it known to the world. (Ibid., 5:24-28.)

Background of Section 17

As a background for our study of Section 17, which is directly connected with Section 5, a brief review of some events in the Prophet's life seems appropriate. Joseph was at this time living in Harmony township, Pennsylvania, where he had met Emma Hale whom he married on January 18, 1827. He worked at various jobs and had acquired a small farm near his father-in-law's at Harmony. By this time Oliver Cowdery had met the Prophet and the work of translating the plates was continuing. The priesthood was restored. (Chapter 8.) In June 1829, the Prophet became acquainted with Peter Whitmer of Fayette township, Seneca County, New York, who provided residence in his home for the Prophet, Emma, and Oliver. It was here that the translating of the plates was finished.

As the work of translating progressed, it was learned that there were to be three special witnesses, "provided by the Lord, to whom he would grant that they should see the plates from which this work [The Book of Mormon] should be translated. . . ." (DHC I:52.)

These witnesses were to bear record of what they saw and heard, as indicated in the following Book of Mormon references: Ether 5:2-4; 2 Nephi 11:3; 27:12. In response to the Prophet's inquiry of the Lord concerning those who should be the three witnesses, Section 17 was received in June 1829.

A Footnote Reference Study

Section 17 begins with a promise that these witnesses were not only to see the plates, but also the breastplate, the sword of Laban, the Urim and Thummim, and the Liahona, also called the miraculous directors. (D&C 17:1.) An informative experience for the reader is to consult the footnote references pertaining to each one of these items. Answers to such questions as these will result: Were the Urim and Thummim in use during the period of the Old Testament? To what extent were the Urim and Thummim used during the Nephite dispensation? What relationship is there between the breastplate and the Urim and Thummim? What is the history of the miraculous directors and the sword of Laban amongst the Nephites?

Proof That Joseph Had the Plates

The Lord made known that it would be only by faith and his power that the plates would be seen. (Ibid., 17:2, 5.) In Sections 5 and 17 we discover proof that Joseph Smith actually had the plates. What do you believe this proof to be? Both of these revelations contain promises that on certain conditions, the plates could be seen. Verses 2 to 5 of Section 17 make this clear, as do also the following verses from Section 5:

And in addition to your testimony, the testimony of three of my servants, whom I shall call and ordain, unto whom I will show these things, and they shall go forth with my words that are given through you.

Yea, they shall know of a surety that these things are true, for from heaven will I declare it unto them.

I will give them power that they may behold and view these things as they are. (Ibid., 5:11-13.)

No person of intelligence would make such promises in his own name or in the name of the Lord unless he could thereafter produce the plates and have their truthfulness declared from the heavens. To be unable to do these things would show him to be a fraud before those who desired to be witnesses and all men who should later learn of his deceitfulness.

The Promise of Witnesses Fulfilled

Joseph Smith did not falsify. The promises made to the three witnesses were fulfilled. Not many days after Section 17 was received, Martin Harris, David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery, and Joseph Smith retired into the woods on the Whitmer farm and prayed that the Lord would fulfill the promises given in this revelation.

After each one of the four persons had prayed in succession without success, a second attempt was made in the same manner and with the same lack of success. Martin Harris then proposed that he withdraw from the others, as he believed his presence was the cause for their failure. He withdrew and the Prophet records that the angel showed them the plates and "we heard a voice from out of the bright light above us, saying, 'These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God. The translation of them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of what you now see and hear."' (DHC I:54-55.) The Prophet then went to Martin Harris and while in prayer with him, the same vision was repeated, whereupon Martin Harris cried out, apparently in an ecstasy of joy, " "Tis enough; 'tis enough; mine eyes have beheld; mine eyes have beheld,' and jumping up, he shouted, 'Hosanna,' blessing God, and otherwise rejoiced exceedingly." (Ibid., I:55.)

The testimony of the three witnesses to The Book of Mormon (found in the forepart of each copy of that book) verifies the divine mission of Joseph Smith. Their later experiences in and out of the Church bear solemn witness to the actuality of the things to which they bore record. Each one of these three men was excommunicated from the Church. (During the past few years evidence has been found that Martin Harris was excommunicated by a High Council Court, a fact which had not been known before. This is stated in the article, " 'publish it upon the mountains,' the Story of Martin Harris" by William H. Homer, Jr., in the Improvement Era, June 1955, p. 387.)

If the three witnesses had been in collusion with Joseph Smith to deceive the world, it would have been the most normal thing for them to expose the falsehood they were attempting to perpetrate. Admitting that some people live lies, the declarations they make on their death-beds usually reveal the truth. Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris maintained to the end of their mortal lives that an angel had appeared to them and given them a view of the plates. (Consult B. H. Roberts, New Witness for God, II:157, 162, 167-8.) The fact that David Whitmer never returned to the Church strengthens the validity of his testimony.

Eight additional witnesses also testified to the existence of The Book of Mormon plates. They saw and they examined the plates with their hands. (For information about the Three and Eight Witnesses, consult Preston Nibley, Witnesses of The Book of Mormon.)

Additional Items on Sections 6, 8, 9, and 5

Section 6: Comment upon verse 7 is given in chapter 9. We are reminded in verse 13 that to be saved in the kingdom of God "is the greatest of all the gifts of God. . . ."

In concluding this revelation, the Lord admonishes Joseph and Oliver to fear not to do good, "for whatsoever ye sow, that shall ye also reap; therefore, if ye sow good ye shall also reap good for your reward." (D&C 6:33.) This scripture is applicable to all Latter-day Saints. The thought in the last verse is a part of the account which begins with verse 32, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, as I said unto my disciples. . . ." which suggests that Joseph and Oliver were to think and ponder over the fact that Jesus is truly the Savior of the world, and that faithfulness in keeping the commandments will bring an inheritance in the kingdom of heaven. This last verse also serves to identify the Christ as the giver of the revelation.

Section 8 Section 9 Another application of this verse is found in a sermon of Elder Melvin J. Ballard during the great depression in the United States. The principle of revelation for the benefit of the members of the Church worthy of this blessing is emphasized in the following:

You do not know what to do today to solve your financial problems, what to plant, whether to buy or sell cattle, sheep or other things. It is your privilege to study it out; counsel together with the best wisdom and judgment the Lord shall give you, reach your conclusions, and then go to the Lord with it, tell him what you have planned to do. If the thing you have planned to do is for your good and your blessing, and you are determined to serve the Lord, pay your tithes and your offerings and keep his commandments, I promise that he will fulfil that promise upon your head, and your bosom shall burn within by the whisperings of the Spirit that it is right. But if it is not right, you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought, and your heart will be turned away from that thing.

I know of nothing today that the Latter-day Saints need more than the guidance of the Holy Spirit in the solution of the problems of life. (Conference Report, April 1931, pp. 37-38.)

Oliver was not to translate but to continue to be Joseph's scribe.

Section 5 One of the great events in the restoration of the gospel was the conferring of the priesthood upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. In this chapter we shall consider some of the implications of this subject.

As Latter-day Saints we know by modern revelation that in the beginning the priesthood was given to man as a necessary part of the plan of redemption. There are a number of biblical examples where men usurped authority and incurred severe punishment. (2 Chronicles 26:16-21; Acts 19:13-16.) Men who act with God's authority will be rejected in the day of judgment, declared the Savior. (Matt. 7:21-23.)

Background of Section 13

In preparation for the formal re-establishment of The Church of Jesus Christ, or kingdom of God upon the earth, the Lord sent his messengers to confer the authority necessary to effect that organization. It was while Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery continued the work of translation of the Book of Mormon that they went into the woods to pray and inquire of the Lord respecting baptism for the remission of sins, that was mentioned on the plates. Joseph Smith continues his account by writing:

. . . While we were thus employed, praying and calling upon the Lord, a messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light, and having laid his hands upon us, he ordained us, saying:

Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness. (D&C Section 13, See also the P. of G. P. The Writings of Joseph Smith 2:68-69.)

He said this Aaronic Priesthood had not the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but that this should be conferred on us hereafter; and he commanded us to go and be baptized, and gave us directions that I should baptize Oliver Cowdery, and that afterwards he should baptize me.

Accordingly we went and were baptized. I baptized him first, and afterwards he baptized me—after which I laid my hands upon his head and ordained him to the Aaronic Priesthood, and afterwards he laid his hands on me and ordained me to the same Priesthood—for so we were commanded.

The messenger who visited us on this occasion and conferred this Priesthood upon us, said that his name was John, the same that is called John the Baptist in the New Testament, and that he acted under the direction of Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the priesthood of Melchizedek, which Priesthood, he said, would in due time be conferred on us, and that I should be called the first Elder of the Church, and he (Oliver Cowdery) the second. It was on the fifteenth day of May, 1829, that we were ordained under the hand of this messenger, and baptized.

Immediately on our coming up out of the water after we had been baptized, we experienced great and glorious blessings from our Heavenly Father. No sooner had I baptized Oliver Cowdery, than the Holy Ghost fell upon him, and he stood up and prophesied many things which should shortly come to pass. And again, as soon as I had been baptized by him, I also had the spirit of prophesy, when, standing up, I prophesied concerning the rise of this Church, and many other things connected with the Church and this generation of the children of men. We were filled with the Holy Ghost, and rejoiced in the God of our salvation. (DHC I:39-42; also the P. of G. P., Writings of Joseph Smith 2:70-73.)

Jesus' Evaluation of John the Baptist

John the Baptist was considered by Jesus to be one of the greatest of the prophets. He said: "Among them that are born of women there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist. . . ." (Matt. 11:11.) In commenting upon this statement, the Prophet Joseph Smith observed that the miracles performed by John could not have constituted his greatness, but three things pointed up John's greatness: First, he prepared "the way before the face of the Lord"; second, he was entrusted with the mission of baptizing Jesus; and third, at that time, John was the only legal administrator in the affairs of the kingdom in holding the keys of power. (DHC V:260-261.)

We are indebted to modern revelation for additional information about John the Baptist and the Priesthood he held. The Doctrine and Covenants, Section 13, tells of some of these powers. Section 84 makes known that his calling was to administer the "preparatory gospel" (vs. 26, 27), and that John was "baptized while he was yet in his childhood, and was ordained by the angel of God at the time he was eight days old unto this power, to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord, in whose hand is given all power." (D&C 84:28.) John the Baptist was a resurrected being when he restored the Priesthood. (Matt. 27:52, 53.)

An Old Testament Prophecy

Jesus often referred to the law and the teachings of the prophets. Upon one of these occasions, he applied the fulfillment of an Old Testament prophecy to the mission of John the Baptist as one who should prepare the way for the coming. As we briefly examine this prophecy, let us see how it also fulfills John's mission of restoring divine authority in the latter days:

Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come saith the Lord of hosts.

But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap:

And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness. (Mal. 3:1-3.)

John's Twofold Mission

As indicated, this prophecy was fulfilled in part during Jesus' lifetime, for he referred to the "messenger" of this prophecy as John the Baptist who prepared the way before him. (See Matt. 11:10.) It is very clear, however, that this same messenger, John the Baptist, was also to prepare the way of Jesus Christ before his second coming. These elements in the prophecy confirm this fact: first, Jesus was to come suddenly to his temple; second, the coming of John the Baptist would occur in the last days. Otherwise, these questions would not be relevant:

But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap. (Mal. 3:2.)

The expression "refiner's fire" refers to the great heat required to bring ore into a fluid state making possible a separation of the precious metal from the dross with which in nature it is usually found mixed. "Fuller's soap" was used to cleanse garments and to whiten them. Thus we see that these expressions definitely refer to a burning and cleansing process, both of which are associated in the scriptures with the second coming of Jesus. (Mal. 4:1; 2 Thessalonians 2:8; and D&C 101:23-34.) Third, the sons of Levi were to offer an offering in righteousness.

To ascertain whether these three points of Malachi's prophecy were fulfilled during Jesus' mortal ministry, all one need do is ask these questions concerning that period: (1) Did Jesus come suddenly to the temple of Herod? (2) Were the questions asked in the prophecy fulfilled in the ministry of Jesus? (3) Did the sons of Levi of that day offer an offering in righteousness?

The answer to each one of these questions would have to be answered in the negative. They could be answered only in connection with Jesus' great second coming. But before that second coming, John the Baptist was to prepare the way by bringing again to the earth the power or authority to act in the name of God. We may say today that John the Baptist has fulfilled his twofold mission: first, as the forerunner of the Savior in the meridian dispensation (Mark 1:2-4; John 1:19-23), and second, as the forerunner of Jesus' second coming by the restoration of divine authority in preparation for the reestablishment of the kingdom of God upon the earth.

In a similar way Isaiah also foretold, in his fortieth chapter, the coming of John the Baptist in the last days. (Isaiah 40:1-5; Matt. 3:12; Luke 3:2-5.)

Aaronic Priesthood to Continue

When John the Baptist conferred the Aaronic Priesthood upon Joseph and Oliver, he used words which might suggest that the priesthood so conferred would continue on the earth only until the sons of Levi would offer their prophesied offering in righteousness. This interpretation, however, cannot be held because of a recognition that as long as mortality continues there will be a need for the performance of the ordinances of the preparatory gospel with which that Priesthood is associated. This point is confirmed in Oliver Cowdery's report of this event. He said in his testimony, quoted later in this chapter, that the Priesthood would continue that the sons of Levi might offer their offering.

Sons of Levi

President Charles W. Penrose answered the question: "Who are the sons of Levi?" in this way:

Now as to the "sons of Levi," spoken of by John the Baptist in his ordination of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. (D&C 13.) They are, or will be, descendants of Levi, holding the Priesthood of Aaron, who will make the offerings predicted by the prophets to be presented to the Lord in latter days in Zion and in Jerusalem. (Malachi 3:2-4; D&C 124:38, and 128:24.) In Zion, men chosen of the Lord for the special work mentioned will be persons sanctified by the spirit unto "the renewing of their bodies." (D&C 84:32-34.) At Jerusalem they will be Levites by lineal descent, offering the sacrifices that will be required after the restoration spoken of in Zechariah 14:16-21, and many others of the prophets of old concerning 'the restitution of all things,"' [Acts 3:19-21.] (Improvement Era 15:952, Aug. 1912.)

Sons of Levi Offering

An explanation of the offering that is to be made by the sons of Levi in the last days is given by President Joseph Fielding Smith, as follows:

What kind of offering will the sons of Levi make to fulfil the words of Malachi and John? (Mal. 3:1-4; D&C 13; 124:39; 128:24.) Logically such a sacrifice as they were authorized to make in the days of their former ministry when they were first called. (Ezek. 43:18-27; 44:9-27.) Will such a sacrifice be offered in the temple? Eventually not in any temple as they are constructed for work of salvation and exaltation today. It should be remembered that the great temple, which is yet to be built in the city of Zion, will not be one edifice, but twelve. Some of these temples will be for the lesser Priesthood. (History of the Church, Vol. 1, pp. 357-359.)

When those temples are built, it is very likely that provision will be made for some ceremonies and ordinances which may be performed by the Aaronic Priesthood and a place provided where the sons of Levi may offer their offering in righteousness. This will have to be the case, because all things are to be restored. There were ordinances performed in ancient Israel in the tabernacle when in the wilderness, and after it was established at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, and later in the temple built by Solomon. The Lord has informed us that this was the case and has said that in those edifices ordinances for the people were performed. (D&C 124:28-29.)

These temples that we now have, however, the Lord commanded to be built for the purpose of giving to the saints the blessings which belong to their exaltation, blessings which are to prepare those who receive them to "enter into his rest . . . which rest is the fulness of his glory," and these ordinances have to be performed by authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood, which the sons of Levi did not hold. (Ibid., 84:24.) Now in the nature of things, the law of sacrifice will have to be restored, or all things which were decreed by the Lord would not be restored. It will be necessary, therefore, for the sons of Levi, who offered the blood sacrifice anciently in Israel, to offer such a sacrifice again to round out and complete this ordinance in this dispensation. Sacrifice by the shedding of blood was instituted in the days of Adam and of necessity will have to be restored. (Moses 5:5-8.)

The sacrifice of animals will be done to complete the restoration when the temple spoken of is built; at the beginning of the Millennium, or in the restoration, blood sacrifices will be performed long enough to complete the fulness of the restoration in this dispensation. Afterwards sacrifice will be of some other character. [3 Nephi 9:10-20.] (Doctrines of Salvation 3:93-94, 1956.)

Some Lessons from the Restoration of Priesthood

The Aaronic Priesthood was restored one year before the Church was organized. From the opening of this dispensation of the gospel, the Prophet Joseph Smith was being prepared for that formal organization. In addition to the numerous visits with the angel Moroni, Joseph's knowledge was greatly enhanced by the restoration of the Priesthood. As one examines the circumstances which occurred on that beautiful day of May 15, 1829, he realizes how important this event was. Let us indicate some of the truths which are suggested by the event itself. (1) The Aaronic Priesthood is the power by which baptism is performed; (2) a valid baptism must be performed by immersion; (3) baptism is for the remission of sins; (4) the ministry of angels comes through sincere faith; (5) ordination to the Priesthood is done by the laying on of hands; (6) the Aaronic Priesthood is limited in its powers; (7) the restoration of priesthood confirms the apostasy; (8) life after death is affirmed by the resurrection of John the Baptist; (9) John the Baptist acted under the direction of Peter, James, and John, the apostles, indicating the difference between the lesser and greater priesthoods, and also that all who hold the priesthood act under the direction of one who holds the keys of the priesthood; (10) the Higher Priesthood was promised. Other lessons and truths might also be obtained from this one important event—the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood.

Oliver Cowdery's Testimony

Of the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood, we also have the testimony of Oliver Cowdery, written September 7, 1834.

. . . On a sudden, as from the midst of eternity, the voice of the Redeemer spake peace to us, while the veil was parted and the angel of God came down clothed with glory and delivered the anxiously looked for message, and the keys of the Gospel of repentance. What joy! what wonder! what amazement! While the world was racked and distracted—while millions were groping as the blind for the wall, and while all men were resting upon uncertainty, as a general mass, our eyes beheld—our ears heard. As in the "blaze of day"; yes, more—above the glitter of the May sunbeam, which then shed its brilliancy over the face of nature! Then his voice, though mild, pierced to the center, and his words, "I am thy fellow-servant," dispelled every fear. We listened, we gazed, we admired! 'Twas the voice of an angel from glory—'twas a message from the Most High, and as we heard we rejoiced, while His love enkindled upon our souls, and we were rapt in the vision of the Almighty! Where was room for doubt? Nowhere; uncertainty had fled, doubt had sunk, no more to rise, while fiction and deception had fled forever. . . .

I shall not attempt to paint to you the feelings of this heart, nor the majestic beauty and glory which surrounded us on this occasion; but you will believe me when I say, that earth, nor men, with the eloquence of time, cannot begin to clothe language in as interesting and sublime a manner as this holy personage. No; nor has this earth power to give the joy, to bestow the peace, or comprehend the wisdom which was contained in each sentence as it was delivered by the power of the Holy Spirit! Man may deceive his fellow man; deception may follow deception, and the children of the wicked one may have power to seduce the foolish and untaught, till naught but fiction feeds the many, and the fruit of falsehood carries in its current the giddy to the grave, but one touch with the finger of his love, yes, one ray of glory from the upper world, or one word from the mouth of the Savior, from the bosom of eternity, strikes it all into insignificance, and blots it forever from the mind! The assurance that we were in the presence of an angel; the certainty that we heard the voice of Jesus, and the truth unsullied as it flowed from a pure personage, dictated by the will of God, is to me, past description, and I shall ever look upon this expression of the Savior's goodness with wonder and thanksgiving while I am permitted to tarry, and in those mansions where perfection dwells and sin never comes, I hope to adore in that day which shall never cease. (DHC I:43, footnote from Messenger and Advocate, 1834.)

Not long after this event, Peter, James, and John conferred the Melchizedek Priesthood upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, according to the promise made by John the Baptist. (D&C 27:12-13.)
