Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 9

"He That Hath Eternal Life is Rich" (D&C 11:7)

(Sections 11:7; 14)

In their historical background, Sections 6 and 11 do not differ very much because each revelation was given to "beginners" in their understanding of the Gospel Plan. Understanding this fact will assist one to appreciate the idea in this chapter concerning the text which follows:

Seek not for riches but for wisdom; and, behold, the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto you, and then shall you be made rich. Behold, he that hath eternal life is rich. (D&C 11:7.)

The Church was not yet organized, but, as sincere seekers for truth, Oliver Cowdery and Hyrum Smith were anxious to understand their place in the unfolding of the marvelous work which was to be accomplished by the Lord through his servant Joseph Smith. Later the Lord made known that those associated with the Prophet had accomplished many things for themselves as well as for others. (Ibid., 1:17-30.)

The Place of Wealth in the Gospel

As we study verse 7 of Section 11, it seems appropriate for us to ask if material riches should be shunned by Latter-day Saints in order to live the life demanded in the gospel. What place does wealth or property have in the Gospel Plan? Every Latter-day Saint recognizes the need for providing sufficient of this world's wealth for himself and for his family. We are under obligation to do this providing. The temporal riches of this world are provided by an all-wise Father that we might sustain ourselves.

For, behold, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which cometh of the earth, is ordained for the use of man for food and for raiment, and that he might have in abundance. (Ibid., 49:19.)

The great welfare plan, in which the Latter-day Saints participate, certainly points up the need for concern about this world's goods. This activity for those in need gives one a rich opportunity to serve his fellow man.

So important is the emphasis of The Book of Mormon upon temporal matters, that Amulek admonished those of his day to "cry [Pray] —unto" the Lord over the crops and flocks of the fields, that the people might prosper in them. (Alma 34:24, 25.)

One's temporal welfare is of such importance that President Joseph F. Smith declared:

It has always been a cardinal teaching with the Latter-day Saints that a religion that has not the power to save people temporally and make them prosperous and happy here cannot be depended upon to save them spiritually and to exalt them in the life to come. (The Welfare Plan, Albert E. Bowen, p. 36.)

It seems quite clear from these few ideas that riches are not to be shunned by Latter-day Saints, but rather that they have a definite place in the Lord's purposes for man. Actually, the line of separation between the temporal and the spiritual is so indefinite in the sight of the Lord that a distinction should not be attempted. (D&C 29:34-35.)

President Joseph F. Smith brings this truth to our attention in this manner:

With God all things are spiritual. There is nothing temporal with him at all, and there ought to be no distinction with us in regard to these matters. Our earthly or temporal existence is merely a continuance of that which is spiritual. Every step we take in the great journey in life, the great journey of eternity, is a step in advance or in retrogression. . . . The work we have to do here, although we call it temporal, pertains alike to our spiritual and our temporal salvation. And the Lord has just as much right to dictate, to counsel, to direct and guide us in the manipulation and management of our temporal affairs, as we call them, as he has to say one word in relation to our spiritual affairs. (Gospel Doctrine, p. 70.)

An Evaluation of Wealth

As stated in the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, the important message to be remembered is that:

. . . Our Lord does not object to his people's being rich. It all depends on how they obtain wealth and how they use it. Wealth obtained by dishonesty and oppression is a curse. Wealth, used . . . for the furtherance of His kingdom is a means of eternal exaltation. (p. 208.)

The riches of this earth should be a means to an end. When considered from the point of view of eternity, which is the only true criterion, riches are designed for the building up of the kingdom of God and its members. The Lord is truly the owner of all temporal possessions and we are but stewards. (D&C 104:13-17.)

What Is Wisdom?

To seek for wealth solely for the sake of satisfying one's pride, ambitions, desire for power or for worldly pleasures, or other reasons for purposes inconsistent with gospel aims, is a barrier to a Latter-day Saint's spiritual welfare. On the other hand, wisdom, which is a gift of the Holy Ghost (Ibid., 46:17, 18), is to be sought. Wisdom is the application of gospel principles into one's life. Knowledge without such application will lead to disappointment and loss of the "crown of righteousness."

The wise person is he who learns the will of the Lord and then does it.

Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with thy getting get understanding. (Prov. 4:7.)

O, remember, my son, and learn wisdom in thy youth; yea, learn in thy youth to keep the commandments of God. (Alma 37:35.)

As one draws close to the Lord through prayer and righteous conduct, together with study of the scriptures, there comes the power to discriminate between the true and the spurious.

Are the "Mysteries" to Be Left Alone?

What is the Lord's promise to those who seek wisdom? He has said that the "mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto you." And yet, how many of us have heard over the years the advice to leave the mysteries alone? The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

. . . Declare the first principles, and let mysteries alone, lest ye be overthrown. Never meddle with the visions of beasts and subjects you do not understand. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, page 292.)

We should keep in mind that there are mysteries which should not concern us. When the Lord is willing to open some of his treasures of knowledge beyond what is already understandable, he will do so. Until then, however, let us keep within the framework which he has established. To go outside of these confines in attempting to learn of things which do not directly apply to our salvation is productive of contention and a loss of faith.

In view of this advice from the Prophet, why should the Lord promise Oliver Cowdery and Hyrum Smith that the mysteries of his kingdom would be made known to them? The answer is probably found in the fact that these men had just begun to learn about some of the Lord's purposes. Their understanding of the Lord's purposes was like that of a child. They had to grow and develop in this work.

Through Whom the "Mysteries" Are Made Known

Actually the "mysteries of God" are unfolded to men by divine revelation through the prophets. (Eph. 1:9, 10; 1 Nephi 1:1; D&C 76:12, 114.) Some of these "mysteries" are not to be made known until the people are ready to receive them. It was not until late in Joseph Smith's life that revelations concerning the temple work and ordinances relating to the dead were made known to the membership of the Church. (D&C 124, 128.) Germane to this point is Joseph Smith's statement:

The Lord deals with this people as a tender parent with a child, communicating light and intelligence and the knowledge of his ways as they can bear it. (DHC V:402.)

The principle just stated applies not only to the membership of the Church as a whole, but also to the individual. As one grows in understanding of the gospel through his obedience, more is made known to him. This was true in the days of the Savior as it is today. (Matt. 13:10-13; D&C 42:65, 66.) What may be a "mystery" to one person may not be to another. It depends upon the "heed and diligence" which one gives to the words of the prophets. (Alma 12:9-11.)

Consistent with what has already been given, one can readily understand that not all of the Lord's mysteries have been revealed. In fact, great blessings of knowledge are a part of the eternal plan that is known by Latter-day Saints as eternal progression. In these words the Lord has given a promise to his faithful saints: "And to them I will reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom. . . ." (D&C 76:7.)

What Eternal Life Is

If one receives the blessing of the faithful, he will be rich, for his reward is eternal life. But what is eternal life? It is more than immortality or the enjoyment of unending conscious existence. The resurrection or immortality is for everyone who is born into mortality.

If we seek for the riches of the kingdom of God, walking in obedience to the commandments, the Lord has promised us that we shall receive the mysteries of God and then we shall receive eternal life. If, on the other hand, we seek the riches of the earth as opposed to the wisdom of following the commandments of the Lord, we shall lose the greatest of all blessings—eternal life.

Application of the Text

How does our text (ibid., 11:7) apply to the members of the Church?

First, we learn that we should prepare early in life to learn the things of God.

Second, preparation for eternal life is a slow process.

When you climb up a ladder, you must begin at the bottom, and ascend step by step, until you arrive at the top; and so it is with the principles of the Gospel—you must begin with the first, and go on until you learn all the principles of exaltation. But it will be a great while after you have passed through the veil before you will have learned them. It is not all to be comprehended in this world; it will be a great work to learn our salvation and exaltation even beyond the grave. . . . (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 348.)

Third, in the process of being saved or exalted, it is necessary that one study the gospel of Jesus Christ. (D&C 131:6; 130:18, 19.)

Fourth, we are to acquire wisdom through "study by faith," prayer, humility, and the wise application of knowledge. A testimony of the gospel is a necessary part of this process of salvation.

Fifth, among the "mysteries of God" for the faithful are the higher ordinances of the gospel. These ordinances are received in the temples of the Lord.

The necessity of receiving these sacred ordinances was expressed by the Prophet Joseph Smith in these words:

What was the object of gathering the Jews, or the people of God in any age of the world? . . .

The main object was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house and the glories of His kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation; for there are certain ordinances and principles that, when they are taught and practiced, must be done in a place or house built for that purpose. . . .

If a man gets a fulness of the priesthood of God, he has to get it in the same way that Jesus Christ obtained it, and that was by keeping all the commandments and obeying all the ordinances of the house of the Lord. . . .

All men who become heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ will have to receive the fulness of the ordinances of his kingdom; and those who will not receive all the ordinances will come short of the fulness of that glory, if they do not lose the whole. (DHC V:423-424; D&C 124:28, 37-61.)

Sixth, in order to obtain eternal life one must obey the leaders of the Church. Concerning this fact, Joseph Smith said:

. . . I advise all to go on to perfection, and search deeper and deeper into the mysteries of Godliness. A man can do nothing for himself unless God direct him in the right way; and the Priesthood is for that purpose. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 364.)

Section 14

The superscription indicates that at the time this revelation was received the Prophet had gone to the Peter Whitmer farm at Fayette, New York, where he completed the work of translation of The Book of Mormon.

An incident is related by David Whitmer in connection with his preparations in bringing the Prophet Joseph Smith to his father's home. It is as follows:

Soon after this [the arrival of a letter from Oliver Cowdery] Joseph sent for me to come to Harmony to get him and Oliver, to bring them to my father's house. I did not know what to do. I was pressed with my work. I had some twenty acres to plow, so I concluded I would finish plowing and then go. I got up one morning to go to work as usual, and on going to the field, found between 5 and 7 acres of my ground had been plowed during the night. I do not know who did it, but it was done just as I would have done it myself, and the plow was left standing in the furrow. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 73.)

The thesis of this chapter is taken from Section 11, verse 7—eternal life is the greatest of all God's gifts. (D&C 29:43; Moses 1:39.) In Section 14, verse 7 the Lord seems to be warning David Whitmer of the need to endure to the end. This admonition seems appropriate in view of his being a special witness to The Book of Mormon and his subsequent excommunication from the Church on April 13, 1838. (v. 8.) He was to assist in the bringing forth of the "fulness of my gospel . . . unto the house of Israel." (v. 10.)
