Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 10

The Desire to Serve in the Gospel Plan

(Sections 7 and 11)

Joseph Smith, Sr., first Patriarch to the Church and father of the Prophet, said to Brigham Young: "If you will live for the blessings you desire, you will obtain them." This statement forms the basis of the title of this chapter.

Several of the revelations given before the organization of the kingdom of God upon the earth were addressed to persons who desired to learn from the Prophet how they could assist in the work committed to Joseph Smith. Among these were Joseph Smith, Senior (D&C 4), Martin Harris (who is referred to in (ibid., 5), Oliver Cowdery (ibid,. 6, 8), Joseph Knight, Senior (ibid., 12), and others.

Instructions to Hyrum Smith

Prominent among those who proved stalwart in defense of the truth was Hyrum Smith, a faithful follower of his brother Joseph. Upon learning about the Prophet's translating The Book of Mormon plates, Hyrum journeyed to Harmony Township, Pennsylvania, to obtain more information about the work in which the Prophet was then engaged. It was upon this occasion that Joseph inquired of the Lord for Hyrum. Section 11 is the answer to this request. The first nine verses of this section are the same as those addressed to Oliver Cowdery. (Ibid., 6.) It seems most appropriate that the importance of the Lord's work would be emphasized to these two men who were to help the Prophet in his calling. Both of them apparently had similar desires. Notice verses 8 and 14 of Section 11:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, even as you desire of me so it shall be done unto you; and, if you desire, you shall be the means of doing much good in this generation.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy;

And then shall ye know, or by this shall you know, all things whatsoever you desire of me, which are pertaining unto things of righteousness, in faith believing in me that you shall receive. (Ibid., 11:8, 13-14.)

As you read these verses and reflect on the promises made therein, what would you give to receive similar blessings? These verses point out the means by which men may receive the Lord's help in realizing their good desires. In the context to verse 14, Hyrum is informed that he is to put his trust "in that Spirit which leadeth to do good—yea, to do justly, to walk humbly, to judge righteously. . . ." (Ibid., 11:12.) If he will do this the righteous desires of his heart will be given to him, but this will also require that faith be expressed in the Lord, which is the basis of a fulfillment of the things which should fill his soul with joy. (Ibid., 11:13.)

Revelations to Others

At other times in this dispensation men sought through the Prophet to learn how their desires might be realized. The Lord on one of these occasions (August, 1831) reminds his people that "those who desire in their hearts, in meekness, to warn sinners to repentance, let them be ordained unto this power." (Ibid., 63:57.)

We are reminded in another revelation that as "a pattern in all things" that "ye may not be deceived" by Satan, men may be contrite and their language meek, yet to be acceptable to the Lord they must obey the ordinances of the gospel. (Ibid., 52:14-16.)

One of the distinguishing characteristics of the true follower of the Master is the sustaining of those in authority over him. The upholding of the leadership of the kingdom of God arises out of the truth that our leaders, both local and general, are the Lord's representatives. (Ibid., 84:35-38.) To another group of elders the Lord made known the way by which they could obtain the kingdom. His words are, "And if ye desire the glories of the kingdom, appoint ye my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and uphold him before me by the prayer of faith." (Ibid., 43:12.) This meant not only by an upraised hand and even by prayer, but by actual material support when necessary.

Book of Mormon Contribution

One of the informative and significant changes found in the Sermon on the Mount as given in The Book of Mormon, deals with the granting of the desire to partake of the blessings of the kingdom of God. Notice the contribution of the Nephite scripture:

Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee;

Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. (Matt. 5:23-24.)

Therefore, if ye shall come unto me, or shall desire to come unto me, and rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee—

Go thy way unto thy brother, and first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come unto me with full purpose of heart, and I will receive you. (3 Nephi 12:23-24.)

Before one can claim the fulness of reward, one must seek reconciliation with those who have anything against him. It is well to notice that the injured or "presumed" injured party is to go to the one who is responsible for the injury or hurt. (Matt. 18:15-17.) This admonition does not absolve the latter from also seeking to make the reconciliation which will bring forth the promised blessings. (D&C 64:8-11.)

Calls to the Ministry

As we consider the revelation given to Hyrum Smith (ibid., 11), we learn that righteous desires will be granted but that they may not come immediately. Hyrum sought to preach the gospel, but the time had not yet arrived for him to do this. In fact, the Lord informed him that he must be patient in this desire, saying "you need not suppose that you are called to preach until you are called." (Ibid., 11:15.) This is an important principle in relation to the gospel. The author remembers one non-Mormon minister who cited Sections 4:3 and 6:4 to justify his own "call" to the ministry as being taught in Latter-day Saint scriptures. However, these revelations were given before the restoration of divine authority and the organization of the Church. Hyrum Smith and all others at that time were informed of the necessity of receiving a call from the Lord when the time was appropriate, through his Prophet upon the earth.

Many today in the Church have reason to ponder over these significant ideas found in the revelation to Hyrum Smith. One who truly desires to serve the Lord should make preparations by living close to the Lord in keeping his commandments with all his might, mind, and strength. (Ibid., 11:20.) Part of this preparation is the learning of what the Lord requires of one by studying his scriptures. (Ibid., 11:22.) There is strong confirmation in verse 25 to the truth that when the Lord does call people to serve him in some capacity in building up the kingdom on the earth, the revelation thus received should not be denied but readily accepted as the word of the Lord. How many of us find ourselves in a condition where, without justification, we do not respond to the call of the Lord's servants and thus bring upon ourselves the penalty of rejecting his revelations?

Examples from the Past

For those who have the desire to serve the Lord and faithfully keep his commandments and seek to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion (ibid., 11:6), the Lord has promised rich rewards. (Ibid., 11:7.) (See Chapter 9.)

These rewards are given to those who desire them sufficiently to live the law which will bring forth the greatest blessings. The kind of desire which the Lord requires of his children is that of strength and ardor of feeling that motivate them to act in accordance with his law. There are many examples in the scriptures of those who were prompted by a desire great enough to call forth the blessings of heaven. It seems that the case of the first Nephi, son of Lehi, illustrates this principle very well. He was rewarded of the Lord because of his "great desire" founded upon a faith which was genuine. (1 Nephi 2:16.) The Lord softened his heart that he might believe even greater things because of his diligence. His life might be considered one of a consuming desire to know the truth and then to follow the voice of the Spirit.

Enos, grandson of Father Lehi, was rewarded with the desire of his heart because of his faith. (Enos 9, 12-17.) An Old Testament example of fulfilled desire on the part of Judah during the reign of King Asa may also be cited. (2 Chronicles 15:15.)

Is the Office All-lmportant?

Opportunities to serve in the Church usually come to all who have the desire. These calls to serve may seem to be minor at times, but one should keep in mind that his or her contribution, regardless of the position one holds, moves the kingdom forward. Individual blessings are received as one remains actively engaged in the Lord's work. Important to an understanding of the kind of desire that one should have in connection with service in the Church, are these words of President Brigham Young:

If I find a man, as I do once in a while, who thinks that he ought to be sustained in a higher position than he occupies, that proves to me that he does not understand his true position, and is not capable of magnifying it. Has he not already the privilege of exhibiting all the talents he has—of doing all the good he is capable of in this kingdom? Is he curtailed in the least, in anywise or place, in bringing forth his wisdom and powers, and exhibiting them before the community, and leading out? No, not in the least. Are any of you infringed upon or abridged in the least? Is there a sister who has not the privilege of exhibiting all the talent and power she will, or is capable of, for the benefit of her sisters and her children? Are the sisters deprived of any liberty in displaying their taste and talent to improve the community? (Journal of Discourses 7:161-162.)

A person's exaltation in the celestial kingdom is not dependent on the position he may hold in the Church, but upon how well he incorporates the principles of righteousness into his life and, at the same time, accepts the responsibilities of membership in the kingdom of God.

If the motivation behind one's desire for position is prompted by ambition to exalt oneself, there is lacking the necessary qualification to serve in righteousness. Martin Harris' desire to become one of the three witnesses to The Book of Mormon is a good case in point. (D&C 5:23-25.) When the apostles James and John desired to exalt themselves by occupying positions on the right and left of Jesus in the Father's kingdom, the Lord gently reprimanded them and, at the same time, denied their desire. (Mark 10:35-41; Matt. 2:20-24.)

Desires of the Living to Aid Their Dead

As one considers further thoughts relative to one's desire in the gospel plan, he learns that the basis of the doctrine of salvation for the dead is desire on the part of the dead to receive the saving ordinances of the gospel. Basically, the ordinances for the dead administered in the temples are for those who have died "without a knowledge of the gospel." (D&C 128:5.) Their desires for salvation will be realized when they have accepted the gospel in the spirit world and when the ordinances are performed in their behalf by the living. In other words, the desires of men's hearts go to judgment as well as their works. (Alma 29:4-5; 41:3-6.) This is indicated in a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith not found in The Doctrine and Covenants. On January 21, 1836, in the Kirtland Temple the "voice of the Lord" came as he beheld in vision the celestial kingdom:

All who have died without a knowledge of this Gospel, who would have received it if they had been permitttd to tarry, shall be heirs of the celestial kingdom of God; also all that shall die henceforth without a knowledge of it, who would have received it with all their hearts, shall be heirs of that kingdom, for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts. (DHC II:380.)

We may also see wherein the desires of the living in behalf of their deceased relatives are realized in this doctrine as their hearts are turned toward their dead in the spirit world.

Death of Righteous from War

One of the comforting assurances received in this life by parents who have lost sons or daughters as the result of war is based upon this concept stated in the revelation given to the Prophet. Such faithful members of the Church will be rewarded according to their desires—the blessings of the exaltation will be made available to them. This fact was stated by the First Presidency during World War II, when many of our righteous young men and women were called to the other side. Among other things, the general conference message of the First Presidency said:

In this terrible war now waging, thousands of our righteous young men in all parts of the world and in many countries are subject to a call into the military service of their own countries. Some of these, so serving, have already been called back to their heavenly home; others will almost surely be called to follow. But "behold," as Moroni said, the righteous of them who serve and are slain: "do enter into the rest of the Lord, their God," and of them the Lord has said ". . . those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them." (D&C 42:46.) Their salvation and exaltation in the world to come will be secure. That in their work of destruction they will be striking at their brethren will not be held against them. (Conference Report, April 6, 1942, p. 95.)

Section 7

We now have an opportunity to examine a revelation in which the desires of one of the Lord's apostles mentioned in the New Testament are clarified. Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery could not agree as to whether or not the following account stated definitely that John the Beloved was promised that he would continue to live in mortality until the second coming of Jesus:

Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved following; which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee?

Peter seeing him saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do?

Jesus saith unto him, if I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me.

Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said unto him, He shall not die; but, if I will that he tarry till I come, what it that to thee? (John 21:20-23.)

By the use of the Urim and Thummim Joseph Smith saw a parchment written by John wherein his desire was granted to have power over death that he might continue to bring souls unto Jesus. The Doctrine and Covenants, Section 7:6 states definitely that John became a ministering angel, and that his ministry was not to end until the Savior comes in his glory. His mission is to "prophesy before nations, kindreds, tongues and people." (Ibid., 7:3.) Nephi foresaw this mission of John. (Nephi 14:18-27.)

As one who has power over death and yet a mortal in other ways, John is known as a translated being. In reference to the work of such beings, the Prophet Joseph Smith once said:

Translated bodies cannot enter into rest until they have undergone a change equivalent to death. Translated bodies are designed for future missions. (DHC IV:425.)

From 3 Nephi, Chapter 28, we learn about the three Nephites, who were given their desire to function in a capacity similar to that of the Apostle John. They were given the privilege to continue their mortal lives until the second coming of Christ. During this time they would minister for the salvation of scattered Israel. They did not have pain, but only sorrow for the sins of the world. Prisons could not keep them nor could they be destroyed. These are some of the powers of the translated being.

In addition to John's assisting in the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood in this dispensation, we have evidence that during the time of Joseph Smith, he was actively engaged in bringing souls unto Jesus. During the June 1831 general conference of the Church, it is recorded that:

The Spirit of the Lord fell upon Joseph in an unusual manner, and he prophesied that John the Revelator was then among the Ten Tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion, to again possess the land of their fathers. (DHC 1:176.)

Again in this revelation (D&C 7) we have an example of fulfilled desires in righteousness. The Lord promised the Apostle Peter that his good desire to come speedily unto him at the allotted time for man to die was granted. (Ibid., 7:4, 5, 8.)
