Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 11

The Worth of Souls

(Sections 15, 16, and 18)

The first two revelations for study in this chapter are identical, but they were given to different persons. The message thus given was of great importance to those two sons of Peter Whitmer, into whose home the Prophet Joseph Smith, Emma, his wife, and Oliver Cowdery were received in June 1829. (DHC 1:48, 49.) John and Peter Whitmer, Jr., to whom Sections 15 and 16 were given, and especially the former, became zealous friends of Joseph Smith and assistants in the work. It was their desire to learn from the Lord what was of most worth to them in life. (D&C 16:4.) The answer of the Lord was definite and clear:

And now, behold, I say unto you, that the thing which will be of the most worth unto you will be to declare repentance unto this people, that you may bring souls unto me, that you may rest with them in the kingdom of my Father. Amen. (Ibid., 15:6.)

The Church had not been formally organized at this time, but The Book of Mormon was translated and, within a year, it was to be printed that it might become in the beginning of this dispensation an effective missionary tool in bringing people to repentance.

Notwithstanding the fact that the Whitmer brothers were given the charge to declare repentance, they would be under the same commandment given to Hyrum Smith, that a formal call to the ministry was necessary before they could preach. (Ibid., 11:15.) It seems evident from the historical context in which Sections 15 and 16 are given, that this call to preach repentance means preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ in calling people to repentance and not just including the principle of repentance as a part of the gospel.

A Unique Missionary System

With these ideas in mind, we are shown how the Lord was preparing men to assist in what later has come to be one of the most unusual missionary systems in the world.

The missionary work of the Church has been carried on regardless of the cost involved. Sacrifices of many kinds have been made by loyal, devoted men and women of this Church. The missionary system has demanded great sacrifices. The expenditure of funds by the missionaries, their families, and the Church has been in the hundreds of millions of dollars. Many missionaries have given their lives, whereas others have shortened their lives, through exposure, hardship, and disease.

The loving service of the wives and mothers of these missionaries has been shown through the decades since this system was inaugurated. In many instances they have taken upon themselves the added responsibility of additional work in the home and on the farm. Widows have, in many cases, provided for their missionary sons and daughters. Added to this sacrifice is the separation of loved ones from their homes. All of these contributions emphasize the service rendered by a devoted people to a divine charge.

The results of this service in the Church and to the missionary system have been great. The building up of the kingdom of God has been furthered as hundreds of thousands from many nations have been brought into the Church. The contribution of these converts in service and material means has compensated the Church many times over, for this contribution has increased the missionary effort, the building of temples, chapels, and, in general, the entire work of building up Zion. At the same time these converts have, in many instances, found new freedoms, opportunities to rear their posterity under conditions more favorable to living the Gospel Plan. Into the communities of the Saints, a greater understanding of people from all parts of the world is brought by the returning missionaries. An increased understanding and respect for mankind has developed among the Saints by this unique system.

The individual benefits to the missionaries in this undertaking have been manifold. Impetus to greater educational aims, the desire to give further service to mankind, and increased abilities in personal relationships, together with other personal benefits, have been realized.

The giving of self and loved ones to a cause which has as its basis a divine mandate to preach repentance and to gather of Israel from the four quarters of the earth, is done because of a personal conviction that the gospel is true.

In 1835, the Prophet Joseph Smith declared his deep respect and love for mankind in the following statement:

The servants of God will not have gone over the nations of the Gentiles, with a warning voice, until the destroying angel will commence to waste the inhabitants of the earth, and as the prophet hath said: "It shall be a vexation to hear the report." I speak thus because I feel for my fellow men; I do it in the name of the Lord, being moved upon by the Holy Spirit. Oh that I could snatch them from the vortex of misery, into which I behold them plunging themselves, by their sins; that I might be enabled by the warning voice, to be an instrument of bringing them to unfeigned repentance, that they might have faith to stand in the evil day! (DHC II:263.)

Section 18—The Worth of Souls

In laying the foundation of the Lord's work in the last days, with stress upon the teaching of the gospel, the Lord gave a revelation, in June 1829, addressed to Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and David Whitmer. (D&C 18.) Especially pertinent to the objective of this chapter are verses 10-16 of this revelation:

Remember the worth of souls is great in the sight of God;

For, behold, the Lord your Redeemer suffered death in the flesh; wherefore he suffered the pain of all men, that all men might repent and come unto him.

And he hath risen again from the dead, that he might bring all men unto him, on conditions of repentance.

And how great is his joy in the soul that repenteth!

Wherefore, you are called to cry repentance unto this people.

And if it so be that you should labor all your days in crying repentance unto this people, and bring, save it be one soul unto me, how great shall be your joy with him in the kingdom of my Father!

And now, if your joy will be great with one soul that you have brought unto me into the kingdom of my Father, how great will be your joy if you should bring many souls unto me! (Ibid., 18:10-16.)

Have you ever considered that you are of great worth in the sight of God? We are confronted directly with the fact that our Redeemer Jesus Christ suffered death of body, and in doing so he suffered "the pain of all men. . . ." (Ibid., 18:11.) Here we are brought to the realization that our Elder Brother underwent severe pain in order that we "might repent and come unto him." (Ibid., 18:11.) This is not the first time that the Lord has made known that by his suffering the resurrection is brought to pass and eventually a judgment. Jacob, The Book of Mormon prophet, said:

And he cometh into the world that he may save all men if they will hearken unto his voice; for behold, he suffereth the pains of all men, yea, the pains of every living creature, both men, women, and children, who belong to the family of Adam.

And he suffereth this that the resurrection might pass upon all men, that all might stand before him at the great and judgment day. (2 Nephi 9:21-22.)

The resurrection of the body saves men from "devil, and death, and hell. . . ." (2 Nephi 9:19.) In order that men might be saved in the celestial kingdom, they must comply with the principles and ordinances of the gospel. This gives to them a release from the bondage of sin and brings them into spiritual life with God. If they do not repent, then they receive a lesser portion of the salvation which they have earned by their obedience to terrestrial or telestial laws. (D&C 88:21-24.)

In other words, men must be obedient to the gospel commandments, which are made efficacious for men through the suffering and death of the Savior. Expressed in scripture this principle is that Jesus "bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance." (Alma 34:15.)

We are of great worth in the sight of God as shown by the great suffering of Jesus in making the atonement for us.

And he hath risen again from the dead, that he might bring all men unto him, on conditions of repentance.

And how great is his joy in the soul that repenteth! (D&C 18:12-13.)

Why the Lord's Joy Is Great

One of the reasons for the "worth of souls in the sight of God" is the fact that men and women are spirit sons and daughters of God. It is not very difficult for a Latter-day Saint to understand the soul's worth when he remembers this parent-child relationship. God is perfect. His love is divine and, therefore, it is greater than that of any human being. It has been said that mother love comes nearest to the divine of any love which is known to man. Great as this love is, God's love is infinitely greater and more constant. John the apostle set forth the fact:

For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. (John 3:16.)

Jesus also loved men, his spirit brothers and sisters, with such a perfect love that he willingly did his Father's bidding and suffered death for them.

That soul which repents and follows the path of righteousness finds in his own heart a love for the Father and the Son that helps him to draw closer to them in appreciation for their love. It is in this way that "joy" of the Lord is great. The soul that repents adds to the Lord's glory in that eternal life is made possible for the obedient. (Moses 1:39.)

Joy by Service

Man as an authorized servant of the Lord is commanded "to cry repentance unto this people." (D&C 18:14), and if one's entire life is spent in this work, and he brings but one person unto the Lord, how great will be his joy with him in God's kingdom. If, however, there are many souls brought to repentance, his joy will be even greater. (Ibid., 18:15-16.)

The Motivation of Missionary Work

These thoughts bring to our attention the need for a missionary system based upon a sincere love for man. The real motivation in this work is the love for the souls of men. There will grow in man such a love, if man will allow the Spirit of the Lord to develop that sentiment. When the missionary is prompted by love for his fellow men, all of his energies are directed to the missionary work. Then he realizes the joy in bringing only one soul unto him while greater joy comes in the many who are brought unto the Lord. One of the miracles of missionary work is the mighty change which is wrought in the hearts of the missionaries as a result of the zeal they develop in this work.

Consistent with what has preceded in this meaningful revelation, the Lord makes his will known: "And if you have not faith, hope, and charity, you can do nothing": (Ibid., 18:19.) Missionaries are not to have the spirit of contention which is of the devil. (3 Nephi 11:29, 30.) They are to oppose all evil, however. (D&C 18:20.) The necessity of taking upon himself the name of Christ by being baptized and enduring to the end is clearly made known. (Ibid., 18:22.) There is no other way that one can be saved in the kingdom of the Father. (Ibid., 18:23-25.)

The Calling of the Twelve

In this same revelation, it is stated that there are to be Twelve Apostles, whose calling is to "declare my gospel, both unto Gentile and unto Jew." (Ibid., 18:26.) These brethren are to receive their appointment because they sincerely desire to take upon them the name of the Lord. (Ibid., 18:26-28.) Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer were called to search out the Twelve who are to be known by "their desires and their works. . . ." (Ibid., 18:37-38; also Chapter 10.) In fulfillment of this revelation, the Prophet later said that the Lord had revealed that the Three Witnesses were to select the Twelve.

As to why Martin Harris may not have been included in Section 18, the following from Elder B. H. Roberts is instructive:

I think it was designed from the first that the Three Witnesses should choose the Twelve Special Witnesses of the name and mission of the Lord Jesus Christ—the Twelve Apostles; but at the time the revelation of June, 1829 [Section 18], was given, making known that Twelve Apostles would be called, and designating Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer as the ones to choose them, Martin Harris was out of favor with the Lord, and I suggest that it was for that reason doubtless that his name was omitted at that time. The evidence that Martin Harris was wavering about that time in his adherence to the Prophet and the work of God is found in Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xix, given in the month of June, 1829; in which revelation Martin Harris is sharply reproved for such wavering; for his covetousness; for hesitating to dispose of his land to meet the obligations entered into with the printer. He is commanded to repent of all these things, which, happily he did; but evidently not before the revelation concerning the choosing of the Twelve (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xviii) was given, for which reason doubtless his name is not there associated with those of his fellow Witnesses when they were designated to choose the Twelve Apostles. (DHC II:186-187, footnote.)

The duties of the Twelve, as given in Section 18, are to ordain men to Priesthood offices, declare the gospel, baptize, and to testify of the truth as revealed. (D&C 18:31-36.)

In concluding Section 18, dealing with the worth of the human soul and the calling of the Twelve, it is declared that a marvelous work will be performed by the Lord through his servants in this dispensation "unto the convincing of many of their sins, that they may come unto repentance, and that they may come unto the kingdom of my Father." (Ibid., 18:44.)
