Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 12

A Message From Him Who is Eternal

(Section 19)

Revelations in The Doctrine and Covenants are better understood if information is known concerning their historical background. Although Section 19 is one of the most important doctrinal revelations received by the Prophet, we do not have specific information about its origin. In other sections of this book of scripture, we have become acquainted with some facts about Martin Harris to whom this revelation was addressed through the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is apparent from the revelation that the Lord felt the necessity to call Martin to repentance at this time. (vs. 13, 20.) Although he had received the blessing of being one of the Three Witnesses, it appears that he had yet to learn obedience and to be reminded of the suffering which comes from nonrepentance. (v. 15.) The reference in the last part of verse 20 to the time when the Lord withdrew his Spirit from Martin, which caused him to suffer, may have reference to the time when the translated portion of the Book of Mormon was lost. (D&C Sections 3 and 10.)

Important Doctrinal Teachings

Although Section 19 has much to say to and about Martin Harris, it is a revelation, among many others, which emphasizes important doctrinal teachings. At the outset there is revealed the truth that Jesus is the Redeemer of the world, the Great I AM or Jehovah, as he was known in the Old Testament. (v. 1.) Because he did the will of the Father in becoming the Atoner for mankind, Jesus is able to destroy Satan and his works at the end of the world. (vs. 2, 3.)

There follows in this revelation the familiar scriptural standard of judgment: namely, that all men will be judged according to their works. (Ibid., 19:3; Rev. 20:13.) But verses 4 through 12 make known an important doctrinal concept of the character of God. The importance of this doctrine is best indicated in the historical background in which it was given. When one knows the beliefs of Joseph Smith's period concerning hell and punishment, he is prepared to understand how the modern Prophet's theological teachings paved the way for a far nobler understanding of God than that conceived by an apostate world. It was not that Joseph Smith had discovered these theological teachings in the Bible, but rather that the Lord revealed them to him. There is another phase of this subject which is important to realize. It is that a change has come about in the Christian world relative to the doctrine of hell and punishment that, sometimes, makes it difficult for some Latter-day Saints of this generation to appreciate fully the message given by the Savior in the First Vision. Some may find it difficult to understand why the Lord would say to the inquiring boy Joseph Smith that he must join none of the churches:

. . . for they were all wrong, and the personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in His sight: that those professors were all corrupt; that "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrines the commandments of men: having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof." (DHC 1:6.)

"Christian" Doctrine Changed

That a decided change has come during the past century in Christian thinking relative to hell and punishment is well expressed by George Harris in A Century's Change in Religion. He says that everlasting punishment is seldom mentioned in the pulpit now (1914); that "hell" is seldom uttered. The concept of a morally ruined man has come to be considered as the character being debased, rather than of extreme physical suffering. He states that the unquenchable fire, the worm that does not die, are believed to mean corrosion and decay.

The "Abominable" Doctrine

But when did this new thought arise? Several decades after the days of Joseph Smith, even as late as the last quarter of the nineteenth century, theologians were teaching a doctrine which was an abomination in the Lord's sight. Just what was that doctrine?

Some ideas held then and to some extent today were brought to the attention of people in England as well as the United States by the Dean of Canterbury in a series of sermons delivered in Westminster Abbey, November and December 1877. In the Preface of his book Eternal Hope, Dr. F. W. Farrar states that the common view is (1) that at death there is passed upon every impenitent sinner an irreversible doom to endless tortures, either material or mental, of the most awful and unspeakable intensity; and (2) that this doom awaits the vast majority of mankind.

In further exposition of these common teachings, the Dean said in one of his five sermons:

What the popular notion of hell is, you, my brethren, are all aware. Many of us were scared with it, horrified with it, perhaps almost maddened by it in our childhood. It is that, the moment a human being dies—at whatever age, under whatever disadvantages—his fate is sealed hopelessly and forever; and that if he die in unrepented sin, that fate is never-ending agony, amid physical tortures the most frightful that can be imagined; so that, when we think of the future of the human race, we must conceive of "a vast and burning prison, in which the lost souls of millions and millions writhe and shriek for ever, tormented in a flame that never will be quenched." You have only to read the manuals, you have only to study the pictures published, though but rarely, by members of our own Church, and more frequently by Roman Catholics on the one hand, and some sections of Nonconformists on the other, to see that such has been and is the common belief of Christendom. (Ibid., pp. 55-57.)

To illustrate the horrible concept of hell as taught in an earlier day, Dean Farrar quotes several examples, among which is this one from Jonathan Edwards:

The world will probably (!) be converted into a great lake or liquid globe of fire, in which the wicked shall be overwhelmed, which shall always be in tempest, in which they shall be tossed to and fro, having no rest day or night, vast waves or billows of fire continually rolling over their heads, of which they shall ever be full of a quick sense, within and without; their heads, their eyes, their tongues, their hands, their feet, their loins and their vitals shall for ever be full of a glowing, melting fire, enough to melt the very rocks and elements. Also they shall be full of the most quick and lively sense to feel the torments, not for ten millions of ages, but for ever and ever, without any end at all. . . . (Ibid., p. 57.)

An apostate "Christian" world had gone astray in fostering such teachings concerning eternal punishment and hell (spirit world). It had lost a true understanding of the relationship of God and mankind as a parent-child relationship. The understanding of the character of God was perverted by a false concept of his plan for his children. People eventually revolted against this position by even denying the existence of and the power of Satan in the world. (2 Nephi, Chapter 28.)

The Lord's Answer

The revelation given for Martin Harris sets forth the Lord's answer to the abominable doctrine described above as a preparation for the preaching of the true doctrine of Christ in this dispensation. Verses 4 through 12 of The Doctrine and Covenants, Section 19 follow:

And surely every man must repent or suffer, for I, God, am endless.

Wherefore, I revoke not the judgments which I shall pass, but woes shall go forth, weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth, yea, to those who are found on my left hand.

Nevertheless, it is not written that there shall be no end to this torment, but it is written endless torment.

Again, it is written eternal damnation; wherefore it is more express than other scriptures, that it might work upon the hearts of the children of men, altogether for my name's glory.

Wherefore, I will explain unto you this mystery, for it is meet unto you to know even as mine apostles.

I speak unto you that are chosen in this thing, even as one, that you may enter into my rest.

For, behold, the mystery of godliness, how great is it! For, behold, I am endless, and the punishment which is given from my hand is endless punishment, for Endless is my name. Wherefore—

Eternal punishment is God's punishment.

Endless punishment is God's punishment.

How do these scriptures give one a concept of punishment and hell which brushes aside the accumulated error of many centuries? In order for man to escape the suffering caused by the misuse of his free agency, he must repent. Punishment for the unrepentant is in accordance with the demand of justice. (vs. 15-19; Alma 34:14-16.) But the Lord declares that there is an end to "endless torment." (D&C 19:6.) In explanation of the use of "endless" and "eternal" in connection with punishment, the Lord explains in verse 7 that these adjectives are more expressive than others to "work upon the hearts of the children of men, altogether for my name's glory." (Ibid., 19:7.) Then the Lord proceeds to explain further that since these expressions are his name, one should understand that it is his punishment that is administered because of wrongdoing without repentance and, therefore, it is not to be endured forever. (Ibid., 19:10-12, 6.) In other words, as you read the terms "endless punishment" and "eternal damnation" substitute the word "God's" for "endless" and "eternal" (v. 10). In making this substitution the expressions mean that the punishment one receives following the death of the body is "God's punishment," and "it is not written that there shall be no end to this torment." (v. 6.)

Repentance Commanded

We are immediately informed in the revelation (ibid., 19:15-19) that if one does not repent, . . . one's sufferings will be sore, even so much that one presently would not know of their intensity. A comparison is made with the sufferings of the Savior. However, there is an end! There is release! Provision is made in the true gospel of Jesus Christ that the blood of Jesus redeems and cleanses men of sin if they will repent. The Plan provides that this is possible in the spirit world for all except the few who become sons of perdition because they have lost the power of repentance. (Ibid., 76:40-48; Matt. 12:31, 32; Alma 12:16-18.) The repentant dead, however, will be redeemed and come from the prison house (spirit world) as heirs of salvation in one of the kingdoms of glory.

Hell and Punishment

Is there a hell? The modern scriptures answer in the affirmative. (D&C 76:84-85, 106.) Where is this hell? It is the spirit world—the intermediate state between death and the resurrection. (Alma 40:11-14; Luke 16:19-31.)

The punishment meted out to the wicked, corrupt, and unrepentant of this earth is not the kind taught by an apostate religious world. What did the Prophet Joseph Smith say was the punishment of the wicked? Here is his answer:

There is no pain so awful as that of suspense. This is the punishment of the wicked; their doubt, anxiety and suspense cause weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth. (DHC V:340.)

The great misery of departed spirits in the world of spirits, where they go after death, is to know that they come short of the glory that others enjoy and that they might have enjoyed themselves, and they are their own accusers. (Ibid., V:425.)

Recapitulation

Summary: Whereas an apostate world taught the abominable doctrine that the fire of hell is material and that its agonies are physical agonies; that there is an everlasting damnation of suffering for all who die in a state of sin; and that the vast majority of mankind receive this condemnation, the Lord revealed that eternal punishment means God's punishment, and "it is not written that there shall be no end of this torment." (D&C 19:6.) But there is a hell and there is a punishment that men may eventually be prepared to enjoy a heaven commensurate with their deeds and desires. (Chapter 10.)

Voluntary Suffering of Jesus

Reference has already been made to verses 15 through 19 of Section 19 concerning the great suffering of the Lord in bleeding at every pore, in suffering both body and spirit, and then giving his life that man might be redeemed from his sins. Although some phases of the atonement of Jesus and his suffering were considered in Chapter 11, this revelation does express the magnitude of the cost involved in that atonement. It is probably sufficient here to remind ourselves that when we know the extent of the suffering of Jesus, we should appreciate more fully the love which he and the Father have for us in providing by the atonement an opportunity to escape from an endless misery, as subjects of Satan. (2 Nephi 9:6-27, especially vs. 7-9, 21; Alma 42:14-15; Luke 22:44; Mosiah 3:7.)

It would be impossible for anyone to describe adequately the great suffering of Jesus as he took upon himself the sins of mankind. President John Taylor has given us a description of Jesus' suffering

The suffering of the Son of God was not simply the suffering of personal death; for in assuming the position that He did in making an atonement for the sins of the world He bore the weight, the responsibility, and the burden of the sins of all men, which, to us, is incomprehensible. . . .

Groaning beneath this concentrated load, this intense, incomprehensible pressure, this terrible exaction of Divine justice, from which feeble humanity shrank, and through the agony thus experienced sweating great drops of blood, He was led to exclaim, "Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me." He had wrestled with the superincumbent load in the wilderness, He had struggled against the power of darkness that had been let loose upon him there; placed below all things, His mind surcharged with agony and pain, lonely and apparently helpless and forsaken, in his agony the blood oozed from His pores. Thus rejected by His own, attacked by the powers of darkness, and seemingly forsaken by His God, on the cross He bowed beneath the accumulated load, and cried out in anguish, "My God, why hast thou forsaken me!" When death approached to relieve Him from His horrible position, a ray of hope appeared through the abyss of darkness with which He had been surrounded, and in a spasm of relief, seeing the bright future beyond, He said, "It is finished! Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit." (Mediation and Atonement, pp. 146-147.)

Two Plans

The benefits of the atonement for personal salvation arise out of our obedience to the laws and commandments of the gospel. The forgiveness of sins comes to us by this obedience to the ordinances of the gospel and by enduring to the end, walking in obedience to the commandments. (3 Nephi 27:13-21; D&C 18:22.)

When we contemplate the great love which God has for mankind in providing redemption through the plan of life and salvation, we may also exclaim with Lehi's son Jacob, as recorded in 2 Nephi, chapter 9:

O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace! . . .

O how great the goodness of our God! . . .

O how great the plan of our God! . . .

O the greatness and the justice of our God!

O the greatness of the mercy of our God, the Holy One of Israel! . . .

O how great the holiness of our God! . . . (2 Nephi 9:8 ff.)

On the other hand, there is the cunning plan of the evil one. In Jacob's exhortation, he reminds his brethren to:

. . . remember the awfulness in transgressing against that Holy God, and also the awfulness of yielding to the enticings of that cunning one. Remember, to be carnally-minded is death, and to be spiritually-minded is life eternal. (Ibid., 9:39.)

Do you feel as Jacob felt in expressing this gratitude to God for the Gospel Plan? Do his expressions of joy also express your sincere feeling for what the Lord has done in restoring light and truth through the Prophet Joseph Smith?

Additional Instructions to Martin Harris

In Section 19, the Lord informs Martin Harris that there are some things which are fundamentals of the gospel not yet to be taught to the world, but repentance is the principal message. (vs. 21, 31, and 32.) Some matters were too advanced for those who were yet babes in gospel understanding. The Lord, therefore, set forth what an earlier prophet had counseled concerning food suited for children contrasted with meat which is suited for those of "full age." (Hebrews 5:12-14.)

Significant in Section 19 is the statement that The Book of Mormon is the Lord's word:

. . . to the Gentile, that soon it may go to the Jew, of whom the Lamanites are a remnant, that they may believe the gospel, and look not for a Messiah to come who has already come. (D&C 19:27)

A definition or clarification of an expression found in many scriptures is given in this revelation. As an example John the Baptist prepared the way of the Lord by declaring that Jesus would follow him and "baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire." (Luke 3:16.) Nephi taught by revelation that through the acceptance of the gospel, there:

. . . cometh the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost; and then can ye speak with the tongue of angels, and shout praises unto the Holy One of Israel. (2 Nephi 31:13.)

Jesus used this expression in addressing the Nephites. (3 Nephi 19:18-20.) Martin Harris is told to:

. . . declare repentance and faith on the Savior, and remission of sins by baptism, and by fire, yea, even the Holy Ghost. (D&C 19:31.)

In other words, water baptism plus the baptism of the Holy Ghost, or "fire," after repentance and faith, cleanse and purify in remitting sins. (2 Nephi 31:17.)

In closing one of the great revelations in The Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord addresses questions to Martin Harris which may be asked of many today.

Pray always, and I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and great shall be your blessing—yea, even more than if you should obtain treasures of earth and corruptibleness to the extent thereof.

Behold, canst thou read this without rejoicing and lifting up thy heart for gladness ?

Or canst thou run about longer as a blind guide?

Or canst thou be humble and meek, and conduct thyself wisely before me? Yea, come unto me thy Savior. Amen. (D&C 19:38-41.)
