Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 14

The Responsibilities of the Members of the Church

(Sections 22; 20:37-84; 26)

In chapter 13 we considered teachings relative to the "fulness of the gospel" as they are contained in The Book of Mormon. In addition, the Lord had commanded the organizing of his Church on April 6, 1830. Inasmuch as only the first part of Section 20 was considered in chapter 13, we shall now examine related revelations and the rest of this revelation. As we do so, let us keep in mind that with the organizing of the kingdom of God upon the earth, there were many things to be made known as to exactly how the Church should function. There are numerous revelations yet to be studied which point out many phases of how the Lord's Church is to carry on its manifold purposes. This is also true with regard to the duties of those who constitute the membership of the organization. In other words, the Lord did not make everything known at one time, but as circumstances demanded, further light and information came through revelations to the Prophet.

Section 22

One of the first questions to arise in this newly organized Church, was concerning the important ordinance of water baptism. It seems that some people who had been baptized into sectarian churches were desirous of uniting with the Church without rebaptism. (DHC I:79; and superscription of Section 22.) In the minds of some, apparently, it was believed that the important factor about baptism was that it be performed by immersion. There are so many "Christians" today who feel, as in Joseph Smith's day, that authority to administer this ordinance is unnecessary, or that any clergyman is authorized by God to perform it.

In order that there may be no question, the Lord made known in Section 22 that there is only one baptism and that is the one administered under the "new and everlasting covenant . . ." (D&C 22:1), which is the gospel of Jesus Christ as restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith. (Ibid., 66:2.) The "dead works" of men for salvation in the kingdom of God are futile and although "a man should be baptized an hundred times it availeth him nothing." (Ibid., 22:2.) Divine law from the beginning prescribed only one "gate" into the kingdom of God, and that through an authorized baptism. (Ibid., 22:1-4; 2 Nephi 31:17; Moses 7:64-68.)

Requirements for Baptism

Another question to arise in this newly organized Church, was the important matter of what should be required of those who came into the fold of Christ. With definite emphasis upon the need to be born of water and of the Holy Ghost, as set forth in The Book of Mormon, just published, the Lord stated in plainness what is required of the prospective member of his Church.

Notice carefully the thirty-seventh verse of Section 20 which reads as follows:

And again, by way of commandment to the church concerning the manner of baptism—All those who humble themselves before God, and desire to be baptized, and come forth with broken hearts and contrite spirits, and witness before the church that they have truly repented of all their sins, and are willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end, and truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins, shall be received by baptism into his church. (D&C 20:37.)

These instructions require a high degree of performance. For example, does not the Lord expect a prospective member of the kingdom to observe the Sabbath day in the manner the Lord has revealed through his living oracles? What about being honest in business transactions and, especially, with the Lord in regard to the payment of tithing, also in keeping the Word of Wisdom and other similar requirements?

If one believes what the Lord revealed as requisites to receive a "remission of sins," then there should not be any question concerning these matters. One is expected and one should come before the Lord with a "broken heart and contrite spirit" (ibid., 59:8) sorrowing for past sins and in true humility seeking forgiveness, "and witness before the church that they have truly repented of all their sins. . . ." (Ibid., 20:37.) The Church member, before whom this convert comes to be received into fellowship, should also have a determination to serve Jesus Christ to the end.

Responsibility of Mothers

Although under a patriarchal order, the father presides in the family in giving counsel and instruction, the great responsibility of the mother is to rear the children in light and truth. It is a well-known fact that the influence of the mother upon her children is very great. The fact that she is with the children so much during their formative years, and even later, gives her a greater opportunity to influence the children in the home. When the teaching of the children comes from both parents, as it should, the double impact upon the child is apparent. Both parents have this responsibility even in matters relating to areas of Church government and administration which normally are best known by the father. An example of this subject matter is found in our text from The Doctrine and Covenants, Section 20.

All the leaders of the Church have given emphasis to the need of teaching in the home. Among these was President Joseph F. Smith, who, in the following quotation, places the responsibility upon both parents.

Another great and important duty devolving upon this people is to teach their children, from their cradle until they become men and women, every principle of the gospel, and endeavor, as far as it lies in the power of the parents, to instil into their hearts a love for God, the truth, virtue, honesty, honor and integrity to everything that is good. That is important for all men and women who stand at the head of a family in the household of faith. Teach your children the love of God, teach them to love the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Teach them to love their fellowmen, and especially to love their fellow members in the Church that they may be true to their fellowship with the people of God. Teach them to honor the priesthood, to honor the authority that God has bestowed upon his Church for the proper government of his Church. (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 292-293.)

The Necessity of Study and Its Application

But how shall we teach our children from their cradles until they become men and women, if we are not informed on these important truths? With an understanding of light and truth, the maturity of years often provides wisdom and judgment which give to parents an influence that may be exercised in behalf of their posterity, young and old.

There is no one in the Church who is exempt from teaching his children the restored gospel. So emphatic is the Lord concerning this matter, that, in 1833 he rebuked the members of the First Presidency composed of Joseph Smith, Frederick G. Williams, and Sidney Rigdon, because of their failure to comply completely with this admonition. (D&C 93:40-48.)

In addition to the need, perhaps this rebuke by the Lord was to be an object lesson for all members of the Church relative to their own responsibilities. There comes a time, however, as indicated concerning the Prophet in verse 48 of Section 93, when the members of a family stand condemned, if they do not give heed to the righteous teachings of the parents.

A Statement of Truths

What do we find in the remaining part of Section 20 which provides opportunities for study in an understanding of Church administration, duties of members, and the law by which we are governed? Here are the elements of this basic revelation which may be referred to as the "constitution" of the kingdom of God.

To baptize.

To ordain other elders, priests, teachers, and deacons.

To administer the sacrament.

To confirm baptized persons into the Church by the laying on of hands and giving of the Holy Ghost.

To teach, expound, exhort, and watch over the Church.

To take the lead of all meetings and conduct them as they are led by the Holy Ghost.

To preach, teach, expound, exhort, baptize, and administer the sacrament.

To visit the house of each member and exhort the family to pray vocally and in secret and attend to all family duties.

To ordain other priests, teachers, and deacons.

To take the lead of meetings when no elder is present.

To assist the elders if occasion requires it.

Watch over and strengthen the Church always.

See that there is no iniquity in the Church—neither hardness with each other, nor lying, backbiting, nor evil speaking.

See that the Church meets together often and that all the members do their duty.

Take the lead of meetings in the absence of the elder or priest.

Assist teachers with their duties when the occasion arises.

Warn, expound, exhort, teach, and invite all to come unto Christ.

a. Every elder, priest, teacher, and deacon is to be ordained according to the gifts and callings of God unto him by the power of the Holy Ghost.

b. Conferences of the Church are to meet once in three months or from time to time, and these conferences are to do whatever Church business is necessary at the time.

c. Elders are to receive their license from other elders by vote of the Church or from conferences, and each priest, teacher, deacon may receive license to perform his duties from an elder, or by a conference of the Church.

d. No person may be ordained to an office in the Church where there is an organized branch without the vote of that branch, but where there is no branch, a presiding elder, high councilor, high priest, or elder may ordain him.

e. Every president of the High Priesthood, bishop, high councilor, and high priest is to be ordained by the direction of a high council at general conference.

a. All ordinances performed in the Church must be done in order. The members shall manifest to all that they are worthy to belong to the Church.

b. Every member having children should bring them to the elders for a blessing.

c. No one can be received into the Church of Christ until he has arrived at the age of accountability before God and is capable of repentance.

a. Immersion is the only mode of baptism, and it must be performed by a person who has authority of Jesus Christ to baptize.

b. The Church should meet together often to partake of the sacrament in remembrance of the Lord. The manner of administering the sacrament is given in Section 20.

a. Any member of the Church found in transgression is to be dealt with as the scriptures direct. It is the duty of the stakes, wards, or branches to keep a record of those who have been excommunicated that their names may be blotted out, and also of all members.

b. All members of the Church who move from one locality to another are to take a letter certifying that they are regular members and in good standing in the Church.

Opportunities for Mothers

An understanding of the above truths will help us to realize that as parents in Zion who have had our children baptized, our responsibility to instruct and prepare them for useful service is not ended. President Heber J. Grant once said that it was folly for parents to imagine that their children will grow up with a knowledge of the gospel without teaching. Parents are not justified when they leave the teaching of their children to the auxiliaries of the Church. The amount of time children are in these organizations per week is small. The great opportunities for teaching the gospel are in the home. A testimony comes and grows by faith arising from true knowledge and diligence in keeping the commandments. If parents know the gospel they can govern themselves and teach correct principles to their children.

Common Consent

One of the great principles in governing the kingdom of God in all dispensations of the gospel is the law of common consent. Whenever that kingdom has been organized on the earth it has never been a democracy, as such, but one of the elements of democracy is this principle. The members do not legislate their own laws by which they are governed, nor do they elect their officers. Revelation from the Law Giver, Jesus Christ, is the means of governing his kingdom. Common consent means that by the united voice of the Church certain actions pertaining to its operations are submitted to the members. As verses 60 through 67 of Section 20 point out, general Church business and ordinations to offices are performed by common consent. Elders of the Church act only under direction of those who are empowered to direct them because of the right given to them by the approval of the members. That the vote of the Church is necessary to make valid the privilege to hold office is brought out clearly in other revelations. (Ibid., 41:9; 51:12; 124:124-144.)

A good example of the operation of this law was the occasion of the organization of the Church on April 6, 1830. A rereading of Chapter 13 will indicate how Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were accepted by those present to be their teachers, and whether or not there was agreement to organize the Church upon that eventful day.

Section 26

One of the shortest revelations in The Doctrine and Covenants is Section 26. Nevertheless, it is important in the fact that again the Lord emphasizes

And all things shall be done by common consent in the Church, by much prayer and faith, for all things you shall receive by faith.

When we exercise our rights under the law of common consent, it is to be done "by much prayer and faith. . . ." If one lives by prayer and in faith, one should be entitled to the Holy Ghost that his judgments may be in accordance with the will of our Lord. Every true Latter-day Saint has the right to that Spirit, if he will but live for it.

The fact that the Prophet Joseph Smith was directed in the governing of the Church and that he relied upon the Lord "by much prayer and faith . . ." is given confirmation in the last part of verse 1 of Section 26. Concerning the conference to be held in the West, together with other matters, the Prophet is told that "it shall be made known what you shall do." (Ibid., 26:1.)
