Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 17

The Revelation to Emma Hale Smith

(Section 25)

Section 25 is the only revelation in The Doctrine and Covenants that is directed to a woman. The revelation is prophetic in calling Emma Hale Smith to a position of honor and responsibility. It also admonishes her to a life of consecrated devotion to duties demanded by reason of her position as the Prophet's wife.

The first verse of the section points out that "all those who receive my gospel are sons and daughters of my kingdom." (D&C 25:1.) Although this fact is made known in many subsequent revelations (Ibid., 34:3; 35:2; 45:8), it is significant in this revelation because Emma had been baptized during the last week of June 1830, and confirmed a member of the Church in August. In the meantime (July 1830) she was the subject of this revelation. Verse eight of Section 25 points out that Emma was yet to receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. The latter circumstance forms a part of the background of Section 27. (See Chapter 15.) By reason of Emma's becoming a member of the kingdom of God and enjoying the blessings of the Holy Ghost, she would be prepared to fulfill some of the specific duties indicated in this revelation.

Emma Hale (born July 10, 1804) became the wife of Joseph Smith on January 18, 1827. They were married for approximately seventeen and one-half years before the martyrdom of the Prophet. There followed three and one-half years of widowhood, when she married (Major) Lewis Crum Bidamon with whom she lived until her death on April 30, 1879.

When the Saints moved West under the direction of the Twelve Apostles with Brigham Young as their President, Emma Smith did not accompany them. She did not continue in the faith for which her husband and his brother Hyrum gave their lives as martyrs.

There were born to Joseph and Emma nine children. The first three, two of whom were twins, died at birth; one other child was born dead and another died at the age of fourteen months. The other four grew to adulthood. Of these children eight were sons, and the only girl was one of the twins who died at birth. Their last child was born after the Prophet's martyrdom. After the death of their twins, they adopted the motherless twins of John Murdock, one of whom, a boy, died at one day less than eleven months of age, only a few days after the Prophet was tarred and feathered by a mob at Hiram, Ohio. (DHC I:265.)

Emma has been described as a woman of exceptional intelligence, refinement, and culture. She was neat in appearance and an immaculate housekeeper. Into her home came such visitors as Stephen A. Douglas and Josiah Quincy, Mayor of Boston, not to mention the great many faithful Latter-day Saints who also came to visit the Prophet.

As the wife of the Prophet, Emma was called upon to undergo many hardships because of the persecutions the Prophet underwent. There were times when the Prophet was imprisoned, in exile, on missions, and discharging his many duties in organizing and directing the Church. Persecution drove the Smith family from one place to another so that their children were born in four different states. It was during some of these trials and persecutions that Section 25 was received. (I am indebted to the research of Raymond T. Bailey for much of the foregoing material.)

The Lord's Counsel to Emma

Her first duty, Emma was told in Section 25, was to be a comfort to her husband in his afflictions by giving "consoling words, in the spirit of meekness." (D&C 25:5.) Where the Prophet was to go she was to be with him, and in the absence of Oliver Cowdery to act as his secretary or scribe. (Ibid., 25:6.)

In the fourth verse the Lord admonished Emma to murmur not concerning things which she had not seen. This counsel may arise out of the fact that she and also the "world" were not to see The Book of Mormon plates, which the Lord declared was his wisdom. Regardless of how people may feel about the ways of the Lord, if we accept him as an all-wise Being, we will recognize, as did Isaiah, that his ways are not always the ways of man nor are his thoughts the thoughts of men. (Isaiah 55:8-9.) This revelation sets forth a principle which is indicated in other scriptures; namely, that the Lord calls imperfect people into his service, although he does require that they show forth fruits of repentance.

An Elect Lady

Verse three states that Emma is "an elect lady, whom I have called." The way in which this honor was to come to her is indicated in verse seven:

And thou shalt be ordained under his hand to expound scriptures, and to exhort the church, according as it shall be given thee by my Spirit. (D&C 25:7.)

When the Relief Society of the Church was organized on Thursday, March 17, 1842, Emma's call as an "elect lady . . ." was fulfilled. Of this expression, the Prophet Joseph Smith said on that occasion:

I assisted in commencing the organization of "The Female Relief Society in Nauvoo" in the Lodge Room. Sister Emma Smith, President, and Sister Elizabeth Ann Whitney and Sarah M. Cleveland, Counselors. I gave much instruction, read in the New Testament, and Book of Doctrine and Covenants, concerning the Elect Lady, and showed that the elect meant to be elected to a certain work, &c., and that the revelation was then fulfilled by Sister Emma's election to the Presidency of the Society, she having previously been ordained to expound the Scriptures. Emma was blessed, and her counselors were ordained by Elder John Taylor. (DHC IV:552, 553.) (Italics, the author's.)

In her capacity as President of the Relief Society, Emma certainly could expound the scriptures and exhort the women of the Society to good works by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

The term "ordained" as used in this revelation and in the days of the Prophet was used synonymously with "set apart." Today, we "ordain" male members of the Church to an office in the priesthood, and we "set apart" men and women to offices and callings in the Church. And so with Emma, she was as we would say today, set apart to her callings by the priesthood who rule in the kingdom of God.

The Priesthood Rules

The Apostle Paul is reported in the New Testament to say that a woman is not to "speak" in the Church. According to the Prophet Joseph Smith, as given in the inspired version of the Bible, Paul's counsel was that women should not "rule" in the Church, "but to be under obedience," that is, they are under the direction of the Priesthood authorities and receive their instructions from them. (1 Cor. 14:34-35.) This principle was stated by the Prophet to the members of the Relief Society the month following their organization:

You will receive instructions through the order of the Priesthood which God has established, through the medium of those appointed to lead, guide and direct the affairs of the Church in this last dispensation; and I now turn the key in your behalf in the name of the Lord, and this Society shall rejoice, and knowledge and intelligence shall flow down from this time henceforth; this is the beginning of better days to the poor and needy, who shall be made to rejoice and pour forth blessings on your heads. (DHC IV:607.)

We have an example of the Priesthood directing the affairs of the Church in the circumstances that led to the organization of the Society. Notwithstanding certain sisters had drawn up a constitution to organize a society, it is reported by Sarah M. Kimball:

In the spring of 1842, a maiden lady (Miss Cook) was seamstress for me, and the subject of combining our efforts for assisting the Temple hands came up in conversation. She desired to be helpful, but no means to furnish. I told her I would furnish material if she would make some shirts for the workmen. It was then suggested that some of the neighbors might wish to combine means and efforts with ours, and we decided to invite a few to come and consult with us on the subject of forming a Ladies' Society. The neighboring sisters met in my parlor and decided to organize. I was delegated to call on Sister Eliza R. Snow and ask her to write for us a constitution and by-laws and submit them to President Joseph Smith prior to our next Thursday's meeting. She cheerfully responded, and when she read them to him he replied that the constitution and by-laws were the best he had ever seen. "But," he said, "this is not what you want. Tell the sisters their offering is accepted of the Lord, and He has something better for them than a written constitution. Invite them all to meet me and a few of the brethren in the Masonic Hall over my store next Thursday afternoon, and I will organize the sisters under the priesthood after a pattern of the priesthood." He further said, "This Church was never perfectly organized until the women were thus organized." (The Relief Society Magazine, vol. VI, March 1919, page 129.)

The Prophet's Counsel to the Relief Society

Pertinent to the subject matter of this revelation and to the Relief Society is the counsel given by the prophet in some of the later meetings of the Society he attended. In addition to the important truth that the sisters, with their officers presiding over them, were to be directed by the Priesthood authorities, the following counsel was given by Joseph Smith:

He spoke of the disposition of many men to consider the lower offices in the Church dishonorable, and to look with jealous eyes upon the standing of others who are called to preside over them; that it was the folly and nonsense of the human heart for a person to be aspiring to other stations than those to which they are appointed of God for them to occupy; that it was better for individuals to magnify their respective callings, and wait patiently till God shall say to them, "Come up higher. . . ."

He exhorted the sisters always to concentrate their faith and prayers for, and place confidence in their husbands, whom God has appointed for them to honor, and in those faithful men whom God has placed at the head of the Church to lead His people; that we should arm and sustain them with our prayers. . . .

. . . you must put down iniquity, and by your good examples, stimulate the Elders to good works; if you do right, there is no danger of your going too fast.

He said he did not care how fast we run in the path of virtue; resist evil, and there is no danger. . . .

This is a charitable Society, and according to your natures; it is natural for females to have feelings of charity and benevolence. You are now placed in a situation in which you can act according to those sympathies which God has planted in your bosom. . . .

You must not be contracted, but you must be liberal in your feelings. Let this Society teach women how to behave towards their husbands, to treat them with mildness and affection. When a man is borne down with trouble, when he is perplexed with care and difficulty, if he can meet a smile instead of an argument or a murmur—if he can meet with mildness, it will calm down his soul and soothe his feelings; when the mind is going to despair, it needs a solace of affection and kindness. (DHC IV:603-607.) (Italics, the author's.)

. . . put a double watch over the tongue: no organized body can exist without this at all. All organized bodies have their peculiar evils, weaknesses and difficulties, the object is to make those not so good reform and return to the path of virtue that they may be numbered with the good, and even hold the keys of power, which will influence to virtue and goodness—should chasten and reprove, and keep it all in silence, not even mention them again; then you will be established in power, virtue, and holiness, and the wrath of God will be turned away.

. . . search yourselves—the tongue is an unruly member—hold your tongues about things of no moment. . . .

I do not want to cloak iniquity—all things contrary to the will of God, should be cast from us, but don't do more hurt than good, with your tongues—be pure in heart. Jesus designs to save the people out of their sins. (Ibid., V. 20.)

The First Latter-day Saint Hymnal

Another assignment given to Emma Smith was that of making a selection of sacred hymns for the Church.

And it shall be given thee, also, to make a selection of sacred hymns, as it shall be given thee, which is pleasing unto me, to be had in my church.

For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads. (D&C 25:11-12.)

In accordance with this call, Emma made a selection of hymns which appeared in two volumes. W. W. Phelps was appointed to revise and arrange them for printing. The first hymnal was published in 1835, with ninety selections, and the second in 1841, with three hundred forty selections.

The first hymnal classified the selections as mourning hymns, evening hymns, farewell hymns, hymns on baptism, on the Sacrament, on marriage, and miscellaneous. The authors of the words of many of these hymns were Latter-day Saints. The principal contributor was William W. Phelps who wrote many well-known Latter-day Saint hymns. Parley P. Pratt was another contributor to this volume. Among some of the songs included in Emma's compilation are favorites of many in the Church today. Some of these are: "The Spirit of God like a Fire Is Burning"; "Redeemer of Israel"; "Gently Raise the Sacred Strain"; "Earth with Her Ten Thousand Flowers"; "How Firm a Foundation, Ye Saints of the Lord"; "He Died! The Great Redeemer Died!" and "I Know That My Redeemer Lives."

The Lord revealed that the songs which would be pleasing unto him would be those that came from the heart. The song of the righteous is indeed a prayer unto the Lord, for those who live his laws are truly the righteous of the earth.

Brother George D. Pyper once wrote concerning the hymns selected by Emma Smith:

It is said that the character of a people may be judged by the songs they sing. If this be true then an examination of those selected by Emma Smith prove that the Latter-day Saints were a reverential, peace-loving, worshipful, God-fearing people. After a hundred years it is acknowledged that the songs selected for that first Latter-day Saint Hymn book are among the best of all Christian hymns. (Stories of Latter-day Saint Hymns, by George D. Pyper, page 195.)

My Voice Is unto All

In closing the revelation to Emma Smith, the Lord stated a principle which has application to Emma and also to every person in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Keep my commandments continually, and a crown of righteoueness thou shalt receive. And except thou do this, where I am you cannot come.

And verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my voice unto all. Amen. (D&C 25:15-16.)
