Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 22

And the Kingdom Grew

(Sections 32, 33, and 34)

Before the Church was organized in this dispensation, the Lord revealed that the field was white already to harvest and that to those who thrust in their sickle with their might, rich treasures would accrue in the saving of souls in the kingdom of God. Concurrent with this promise The Book of Mormon was translated and published to the world as a new witness for Jesus as the Savior. The Lord had made known, early in this dispensation, that it was his purpose to bring The Book of Mormon information of the Nephites and Lamanites to their descendants. (D&C 10:48-51.) In addition, this divine record indicated great promises and blessings for the descendants of Lehi. (2 Nephi 30:5; 3 Nephi 5:22, 23; 21:26.)

Appointment of Missionaries to the Lamanites

By the time the conference of September 26, 1830, convened, there was considerable interest shown toward the Lamanites on the part of some of the elders present. Before this conference, however, the Lord by revelation had called Oliver Cowdery on a mission to this people. (D&C 28:8-10.) Peter Whitmer, Jun. and Ziba Peterson assigned to accompany him. (Ibid., 30:5-6)

Conversion of Parley P. Pratt

Parley P. Pratt had accepted the gospel only one month before this time (October 1830). His conversion to the gospel in receiving a testimony of the truth of The Book of Mormon is typical of the manner in which the kingdom of God has grown. In his own words, we read:

I opened it with eagerness, and read its title page. I then read the testimony of several witnesses in relation to the manner of its being found and translated. After this I commenced its contents by course. I read all day; eating was a burden, I had no desire for food; sleep was a burden when the night came, for I preferred reading to sleep.

As I read, the spirit of the Lord was upon me, and I knew and comprehended that the book was true, as plainly and manifestly as a man comprehends and knows that he exists. My joy was now full, as it were, and I rejoiced sufficiently to more than pay me for all the sorrows, sacrifices and toils of my life. I soon determined to see the young man who had been the instrument of its discovery and translation. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, 1874 Edition, page 38)

The strength of his conversion was so great that he traveled to Palmyra, New York, the home of the Smith family, for further information. Hyrum Smith, the Prophet's brother, who had already been promised that he would have "the power of God unto the convincing of men" (D&C 11:21), and Parley P. Pratt remained up almost all of the night discussing the claims of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. After leaving the Smith home the following morning, he continued his account:

This discovery greatly enlarged my heart, and filled my soul with joy and gladness. I esteemed the Book, or the information contained in it, more than all the riches of the world. Yes; I verily believe that I would not at that time have exchanged the knowledge I then possessed, for a legal title to all the beautiful farms, houses, villages and property which passed in review before me, on my journey through one of the most flourishing settlements of western New York. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, 1874 Edition, p. 40.)

Sidney Rigdon a Convert

The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote in his history of the Church (DHC) that soon after the appointment of the brethren to this Lamanite mission, they journeyed westward preaching in the various villages through which they traveled. In the vicinity of Kirtland, Ohio, their missionary efforts among the white people brought immediate results. Brother Pratt had been a preacher for the organization known as "Disciples of Christ" or "Campbellites" before his conversion to the true gospel. It was because of his activities in that organization that he stopped over to visit with friends belonging to that church. Among these people was Sidney Rigdon, who presided over one of these same churches. The missionary practice followed today of presenting The Book of Mormon to missionary contacts was done in this case. Sidney Rigdon indicated that, although he believed the Bible to be a revelation from God, he did not feel the same way about The Book of Mormon. This being the first time, however, that he had seen the book he would read it with the purpose of determining whether or not it was of God.

By permission of Mr. Rigdon, the missionaries were given the opportunity to preach to his congregation. When this was done, Mr. Rigdon told his people that what they had heard was of such an extraordinary character that it required their most serious consideration. These missionaries converted a number of Mr. Rigdon's parishioners. Within two weeks, and after careful reading of The Book of Mormon, together with prayer, Mr. Rigdon was fully convinced of the truth of the work.

The Lamanite Mission by Parley P. Pratt

Parley P. Pratt has given us our best first-hand account of the Lamanite mission with its successes among the white people in Ohio especially, as well as the work accomplished among the Lamanites. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, pp. 49-50.)

In and around the Kirtland region the interest in the message of the missionaries was so high that people thronged by night and day so that the missionaries hardly had time for rest.

Meetings were convened in different neighborhoods, and multitudes came together soliciting our attendance; while thousands flocked about us daily; some to be taught, some for curiosity, some to obey the gospel, and some to dispute or resist it. (Ibid., p. 50.)

In two or three weeks from the time of their arrival in that region, the missionaries had baptized one hundred and twenty-seven, and before long it had increased to one thousand. Simeon Carter, who is mentioned in some revelations later, upon reading The Book of Mormon, walked fifty miles to Kirtland where he was baptized and ordained an elder. He returned to his home and within a short time a branch of the Church was organized there with sixty members.

The missionaries continued their journey farther west preaching to both whites and Indians until they reached the western frontier in Jackson County, Missouri.

Brother Pratt relates that this was about fifteen hundred miles from where they started, most of which was traveled by foot over a period of four months. The missionaries had preached the gospel to tens of thousands of people, including two nations of Indians. This was the first mission of the Church west of New York State. During this time many hundreds of people were converted to the true Church.

Just west of Independence, Missouri, was the settlement of the Delaware Indians whose interest in The Book of Mormon increased day by day until nearly the whole tribe began to become responsive to its message. The excitement thus created came to the attention of sectarian missionaries and Indian agents who ordered the Latter-day Saint missionaries from the area. "Thus ended our first Indian Mission," wrote Brother Pratt, "in which we had preached the gospel in its fulness, and distributed the record of their forefathers among three tribes, viz.: the Cattaraugus Indians, near Buffalo, New York, the Wyandots of Ohio, and the Delawares west of Missouri." (Ibid., p. 61.)

Thus the kingdom of God grew, with the greatest success among the Gentiles. The Book of Mormon was one of the principal means which gave the truth-seeker a testimony that the gospel of Jesus Christ had been restored.

In the true missionary spirit, Brother Pratt continued:

We trust that at some future day, when the servants of God go forth in power to the remnant of Joseph, some precious seed will be found growing in their hearts, which was sown by us in that early day. (Idem.)

Today's Activities

Since 1830 our people have taken the message of The Book of Mormon to the descendants of Father Lehi. In recent years a renewed effort has been made to proselyte the Indians in the United States. One of the first tribes to be contacted in the eastern states was the Catteraugus tribe near Buffalo. Because of this missionary work among these Indians, a branch of the Church presided over by a Lamanite convert on that reservation, is in operation. A Church-owned chapel was dedicated there in 1957.

The Book of Mormon was a new volume of scripture and a powerful converter of men, and it was the means by which many of the missionaries and investigators learned of great fundamental teachings of the gospel of Jesus Christ. (See Chapter 13.)

Section 33

In The Doctrine and Covenants, Section 33, Ezra Thayer and Northrop Sweet were called to preach the gospel. (verse 2.) In calling these brethren to this work, the revelation provides us with an understanding of the reason for the growth of the kingdom of God and the need for participation in missionary activities.

There was an urgent need in the beginning of this dispensation for people to know that the world religiously had become corrupted. A great apostasy or falling away from the teachings of the Savior had made its inroads into every part of the Lord's vineyard.

And my vineyard has become corrupted every whit; and there is none which doeth good save it be a few; and they err in many instances because of priestcrafts, all having corrupt minds. (D&C 33:4; see also 2 Nephi 26:29.)

The importance of this evaluation of the world, when given, and as an evidence for the truth of the restored gospel, is well stated in the following comment on this verse:

Many object to the teachings of the gospel on the subject of the deviation from the original pattern. They take exception to the picture of total corruption presented but this only confirms the truth of the gospel. We have in holy writ successive portraits of human nature taken at various times. One was taken before the deluge: "All flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth." (Gen. 6:12.) Another is presented by Eliphaz, in Job: "Man, which drinketh iniquity like water." (Job 15:16.) David viewed the conditions in this light: "The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did understand, and seek God. They are all gone aside; they are all together become filthy; there is none that doeth good, no, not one." (Psalm 14:2, 3.) Paul, in his day, repeats this and draws a terrible picture of man outside the influence of the gospel. (Rom. 3:10-18.) "There is," he says, "no fear of God before their eyes." The picture presented in the Revelations given in our day has the same features. "They [the sects] were all wrong. . . ." My vineyard has been corrupted, every whit." Let the reader compare these statements with those quoted from the Bible, and he will feel convinced that they originated in the same source—the Foundation of truth. The purpose of God in presenting these pictures is to call men to repentance. Even those who are doing good, according to the best of their understanding, err in many respects because of "priestcraft." (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 173.)

The need for a restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ arose out of the fact of a departure from the truth; consequently, the Church was called out of the wilderness, or apostasy. It was this apostasy from the gospel and the restoration that John saw in vision. (Rev. 12:1-6; 14:6-7.)

The Eleventh Hour

The Dispensation of the Fulness of Times is referred to in this (Section 33 of The Doctrine and Covenants) and other revelations as "the eleventh hour, and the last time that I shall call laborers into my vineyard." (D&C 34:3. See also D&C 43:28; 95:4.)

The prediction that the Lord would gather his elect from the nations of the earth in this last time is fully affirmed by the number who have come into the gospel net. It is worthy to notice that the "elect" of the Lord are those who believe in him and hearken unto his voice. (See verse 6.) The gatherers in this important activity are the missionaries who are always counseled to work devotedly in thrusting in their sickles and "reap with all your might, mind, and strength." (Ibid., 33:7.) This counsel is as pertinent today as in other dispensations of the gospel, and the rewards to the gatherers are as sure.

The Rock of Revelation

The kingdom of God grew as people accepted the gospel—faith, repentance, baptism in water for the remission of sins and the receiving of the Holy Ghost. There is no other way to hearken to the voice of the Redeemer and to be saved. The gospel of Jesus Christ and its organization, the Church, is founded upon the "rock" of revelation. Men and women know of the truth of the gospel by the power of revelation to their souls. Continuance in the true faith insures to them that the "gates of hell," the powers of Satan in the spirit world, will not hold them from their eternal reward because they have won the victory by overcoming evil on the earth. (Ibid., 33:10-13.)

What was to make the kingdom of God, the Church, grow in this dispensation? A knowledge of the great apostasy whereby the Lord's vineyard became corrupted in its every part; the restoration of the gospel and Church in the last days; the revelation of the Lord given to men whereby they might know of these facts, and The Book of Mormon as a source of knowledge of that gospel and of its truth.

Section 34 and a Prophetic Element

With the conversion of Parley P. Pratt, many able men came into the Church through his preaching. Among these was his brother Orson Pratt, one of the most ardent missionaries that this dispensation has seen. Joining the Church at the age of nineteen, he immediately set out to visit the Prophet Joseph Smith, who was residing about 200 miles away. Many converts to the true Church of this period sought counsel from the Prophet. The prophetic nature of many of the revelations given through Joseph Smith is well-known among Latter-day Saints.

In Section 34 we find a revelation part of which has been literally fulfilled, if we are thinking of the element of prophecy. Although short in length, it is deep in meaning.

Orson Pratt, A Missionary

Orson Pratt is told that he is blessed because he has accepted the gospel (verse 4), but more blessed is he because he is now called to preach the gospel (verse 5):

To lift up your voice as with the sound of a trump, both long and loud and cry repentance unto a crooked and perverse generation, preparing the way of the Lord for his second coming. (Ibid., 34:6.)

Important indeed is this prophetic element in the quoted verse concerning Brother Pratt's call to proclaim the gospel "both long and loud." If there was ever a man in this dispensation who served faithfully and devotedly in the missionary work in building up the kingdom on the earth, it was Orson Pratt. Over a period of fifty years it is said that he traveled more miles, preached more sermons, studied and wrote more upon the gospel and science than any other man in the Church. It would be reasonable to believe that this revelation (Section 34) served as a factor in his achieving this tremendous record. The Lord declared:

. . . lift up your voice and spare not . . . therefore prophesy, and it shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost.

And if you are faithful behold, I am with you until I come. (Ibid., 34:10-11.)

Brother Pratt's missionary work included at least eleven missions to the eastern part of the United States, with seven different missions to Great Britain and Europe. Hundreds of people came into the fold of Christ through these efforts. One of his difficult missionary assignments was in Scotland where he labored for nine months raising up a branch of more than two hundred members. True to the call which came in 1830 by this revelation (Section 34), he knew that he was preparing the way for the Lord for his second coming. His literary works, which were many, emphasized the need for preparing oneself for the glorious coming of the Savior. (Ibid., 34:7-9.)

It was Orson Pratt who arranged the text of The Book of Mormon and The Doctrine and Covenants in chapters and verses, with footnotes and references as published in 1876-1879.

In this chapter we have seen how the kingdom of God grew by the Lord raising up men equipped to labor with all their might, mind, and strength in a field that was white already to harvest. They had a message which bore the stamp of divine approval and which, by the Spirit of the Lord, was carried into the hearts of men. One instrumentality by which this was done, as it is today, was The Book of Mormon.
