Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 23

A Trial of Faith

(Sections 35, 39, and 40)

The persons to whom the revelations comprising this chapter were addressed were formerly ministers in the "Christian" clergy. One of these we were introduced to in the last chapter.

Sidney Rigdon, Forerunner

Sidney Rigdon was at one time in the Reformed Baptist Church and later one of the leaders in the "Disciples of Christ" Church in Ohio, from which so many converts came, beginning in 1830. When Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge, also a former member of the latter organization and a convert to the gospel of Jesus Christ, visited the Prophet Joseph Smith in December 1830, a revelation was received in which some interesting thoughts are given concerning Brother Rigdon.

Behold, verily, verily, I say unto my servant Sidney, I have looked upon thee and thy works. I have heard thy prayers, and prepared thee for a greater work.

Thou are blessed, for thou shalt do great things. Behold thou wast sent forth, even as John, to prepare the way before me, and before Elijah which should come, and thou knewest it not.

Thou didst baptize by water unto repentance, but they received not the Holy Ghost;

But now I give unto thee a commandment, that thou shalt baptize by water, and they shall receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, even as the apostles of old. (D&C 35:3-6.)

As this revelation points out, there was a considerable difference between the work performed by Sidney Rigdon as one who was not a member of the true Church of Jesus Christ and the service to which he was being called. Although he baptized with water unto repentance, that baptism was not effective for salvation; for "they received not the Holy Ghost." It is necessary for salvation that one receive both baptisms, water and spirit, which, in reality, are only one baptism. (John 3:5; Eph. 4:5.)

When Nephi, by vision, learned the reasons for Jesus' being baptized and the necessity of teaching the Nephites (and us) the place of baptism in the plan of salvation, he counseled:

Wherefore, do the things which I have told you I have seen that your Lord and your Redeemer should do; for, for this cause have they been shown unto me, that ye might know the gate by which ye should enter. For the gate by which ye should enter is repentance and baptism by water; and then cometh a remission of your sins by fire and by the Holy Ghost. (Italics by author.)

And then are ye in this straight and narrow path which leads to eternal life; yea, ye have entered in by the gate. . . . (2 Nephi 31:17-18.)

In order for one to receive the remission of sins, it is essential that he receive the baptism of the Holy Ghost as well as water baptism.

Preparation for Gospel Restoration

In view of the Lord's statement that Sidney Rigdon was as John the Baptist in preparing for a greater work, may we consider that there were many others, who, at different periods, also prepared the way for the establishment of the true gospel on the earth? As Latter-day Saints we believe that when the time came for the restoration of the gospel in its fulness, everything was in readiness. The Lord had preserved this land of America that it might be the place where his latter-day work would be established. Book of Mormon prophets had seen in vision the time when this land "choice above all other lands" was being prepared. (Ibid., 1:3-9; 10:10-14, 19; Ether 13:1-6.)

In Nephi's vision, the "man among the Gentiles" believed by us to be Columbus, "who was separated from the seed of my brethren by the many waters" (1 Nephi 13:12), was wrought upon by the Spirit of God to perform his mission of discovery. Other Gentiles were also to come to this land out of captivity, until a mighty Nation founded upon principles of freedom would be raised up under the providence of God. (Ibid., 13:13-19.)

In the meantime, other leaders were performing a work of preparation—a preparation of the minds of men whose descendants would benefit from their noble labors. The discovery of the printing press; the removal of the shackles of ignorance was a slow process, but, in time, it brought about conditions which permitted men to think for themselves.

Religiously, men benefited from these improved conditions, but the gospel of Jesus Christ was not restored until full preparation had been made. President John Taylor places before us the attitude of Latter-day Saints in some of these matters:

Who are we? The children of our Heavenly Father. Who are the world, as we sometimes denominate those that are not of our Church? The children of our Heavenly Father. . . .

Now outside the Gospel, outside of revelation, outside of any special communication from the Lord, all men, more or less, everywhere have certain claims upon their Heavenly Father, who is said to be the God and Father of the spirits of all flesh . . . and whenever and wherever there was no knowledge of life and immortality there was no Gospel. But outside of that there have been many good influences in the world. Many men in the different ages, who, in the midst of wickedness and corruption, have tried to stop the current of evil, have placed themselves in the catalogue of reformers. . . . The many reformers that existed in former ages have been men many of whom have been sincerely desirous to do the will of God, and to carry out His purposes, so far as they knew them. And then there are thousands and tens of thousands of honorable men living to-day in this nation, and other nations, who are honest and upright and virtuous, and who esteem correct principles and seek to be governed by them, so far as they know them. . . .

Men may be desirous to do right; they may be good, honorable and conscientious; and then when we come to the judgment pertaining to these things we are told that all men will be judged according to the deeds done in the body, and according to the light and intelligence which they possessed.

I will take, for instance, the position of the reformers, going no further back than Luther and Melancthon; and then you may come to Calvin, Knox, Whitfield, Wesley, Fletcher, and many others; men who have been desirous in their day to benefit their fellow-men; who have proclaimed against vice, and advocated the practice of virtue, uprightness and the fear of God. But we all, who have contemplated these subjects, know that those men never did restore the Gospel as it was taught by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; neither did they see or comprehend alike in biblical matters; they groped, as it were, in the dark with a portion of the Spirit of God. They sought to benefit their fellow-man; but not having that union with God that the Gospel imparts, they were unable to arrive at just conclusions pertaining to those matters. Hence one introduced and taught one principle, and another introduced and taught another; and they were split up and divided, and the spirit of antagonism was found at times among them; and with all their desires to do good, they did not, and could not restore the Gospel of the Son of God, and none among them were able to say, Thus saith the Lord. And that is the condition of the religious world to-day. . . . (Journal of Discourses 23:369-371.)

A Minister Makes a Covenant

As we now turn our attention to another clergyman, James Covill, (D&C 39), who had served in the Baptist ministry for about forty years, we are informed by the Prophet Joseph Smith that he came to him "and covenanted with the Lord that he would obey any command that the Lord would give to him through me, as His servant." (DHC I:143.)

Sons and Daughters of God

Several times in revelations we have studied, the Savior has made known the way we may become his sons and daughters. For example, Section 34 begins with "My son Orson. . ." and later after giving the reasons for this introduction, states: "Wherefore you are my son." (D&C 34:3.) Why was this recent convert to the Church so addressed? Why was James Covill, a nonmember, told that Jesus Christ is the light and life of the world and that, in the Meridian of Time (the time of the earthly ministry of Jesus), Jesus was not received?

But to as many as receive me, gave I power to become my sons; and even so will I give unto as many as will receive me, power to become my sons.

And verily, verily, I say unto you, he that receiveth my gospel receiveth me; and he that receiveth not my gospel receiveth not me. (Ibid., 39:4-5.)

The answer is the same for everyone who qualifies in the same way that Brother Pratt qualified. All who accept "the only true and living church upon the face of the earth" become sons or daughters of the "Lord God." Jesus Christ, as your Redeemer, "so loved the world that he gave his own life, that as many as would believe might become the sons of God." (Ibid., 34:3.)

Christ is our Redeemer. Redemption means deliverance by means of ransom. There is a deliverance from guilt (Eph. 1:7; Col. 1:14); from the power and dominance of sin, through the sanctifying influence of the Holy Spirit (1 Peter 1:18); and from death through the resurrection. (Rom. 8:23.) There is, finally, a deliverance from all evil. (Eph. 1:14; 4:30; 1 Cor. 1:30; Titus 2:14.) All this is the work of Christ, through obedience to the gospel. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, page 177.)

Jesus is our Savior when we accept him in the waters of baptism and by confirmation of the Holy Ghost. This is what James Covill is told as a nonmember. (D&C 39:4-6.) Jesus' atonement for individual exaltation is of no force until the person completes his repentance through the ordinances of the gospel. (Ibid., 29:17; 42:1.) As we become the sons and daughters of Jesus, so also, he becomes our Father. (See Chapter 20 for discussion on this point.)

Rich Rewards Promised

James Covill, the clergyman, was informed that the Lord had looked upon him and his works and, at that time, his heart was right before him. (Ibid., 39:7-8.) There had been times in the past, however, when the things of the world had brought sorrow into Mr. Covill's life. Notice the important fact made known in verse 6 that if this man would accept Jesus as his Savior, the Holy Ghost, which he had not received, would give him the "peaceable things of the kingdom." It would seem from the circumstances which brought this clergyman to the Prophet, that he was not at peace. There were unanswered questions and difficulties which had not been resolved in his mind.

In applying this idea to us who are members of the kingdom, how may we receive peace of mind? A function of the Holy Ghost is to give to the son or daughter of Jesus Christ a sense of security, peace, and joy. This satisfaction comes by having the influence of the Holy Spirit through living the laws of the gospel, just as James Covill was promised "a blessing so great as you never have known" (Ibid., 39:10) by his adherence to the same laws.

A greater work in teaching the fulness of the gospel than the work in which he had formerly engaged was before Covill, predicated upon his obedience. His contribution would be to assist in moving the kingdom forward that, eventually, Zion might come. (Ibid., 39:11-13.) How many of us have before us this objective? Do our works make such contributions?

Our forefathers were gathered from out of the world that they might eventually receive eternal life. Mr. Covill was promised that he could participate in this great undertaking of gathering Israel from the nations to "be gathered unto me [Jesus] in time and in eternity." (Ibid., 39:22.) Those who are gathered are to look forth for the signs of the Lord's coming. As we continue steadfast in his work, our knowledge and testimony of him will increase. (Ibid., 39:23.)

The Rejection of a Covenant

Notwithstanding that great blessings were promised James Covill upon his acceptance of the true gospel, he did not have sufficient faith in the Redeemer to accept his counsel. The day of his deliverance from the sorrows of the world was at hand (ibid., 39:10), provided he would be obedient. But Covill returned to his former principles and people, and of him the Lord said:

Behold, verily I say unto you, that the heart of my servant James Covill was right before me, for he covenanted with me that he would obey my word.

And he received the word with gladness, but straightway Satan tempted him; and the fear of persecution and the cares of the world caused him to reject the word.

Wherefore he broke my covenant, and it remaineth with me to do with him as seemeth me good. Amen. (Ibid., 40:1-3.)

James Covill was a covenant breaker. It is apparent that his former weaknesses gained ascendancy over the gladness which came into his heart, and he succumbed to fear. It was a fear of persecution and the cares of the world. Unmindful of the beatitude of promised blessings to those who are persecuted for righteousnes sake (for their reward was to be an inheritance in the kingdom of heaven), Covill's actions were not motivated to this extent. (Matt. 5:10-12.) The fear that he might not be able to provide for himself temporally, also was a factor in his rejection of the gospel.

Blessings Predicated upon Obedience

Judgment of all such individuals is in the hands of the Lord. There have been many in the world who have come to the threshold of the kingdom of God but who have succumbed to similar fears. Concerning such an one who was in the same profession as James Covill, we have the comment of President Joseph F. Smith. An ordained minister in the "English Church" for fifty-five years wrote to his Latter-day Saint relatives that:

I preach three sermons every week and execute other ministerial duties, but I never preach anything contrary to the doctrines of "Mormonism," not designedly but necessarily, because I see the fundamentals of Holy Scripture are the same as those restored by what people call "Mormonism."

He then posed this question:

What is to become of such as me, who believes this about you, and yet are tied and bound by circumstances such as mine?

The President of the Church wrote:

In answer to the question, "What is to become of such as me?" let it be said that every person will receive his just reward for the good he may do and for his every act. But let it be remembered that all blessings which we shall receive, either here or hereafter, must come to us as a result of our obedience to the laws of God upon which these blessings are predicated. Our friend will not be forgotten for the kindness he has extended to the work and the servants of the Lord, but will be remembered of Him and rewarded for his faith and for every good deed and word. But there are many blessings that result from obeying the ordinances of the gospel, and acknowledging the priesthood authorized by the Father and restored to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, that cannot be obtained, until the person is willing to comply with the ordinances and keep the commandments revealed in our day for the salvation of mankind. The true searcher will see and understand this truth and act upon it, either in this world or in the world to come, and not until then, of course, may he claim all the blessings. The earlier he accepts, the earlier will he obtain the blessings, and if he neglects to accept the laws, in this world, knowing them to be true, it is reasonable to suppose that disadvantages will result that will cause him deep regret. (Improvement Era, November 1912, 71-72.)

"Unto Whom Much Is Given Much Is Required"

One is reminded of the truth given by the Lord when he said that "unto whom much is given much is required" (D&C 82:3) and as greater light is made known and as one sins against that light, condemnation results. This thought is pertinent:

Ye call upon my name for revelations, and I give them unto you; and inasmuch as ye keep not my sayings, which I give unto you, ye become transgressors; and justice and judgment are the penalty which is affixed unto my law.

Therefore, what I say unto one I say unto all: Watch for the adversary spreadeth his dominions, and darkness reigneth. (Ibid., 82:4-5.)

In accordance with this thought, how many who have entered the kingdom of God have found that they were not deeply rooted in gospel teachings and faith in the Redeemer so that they succumbed to the fears of the world? Are any of us as the seeds in the parable of the sower where the word of God has not taken sufficient root, and "the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word," and seeds become barren? Or, on the other hand, are seeds sown on the "good ground" which beareth the fruit of the gospel in our lives? (Matt. 13:18-23.)

How many of us may fall away from the principles of the gospel because of fear of persecution? In the early part of the dispensation persecution was many times physical. Today, however, it may be, as it was then also, the tauntings of associates or "friends." The use of names having strong unchristian implications or inferences of overzealousness may be examples of a type of persecution which has mental or psychological effect. In common expression it may be expressed as "Don't be fanatical about your religion!" or "Why be so straight-laced?" Aside from the usual meaning of inflicting loss and injury, persecution means to harass, to pursue with persistent solicitations or to annoy.

Additional Items from Section 35

Beginning with verse 7 of Section 35, we learn that by faith great things are to be manifest in the latter days, including the working of miracles. (D&C 35:7-11.) In harmony with what has already been given in this chapter, the Lord makes known that those who do "good" in his sight, are "those who are ready to receive the fulness of my gospel" (ibid., 35:12) and that those who constitute the "poor and the meek" (ibid., 35:15) of the earth shall have the gospel preached unto them, and they shall be looking forth for the time of my coming, for it is nigh at hand." (Ibid., 35:15; see D&C 35:12-18.) The faithful members of the kingdom of God will make contributions to the building of that kingdom and eventually "Zion shall rejoice upon the hills," probably having reference to the home of the Saints in the West. (Ibid., 35:19-24.) By the power of God, latter-day Israel will be saved in the Lord's kingdom, and all who belong to the Savior should lift up their hearts and be glad. (Ibid., 35:25-27.)
