Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 24

The Great I Am

(Sections 36, 37 and 38)

The revelation (D&C Section 38), which will command our attention principally in this chapter, was given at the beginning of the year 1831. The Church had been organized for about nine months. It was a year during which a large number of revelations were received for the development of the growing kingdom of God. Many commandments during this period were given for the temporal as well as the spiritual welfare of the Saints.

The Great I Am

Section 38 opens with some important truths regarding the Savior. Other books of scripture give affirmation of those truths but this revelation provides us with a clear understanding of Jesus' position in the plan of salvation before his mortal birth.

Thus saith the Lord your God, even Jesus Christ, the Great I Am, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the same which looked upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made;

The same which knoweth all things, for all things are present before mine eyes;

I am the same which spake, and the world was made, and all things came by me.

I am the same which have taken the Zion of Enoch into mine own bosom; and verily, I say, even as many as has believed in my name, for I am Christ, and in mine own name, by the virtue of the blood which I have spilt, have I pleaded before the Father for them. (Ibid., 38:1-4.)

In verse one we find the title to this chapter—The Great I Am. This title or name of the Christ is related in meaning to Jehovah, a name which the Jews regarded as sacred to the extent of not saying it. They substituted the Hebrew name Adonai (Ad-o-ni), meaning "the Lord."

The use of the title I Am is found in other scriptures and is definitely associated with Jesus in this and other revelations. (Ibid., 29:1; 39:1.) Certain Jews at the time of the Master criticized him and declared themselves to be of Abraham's lineage, and thereby believed themselves preferred above others. The Savior used this expressive statement in declaring his divine calling: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am." (John 8:58.) In effect, the Lord was saying that before Abraham was, he was Jehovah, or the Being that gave revelation to the prophets.

Seraphic Hosts

In this revelation (Section 38), the Redeemer is said to have surveyed the wide expanse of eternity and also to have seen "The seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made." (D&C 38:1.) Those who compose the seraphic hosts are seraphs or angels without wings, however, for when wings or flying is associated with such personages, the language is symbolic and conveys the meaning of the power of motion, movement.

Jesus as Creator

As one continues to read this revelation, he is immediately impressed with the additional point that Jesus is truly the Creator of this earth and that all things came by him. (Ibid., 38:3.) His work with the children of men in this world has not been confined to what we sometimes call the New Testament or meridian period, but, from the very beginning, he is the Lord of the Old Testament dispensations. Notice how verse 4 points this up:

I am the same which have taken the Zion of Enoch into mine own bosom; and verily, I say, even as many as have believed in my name, for I am Christ, and in mine own name, by the virtue of the blood which I have spilt, have I pleaded before the Father for them. (Ibid., 38:4.)

For those who obediently follow the Master's way of life, the benefits of his atonement are available, while, on the other hand, those who become hardened in their lives look forward to a "judgment of the great day, which shall come at the end of the earth." (Ibid., 38:5.) In the meantime, however, the hardened or "wicked" unrepentant remain in chains of darkness in the spirit world. (Ibid., 38:6, and Alma 40:11-14.)

The same Jesus who was born in the Meridian of Time gave commandments and revelations to the prophets of the Old Testament. The Book of Mormon brings out clearly that it was Jesus Christ who spoke to the prophets before the time of his birth into mortality. (1 Nephi 19:10; 3 Nephi 11:10, 14.) Important in this regard are the words of the resurrected Jesus to the Nephites:

Behold, I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled for I have come to fulfill the law; therefore it hath an end. . . .

Behold, I have given unto you the commandments; therefore keep my commandments. And this is the law and the prophets, for they truly testified of me. (3 Nephi 15:5, 10.)

God Is Perfect

That God is perfect is acclaimed in scripture. (Matt. 5:48; D&C 93:21, 26.) Revelation 3:8 makes known concerning the Lord's knowledge of all things.

The same which knoweth all things, for all things are present before mine eyes. (D&C 38:2.)

In Section 88, verse 41, the Lord also makes known his characteristic of being all-knowing.

From the "Lectures on Faith" prepared for use in the School of Elders, during the winter of 1834-35, there are some meaningful passages concerning the perfection of God in all things. These two quotations are important:

. . . God is the only supreme governor and independent being in whom all fulness and perfection dwell; who is omnipotent [all powerful], omnipresent [everywhere present] and omniscient [all-knowing]; without beginning of days or end of life; and that in him every good gift and every good principle dwell. . . .

. . . Without the knowledge of all things, God would not be able to save any portion of his creatures; for it is by reason of the knowledge which he has of all things, from the beginning to the end, that enables him to give the understanding to his creatures by which they are made partakers of eternal life; and if it were not for the idea existing in the minds of men that God had all knowledge it would be impossible for them to exercise faith in him. ("Lectures on Faith," Lecture 2, paragraph 2; Lecture 4, paragraph 11.)

God is not relatively perfect, but his perfection is absolute. Latter-day Saints have recognized that our knowledge of the Lord and our relationship to him are known by what he has revealed on these matters. Men may believe ideas which are not in the revealed word of God, but these notions are but the products of their own thinking and not from him who knoweth all things. (2 Nephi 9:20, 28-29.)

The Latter-day Saint finds in modern revelations great comfort, strength, and a security such as that experienced by Ammon of The Book of Mormon:

Now have we not reason to rejoice? Yea, I say unto you, there never were men that had so great reason to rejoice as we, since the world began; yea, and my joy is carried away, even unto boasting in my God; for he has all power, all wisdom, and he is a merciful Being, even unto salvation, to those who will repent and believe on his name.

Now if this is boasting, even so will I boast; for this is my life and my light, my joy and my salvation, and my redemption from everlasting wo. Yea, blessed is the name of my God, who has been mindful of this people, who are a branch of the tree of Israel, and has been lost from its body in a strange land; yea I say, blessed be the name of my God, who has been mindful of us, wanderers in a strange land. (Alma 26:35-36.)

"I Am in Your Midst"

Continuing in Section 38, we learn:

But behold, verily, verily, I say unto you that mine eyes are upon you. I am in your midst and ye cannot see me;

But the day soon cometh that ye shall see me, and know that I am; for the veil of darkness shall soon be rent, and he that is not purified shall not abide the day. (D&C 38:7-8.)

Here again, the Lord gives further assurance to his Saints that there is reason to rejoice for "I am in your midst and ye cannot see me." As one remains true to the faith, the Spirit whispers to his soul that this is the work of God, and that he is directing it through his appointed servants. He has not always made himself visibly manifest, but the time will come when he shall withdraw the veil separating himself from us, and we shall then be hold him. The comforting assurance that he is with his Church and people abounds in the soul of every true Latter-day Saint.

One may be reminded of the vision of the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Kirtland Temple in 1836, when he said:

I saw the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb, who are now upon the earth, who hold the keys of this last ministry, in foreign lands, standing together in a circle, much fatigued, with their clothes tattered and feet swollen, with their eyes cast downward, and Jesus standing in their midst, and they did not behold Him. The Savior looked upon them and wept. (DHC 2:381.)

As of them, so today, the Savior is continuing to direct his Church on the earth.

When the Lord at his coming shall be seen, it is said that the purified will abide that day. Those who have accepted the Savior as their Redeemer are declared in this revelation to be "clean." As to the world at large, the powers of darkness prevail upon the earth because of the great apostasy which will bring destruction to the tares or the wicked. (D&C 38:10-12.) Notwithstanding the saints are "clean," there are those among them who are not taking full advantage of their privileges in receiving greater blessings. Although the Lord is mindful of their weaknesses, he will extend his mercy to them. (Ibid., 38:14.)

Section 37

In this short revelation given in December of the year 1830, the Lord makes known that the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon were to discontinue their present activities in "translating" or revising the Bible until they go to the Ohio valley. The membership of the Church was commanded also to "assemble together at the Ohio." This is the first time that a place of gathering was indicated for the Church as a whole. We have already learned of the growth of the kingdom in that area. (See Chapter 22.)

A Promise of the Future

Returning to Section 38, we learn that the Lord reveals his intentions concerning the temporal welfare of the Saints. It is evident that not only the Prophet Joseph Smith but the poor among the Saints had prayed for the time when the condition of those in need might be improved. Taking cognizance of their condition, the revelation reads:

And for your salvation I give unto you a commandment, for I have heard your prayers, and the poor have complained before me, and the rich have I made, and all flesh is mine, and I am no respecter of persons.

And I have made the earth rich, and behold it is my footstool, wherefore, again I will stand upon it.

And I hold forth and deign to give unto you greater riches, even a land of promise, a land flowing with milk and honey, upon which there shall be no curse when the Lord cometh;

And I will give it unto you for the land of your inheritance, if you seek it with all your hearts. (D&C 38:16-19.)

What are the promises of the Lord to his people who cry unto him for relief from a lack of the things of this earth? The day will come, when the Lord stands upon the earth, that his people shall inherit it and receive all of the bounteous blessings that the earth will provide. By what means will these blessings come to the Saints? Here is a commentary upon this question:

God's design was to give to His gathered people great riches, even a land of promise, "upon which there shall be no curse [of destitution] when the Lord cometh."

The Lord promises to give His Saints such a land, if they will seek it with all their hearts. It cannot be obtained except through diligent, God-directed effort. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 204.)

Notice in verse 20 how the promised land is to be:

. . . for the inheritance of your children forever, while the earth shall stand, and ye shall possess it again in eternity, no more to pass away. (Ibid., 38:20.)

Were the Saints to wait until some long period ahead for the relief of the poor among them? No, certain members of the Church in the New York area were to "look to the poor and the needy, and administer to their relief that they shall not suffer." (Ibid., 38:34-35.)

The commandment had gone forth that the members were to go to the Ohio, where the law of the Lord would be given his people. (Ibid., 38:32.) The keeping of this law would bring great spiritual blessings as well as temporal. It is the Lord's purpose to provide for his Saints in his own way and not after the manner of the world. An explanation of that law of the Lord is spoken of in the revelations to be studied in this book. There are yet great blessings to be received by the Lord's people.

As we return to a study of the future as envisioned in this revelation, it is apparent that there were questions among the members in 1831 concerning the laws of the land, and what the Saints might expect. When the Savior comes to inaugurate his reign, he shall be the ruler of the earth, and then men shall truly be free.

But, verily I say unto you that in time ye shall have no king nor ruler, for I will be your king and watch over you.

Wherefore, hear my voice and follow me, and you shall be a free people, and ye shall have no laws but my laws when I come, for I am your lawgiver, and what can stay my hand. (Ibid., 38:21-22.)

From the Great I Am, who is our Creator and Redeemer, we are asked the question (38:22): "What can stay my hand?" The voice of the Spirit to each Latter-day Saint verifies the all-perfection of God and his designs for his people. The answer to this question is given in many scriptures:

How long can rolling waters remain impure? What power shall stay the heavens? As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints. [Ibid., 121:33.] (See also D&C 76:3; Matt. 24:35.)

Be One in Purpose and Action

Following the assurance that the time will come when a righteous reign of law will begin with the second coming of Christ, the Lord informs us that each person is to esteem his brother as himself and to "practice virtue and holiness before me." (D&C 38:24.) When men so esteem their brothers, then they will have come, in a large measure, to the objective of the accomplishment of the Lord's purposes by following this important truth: "I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine." (Ibid., 38:27.) Unity in faith and oneness in action have been the objectives of the Church in all dispensations. The necessity of unity in The Church of Jesus Christ is strongly expressed in Jesus' words as he prayed to the Father that his apostles might "be one, as we are." Furthermore, it was his desire that all those who would believe on him:

. . . may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me. (John 17:21.)

As the Saints of this dispensation become unified in the building up of the kingdom of God upon the earth, to which they are committed, then the world will more readily believe in the Christ and in the restoration of the gospel. Are not people attracted to the standard of righteousness by the fruits of the gospel as they are observed in the lives of the members of the Church? This was the prophetic understanding of Ezekiel who saw the gathering of Israel in our dispensation, and who saw that the unbeliever should "know that I am the Lord, saith the Lord God, when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes." (Ezekiel 36:23. Italics are the author's. See Ezekiel 36:21-24.)

So important is the need for unity among the members of the Priesthood of the Church and also the other members, that President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., of the First Presidency has often admonished the Church to come more fully to a oneness of action:

We are all bound together as one, and insofar as we fail, as individuals, to carry on the work which we are supposed to do, we are to that extent hindering the carrying on of the work of the Lord and to that extent we are responsible for the lack or fullness of growth that may occur on account of our failure. (Conference Report, September 29, 30, and October 1, 1950, page 171.)

The Civil War

Consistent with the theme of this revelation regarding the Lord's concern for his people, another important part of the future is called to their attention. The first intimation of the coming American Civil War is indicated in this manner:

Ye hear of wars in far countries, and you say that there will soon be great wars in far countries, but ye know not the hearts of men in your own land.

I tell you these things because of your prayers; wherefore, treasure up wisdom in your bosoms, lest the wickedness of men reveal these things unto you by their wickedness, in a manner which shall speak in your ears with a voice louder than that which shall shake the earth; but if ye are prepared ye shall not fear. (D&C 38:29-30.)

Important in understanding this portent of things to come is this comment from the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, page 208:

In the United States the opinion prevailed that internal troubles such as those from which France, Belgium, Poland, and some other countries suffered, could not arise in the great Republic. The people generally did not know what was in the hearts of men, but the Lord knew, and He gave in this paragraph, the first intimation that there would be civil war in the United States. . . .

If they [the Saints] were wise, they would prepare themselves by gathering to one place. As a matter of fact the Saints did, in due time, go to the valleys of the Rocky Mountains, and in those impregnable "chambers" they were effectively secluded "for a little moment, until the indignation be overpass." (Isa. 26:20.)

Seek the Riches of Eternity

After the Lord counseled his people to care for the needs of the poor (D&C 38:35), reference is made to the time when his servants will be endowed with power from on high and sent forth to the nations. (Ibid., 38:38.) Not many years later, when the Church was assembled in Ohio, a great pentecostal feast was enjoyed at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple and the manifold blessings accruing to the Church membership therefrom. (Ibid., Section 110.)

Significantly, this revelation draws to an end with the admonition that:

. . . if ye seek the riches which it is the will of the Father to give unto you, ye shall be the richest of all people, for ye shall have the riches of eternity; and it must needs be that the riches of the earth are mine to give; but beware of pride, lest ye become as the Nephites of old. (Ibid., 38:39.)

This stern reminder of the Nephite period and the destruction of their civilization and people is one to be remembered. Examples of the results of pride and other evils as emphasized by Nephite historians who saw them either in vision or who witnessed the destructions are worthy of careful consideration. (2 Nephi 26:10; 3 Nephi 6:15; Moroni 8:27.)

To the members of the Church who dedicate so much of their time and effort to the assistance of those in need, the words of Jacob will give encouragement to continue and further to assure their own eternal welfare.

Think of your brethren like unto yourselves, and be familiar with all and free with your substance, that they may be rich like unto you.

But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God.

And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good—to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted. (Jacob 2:17-19.)

Section 36

The short revelation numbered thirty-six was addressed to Edward Partridge, who later became "a bishop to the Church." (D&C Section 41.) It was during the month of December 1830, that he was baptized. In this revelation he is called to preach the gospel boldly. (Ibid., 41:1, 3.) By his receiving the Holy Ghost, Brother Partridge was to be taught "the peaceable things of the kingdom." (Ibid., 36:2.) As a missionary is called to bring people to repentance, so this recent convert to the Church was to speak peace to the souls of men who would thus be rescued from the evils of the world. (Ibid., 36:6.)

We have in this revelation the first indication that temples were to be constructed in this dispensation. The Lord says, "I will suddenly come to my temple." (Ibid., 36:8.) Edward Partridge was present in the Kirtland Temple when the Savior accepted it as his own. (Ibid., Section 110.)
