Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 25

A Promise Fulfilled

(Sections 41; 42:1-17)

From our history of the Church and other sources, we learn of events in the Ohio valley to which the Saints had been instructed to gather. From Section 38 we learned that when the Saints gathered to the Ohio, they would receive the law of the Lord. With the great increase in Church membership in that area, it is clear that many problems would arise. This condition would make necessary the presence of the Prophet Joseph Smith to direct the activities of the growing kingdom of God.

The Prophet's first visit to Kirtland brought forth an event which is an example of the seeric powers possessed by Joseph Smith. Briefly, it is recorded that in company with his wife Emma, Sidney Rigdon, and Edward Partridge (the latter two having been converted as a result of the Lamanite mission, see Chapter 22), the Prophet walked into the store operated by Whitney and Gilbert. He approached Newel K. Whitney and said: "Newel K. Whitney! Thou art the man!" whereupon, Mr. Whitney replied: "You have the advantage of me. . . . I could not call you by name as you have me." The Prophet then said, "I am Joseph the Prophet. . . . You've prayed me here, now what do you want of me?" (DHC I:146.)

An indication of how the Lord prepared the way of the first missionaries into the Ohio valley and the visit of the Prophet later is told in the experience of Mr. and Mrs. Whitney. As members of the Campbellite faith, they desired to know how they might obtain the gift of the Holy Ghost.

One night, says Mother Whitney, it was midnight—my husband and I were in our house at Kirtland, praying to the Father to be shown the way when the Spirit rested upon us a cloud overshadowed the house. It was as though we were out of doors. The house passed away from our vision. We were not conscious of anything but the presence of the spirit and the cloud that was over us. We were wrapped in the cloud. A solemn awe pervaded us. We saw the cloud and felt the Spirit of the Lord. Then we heard a voice out of the cloud saying, "Prepare to receive the Lord, for it is coming." At this we marveled greatly, but from that moment we knew that the word of the Lord was coming to Kirtland. (Jenson, Andrew: L. D. S. Biographical Encyclopedia I:223.)

Conditions in Kirtland

The Prophet learned when he arrived in Kirtland that some very strange things had been developing in that branch of the Church. Let us keep in mind that the members there, all recent converts, had been associated with other churches, consequently theological ideas and practices were understood by them differently. In the words of Elder George A. Smith, it is reported that "a society that had undertaken to have a community of property" and had been called "the Morley family" being "located on a farm owned by Captain Isaac Morley . . . had not yet been instructed in relation to their duties." These members developed some "extravagant and wild ideas." The Prophet Joseph Smith taught the people the true order of the Church which resulted in the apostasy of some members who continued to be deceived. Among these was Wycom Clark, who "got a revelation that he was to be the prophet—that he was the true revelator" and with a few others organized the "Pure Church of Christ." (Journal of Discourses 11:3-4.)

Section 41

A knowledge of these conditions helps us to understand the following verses which introduce this section, the first revelation received in Kirtland:

Hearken and hear, O ye my people, saith the Lord and your God, ye whom I delight to bless with the greatest of all blessings, ye that hear me; and ye that hear me not will I curse, that have professed my name, with the heaviest of all cursings.

Hearken, O ye elders of my church whom I have called, behold I gave unto you a commandment, that ye shall assemble yourselves together to agree upon my word;

And by the prayer of your faith ye shall receive my law, that ye may know how to govern my church and have all things right before me. (D&C 41:1-3.)

Notice the emphasis put upon the law of common consent; namely, that the brethren were to ". . . assemble . . . together to agree upon my word." As they came together for this purpose they were to meet ". . . by the prayer of your faith . . ." in order to be prepared for the law which had been promised earlier. (Ibid., 38:32.) It was only a few days later that this promise was fulfilled when the Lord gave Section 42, which is known as "The Law of the Church."

In continuation of preparation for this event, the Saints are advised that:

He that receiveth my law and doeth it, the same is my disciple; and he that saith he receiveth it and doeth it not, the same is not my disciple, and shall be cast out from among you;

For it is not meet that the things which belong to the children of the kingdom should be given to them that are not worthy, or to dogs, or the pearls to be cast before swine. (Ibid., 41:5-6.)

These words bring out clearly who is the true disciples of the Lord. He who professes to believe and to be the followers of the Christ is deceiving himself and also those who follow him when there is no acceptance of what the Lord reveals as his law. There were members of the Church in Kirtland who considered themselves true disciples, as there have been since the days of Joseph Smith. Unless members continue to obey the law of the Lord, they are not disciples, and a judgment awaits them. (John 8:31-32; Matt. 7:21-23.) On the other hand, the promise is given that the Spirit will be with the true believer. (Ether 4:10-12.)

With the growth of the kingdom, the Lord called Edward Partridge to be the first bishop in this dispensation. In this call by revelation, there are established the important steps in all calls to service in the Church. This procedure is: first, the call by the authorized servant of the Lord; second, appointment "by the voice of the Church"; and third, ordination by those in authority. As pointed out in a former chapter, these three steps also constitute a key against the claims of those who seek to deceive Latter-day Saints. (See Chapter 18.)

Bishop Partridge was to devote his entire time to the office of bishop. His work as bishop was to be confined to those things "as it shall be appointed unto him in my [the Lord's] laws in the day that I shall give them." (D&C 41:10.) This thought is important to remember: when one receives an office in the Church, he is to function only within the calling he has received. Compliance with this important principle maintains order in the kingdom and prevents disharmony, regret, and in some cases, even apostasy.

In closing this revelation, the members of the Church are informed of the necessity to obey the words given; otherwise, they will be answered upon their souls in the day of judgment. (Ibid., 41:12.) President Brigham Young had this to say about such a situation:

Those who do not profess to know anything of the Lord are far better off than we are, unless we live our religion, for we who know our Master's will and do it not, will be beaten with many stripes; while they who do not know the Master's will and do it not will be beaten with few stripes. This is perfectly reasonable. (Journal of Dscourses 16:111.)

The Promised Law (Section 42)

Including this and the next four chapters, there is an opportunity to examine the important teachings of the law of the Church. Although there are different ways that this revelation might be divided, it seems that this division is a practical one: the law of preaching the gospel (D&C 42:4-17); the law of moral conduct (ibid., 42:18-29); the law of consecration (ibid., 42:30-42); the law of administration to the sick (ibid., 42:43-52); the law of sundry duties (ibid., 42:53-69); the law of remuneration of services (ibid., 42:70-73); and the law concerning transgressors. (Ibid., 32:74-93.)

Introduction to the Law

The Church is told to hearken obediently to the instructions given in this revelation. (Ibid., 42:1-4.) The twelve elders in whose presence this revelation was given, are to go forth to teach the gospel by the power of the Spirit. The preaching or dissemination of the gospel may be called the law of preaching the gospel.

The Law of Preaching the Gospel

Missionaries of the Church are to travel "two by two." The reasons for doing this are apparent when one considers that the testimony of two or three witnesses is the Lord's way of making known his marvelous work. There is also protection, both moral and physical, afforded the missionaries against those who would seek to do them harm.

In the sixth verse of this revelation, the elders are told that they are to declare "my word like unto angels of God." (Ibid., 42:6.) In this same year of 1831, the Lord reminded the elders that:

And now, verily saith the Lord, that these things might be known among you, O inhabitants of the earth, I have sent forth mine angel flying through the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel, who hath appeared unto some and hath committed it unto man, who shall appear unto many that dwell on the earth.

And this gospel shall be preached unto every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.

And the servants of God shall go forth, saying with a loud voice: Fear God and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come;

And worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters. (Ibid., 133:36-39. Italics are the author's.)

When one compares these verses with what was proclaimed by the Apostle John in foretelling the restoration of the gospel by an angel (Rev. 14:6-7), the part in italics by the writer suggests that the divinely commissioned missionaries are to carry the angel's message to the world. This message becomes more meaningful when it is understood that when the elders speak by the Holy Ghost they are speaking with the "tongue of angels." (Cf. 2 Nephi 32:2-3; 31:11-14.)

Ordination Necessary

In order to preach the gospel and officiate in the ordinances thereof, the person must be ordained by one having the proper authority, and he is known to hold such authority. (D&C 42:11.) Those who go forth representing the Lord are to teach the principles of the gospel as contained in the books of scripture available at the time—the Bible and The Book of Mormon. Later The Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price came into existence as books of scripture. Experience has shown that the Bible and The Book of Mormon are better adapted for missionary use. Occasionally the Lord has pointed out that the world is to receive the milk of the gospel first and later the stronger teachings which have been compared to meat. (Ibid., 19:22.) Again, there is suggested that The Book of Mormon contains the "fulness of the gospel." The meaning of this expression is simply that it implies (a) sufficient knowledge for salvation, and (b) the necessity of the Priesthood. (Chapter 13.)

The missionaries are not only to proclaim the gospel from these books of scripture, but they are to observe the "covenants and church articles to do them." (Ibid., 42:13.) By this it is meant that other sources of truth, as contained in later revelations through prophets, are to be practiced as well as taught. The teaching by the missionary is to be done under the influence of the Spirit. (Ibid., 42:13.) If this is done, there will be given sufficient to influence the investigator, and the missionary will not be led astray in what he teaches.

The Prayer of Faith

There follows in this revelation the statement of a great truth for both the set apart missionary as well as the teacher in the auxiliary organizations of the Church.

And the Spirit shall be given unto you by the prayer of faith; and if ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach. (Ibid., 42:14.)

In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, where so many members have an opportunity to teach the gospel, there seems to be reason for knowledge of and emphasis upon this truth.

To receive any blessings from the Lord the necessity of exercising faith in Him is a truism. The Prophet Joseph Smith learned this as a lad when he read the words of James that if one lacked wisdom, he was to ask of God. "But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed." (James 1:6.) The faith required is that of full trust in the Lord, recognizing from the depths of one's soul that the desired result will follow.

Prayers for divine assistance sometimes are words expressed in prayer language, but they lack faith intended in the expression "prayer of faith," which we are admonished will bring the blessing of the Lord. An example of this contrast is found in the case of the Zoramites in The Book of Mormon. Their set prayer was meaningless because it was uttered to gain the favor of men and for religious ritual only. (Alma 31:15-22, 34-38.)

Some of the essentials in obtaining the "prayer of faith" and to receive the influence of the Holy Ghost were given by President Brigham Young, as follows:

Let us be humble, fervent, submissive, yielding ourselves to the will of the Lord, and there is no danger but that we shall have His Spirit to guide us. (Journal of Discourses 13:155.)

But what is there to say about the growth of faith necessary for one who wants to exercise the "prayer of faith"? Alma spoke of the need to "arouse your faculties, even to an experiment . . . and exercise a particle of faith, yea, even if ye can no more than desire to believe, let this desire work in you, even until ye believe. . . ." (Alma 32:27.)

But what if the individual does not feel the need to pray at a given time for the assistance of the Lord? The following gleanings from President Brigham Young are pertinent to obtaining the spirit of prayer:

It matters not whether you or I feel like praying, when the time comes to pray, pray. If we do not feel like it, we should pray till we do. . . . You will find that those who wait till the Spirit bids them pray, will never pray much on this earth. (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 44.)

Receive the Spirit

Every member of this Church may have the privilege of enjoying the Holy Ghost, which is the Spirit referred to in the admonition before us. (D&C 42:14.) The Spirit will be received to the degree that the member of the Church is diligently seeking to keep the commandments of the Lord. Worthiness of life, coupled with prayer and faith, will bring forth the Spirit. (Ibid., 63:64.)

The Spirit and Teaching

Why should a person have the Spirit of the Lord to teach, as admonished in our text? (Ibid., 42:14.) The Lord has specifically informed us that we are to have his Spirit. Fundamentally, the person having the Spirit will be able to distinguish between the truth and error. Is not the Holy Ghost the giver of truth? (John 14:15-17.) To some of the missionaries of this dispensation a reminder was given that they should preach by the Spirit of truth:

Verily I say unto you, he that is ordained of me and sent forth to preach the word of truth by the Comforter, in the Spirit of truth, doth he preach it by the Spirit of truth or some other way?

And if it be by some other way it is not of God. (D&C 50:17-18.)

To those who receive the word of truth, is it received by that same Spirit—truth, or in some other way, is another question the Lord asks these missionaries. (Ibid., 50:19.) If the teacher and the hearer receive the Lord's word under the influence of his Spirit both are enlightened and rejoice together. (Ibid., 50:22.)

But what if the member of the Church, as a teacher in an auxiliary organization or in the capacity of the member who tells others, members or nonmembers, of the gospel, does not feel adequately prepared of the Spirit? Certainly, no one may have all of the knowledge necessary, nor the fulness of the Spirit to accomplish the call at hand.

This feeling of inadequacy may also be present among many who are called to preach the gospel as missionaries. In a revelation given to two missionaries, there is found this encouraging word: "declare the things which ye have heard, and verily believe, and know to be true." (Ibid., 80:4.) However, those who do have the responsibility of teaching are under the definite obligation to prepare themselves in knowledge and also to have the Holy Ghost.

Source of Knowledge

The law of preaching the gospel is concluded with these words:

And all this ye shall observe to do as I have commanded concerning your teaching, until the fulness of my scriptures is given.

And as ye shall lift up your voices by the Comforter, ye shall speak and prophesy as seemeth me good;

For, behold, the Comforter knoweth all things, and beareth record of the Father and of the Son. (Ibid., 42:15-17.)

Although the Lord had not yet made known many important principles and ordinances of the gospel by the year 1831, this was not to prevent the missionaries from preaching the gospel. They were to go on their missions relying upon the Holy Ghost for guidance. More revelation was forthcoming that the Lord's representatives might also more effectively teach the plan of salvation. An example of the way in which the Spirit directed some of the early brethren in their activities is related by President George Q. Cannon:

I remember hearing related Brother Parley P. Pratt's first interview with the Saints at Fayette, Seneca County, where the Church was organized. . . . On that occasion he was called upon to speak; the Prophet Joseph was not present at the time. He brought forth from the prophecies of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and other prophets, abundant proofs concerning the work which the Lord had established through His servant Joseph. A great many of the Latter-day Saints were surprised that there were so many evidences existing in the Bible concerning this work. The Church had then been organized some five months, but the members had never heard from any of the Elders these proofs and evidences which existed in the Bible. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, pp. 238-39.)
