Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 26

The Law of Moral Conduct

(Sections 42:18-20, 79, 84, 85)

In the last chapter, the background for the study of Section 42 was given. By way of reminder, we learned that not long after the Prophet Joseph Smith arrived in Kirtland, Ohio, the Lord gave to him, as promised earlier (D&C 38:32; 41:3), his law to the Church. The first part of this law is known as that of preaching the gospel. (Ibid., 42:4-17.)

"Historical" Background

In the world today there are at least two points of view concerning the origin of the Ten Commandments: first, that they are simply the crystallization of moral laws which have developed out of the experiences of an evolving civilization, which belief arises out of the notion that man evolved from a lower form of animal, known as organic evolution; and second, that this formation of a code of moral laws was the work of Moses.

As far as Latter-day Saints are concerned, the gospel teaches us that in the beginning the Lord gave commandments to Adam by revelation. One of the unique teachings of the restored gospel is that the gospel of Jesus Christ was upon the earth before the time of Jesus' mortal ministry. Included in this concept is the fact that God revealed his will to man and that man did not "make" the laws of salvation. In the plan of salvation are the Ten Commandments, which do form the basis of the laws governing civilized people. Did the Ten Commandments come into being for the first time on Mount Sinai through the prophet Moses? No, the Lord provided laws and commandments for the salvation of his children in the gospel of Jesus Christ from the beginning. (Ibid., 20:17-19.)

Section 42 and Moral Law

In Section 42 some of the great moral commandments are given; but the reader should not consider that all of the laws pertaining to moral conduct in the Doctrine and Covenants are found in this revelation. For our present consideration, however, the following laws are included in this chapter: "Thou shalt not kill (ibid., 42:18-19, 79), steal (ibid., 42:20, 84-85), lie (ibid., 42:21, 86), commit adultery (ibid., 42:23-25, 74-75), speak evil of thy neighbor (ibid., 12:27, 88), and thou shalt love thy wife (ibid., 42:22.)

That more laws of moral conduct than the foregoing are a part of the gospel is made plain in these two verses:

Thou knowest my laws concerning these things are given in my scriptures; he that sinneth and repenteth not shall be cast out. (Ibid., 42:28.)

And if he or she do any manner of iniquity, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law, even that of God. (Ibid., 42:87.)

The Single Standard

The single standard of morality is defined as a law which applies to both sexes; whereas, the double standard of morality means that the male or the female may have a different rule of conduct from the other. In this revelation the Lord repeatedly emphasizes the single standard of conduct as his law to the Church. This is done by the use of "he or she" or "man or woman," particularly in verses 80 to 92. An example of this is given in verse 87, quoted above.

"I Speak unto the Church"

As the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary (page 222) points out, the laws of moral conduct are given especially to the Church, as the Ten Commandments were given to ancient Israel. A distinction may be made, according to this same source, among various laws given to man.

Some are binding because of peculiar conditions or relations that may exist, and cease to be binding with the end of those conditions. New conditions require new laws, Israel in a settled condition in Canaan needed many rules and regulations which would have been inapplicable to their national life while in the wilderness. Laws regarding property, marriage, etc., belong to this class. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, pp. 222-223.)

These may be classified as statutes. (Ibid., pp. 222-223.) On the other hand, there are moral laws which are permanent. Concerning them, it is said:

Some laws are binding because they are founded on the nature and attributes of God. If God is love, it is our duty to love Him and teach others. If He is just, merciful, pure, it is our duty to conform our lives to the divine standards of justice, mercy, and holiness. And from this springs another class of laws which are founded on the permanent relations of men in their present state of existence. They are called the moral laws to distinguish them from statutes, which are founded on temporary relations of man to man which may vary from time to time and in different countries. Moral laws are permanent. (Ibid., 223.)

An example is taken from an address by President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., of a temporary law which prohibits the Israelites from eating sea foods "that have not fins and scales. . . ." (Lev. 11:10.) A possible reason for this prohibition, President Clark points out, may have been because of the perishability of certain sea foods which would have generated poison harmful to the body, because of a lack of a means of food preservation. With our modern means of refrigeration and rapid transportation, there is no law against the use of this particular food. The Lord is concerned today, as anciently, with the health of his people.

Thus the law that God's people must be clean and healthy has not changed, but the rule prescribed to secure obedience to the law has changed with the change in the manner of living. (Ibid., p. 224.)

"Thou Shalt Not Kill"

As explained by Elder Harold B. Lee of the Council of the Twelve, the reason for the injunction of the Lord against taking human life, has its basis in the plan instituted in the heavens before the earth came into existence. Every person is a spirit child of God for whom the Lord has planned to bring to pass his immortality and, if faithful, an eternal life. (Moses 1:39.) Satan and his spirit followers rebelled against that plan and thus have sought to destroy all mortals by enticing them to commit sins. On the other hand, the Advocate of man with the Father is Jesus our Redeemer who gave his life that man might be able to repent and, eventually by man's faithfulness, receive eternal glory.

One of the most serious of all sins and crimes against the Lord's plan of salvation is the sin of murder or the destruction of human life. It seems clear that to be guilty of destroying life is the act of "rebellion" against the plan of the Almighty by denying an individual thus destroyed in mortality, the privilege of a full experience in this earth-school of opportunity. It is in the same category as the rebellion of Satan and his hosts and therefore it would not be surprising if the penalties to be imposed upon a murderer were to be of similar character as the penalties meted out to those spirits which were cast out of heaven with Satan. ("The Sixth Commandment," The Ten Commandments Today, p. 88.)

As scriptural examples to indicate the nature of the penalties imposed, Elder Lee suggests the case of (a) Cain (Genesis 4:6-12), and (b) David in plotting the death of Uriah; and also the crucifixion of the Savior by the Jews. The Prophet Joseph Smith as recorded in his history, discusses the case of David by stating that the murderer, one who sheds innocent blood, cannot have forgiveness.

David sought repentance at the hand of God carefully with tears, for the murder of Uriah; but he could only get it through hell: he got a promise that his soul should not be left in hell. . . .

. . . and the Priesthood that he [David] received, and the throne and kingdom of David is to be taken from him and given to another. . . . (DHC 6:253.)

Concerning certain Jews, who, it appears, assented to the crucifixion of Jesus, the Prophet said Peter did not say to them ". . . Repent and be baptized . . . for the remission of sins. . . ." (Acts 2:38.) See also DHC VI:253.)

In commenting upon the commandment against taking human life, the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary quotes Jesus' injunction against this crime, (Matt. 5:21-22), and of his condemnation of anger "without a cause."

There is a difference between the anger that is but malice or thirst for revenge, and the emotion that is felt in the presence of injustice and wrong. It is malice that is forbidden. To take the life of a fellow-being in order to gratify malice is the highest crime one human being can commit against another. . . . This commandment prohibits dueling, because dueling is but manslaughter, actual or potential. It prohibits suicide, which is self-murder. It condemns unjustifiable wars, which are but wholesale murders. There have been wars which are justifiable from the standpoint of one side of the contesting parties, but when the nations have courts of arbitration there will be no justification for any war, any more than there is for murder. The moral law must be applied to nations as well as individuals. "He that killeth shall die." (v. 19.) (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 224.)

Military Service and Killing

Is the Latter-day Saint who is called into the military service of his country guilty of murder as he takes human life while in that service?

During World War II, the First Presidency addressed a message to the members of the Church at the 112th annual general conference, in which they considered this question. After quoting from the modern revelations concerning war, the following appears:

When, therefore, constitutional law, obedient to these principles, calls the manhood of the Church into the armed service of any country to which they owe allegiance, their highest civic duty requires that they meet that call. If, hearkening to that call and obeying those in command over them, they shall take the lives of those who fight against them, that will not make of them murderers nor subject them to the penalty that God has prescribed for those who kill, beyond the principle to be mentioned shortly. For it would be a cruel God that would punish His children as moral sinners for acts done by them as the innocent instrumentalities of a sovereign whom He had told them to obey and whose will they were powerless to resist. . . .

In this terrible war now waging, thousands of our righteous young men in all parts of the world and in many countries are subject to a call into the military service of their own countries. Some of these, so serving, have already been called back to their heavenly home; others will almost surely be called to follow. But "behold," as Moroni said, the righteous of them who serve and are slain "do enter into the rest of the Lord their God," and of them the Lord has said "those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them." (D&C 42:46.) Their salvation and exaltation in the world to come will be secure. That in their work of destruction they will be striking at their brethren will not be held against them. That sin, as Moroni of old said, is to the condemnation of those who "sit in their places of power in a state of thoughtless stupor," those rulers in the world who in a frenzy of hate and lust for unrighteous power and domination over their fellow men, have put into motion eternal forces they do not comprehend and cannot control. God, in His own due time, will pass sentence upon them. (Conference Report, pp. 94-96.)

Penalty for Murder

As part of the moral law, the Lord revealed in this dispensation:

And now, behold, I speak unto the church. Thou shalt not kill; and he that kills shall not have forgiveness in this world, nor in the world to come.

And again, I say, thou shalt not kill; but he that killeth shall die. (D&C 42:18-19.)

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints accepts capital punishment for this offense against God and the law of the land.

And it shall come to pass, that if any persons among you shall kill they shall be delivered up and dealt with according to the laws of the land; for remember that he hath no forgiveness; and it shall be proved according to the laws of the land. (Ibid., 42:79.)

"Thou Shalt Not Steal"

Thou shalt not steal; and he that stealeth and will not repent shall be cast out. . . .

And if a man or woman shall rob, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of the land.

And if he or she shall steal, he or she shall be delivered up unto the law of the land. (Ibid., 42:20, 84-85.)

The essence of the moral law of the gospel of Jesus Christ is summed up in the words of the Savior that his disciple will love God and his neighbor as himself. (Matt. 22:37-39.) In a modern revelation, the Lord has again brought to the attention of his people that they are to follow this commandment. After expressing the fact that one should love the Lord "with all thy heart, with all thy might, mind, and strength; and in the name of Jesus Christ thou shalt serve him," it continues, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. Thou shalt not steal neither commit adultery, nor kill, nor do anything like unto it." (D&C 59:5-6.)

It should not be difficult for one to understand that if there is love in one's heart for his fellow men, he will not steal, commit adultery, neither kill nor do anything that would injure his fellow man. The association of these three crimes with the love of God and neighbor in the modern revelation assuredly points up their importance in the sight of the Lord. Dishonesty in any of its forms, if uncontrolled or unregulated by divine fiat and if accepted by man as the foundation of a civilized people, would lead to a state of chaos in civilization.

The Nephites at one point in their history were told that their iniquity in casting out the prophets and thus disregarding the law of God would bring destruction upon them. Samuel, the Lamanite, prophesied of the time when the riches of the wicked Nephites would be lost because of a disregard for the property rights of others. Of the nation, the prophet said they would lament over their losses in a time of need. (Helaman 13:33-36.)

The fulfillment of this prophecy came toward the end of the Nephite nation during the time of Mormon when "no man could keep that which was his own, for the thieves, the robbers, and the murderers, and the magic art, and the witchcraft which was in the land." (Mormon 2:10.)

Types of Stealing

Ordinarily, a person thinks of stealing as involving the taking of someone else's property without realizing the consequences of this act before the law of the land. The types of stealing and the penalties imposed by the laws of the State of Utah which do not differ very much from most States, are summarized by Elder W. Cleon Skousen, former Salt Lake City Police Chief, as follows:

Many people are astonished when they discover how severe the punishment can be for thievery. The reason the penalty is so severe is because stealing strikes at the very foundation of a community. It is lawless indifference to the property rights of others. There can be no security when homes and stores are frequently raided by thieves. And there can be no safety on a highway where hijackers and road-robbers operate.

Because the criminal code in each state lays great stress on the seriousness of stealing, it is thought it may be of interest to list some of the different kinds of thievery mentioned by the state statutes.

The penalty for stealing by means of a confidence game may go as high as ten years in the state penitentiary. (Utah Penal Code, 76-20-17.)

"Will a Man Rob God?"

In the book of Malachi we learn that one who withholds tithes and offerings from the Lord is guilty of robbing God. "Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation." (Mal. 3:8-9.)

If we consider this stern rebuke in the light of the above discussion on stealing, what must we conclude concerning the tithing obligations placed upon us by the Lord? Would we not be in a similar situation as David on the occasion of the Prophet Nathan's visit? It was David who condemned himself unknowingly when Nathan approached him about a situation where one man was taking advantage of another man, at which time David became angry and said that the erring man "shall surely die." In the end, David was informed that he was the erring man. (2 Samuel 12:1-14.) We also are guilty when we condemn stealing, and in the same instant say we love the Lord and yet rob him of tithes. Is it possible that we could love our brethren and yet steal from them? Can we therefore without impunity, say we love the Lord and yet rob him at the same time?
