Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 27

The Law of Moral Conduct (Continued)

(Section 42:21-26, 80-83, 86)

While conducting a conference of the Church at Fayette, New York, during the month of January 1831, the Prophet Joseph Smith received the Lord's promise that when he got to the Ohio valley the law to the Church would be given. Upon the Prophet's arrival in Kirtland, Ohio, the following month of February, the Prophet received the great revelation which included more of the Lord's will than the immediate problem before the Saints at the time; that is, the need to care for the relief of the poor and needy. The responsibility of the Church to carry the gospel to the world and the manner in which this should be done formed the basis of the first part of the law. (Chapter 25.)

A major part of the law to the Church is concerned with the relations of people who are interested in living lives which conform to the law of the Lord. These basic laws of moral conduct are necessary for a civilized people. An introduction to this law was given in the last chapter.

"Thou Shalt Not Lie"

The liar is strongly condemned in many scriptures of ancient and modern origin. The revelation under discussion is emphatic in denouncing this vice. (D&C 42:21, 86.)

What is a lie? A dictionary definition is as follows: "To utter a falsehood with an intention to deceive, or with an immoral design; to say or do that which is designed to deceive another when he has a right to know the truth, or when morality requires a just representation. To cause an incorrect impression; to present a misleading appearance."

The Father of Lies

Lying is the opposite of truth. Those who indulge in lying, the speaking of untruths, are being deceived by the father of lies, the devil, who, from the beginning, sought to destroy God's work. In denouncing the false beliefs and practices of certain Jews, Jesus said:

Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it.

And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not. (John 8:44-45.)

Satan's Plan

It is Satan's plan to deceive all people who will succumb to his influence. The half-truth is used as a means of deception. As President George Q. Cannon once explained concerning Mother Eve being deceived by the devil, he:

. . . told the truth in telling that, but he accompanied it with a lie as he always does. He never tells the complete truth. He said that they should not die. The Father had said that they should die. The devil had to tell a lie in order to accomplish his purposes; but there was some truth in his statement. Their eyes were opened. They had a knowledge of good and evil just as the Gods have. They became as Gods; for that is one of the features, one of the peculiar attributes of those who attain unto that glory—they understand the difference between good and evil. (Journal of Discourses, 26:190-191.)

Those who tell half-truths or untruths; they who falsify are aiding and abetting the cause of the devil. They bring themselves into bondage, and, depending upon the purpose of the lie in reference to others, they may lead the deceived from the paths of honesty and virtue. It would seem obvious that the lie is one of the most powerful tools in the hands of Satan and those who perpetuate his designs to bring about the destruction of the souls of men.

Should a Latter-day Saint foster the kingdom of the devil by imitating the plans of the evil one?

Slave to a Lie

Do members of the kingdom of God realize that the lie brings eventual sorrow and regret into their own lives? Is it clear that when one follows this practice, he is bringing himself into a bondage which counteracts the very purpose of his earth-existence?

How much easier it is to tell the truth and be free from any enemy of salvation. When the Prophet Joseph Smith said that salvation consists of a man's being placed beyond the power of his enemies, meaning the enemies of his progression, such as dishonesty, greediness, lying, immorality, and other vices, he was saying that man is in bondage to these vices.

Joseph Smith and Salvation

Salvation is nothing more nor less than to triumph over all our enemies and putting them under our feet. And when we have power to put all enemies under our feet in this world, and a knowledge to triumph over all evil spirits in the world to come, then we are saved, as in the case of Jesus, who was to reign until He had put all enemies under his feet, and the last enemy was death. (DHC 5:387.)

As long as man is a captive to habits and vices that restrict or limit his power to act as a free agent, he will not receive salvation. But, wherein does the individual place himself in such a position of bondage by lying? He binds himself by making the lie a part of himself to the extent that he is no longer free from the falsehood. It has been said that to be a successful liar, it is necessary to remember not only the lie but the person to whom it is told. In doing this the person immediately loses his freedom to that extent. The necessity of remembering the lie, makes a deeper impression upon the liar, requiring that it become a part of his life.

The Truth Shall Make You Free

On the other hand, "the truth shall make you free." (John 8:32.) The truth-teller need not fear the consequences of his actions—he is free indeed. When the lie is spoken, it is almost always discovered and the loss of a friend and character debasement follow. When confronted with the temptation to lie or deceive, one should think of the consequences—possible loss of friends, sorrow, and regret. What self-respecting person would knowingly place himself in this position?

The adversary sought to destroy the work of the Lord in bringing forth The Book of Mormon by a planned attempt to use the loss of the translated portion from the gold plates to his advantage. The plan was to change that part which had been translated and then "expose" the Prophet Joseph Smith by showing that his retranslation was incorrect. This plan, however, was foiled by the translation of the small plates of Nephi which covered the same period of history. Of Satan it is said in the revelation disclosing this deception that:

Yea, he stirreth up their hearts to anger against this work.

Yea, he saith unto them: Deceive and lie in wait to catch, that ye may destroy; behold, this is no harm. And thus he flattereth them, and telleth them that it is no sin to lie that they may catch a man in a lie, that they may destroy him.

And thus he flattereth them, and leadeth them along until he draggeth their souls down to hell; and thus he causeth them to catch themselves in their own snare.

And thus he goeth up and down, to and fro in the earth, seeking to destroy the souls of men. (D&C 10:24-27.)

Korihor, the anti-Christ, in learning of the power of Alma, became convinced that he (Korihor) had been deceived, and then confessed his guilt in deceiving some Nephites. Alma records that ". . . the devil will not support his children at the last day, but doth speedily drag them down to hell." (Alma 30:60.)

Punishment of the Liar

Severe rebukes of the liar are mentioned many places in scripture. Solomon said that the Lord hates "a lying tongue" (Proverbs 6:17), and a "false witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren." (Ibid., 6:19.)

"Wo unto the liar, for he shall be thrust down to hell." (2 Nephi 9:34.) Concerning those who will eventually make up the telestial kingdom, it is revealed that:

These are they who are liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

These are they who suffer the wrath of God on earth.

These are they who suffer the vengeance of eternal fire.

These are they who are cast down to hell and suffer the wrath of Almighty God, until the fulness of times, when Christ shall have subdued all enemies under his feet, and shall have perfected his work. (D&C 76:103-106; cf. 63:17.)

"Thou Shalt Not Commit Adultery"

As heretofore pointed out, the law of moral conduct applies to both sexes. This is the single standard of conduct. This fact is indicated clearly in making known the procedure of excommunication from the Church as the penalty for this sex sin.

And if any man or woman shall commit adultery, he or she shall be tried before two elders of the church, or more, and every word shall be established against him or her by two witnesses of the church, and not of the enemy; but if there are more than two witnesses it is better.

But he or she shall be condemned by the mouth of two witnesses; and the elders shall lay the case before the church, and the church shall lift up their hands against him or her, that they may be dealt with according to the law of God.

And if it can be, it is necessary that the bishop be present also.

And thus ye shall do in all cases which shall come before you. (Ibid., 42:80-83. Italics by author.)

Because of the Lord's setting forth the single standard of conduct as his law, it is not inconsistent, nor is it a changing of the scriptures from their intended meaning, to insert the words shown in brackets below.

Thou shalt love thy wife [husband] with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her [him] and none else.

And he that looketh upon a woman [man] to lust after her [him] shall deny the faith, and shall not have the Spirit; and if he [she] repents not he [she] shall be cast out.

Thou shalt not commit adultery; and he [she] that committeth adultery, and repenteth not, shall be cast out.

But he [she] that has committed adultery and repents with all his [her] heart, and forsaketh it, and doeth it no more, thou shalt forgive;

But if he [she] doeth it again, he [she] shall not be forgiven, but shall be cast out. (Ibid., 42:22-26.)

The penalty for adultery is severe because in the category of sins, it is classed next to murder. (Alma 39:5-9.) President Joseph Fielding Smith of the Council of the Twelve has written the following in comment upon verses 22 to 26 of Section 42 quoted above:

Now this revelation was given before the endowment was made known. Since that time when a man is married in the temple, he takes a solemn covenant before God, angels, and witnesses that he will keep the law of chastity. Then if he violates that covenant it is not easy to receive forgiveness. I call your attention to this statement by the Prophet Joseph Smith: "If a man commit adultery, he cannot receive the celestial kingdom of God. Even if he is saved in any kingdom, it cannot be the celestial kingdom."

Of course, a man may, according to the Doctrine and Covenants, 132:26, receive forgiveness, if he is willing to pay the penalty for such a crime: that is he "shall be destroyed in the flesh, and shall be delivered unto the buffetings of Satan unto the day of redemption," which is the time of the resurrection. We cannot destroy in the flesh, so what the Lord will require in lieu thereof, I do not know. (Doctrines of Salvation II:93-94.)

From what the Lord has revealed about repentance or forgiveness of this sin, as great as it is, there is forgiveness for the Church member upon his or her true repentance. It may be forgiven when the member of the Church has not received the light and understanding of the temple ordinances, but even then the second offense will surely bring the casting out of the offender from the Church. For the person who may have committed this act before membership in the Church, upon his or her sincere repentance and the acceptance of baptism the remission of sins is received. Salvation in the kingdom of God comes to him or to her who endures to the end. (3 Nephi 30; 1 Cor. 6:9-11.)

An Heinous Practice

Elder Harold B. Lee draws attention to a practice directly related to this subject:

There is, however, another heinous practice, the sin of abortion, or the destruction of unborn children by illegal operations, which lies somewhere a close kin to the crime of destroying human life and certainly to be condemned under the subject heading of this chapter, "Thou shalt not kill!"

Against this deplorable practice the leaders of the Church have declared from the beginning. This serious sin against the Lord's plan is committed by two groups of individuals: first, those who, having committed their first great error in yielding to sexual sin, seek to cover their sins after gratifying their lusts, by committing an even more heinous crime before the law of the land and against the law of God; and, second, by those having entered into the sacred relationships of the married state but who, rather than accept the responsibilities of parenthood, yield to this awful practice by which they forfeit their rights to wonderful blessinge which otherwise could have been theirs. ("The Sixth Commandment," The Ten Commandments Today, pp. 91-92.)

Love Thy Husband

"Thou shalt love thy wife [husband] with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her [him] and none else." (D&C 42:22.) When the Lord instituted marriage in the beginning, it was the intention that husband and wife should remain true to each other. They were to "be one flesh" (Genesis 2:24; see also Mark 10:6-9; Ephesians 5:31) and to be faithful to each other, as the word "cleave" denotes.

Two ideas from the Apostle Paul bring together an emphasis which the Lord intends in this same connection:

Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord.

For as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the woman; but all things of God. (1 Cor. 11:11-12.)

Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it. . . .

Nevertheless let everyone of you in particular so love his wife even as himself; and the wife see that she reverence her husband. (Ephesians 5:25, 33.)

Safeguard against Sin

As the reader remembers the New Testament Sermon on the Mount, he will recognize the common element in Matthew 5:27-28, and part of Section 42:22-26 of The Doctrine and Covenants given above. When the resurrected Savior instructed the Nephites, however, he gave them this admonition which seems to reinforce and further clarify the meaning of the New Testament scripture, as also the modern revelation. Jesus emphasized in those instructions that control of thought, feelings, and desires is necessary as a safeguard against adultery.

Behold, it is written by them of old time, that thou shalt not commit adultery;

But I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman [man] , to lust after her [him], hath committed adultery already in his [her] heart.

Behold, I give unto you a commandment, that ye suffer none of these things to enter into your heart;

For it is better that ye should deny yourselves of these things, wherein ye will take up your cross, than that ye should be cast into hell. (3 Nephi 12:27-30.)

Is not this instruction in harmony with the words of the prophet-king Benjamin and later by Amulek (see Alma 12:14), when Benjamin counseled his people, as follows?

And finally, I cannot tell you all the things whereby ye may commit sin; for there are divers ways and means, even so many that I cannot number them.

But this much I can tell you, that if ye do not watch yourselves, and your thoughts, and your words, and your deeds, and observe the commandments of God, and continue in the faith of what ye have heard concerning the coming of our Lord, even unto the end of your lives, ye must perish. And now, O man, remember, and perish not. (Mosiah 4:29-30. Italics by author.)

Vulgarity of thought, word, and desire may well lead to the deed. "For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he. . . ." (Proverbs 23:7.)

Results of Unchaste Thoughts

Transgression begins in the mind, prompted by obscene pictures, salacious literature, immodesty of dress, and other forms of lewdness. Impure thoughts thus engendered, unless repented of, encourage apostasy. Three consequences of this thought transgression are mentioned in the text under consideration (D&C 42:22-26), (1) a denial of the faith; (2) a loss of the Spirit; and (3) to be cast out of the Church. Included in these consequences is (4) that fear will come to the transgressor as he realizes that his unrepentance has brought upon him the condemnation of those who love him most in this life and also the wrath of God. (Ibid., 63:16.)

Honest Hearts Produce Honest Actions

Admonitions against breaking the law of moral conduct are of great importance. Although breaking the laws against stealing and lying are more common than adultery and the taking of human life, none of these offenses against the Lord should be taken lightly. When one is genuinely converted to the gospel of Jesus Christ, it will be recognized that the breaking of a commandment is wrong in itself. Some people feel that they can commit sin as long as no one knows about the sin. The foundation of such a belief is based upon an idea contrary to the teachings of the gospel. Falling into the error of the Pharisees should not be an indulgence of the Latter-day Saint. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts and deeds. (Matt. 15:11-20, especially 18-19.)

The Ideal Home

Love in the home is expressed in other ways in addition to the one on which emphasis has been placed thus far in this chapter. One of these ways is consideration for the feelings of the wife and husband, as expressed by President David O. McKay, in a general conference:

I cannot imagine a man's being cruel to a woman. I cannot imagine her so conducting herself as to merit such treatment. Perhaps there are women in the world who exasperate their husbands but no man is justified in resorting to physical force or in exploding his feelings in profanity. There are men, undoubtedly, in the world who are thus beastly, but no man who holds the Priesthood of God should so debase himself. (Conference Report, October 1951, p. 181.)

Where confidence and love between husband and wife exist, there is the basis of the ideal home. In the words of President Joseph F. Smith, we learn:

A home is not a home in the eye of the gospel, unless there dwell perfect confidence and love between the husband and the wife. Home is a place of order, love, union, rest, confidence, and absolute trust; where the breath of suspicion of infidelity cannot enter; where the woman and the man each have implicit confidence in each other's honor and virtue. (Gospel Doctrine, p. 302.)
