Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 28

The Law of Consecration

(Section 42:30-42, 53-55, 70-73)

When the law to the Church was promised, we learned that there was considerable poverty among the Saints. The Lord informed the Prophet Joseph Smith that when that law was revealed, his plan for caring for the poor would be given. (D&C 38:15-22, 32, 41.) Although this is not the only subject matter of this great revelation, it is an important part of Section 42, and the subject of many later revelations.

Up to this time our study of this revelation has included the laws of preaching the gospel and of moral conduct. As we have indicated, the living of the moral law is fundamental in "working out one's salvation." When a person becomes acquainted with the law of consecration, it is apparent that, as a basis for living this law, the moral teachings of the gospel are directly related to the successful operation of the law of consecration.

Man's Struggle

The basic wants of man are known to be food, clothing, and shelter. In order for a man to obtain these for himself and family, he has to struggle with his environment as the principal factor in accomplishing this purpose. When the law was promised, the Lord revealed that he had made the earth rich and that the Saints would partake of those riches. (Ibid., 38:16-20.) After the law of consecration was given, the Lord also made known that he would provide for his people in his own way. Furthermore, that every man is a steward in his sight and that ample riches of the earth are available for man. (Ibid., 104:13-14, 17.)

Several systems or plans for giving security to man have been devised. The Lord, however, has revealed that pertaining to his Saints there is a way which will give security in accordance with the way in which his plan is lived.

And it is my purpose to provide for my saints, for all things are mine.

But it must needs be done in mine own way. . . . (Ibid., 104:15-16.)

The Lord's Way in the Past

There are two instances in the scriptures where the Lord's people lived the law given to them to the extent that there was neither rich nor poor among them. The first of these was in the days of righteous Enoch and his people. Although there were wars and contentions among the people of other lands, Enoch's people lived the laws of God to the degree that they were blessed exceedingly.

The fear of the Lord was upon all nations, so great was the glory of the Lord, which was upon his people. And the Lord blessed the land, and they were blessed upon the mountains, and upon the high places, and did flourish.

And the Lord called his people ZION, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them. (Moses 7:17-18.)

Following the visit of the resurrected Christ to the Nephites on the American Continent, a reign of righteousness was inaugurated and continued for about 165 years. The record of this period is an informative one because it makes known the means by which their happy condition was achieved. (4 Nephi 2-3, 15-16.)

The New Testament example of a similar instance of having "all things common" is not as clear as the latter account. The record states that there was some division of property among the Saints in the meridian dispensation. (Acts 2:41-47.)

In addition to the all-important condition of morality which existed among the members of the Church in these earlier dispensations, we discover another principle which the Lord informed our own dispensation was necessary for the successful living of the Lord's law. It is given in Section 38, as follows: "I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine." (D&C 38:27.)

"All Things Common"

In commenting upon the practice of the New Testament Saints having "all things common," Elder Albert E. Bowen furnishes the following observation based upon the commentaries of others:

In relation to the matter of their having all things in common it is interesting to note that the Primitive Church apparently did not long continue the practice. Gibbon relates that the rule was early relaxed so as to permit of individual undertakings and was finally supplanted by the law of tithing. (I Gibbon, Decline and Fall, p. 416-417.) In this connection Dummelow's Bible Commentary, p. 824, says: "The Church of Jerusalem recognized the principle of private property. A disciple's property really was his own, but he did not SAY it was his own; he treated it as if it were common property. The Anabaptist principle that private property is unlawful finds no support in the Acts. The communism was voluntary. (The Welfare Plan, pp. 15-16.)

In the thinking of some people of our own times. there is an association of the law of consecration with having things in common to the extent that they believe it is in agreement with communism of today. In 1838, the Prophet Joseph Smith set down in print some questions which were most frequently asked him, as he said, in order to save himself the trouble of repeating them over and over again. Among these was the one: "Do the Mormons believe in having all things in common?" His answer was, "No." (DHC 3:23.) As indicated in Chapter 25 on the background of Section 41 (the first revelation received by the Prophet in Kirtland, Ohio), some members of the Church in that place had been organized in an effort to live as the early Christians are said to have lived, having all things common. Concerning the Kirtland branch, the Prophet wrote:

The branch of the Church in this part of the Lord's vineyard, which had increased to nearly one hundred members, were striving to do the will of God, as far as they knew it, though some strange notions and false spirits had crept in among them. With a little caution and some wisdom, I soon assisted the brethren and sisters to overcome them. The plan of "common stock," which had existed in what was called "the family," whose members generally had embraced the everlasting Gospel, was readily abandoned for the more perfect law of the Lord; and the false spirits were early discerned and rejected by the light of revelation. (Ibid., 1:146-147.)

As we shall see in our brief discussion of the law of consecration, it is neither communistic nor communal.

The Law of Consecration

The Lord's way of providing for the poor required that the individual consecrate or give to the Church all of his property. This was to be done by deed or legal title.

And behold, thou wilt remember the poor, and consecrate of thy properties for their support that which thou hast to impart unto them, with a covenant and a deed which cannot be broken. (D&C 42:30.)

Following this introduction to the law of consecration, the revelation continues with these words:

And inasmuch as ye impart of your substance unto the poor, ye will do it unto me; and they shall be laid before the bishop of my church and his counselors, two of the elders, or high priests, such as he shall appoint or has appointed and set apart for that purpose.

And it shall come to pass, that after they are laid before the bishop of my church, and after that he has received these testimonies concerning the consecration of the properties of my church, that they cannot be taken from the church, agreeable to my commandments, every man shall be made accountable unto me, a steward over his own property, or that which he has received by consecration, as much as is sufficient for himself and family. (Ibid., 42:31-32.)

Again, emphasis is given to the consecration as belonging to the Church, but the donor is to become a steward over that which he has consecrated or properties which may not have belonged to him. As noted in the verses above, the standard or measure of one's stewardship is "as much as is sufficient for himself and family." In Section 51, Edward Partridge, and those chosen by him, are to "appoint unto this people their portions, every man equal according to his family, according to his circumstances and his wants and needs." (Ibid., 51:3.) Although this and other revelations point out that men are to be equal under the law of consecration, the words just quoted describe the manner in which the men are to be equal. In pointing up this fact, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Counselor in the First Presidency, says:

Obviously, this is not a case of "dead level" equality. It is "equality" that will vary as much as the man's circumstances, his family, his wants and needs, may vary. (Conference Report, October 4, 1942, p. 55.)

If, however, there would arise a difference of opinion between the agent of the Church and the member, over the amount to be received as a stewardship, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote the following to Bishop Edward Partridge:

. . . every man must be his own judge how much he should receive and how much he should suffer to remain in the hands of the Bishop. I speak of those who consecrate more than they need for the support of themselves and their families.

The matter of consecration must be done by the mutual consent of both parties; for to give the Bishop power to say how much every man shall have, and he be obliged to comply with the Bishop's judgment, is giving to the Bishop more power than a king has; and upon the other hand, to let every man say how much he needs, and the Bishop be obliged to comply with his judgment, is to throw Zion into confusion, and make a slave of the Bishop. The fact is, there must be a balance or equilibrium of power, between the Bishop and the people, and thus harmony and good will may be preserved among you.

Therefore, those persons consecrating property to the Bishop in Zion, and then receiving an inheritance back, must reasonably show to the Bishop that they need as much as they claim. But in case the two parties cannot come to a mutual agreement, the Bishop is to have nothing to do about receiving such consecrations; and the case must be laid before a council of twelve High Priests, the Bishop not being one of the council, but he is to lay the case before them. (DHC I:364-365.)

From the foregoing and other places yet to be noted, it should be clear to all that the principle of free agency is an important part of this order. The difference between this law and that of communism, as known today, lies in man's freedom to act. This fact and another one in connection with this law is further indicated in the answer to this and a related question: Is it intended that the donor of property in receiving a stewardship have legal title to the stewardship received from the Church? The revelation answering this question states:

And let my servant Edward Partridge, when he shall appoint a man his portion, give unto him a writing that shall secure unto him his portion, that he shall hold it, even this right and this inheritance in the church, until he transgresses and is not accounted worthy by the voice of the church, according to the laws and covenants of the church, to belong to the church.

And if he shall transgress and is not accounted worthy to belong to the church, he shall not have power to claim that portion which he has consecrated unto the bishop for the poor and needy of my church; therefore, he shall not retain the gift, but shall only have claim on that portion that is deeded unto him. (D&C 51:4-5.)

Not only was the person to consecrate his property to the Church by legal deed and thus surrender all claim to the property, but the stewardship received as a member of the order was to be his own. Private property is a fundamental part of the operation of the law of consecration. But what if the member of this order is no longer worthy to continue in the Church, is the property deeded to him his own or that of the Church? From the foregoing revelation the answer is that he has claim on the stewardship deeded to him. This answer also points up the fact of free agency in that a person may leave the order and yet still retain his property.

The Bishop's Storehouse

As a member of the order produces surpluses from his stewardship or there are residues arising from the original consecration beyond what the donor has consecrated to the Church, provision is made in the revelations for the use of these portions. (D&C 42:33-34.)

Not only were these residues to be used for the poor, but also for the building up the kingdom of God upon the earth, as the revelation indicates:

And for the purpose of purchasing lands for the public benefit of the church, and building houses of worship, and building up of the New Jerusalem which is hereafter to be revealed. (Ibid., 42:35.)

In a later revelation, the Lord makes known that children are to be maintained from the parents' stewardship, but if the time should come that they are unable to provide a stewardship for their children of age, the Lord's storehouse is to provide for them. It also indicates:

And the storehouse shall be kept by the consecrations of the church; and widows and orphans shall be provided for, as also the poor. (Ibid., 83:6.)

Law of Remuneration

Provision is made in verses 70 through 73 of Section 42 for those who labor in a full-time capacity for the Church to have their families supported out of the general funds of the Order.

The law of remuneration is that those who administer in spiritual affairs must have their stewardships and labor for their living, "even as the members." This is wisdom. For in that position they are absolutely independent and can preach the truth without fear. Those who administer in temporal affairs and give their entire time to public business are to have a just remuneration. If they were to earn a living for themselves, they could not give all their time and energy to the community. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 234.)

Summary

The law of consecration, also known as the United Order (not to be confused with the Orders operated between 1877 and 1884 in the West), required that the donor of property consecrate his wealth by legal title to the agent (bishop) of the Church. In return, the consecrator would receive a stewardship, also called an inheritance, by legal title or deed, which secured his inheritance by law. If he left the Order, this stewardship would be his own; thus, the law of consecration was not communistic because of the principles of free agency and private property. The surplus arising from the "working" of the stewardship, beyond the circumstances and wants and needs of the family, would be placed in the bishop's storehouse for the care of the poor, widows, orphans, and the building up of Zion. Additional stewardships would also come, in part, from this source.

History of the United Order

In the spring of 1831, members of the Church from New York State began arriving in the Kirtland, Ohio, area. A branch of the Church from Colesville, New York, settled at Thompson, Ohio, where they were given the privilege of organizing themselves according to the law of consecration. (D&C 51:15.) That this branch of the Church was to remain in Ohio for only a short time is evident from the revelation, for they were to receive another commandment about their location at some future time. (Ibid., 51:16.) In the meantime, however, they were to act as though they were to be in Ohio "for years." (Ibid., 51:17.) It was only a matter of months until the faithful members of this branch were commanded to gather in Missouri. (Ibid., 56:5-7.) It was during the time of the saints sojourn in Jackson County, Missouri, that further attempts were made to live this law.

The United Order Discontinued

By revelation the Lord set the law of consecration in abeyance until such time as the saints would again be established in Missouri to build up the city of Zion. (Ibid., 105:34.) One reason for the failure of this law to remain in force, as reported in The Evening and Morning Star, was that "There has not been enough consecrated to plant the poor in inheritances." A reason for this condition was that many, before coming to Zion, had given their property away, and sacrificed some, resulting in their not having property which could be made available for consecration. (DHC I:381.) It should also be remembered that, due to other weaknesses of the Saints, they did not measure up to the standards necessary to live this law. (D&C 101:6-8; 105:2-6.) The persecution of the Church in Missouri shortened the time when the law of consecration was in force among the saints.

Although some members in Illinois, the place of gathering after the expulsion of the saints from Missouri, felt that the law of consecration should be lived, the Prophet Joseph Smith said to the Iowa High Council at a meeting at Montrose:

. . . that it was the will of the Lord that we should desist from trying to keep it; and if persisted in, it would produce a perfect defeat of its object, and that he assumed the whole responsibility of not keeping it until proposed by himself. (DHC 4:93.)

Revocation of Commandments

Does the Lord command or give his people the privilege of living a law and then revoke that command? The word of the Lord is definite in this regard, as evidenced in the modern revelation. (D&C 56:1-4.) An example from the New Testament may be appropriately referred to when the Lord commanded his disciples not to take purse and scrip (baggage), but subsequently, when circumstances and conditions were different, he counseled them to take purse and script. (Luke 22:35-36; Mt. 10:9-10.) Another example in our dispensation when conditions released the saints from compliance to a command was the building of the temple in Jackson County, Missouri. Due to circumstances, the persecution of the saints, this commandment was also placed in abeyance. (D&C 124:49-51.)

Conversion Necessary

It is evident from the revelations already referred to in this chapter that obedience to the law of consecration requires that the members of the Church live on a high moral plane, keeping the commandments to the extent that they are able to eliminate greed, selfishness, dishonesty, and other barriers to living the great commandment—to love one's neighbor as oneself.

The testimony of the gospel is a necessary step in the accomplishment of this purpose, but there remains the fact that one must still, as a member of the Church, be "born again." (Alma, chapter 5.)

The Welfare Plan

Over two decades ago, by revelation to the leadership of the Church, there was inaugurated the Welfare Plan. Conditions at that time brought into existence a program designed to meet the circumstances of the times. Through the years since 1936, this program has made great advances in the accomplishment of the objectives which brought it into being. The existence of the "bishop's storehouse," originally a part of the law of consecration, is known to all Latter-day Saints. The accumulated stocks of food, clothing, and other materials in these buildings for the use of faithful members of the Church in need, have demonstrated the complete justification for such a plan.

To some in the Church, however, there is another reason for the Welfare Program other than to take care of the present needs of the people. Appropriate to this lesson are the remarks made in a General Conference by President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., of the First Presidency, when he compared the Welfare Plan with the law of consecration.

We have all said that the Welfare Plan is not the United Order and was not intended to be. However, I should like to suggest to you that perhaps, after all, when the Welfare Plan gets thoroughly into operation—it is not so yet—we shall not be so very far from carrying out the great fundamentals of the United Order.

In the first place I repeat again, the United Order recognized and was built upon the principle of private owernship of property; all that a man had and lived upon under the United Order, was his own. Quite obviously, the fundamental principle of our system today is the ownership of private property.

In the next place, in lieu of residues and surpluses which were accumulated and built upon the United Order, we, today, have our fast offerings, our Welfare donations, and our tithing, all of which may be devoted to the care of the poor, as well as for the carrying on of the activities and business of the Church. After all, the United Order was primarily designed to build up a system under which there should be no abjectly poor, and this is the purpose, also, of the Welfare Plan.

In this connection it should be observed that it is clear from these earlier revelations, as well as from our history, that the Lord had very early to tell the people about the wickedness of idleness, and the wickedness of greed, because the brethren who had were not giving properly, and those who had not were evidently intending to live without work on the things which were to be received from those who had property. (D&C 56:16-20.)

Furthermore, we had under the United Order a bishop's storehouse in which were collected the materials from which to supply the needs and the wants of the poor. We have a bishop's storehouse under the Welfare Plan, used for the same purpose.

As I have already indicated, the surplus properties which came to the Church under the Law of Consecration, under the United Order, became the "common property" of the Church (D&C 82:18) and were handled under the United Order for the benefit of the poor. We have now under the Welfare Plan all over the Church, ward land projects. In some cases the lands are owned by the wards, in others they are leased by the wards or lent to them by private individuals. This land is being farmed for the benefit of the poor, by the poor where you can get the poor to work it.

We have in place of the two treasuries, the "Sacred Treasury" and "Another Treasury," the general funds of the Church.

Thus you will see, brethren, that in many of its great essentials, we have, as the Welfare Plan has now developed, the broad essentials of the United Order. Furthermore, having in mind the assistance which is being given from time to time and in various wards to help set people up in business or in farming, we have a plan which is not essentially unlike that which was in the United Order when the poor were given portions from the common fund. (Conference Report, October 3, 1942, pp. 57-58.)
