Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 29

The Law of Administration to the Sick

(Section 42:43-52)

The introduction of Section 42 of The Doctrine and Covenants has been given in other chapters. In general, the receiving of this revelation arose out of the Lord's recognition of the poverty of some saints. The law concerning this condition and the promises of the Lord that the earth is to bring forth its fulness for the benefit of his people "in the due time of the Lord" is provided in this revelation. We have already learned that there are other laws mentioned in this revelation, one of which is the subject of this chapter.

Objective of This Chapter

Although reference is made to the working of miracles, including healings, in other revelations yet to be studied, this chapter will be limited in subject matter to some of the principles of adminstration to the sick. All of the ramifications of this important subject are not to be discussed in this chapter.

Some Aspects of This Ordinance

The healing of a person's infirmity, disease, or the correction of some impediment such as in speech, use of legs or arms, have always been a part of the gospel of Jesus Christ. One of the most direct references to the practice of administering to the sick during the meridian dispensation is that given in the New Testament, as follows:

Is any sick among you? Let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord:

And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.

Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much. (James 5:14-16.)

There are several factors to be noted in James' counsel concerning this ordinance. One of these is that the Lord provided in his plan such an ordinance as administration to the sick by the elders of the Church. In other places in the New Testament are found references to the laying on of the hands for this purpose. The Savior said that his believers should "lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." (Mark 16:18.) In our own dispensation, the Prophet Joseph Smith has told us that the sign of the healing of the sick is the laying on of hands. (DHC IV:555.)

The use of oil is indicated by James as a part of the ordinance of administration to the sick. In the call and commission to the Twelve Apostles, it is recorded by Mark that Jesus,

. . . called unto him the twelve, and began to send them forth by two and two; and gave them power over unclean spirits. . . .

And they went out, and preached that men should repent.

And they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them. (Mark 6:7, 12-13.)

After asking this question "Can not the Lord hear prayer and heal the sick just as well without laying on of hands and anointing with oil as with?" Elder Orson Pratt said:

He could have thrown down the walls of Jericho without the children of Israel walking around them and blowing rams' horns; but the Lord has a form, then why not comply with it, and leave the event with him. (Journal of Discourses 16:290.)

A frequently raised question arising out of James' instructions is this one answered by President Joseph Fielding Smith:

"James says when a man administers to a sick person he has power to remit his sins; how does the elder get power to remit sins?"

It is not the elder who remits or forgives the sick man's sins, but the Lord. If by the power of faith and through the administration by the elders the man is healed it is evidence that his sins have been forgiven. It is hardly reasonable to think that the Lord will forgive the sins of a man who is healed if he has not repented. Naturally he would repent of his sins if he seeks for the blessings by the elders. (Smith, Joseph Fielding, "Your Question," The Improvement Era, August 1955, p. 607.)

The Lord Speaks to Us

From the law of the Lord:

And whosoever among you are sick, and have not faith to be healed, but believe, shall be nourished with all tenderness, with herbs and mild food, and that not by the hand of an enemy.

And the elders of the church, two or more, shall be called, and shall pray for and lay their hands upon them in my name; and if they die they shall die unto me, and if they live they shall live unto me. (D&C 42:43-44.)

The elders of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are to administer to the members of the kingdom of God in this dispensation by the "prayer of faith" and the power of the Priesthood. Rather than restricting or limiting the operations of the Priesthood of God, the fulness of times is the period when greater evidence of the power of the Lord is to be manifest. This dispensation is the time for gathering together in one all dispensations of times to culminate in the salvation of mankind. In the beginning of this dispensation, the Lord said in his preface to The Doctrine and Covenants that he had established the gospel upon the earth "That faith also might increase in the earth; That mine everlasting covenant might be established." (D&C 1:21-22.)

Medical Aid?

Throughout the law of administration to the sick, as given in Section 42, emphasis is placed upon the principle of faith in bringing about a restoration to health. (D&C 42:48-51.) It does not follow, however, that Latter-day Saints believe that the use of medicine and the skill of the surgeon are not to be used. In commenting upon verses 43 and 44 of this revelation, the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 232, gives the following information:

The Latter-day Saints believe in the healing virtue of the prayer of faith, but they do not proscribe the use of "herbs and mild food," nor the aid of a physician. In the month of November, 1842, Brigham Young was seriously ill. In his diary the Prophet Joseph notes that, "He was suddenly and severely attacked by disease, with strong symptoms of apoplexy," and then he adds, "We immediately administered to him by laying on of hands and prayer, accompanied with the use of herbs." (History of the Church, Vol. 5, p. 126.)

Under date of December 26th, 1842, the Prophet writes:

"General Law gave me in custody of Doctor Richards, with whom I visited Sister Morey, who was severely afflicted. We prescribed Lobelia for her, among other things, which is excellent in its place." (Ibid., p. 209.) (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 232.)

Revelation Continued

In continuing this law the Lord reveals some important truths relative to the Latter-day Saints' attitude toward the dead and also the blessing awaiting the faithful of his kingdom:

Thou shalt live together in love, insomuch that thou shalt weep for the loss of them that die, and more especially for those that have not hope of a glorious resurrection.

And it shall come to pass that those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them;

And they that die not in me, wo unto them, for their death is bitter.

And again, it shall come to pass that he that hath faith in me to be healed, and is not appointed unto death, shall be healed.

He who hath faith to see shall see.

He who hath faith to hear shall hear.

The lame who hath faith to leap shall leap.

And they who have not faith to do these things, but believe in me, have power to become my sons; and inasmuch as they break not my laws thou shalt bear their infirmities. (D&C 42:45-52.)

Death is a part of the eternal plan of the Father. Jacob taught that death "hath passed upon all men, to fulfill the merciful plan of the great Creator." (2 Nephi 9:6.) The Prophet Joseph Smith spoke of death as the last enemy to be overcome. (DHC 5:387-388.) The ancient prophets heralded the day when the bands of death would be broken by the resurrection of the body from the grave. Thus, there would be no victory in the grave. Life would be endless. The removal of death by the resurrection was proclaimed as a grand objective of the atonement of Christ. Sorrow would depart from the land in the realization that no longer would there be a parting of loved ones. (2 Nephi 9:19; Mosiah 15:20; 16:9; I Cor. 15:53-55; D&C 63:49.)

They That Die Not Unto the Lord

A scene of mourning is depicted in The Book of Mormon account of the great destruction upon this continent when the Savior was crucified. (3 Nephi 8:23-25.) Following this destruction a voice was heard, crying: "Wo, wo, wo unto this people; wo unto the inhabitants of the whole earth except they shall repent; for the devil laugheth, and his angels rejoice, because of the slain of the fair sons and daughters of my people." (Ibid., 9:2.) But for what reason was there rejoicing on the part of the devil and his cohorts? The scripture continues, "and it is because of their iniquity and abominations that they are fallen." (Ibid., 9:2.) So strongly did the Nephites feel against the necessity of taking the lives of the Lamanites in the days of Helaman and Moroni (the great general and prophet) that they sorrowed in sending so many "out of this world into an eternal world, unprepared to meet their God." (Alma 48:22-25.) Mormon's lamentation over the fallen Nephites in the last great battle with the Lamanites reminds one of the eternal truth that all must stand before the judgment-seat of Christ where every man will be rewarded according to justice and mercy. (Mormon 6:16-22.)

"Death Shall Be Sweet Unto Them"

When death strikes in a family, it is natural to weep for the loss thus sustained. The extent of such mourning, among Latter-day Saints, however, may also be determined by the circumstances. President John Taylor had this to say at a funeral service:

It is proper to sorrow; it is proper to show respect for the departed. It is proper that our sympathies should be drawn out; it is proper that we should assemble together to attend to appropriate funeral services, as we are now doing, that we may reflect upon our lives and upon the uncertainty thereof, and upon death and the results that may follow after; and that we consider the Gospel of the Son of God, and reflect upon our position, etc. . . . We, above all other people upon the face of the earth, ought to be free from outward show, and from the appearance of sorrow and mourning, having had planted within us the germs of immortality and eternal life; inasmuch as when we get through with the affairs of this world, we not only expect, but we know that we will inherit eternal lives in the celestial kingdom of God. And knowing this, it would not be for us to mourn as people without any hope. (Journal of Discourses 22:255.)

In quoting the words of President Joseph F. Smith, the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary (p. 232) gives the following statement which applies to the expressions from the text of our chapter "and if they die they shall die unto me" (D&C 42:44) and "Those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them" (D&C 42:46):

That which we call death is merely the slumber and rest of this mortal clay, and that only for a little season, while the spirit, the life, has gone to enjoy again the presence and society of those from whence it came, and to whom it is joy again to return. And this will be the condition of the righteous until the morning of the resurrection, when the spirit will have power to call forth the lifeless frame to be united again, and they both become a living soul, an immortal being, filled with the light and power of God. . . .

What reason have we to mourn? None, except that we are deprived for a few days of the society of one whom we love. (Journal of Discourses 19:265.)

Faith To Be Healed

The scriptures teach us that where faith is present, blessings follow. Miracles are performed by this principle. (Mark 16:17-18.) Jesus said to the woman healed by him, "thy faith hath made thee whole." (Mt. 9:22.) On the other hand, no mighty miracles were performed by Jesus in "his own country" because of the unbelief of the people, who knew him as the carpenter; yet "he laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed them." (Mark 6:5.) Upon one occasion Paul healed a lame man because he had faith to be healed. (Acts 14:8-10.)

Are All of Faith to be Healed?

From an informative sermon by Elder Spencer W. Kimball of the Council of the Twelve, this thought is expressed on this question and the subject of pain, sorrow, and punishment:

Now, we find many people critical when a righteous person is killed, a young father or mother is taken from a family, or when violent deaths occur. Some become bitter when oft-repeated prayers seem unanswered. Some lose faith and turn sour when solemn administrations by holy men seem to be ignored and no restoration seems to come from repeated prayer circles. But if all the sick were healed, if all the righteous were protected and the wicked destroyed, the whole program of the Father would be annulled and the basic principle of the Gospel, free agency, would be ended.

If pain and sorrow and total punishment immediately followed the doing of evil, no soul would repeat a misdeed. If joy and peace and rewards were instantaneously given the doer of good, there could be no evil—all would do good and not because of the rightness of doing good. There would be no test of strength, no development of character, no growth of powers, no free agency, only satanic controls.

Should all prayers be immediately answered according to our selfish desires and our limited understanding, then there would be little or no suffering, sorrow, disappointment or even death, and if these were not, there would also be an absence of joy, success, resurrection, eternal life and Godhood. (Kimball, Spencer W.: "Tragedy or Destiny," address to the Brigham Young University Student Body, December 6, 1955, pp. 4-5.)

Elder Kimball continues in pointing out that death is a part of life's experiences:

Everyone must die. Death is an important part of life. Of course, we are never quite ready for the change. Not knowing when it should come, we properly fight to retain our life.

Why are we so afraid of death? We pray for the sick—we administer to the afflicted—we implore the Lord to heal and reduce pain and save life and postpone death, and properly so, but is eternity so frightful? So awful?

The Prophet Joseph Smith confirmed:

"The Lord takes many away even in infancy, that they may escape the envy of man and the sorrows and evils of this present world; they were too pure, too lovely, to live on this earth; therefore, if rightly considered, instead of mourning we have reason to rejoice as they are delivered from evil and we shall have them again. The only difference between the old and the young dying is, one lives longer in heaven and eternal light and glory than the other, and is freed a little sooner from this miserable world." (Ibid., p. 8.)

"Appointed unto Death"

In commenting upon the Lord's statement that "he that hath faith in me to be healed, and is not appointed unto death, shall be healed." (D&C 42:48), Brother Kimball states in the source already quoted:

If not "appointed unto death" and sufficient faith is developed, life can be spared. But if there is not enough faith many die before their time. It is evident that even the righteous will not always be healed and even those of great faith will die when it is according to the purpose of God. Joseph Smith died in his thirties as did the Savior. Solemn prayers were answered negatively. . . .

"If he is not appointed unto death!" That is a challenging statement.

I am confident that there is a time to die. I am not a fatalist. I believe that many people die before "their time" because they are careless, abuse their bodies, take unnecessary chances, or expose themselves to hazards, accidents and sickness. . . . (Kimball, Spencer W.: "Tragedy or Destiny," address to the Brigham Young University Student Body, December 6, 1955, pp. 6, 9.)

In confirmation of some of these ideas, Elder Kimball refers to the scripture in Job 22:15-16; Ecclesiastes 3:1-2, 7:17, with the stated belief that "we die prematurely but seldom exceed our time very much though there are exceptions." As an exception, reference is made to King Hezekiah of Judah. (2 Kings 20:1-6.) Examples from The Book of Mormon bearing out the fact that efforts were made to bring some of the Lord's servants to an early death before their "time to die" were cited in the cases of Abinadi (Mosiah 13:3, 7; 17:19); and Lehi and Nephi, sons of Helaman, (Helaman 5:26, 29.) Bible examples include Enoch (Moses 6:39), and Paul (2 Cor. 11:23-27; Phil. 1:28; Acts 21:13).

In conclusion, Brother Kimball says:

God can control our lives, He guides and blesses us, but gives us our agency. We may live our lives in accordance with His plan for us or we may foolishly shorten or terminate them.

I am positive in my mind that the Lord has planned our destiny. We can shorten our lives but I think we cannot lengthen them very much. Sometimes we'll understand fully, and when we see back from the vantage point of the future we shall be satisfied with many of the happenings of this life which seemed so difficult for us to comprehend. (Kimball, Spencer W.: "Tragedy or Destiny," address to the Brigham Young University Student Body, December 6, 1955, pp. 11-12.)
