Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 30

The Past, Present, and Future

(Section 45:1-42)

The title of this chapter suggests the functions of a prophet of God. Although there are many responsibilities belonging to a prophet in furthering the kingdom of God upon the earth, one of the principal functions is to receive revelation for the guidance of the Church. The revelation thus received may refer to the past, as an example, or illustration for present and future obedience on the part of the saints, or to clarify the scriptures previously given.

A prophet thus uses the revelations of other prophets in his understanding of the purposes of the Lord. Another purpose of the revelations received by a living prophet is to give admonitions, warnings, and advice to the people of his own generation. In other words, by the spirit of prophecy, a prophet is empowered to interpret present-day conditions for the people. He enjoys the privilege of foreseeing future events, as the Lord wills it, that the saints may be adequately warned against calamities of the future. The Lord's Preface to The Doctrine and Covenants definitely states that the revelations in that book of scripture are to constitute a voice of warning. The Prophet Joseph Smith was called by the Lord, among other reasons, for the purpose of receiving revelations because of the judgments to come in the latter days. (Chapter 3.)

Historical Background

At the time Section 45 was received by Joseph Smith, many efforts were made by the Adversary to destroy the effectiveness of the Church.

At this age of the Church [i.e., early in the spring of 1831] many false reports, lies, and foolish stories, were published in the newspapers, and circulated in every direction, to prevent people from investigating the work, or embracing the faith. A great earthquake in China, which destroyed from one to two thousand inhabitants, was burlesqued in some papers, as "Mormonism in China." But to the joy of the Saints who had to struggle against every thing that prejudice and wickedness could invent, I received the following: [D&C Section 45]. (DHC 1:158.)

Obedience—Why?

Not all of the Lord's instructions nor the reasons for his giving commandments are given in one revelation. In Section 45, however, several reasons are mentioned for strict obedience to his will. The revelation begins with the fact stated, as one of these reasons, that the kingdom of God has been given to his people. (D&C 45:1.) Possession of the kingdom by the saints is the same as the attainment of salvation upon their part, but this blessing is only for those who are obedient. Because salvation is the greatest blessing obtainable to a child of God, the necessity for full obedience is apparent.

Why should one be obedient? Jesus Christ is the Creator of our earth, as well as of other worlds. He is supreme and by his power we are able to receive the benefits of an earth-life with its environment or ordered that we may live under a reign of law.

Is there anyone who is assured that he will be alive on the morrow? Death comes to all men, but when? In the words of the Savior" . . . hearken unto my voice, lest death shall overtake you; in an hour when ye think not the summer shall be past, and the harvest ended, and your souls not saved." (Ibid., 45:2.) Now is the day for repentance.

If man fully understood the sufferings of Christ (who is our Advocate with the Father), as he made the atonement for us, man would be fully determined to obey all of the Lord's commands. So intense was the suffering of Christ that he sweat drops of blood from his pores. (Ibid., 19:15-17.) It is only through Jesus Christ that man may receive individual salvation; consequently, he reminds the Saints of latter days that his prayer to the Father is in behalf of them as follows:

. . . Father, behold the sufferings and death of him who did no sin, in whom thou wast well pleased; behold the blood of thy Son which was shed, the blood of him whom thou gavest that thyself might be glorified;

Wherefore, Father, spare these my brethren that believe on my name, that they may come unto me and have everlasting life. (Ibid., 45:4-5.)

As Christ was obedient in glorifying the Father, so, also, may we glorify the Father and the Son by our receiving through obedience the greatest blessing of eternal life. Everything the Father and the Son do is for our blessing. One may well exclaim: "O how great the goodness of our God. . . . O how great the plan of our God. . . ." (2 Nephi 9:10, 13.) Therefore, hearken" . . . today, and harden not your hearts." (D&C 45:6.) He who hardens his heart by disobedience is in darkness. "The Lord Is My Light" sing his people, for Jesus is ". . . the light and the life of the world—a light that shineth in darkness and the darkness comprehendeth it not." (Ibid., 45:7.)

There follows in this revelation another reminder for the necessity of obedience—the Jewish people as a nation anciently did not receive their Messiah who was one of their own. This example from the past poses the thought:

. . . Let it not be said a second time, that Christ has come to "His own," even to His Church in this dispensation, but "His own" refused to hearken to Him. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 254.)

Obedience, A Challenge

In verses eleven through fourteen of Section 45, there is recounted an event of the past which the Lord says could be duplicated in this dispensation by the full obedience of his people.

Wherefore, hearken ye together and let me show unto you even my wisdom—the wisdom of him whom ye say is the God of Enoch, and his brethren,

Who were separated from the earth, and were received unto myself—a city reserved until a day of righteousness shall come—a day which was sought for by all holy men, and they found it not because of wickedness and abominations;

And confessed they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth;

But obtained a promise that they should find it and see it in their flesh. (D&C 45:11-14.)

Among the points which are brought to the reader's attention by these verses, we may think (1) verification from the Lord in this modern revelation of the historical fact that Enoch was an actual person mentioned in the Bible (Genesis 25:24); (2) the actual separation of the city of Enoch and its inhabitants from the earth; (3) the promise that the city of Enoch will return to the earth in a day of righteousness, the millennium. (In reference to Enoch's dispensation and the great events made known to him by revelation, consult Moses, chapter 7.)

The challenge to the Saints of God today is so to live that, if alive on the earth, when the millennium begins, they will as inhabitants of Zion, the New Jerusalem, be prepared to meet the people of Enoch's city when it returns to the earth. (Moses 7:62-65.) The Lord also promises that all those in the past who considered themselves to be "strangers," but were holy in their lives, seeking for a day of righteousness, might see that day "in their flesh," as resurrected beings to join with the saints of this dispensation. (Ibid., 7:62-65.) Will you be numbered among those Latter-day Saints who have lived faithfully to warrant such a blessing, whether you are in mortality at the time or whether you have passed away?

Purpose of the Everlasting Covenant

In speaking of the past and the reason for obedience to the fulness of the gospel, the Savior makes known the opportunity for people to become the sons of God and to receive power to obtain eternal life. (D&C 45:8.) For this purpose the everlasting covenant has been established on the earth with all of its powers and glories. (Ibid., 133:57.) This covenant is the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ. (Ibid., 66:2.)

The Lord informs us, however, of other purposes, in fact, that there are three other reasons for which he has sent the gospel into the world. These are: (1) "to be a light to the world," that is, to show the world the way to live; (2) "to be a standard for my people, and for the Gentiles to seek to it"—the gospel will always be the means of salvation to those who accept it, and it will be an ensign to the nations through the lives of the Saints. (Ibid., 115:5; Isaiah 49:22; 62:10); and (3) "to be messenger" in preparing the way before the second coming of Christ. (D&C 45:9.)

All of these purposes are important. When one thinks of the mission given to the Saints in publishing the glad tidings of eternal life through the gospel, and that all may participate in it to some extent, an enthusiasm for magnifying one's calling should be greatly heightened.

"I Will Reason With You"

In addition to showing forth strong reasons to those who come unto him (Ibid., 45:10), the Lord says he will prophesy as he gave forth prophecy to men in days of old. (Ibid., 45:15.) But of what shall he prophesy? Of those things which are in the minds of the Saints today and were in the meridian dispensation. His disciples during the Redeemer's earthly mission asked him what would be the signs of his coming in the clouds of heaven? In the verses which follow, from Section 45, notice that the Lord uses language in the present tense as though he were speaking directly to his disciples of old:

as I stood before them in the flesh, and spake unto them, saying: As ye have asked of me concerning the signs of my coming, in the day when I shall come in my glory in the clouds of heaven, to fulfill the promises that I have made unto your fathers,

For as ye have looked upon the long absence of your spirits from your bodies to be a bondage, I will show unto you how the day of redemption shall come, and also the restoration of the scattered Israel. (Ibid., 45:16-17.)

The Doctrine and Covenants Commentary interprets verse 17 as follows:

One reason for their anxiety to know the signs is here stated. The separation of the spirits from the bodies is, even to those who are Christ's own, a "bondage," which is ended only by a glorious resurrection, and they were interested in knowing by what signs they might recognize that their day of redemption was drawing near, when spirit and body should be united. The departed Saints are, we may be sure, looking for the signs of the coming of the Lord, with an intense interest as the Saints still in mortality. Jesus graciously showed them "how the day of redemption shall come, and also the restoration of scattered Israel." The two events are inseparably connected. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 259.)

Continuing his prophecy of events of the meridian dispensation, Jesus said to his disciples (Cf. Matt. 24:1-2; Luke 21:23-24):

And now ye behold this temple which is in Jerusalem, which ye call the house of God, and your enemies say that this house shall never fall.

But, verily I say unto you, that desolation shall come upon this generation as a thief in the night, and this people shall be destroyed and scattered among all nations.

And this temple which ye now see shall be thrown down that there shall not be left one stone upon another. (D&C 45:18-20.)

How literally was this prophecy fulfilled? A summary of the seige and destruction of the temple and the city of Jerusalem, including the scattering of the Jews, is given in the account of Josephus:

In the construction of this sanctuary many stones of prodigious size had been used. Josephus says some were 45 cubits long, 5 high, and 6 broad—something like 78x8x10 feet. How improbably it must have appeared that the time could ever come when one stone should not be left upon another (v. 20)! Yet, in the year 70 A.D., in the same month and on the same day that witnessed the destruction of the temple of Solomon, this temple was demolished. Roman soldiers, it is said, ploughed the ground on which it had stood.

As one continues reading Section 45, it is discovered that what the Lord declares therein is fulfilled in the description of the desolation given by Josephus, which came upon the Jews of the meridian dispensation:

And it shall come to pass, that this generation of Jews shall not pass away until every desolation which I have told you concerning them shall come to pass. (D&C 45:21.)

Following this prophecy, Jesus said to his disciples, according to this revelation, that they said they knew "that the end of the world cometh," meaning the destruction of the world (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith 1:4, 31) which would be at his second coming, and later on the purification of the earth. Then the assurance was given that their knowledge of these things was true, and all of the prophecies would be fulfilled.

And in this ye say truly, for so it is; but these things which I have told you shall not pass away until all shall be fulfilled.

And this I have told you concerning Jerusalem; and when that day shall come, shall a remnant be scattered among all nations. (D&C 45:23-24.)

As indicated, the material of this revelation, through verse 24, pertains to the generation or dispensation of the Meridian of Time, but later verses in this chapter (D&C 45:25-42.) describe events of the generation in which we live, the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. A parallel between what is given in this modern revelation and the account of the Savior's instructions to his disciples of the meridian dispensation is found in the Pearl of Great Price. (Joseph Smith 1:1-20, 21-35.) The latter verses concern our own dispensation.

Dispensation of the Fulness of Times

Even as the Jews were scattered with the destruction of Jerusalem, so their descendants were to be gathered in the last days. But when would those days come? Only after the long period of apostasy from the Church established by the Christ, and then the Church restored to the earth in the last dispensation of the gospel. This restoration is described in this way:

And when the times of the Gentiles is come in, a light shall break forth among them that sit in darkness, and it shall be the fulness of my gospel. (D&C 45:28.)

Signs of the Times

As foreknown by the prophets, the restoration of the gospel would bring many great changes on the earth. In this revelation the Lord points out:

. . . in that day shall be heard of wars and rumors of wars, and the whole earth shall be in commotion, and men's hearts shall fail them, and they shall say that Christ delayeth his coming until the end of the earth. (D&C 45:26.)

Needless to state, since the return of the gospel and the Church upon the earth, wars and rumors of wars have increased upon the earth.

"Christ delayeth his coming" is another sign of this period, for men teach that Christ will not come until the end of the earth. The Doctrine and Covenants Commentary mentions that:

. . . the common doctrine of the world is that Christ will not come, until a majority of the race is converted, the Jews gathered and anti-christ conquered, and then, it is taught, come the judgment and the destruction of the Earth. It is one of the signs of the end, that men shall teach that there will be no Millennium, no personal reign of Christ on Earth. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 262.)

As this revelation unfolds the future for the disciples of old (and now for us of this generation), several signs are given in rapid succession.

"And the love of men shall wax cold, and iniquity shall abound." (D&C 45:27.) As interpreted by the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 262, this means that because of lawlessness, the majority of men will not have genuine Christian love, which is true, unselfish, and constant. As a result, Christian unity or oneness is not to be found, but there is an abundance of cooperation based on self-interest or family connections.

When one thinks of present conditions in reference to the latter part of this verse—that iniquity or wickedness shall abound—there immediately comes to mind the extent of crime and evil practices that are present throughout the world.

Regardless of what may be said to the effect that lawlessness has always been present, the presence of organized and unorganized evil in the world in the form of sex immorality, dishonest practices in business, disrespect for human beings and life itself, are widespread today and thus they constitute one of the signs of the last days.

The coldness of men's hearts to the fulness of the gospel is another sign. With the restoration of the gospel to the earth through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord said that the world will ". . . receive it not; for they perceive not the light, and they turn their hearts from me because of the precepts of men." (D&C 45:29.) Although the number of converts to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is presently increasing in the world, yet, over the time of this dispensation, the number of members of the true Church is very few compared with the population of the world. As predicted, the people of the world will reject the gospel message and thus bring upon themselves the judgment prophesied. As people reject the Lord's plan of salvation and wickedness continues to abound, the time will come when our dispensation "shall see an overflowing scourge; for a desolating sickness shall cover the land." (Ibid., 45:31.) Other prophecies in the modern revelations reveal, in part, the nature and the extent of such plagues. (Ibid., 29:18-19.)

Amid the difficulties of the times when the foregoing events occur, the Lord makes known that his ". . . disciples shall stand in holy places, and shall not be moved; but among the wicked, men shall lift up their voices and curse God and die." (Ibid., 45:32.) The disciple is one who is a true follower, and as far as this revelation is concerned, is that individual who has accepted Jesus Christ and has thus become a member of his Church. These disciples will stand in the places appointed by revelation as gathering places. (Ibid., 101:16-21.)

Other signs indicating the nearness of the Lord's coming are desolations of various kinds. Amid conditions such as floods, dust storms, hurricanes, and other commotions, in which the elements give testimony of the rejection of the Lord's servants, men will continue to harden their hearts and will kill one another and curse God and die.

And there shall be earthquakes also in divers places, and many desolations; yet men will harden their hearts against me, and they will take up the sword, one against another, and they will kill one another. (Ibid., 45:33.)

When disciples of old indicated concern about these various signs, assurance was given that ". . . when all these things shall come to pass, ye may know that the promises which have been made unto you shall be fulfilled." (Ibid., 45:35.) By reference to the fig tree shooting forth its leaves as a sign of summer being at hand, so also these various events (Ibid., 45:16-33) constitute signs by which the believer will "know that the hour is nigh." (Ibid., 45:36-38.) What is the hour spoken of? It is the period when the times of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled.

"Times of the Gentiles Shall Be Fulfilled"

By vision, Nephi was permitted to see the time when Jesus would manifest himself to the Jews first, and then the Gentiles would have the opportunity to accept the fulness of the gospel. Later, however, the Gentiles would have this privilege first and the Jews last. (1 Nephi 13:28-30.) Thus the first should be last and the last should be first. (Cf. Luke 13:28-30.) As we have seen in this lesson, the "times of the Gentiles" are ushered in with the restoration of the gospel in its fulness. (D&C 45:28-29.) Moroni told Joseph Smith that this time "was soon to come in." (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith 2:41.) Later in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, when Jerusalem is no longer trodden down by the Gentiles, it is to be a sign that the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled. (D&C 45:25, 30; Luke 21:24.) This sign is to indicate the beginning of the period of transition when the Jews are to receive their opportunity to have the gospel taught to them.

Purpose of the Signs of the Times and a Prophet's Answer

President Joseph F. Smith, sixth President of the Church, had this to say concerning the purposes of these signs of the times:

There are, in the great world of mankind, much social and civil unrighteousness, religious unfaithfulness, and great insensibility to the majesty, power, and purpose of our eternal Father and God. In order, therefore, that he may bring the sense of himself and his purposes home to the minds of men, his intervention and interposition in nature and in men's affairs, are demanded. His aims will be accomplished even if men must be overwhelmed with the convulsions of nature to bring them to an understanding and realization of his designs. As long as conditions remain as they are in the world, none is exempt from these visitations.

The Latter-day Saints, though they themselves tremble because of their own wickedness and sins, believe that great judgments are coming upon the world because of iniquity; they firmly believe in the statements of the Holy Scriptures, that calamities will befall the nations as signs of the coming of Christ to judgment. They believe that God rules in the fire, the earthquake, the tidal wave, the volcanic eruption, and the storm. Him they recognize as the Master and Ruler of nature and her laws, and freely acknowledge his hand in all things. We believe that his judgments are poured out to bring mankind to a sense of his power and his purposes, that they may repent of their sins and prepare themselves for the second coming of Christ to reign in righteousness upon the earth. (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 54-55.)

What about the Latter-day Saints and the predicted judgments? President Smith wrote:

We firmly believe that Zion—which is the pure in heart—shall escape, if she observes to do all things whatsoever God has commanded; but, in the opposite event, even Zion shall be visited "with sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, and with devouring fire." (D&C 97:26.) All this that her people may be taught to walk in the light of truth and in the way of the God of their salvation. (Ibid., p. 55.)

Following this instruction, President Smith continues to state the belief of Latter-day Saints concerning the judgment:

We believe that these severe, natural calamities are visited upon men by the Lord for the good of his children, to quicken their devotion to others, and to bring out their better natures, that they may love and serve him. We believe, further, that they are the heralds and tokens of his final judgment, and the schoolmasters to teach the people to prepare themselves by righteous living for the coming of the Savior to reign upon the earth, when every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ. (Ibid., p. 55.)

In the original article from which this material was taken, President Smith wrote that:

. . . judgment is not an end in itself. Calamities are only permitted by a merciful Father, in order to bring about redemption. Behind the fearful storms of judgment, which often strike the just and the unjust alike, overwhelming the wicked and the righteous, there arises bright and clear the dawn of the day of salvation. (Improvement Era, "The Lesson in Natural Calamities," Vol. 9, p. 651.)

The President stated, furthermore, that judgments occur that the finger of God's power is manifest to call attention to:

. . . the transgressions of all mankind, that all may take warning and repent. Men who stand in the way of God's wise purposes, whether they be good or evil, must suffer in the turmoil. Thus it is that often the righteous suffer for the unrighteous; and it is not satisfactory to the thinking mind to say that therefore God is unjust: "His visage was so marred, more than any man, and his form more than the sons of men." And if, in the wisdom of God, it was so that he who is without sin should suffer for the sins of the world, why should not imperfect man, though less sinful than his neighbor, suffer with the wicked. (Ibid., Vol. 9, p. 654.)

Although these calamities happen, Latter-day Saints:

. . . believe in doing all in our power to relieve distress, to aid the afflicted. and to extend to all mankind the brotherly kindness and sympathy which we ourselves crave from our fellow beings and from God. (Ibid., Vol. 9, p. 654.)
