Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 31

The Second Coming of Christ

(Sections 43:8-35; 45:43-75)

Our attention is directed in this chapter to the need of becoming more fully acquainted with what the revelations of the Lord say regarding the times in which we live; and also of events which are prophesied to occur near the time of the Savior's return to the earth and of his appearance.

Section 43

In Chapter 18 the first seven verses of Section 43 of The Doctrine and Covenants were discussed as setting forth the important principle that there is only one man on the earth at a time who has the right by ordination and calling to receive revelation for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In exercising this right, the President of the Church not only directs his message to the Saints but to the world, if necessary. Joseph Smith was the mouthpiece of the Lord in the opening of this dispensation of the gospel. (D&C 21:4-6.) The Lord introduced his volume of scripture, The Doctrine and Covenants, by stating that his message was to go to all the world as "the voice of warning" unto all people. His servants were to proclaim this message and, in time, all would hear that message. (Ibid., 1:1-7.) In preparation for preaching the gospel, the Lord gave pertinent advice to elders or to the members of the Church. They were instructed:

. . . when ye are assembled together ye shall instruct and edify each other, that ye may know how to act and direct my church, how to act upon the points of my law and commandments, which I have given. (Ibid., 43:8.)

By giving words of edification arising out of their understanding of the gospel, the elders were to become "sanctified by that which ye have received, and ye shall bind yourselves to act in all holiness before me." (Ibid., 43:9.) As the result of being so instructed in meetings, and making of the commandments a part of daily living ". . .glory shall be added to the kingdom [Church] which ye have received . . ." but negligence in these matters would result in a loss of the blessings which it was the right of the faithful to obtain. The Lord continued:

Purge ye out the iniquity which is among you; sanctify yourselves before me;

And if ye desire the glories of the kingdom, appoint ye my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and uphold him before me by the prayer of faith. (Ibid., 43:11-12.)

Joseph Smith Prophesies

The Saints have always been admonished to uphold the prophet of the Lord for therein lies safety. How closely do we follow the revelations which have come through the Prophet Joseph Smith? For example, do we, as Latter-day Saints, uphold him in what he has given us? Here are some of his prophecies:

I will prophesy that the signs of the coming of the Son of Man are already commenced. One pestilence will desolate after another. We shall soon have war and bloodshed. The moon will be turned into blood. I testify of these things, and that the coming of the Son of Man is nigh, even at your doors. If our souls and our bodies are not looking forth for the coming of the Son of Man; and after we are dead, if we are not looking forth, we shall be among those who are calling for the rocks to fall upon them. (DHC III:390.)

The coming of the Son of Man never will be—never can be till the judgments spoken of for this hour are poured out: which judgments are commenced. (DHC V:336.)

The hour spoken of in the last prophecy was predicted by John the Revelator as "the hour of his [God's] judgment. . . ." (Rev. 14:7.)

"Give as I Have Spoken"

As the Lord continued to instruct the elders who would study and take the message of the dispensation to the world in preparation for the Lord's coming, he charged them that they were sent forth to teach the children of men and not to be taught. He had given them information of things to come—of "judgments which are on the land" (D&C 88:79)—and by the power of his Spirit they were to teach. Since their instructions came from the Giver of truth, who knows all things, they were to sanctify themselves and "ye shall be endowed with power, that ye may give even as I have spoken." (Ibid., 43:15-16.)

But what has the Lord spoken? What has he given which is to be carried by the elders?

Hearken ye, for, behold, the great day of the Lord is nigh at hand.

For the day cometh that the Lord shall utter his voice out of heaven; the heavens shall shake and the earth shall tremble, and the trump of God shall sound both long and loud, and shall say to the sleeping nations: Ye saints arise and live; ye sinners stay and sleep until I shall call again. (Ibid., 43:17-18.)

In continuing his message, the Lord emphasized the need for missionary work to be done among the nations that all who would respond to his call might repent. The missionaries were to accept the call to service lest they be found among those who were negligent in their responsibilities. (Ibid., 43:19-20.) In fact, this dispensation is the last time when the Lord's servants are to call upon the inhabitants of the earth. (Ibid., 43:28.) As one reads this revelation, he discovers that the people of the Lord are to make preparations for the great day of the Lord. (Ibid., 43:20-22.)

The great day of the Lord is the day when the Lord comes to reign upon the earth. Joseph Smith was informed in many revelations that this was the message of the Lord for this dispensation.

When the inhabitants of the earth do not accept the call of the missionaries to repent, the Lord will, as this revelation points out, answer his own question—"What will ye say when the day cometh when the thunders shall utter their voices from the ends of the earth?"—by saying:

How oft have I called upon you by the mouth of my servants, and by the ministering of angels, and by mine own voice, and by the voice of thunderings . . . lightnings . . . tempests . . . earthquakes, and great hailstorms, and by the voice of famines and pestilences of every kind . . . and by the voice of glory and honor and the riches of eternal life, and would have saved you with an everlasting salvation, but ye would not. (Ibid., 43:25.)

The Lord's Message Literal or Figurative?

The Lord's message is to be taken literally:

It is predicted that calamity and destruction await the inhabitants of the earth if they continue to reject the Gospel and fill the cup of their iniquity. This punishment will come when "the wrath of God shall be poured out upon the wicked without measure." (Ibid., 1:9.) It will come after the elders of Israel have declared their message to all the world. Then will come the testimony of wrath and indignation; the testimony of earthquakes, the voice of thunders and lightnings and tempests and the waves heaving themselves beyond their bounds. (Ibid., 88:88-91.) (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 246.)

The Lord Shall Utter His Voice

When the judgments of the Lord come as warnings, how will he speak?

If we understand this prophecy [Section 43:23], correctly, it means that after the warning voices of the thunders and lightnings and world wars, God will again speak to the children of men. In other words, the gospel sound will be heard. The Lord will explain to men, through His servants, why the calamities have come, viz., to cause men to repent and be saved. (v. 24-27.) (Ibid., p. 247.)

Section 45—Review and Prelude

The purpose of Chapter 30 was to give the reader an insight into some of the signs of the times as those events were foreseen by the Master and told to his disciples in the Meridian of Time, and then to relate the events of our own dispensation. (D&C 45:1-42.) From Section 45, beginning with verses 15 through 24, Jesus told his disciples of events to be expected during their own dispensation or generation. From verses 25 through 38 the Lord gave his disciples some signs by which they might know that in the final dispensation of the gospel the "times of the Gentiles" were about to be finished.

Should Latter-day Saints look forward to these signs of the times? Hear the word of the Lord:

And it shall come to pass that he that feareth me shall be looking forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the coming of the Son of Man. (Ibid., 45:39.)

This prophecy would suggest that as the Lord's coming nears, there will be some devout souls who will be impressed with the doctrine of the second coming and the millennium, but, in general, the people of the world will not give heed to these biblical teachings. These devout people:

. . . shall see signs and wonders, for they shall be shown forth in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath.

And they shall behold blood, and fire, and vapors of smoke. (Ibid., 45:40-41.)

Sign of the Son of Man

Among these signs to precede the Lord's coming, is one event which was mentioned by Jesus to his disciples in the Meridian of Time (Matt. 24:30; Luke 21:25-27), and spoken of again in this dispensation as "a great sign in heaven, and all people shall see it together." (D&C 88:93.) What is this sign? Because all people shall see it, does it follow that it will be recognized by the world as a sign indicating that the Lord's coming is near, or will it be explained as another natural phenomenon? In February 1843, the Prophet Joseph Smith reported that a Mr. Redding had claimed he saw the sign of the Son of Man. The Prophet wrote concerning this claim:

He has not seen the sign of the Son of Man as foretold by Jesus; neither has any man, nor will any man, until after the sun shall have been darkened and the moon bathed in blood: for the Lord hath not shown me any such sign; and as the prophet saith, so it must be—"Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (See Amos 3:7.) (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 280.)

Inasmuch as wickedness and unbelief will, in general, reign on the earth near the Lord's coming, the world will not accept this great sign for what it is. Among faithful Latter-day Saints, however, who are looking forward to these signs and to the leadership of the Church for guidance in such matters, they shall know what the sign is and of its meaning.

Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, and water come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed. It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the city and the temple, &c.; and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make His appearance. There will be wars and rumors of wars, signs in the heavens above and on the earth beneath, the sun turned into darkness and the moon to blood, earthquakes in divers places, the seas heaving beyond their bounds; then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven. But what will the world do? They will say it is a planet, a comet, &c. But the Son of Man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east. (DHC V:337.)

A Bow in the Heavens? (Not One but Many Signs)

It is well to keep in mind that there is no one sign or event which signalizes the nearness of the Lord's second coming. Included among these signs are those which are referred to about the sun, moon, and the stars. (D&C 45:42.) But there is one sign referred to by the Prophet which, by the absence of a natural phenomenon, has considerable importance. Here are the words of the Prophet:

I have asked of the Lord concerning His coming; and while asking the Lord, He gave a sign and said, "In the days of Noah I set a bow in the heavens as a sign and token that in any year that the bow should be seen the Lord would not come; but there should be seed time and harvest during that year; but whenever you see the bow withdrawn, it shall be a token that there shall be famine, pestilence, and great distress among the nations, and that the coming of the Messiah is not far distant." (DHC V:254.)

First Appearance—to the Saints

The Lord's first appearance as part of the second coming will be to his Saints. Of such an appearance the Old Testament prophet spoke when he referred to the Lord's suddenly coming to his temple in the day when it could be appropriately asked: "But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap. " (Mal. 3:2.) Moroni quoted part of this chapter to Joseph Smith when he visited him in 1823. (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith 2:36.)

It may be concluded that this appearance to the Saints may not be generally known, except as the world is informed of it by the Saints. As partial fulfillment of this prophecy was the appearance of the Savior in the Kirtland Temple in 1836. (D&C 110:1-4.) That the complete fulfillment has reference to the temple in the New Jerusalem, yet to be erected in Jackson County, Missouri, is indicated by reason of the offering to be made by the sons of Levi. (Mal. 3:3; D&C 84:21-34; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 171-173.) President Brigham Young said that:

When Jesus makes his next appearance upon the earth, but few of this Church and kingdom will be prepared to receive him and see him face to face and converse with him; but he will come to his temple. (Journal of Discourses 7:142.)

In the General Conference of April 1898, President Wilford Woodruff told of his first meeting the Prophet Joseph Smith and of the Priesthood assemblage of 1833 when the Prophet prophesied that the Saints would be settled in the Rocky Mountains.

. . . When they [the brethren present] got through the Prophet said, "Brethren I have been very much edified and instructed in your testimonies here tonight, but I want to say to you before the Lord, that you know no more concerning the destinies of this Church and kingdom than a babe upon its mother's lap. You don't comprehend it." I was rather surprised. He said "it is only a little handful [sic] of Priesthood you see here tonight, but this Church will fill North and South America—it will fill the world." Among other things he said, "It will fill the Rocky Mountains. There will be tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints who will be gathered in the Rocky Mountains, and there they will open the door for the establishing of the Gospel among the Lamanites, who will receive the Gospel and their endowments and the blessings of God. This people will go into the Rocky Mountains; they will there build temples to the Most High. They will raise up a posterity there, and the Latter-day Saints who dwell in these mountains will stand in the flesh until the coming of the Son of Man. The Son of Man will come to them while in the Rocky Mountains."

I name these things because I want to bear testimony before God, angels and men that mine eyes behold the day, and have beheld for the last fifty years of my life, the fulfillment of that prophecy. . . . (Conference Report, April 1898, p. 57.) (Italics by author.)

Some of the Saints by appointment will attend the great council at Adam-ondi-Ahman spoken of by the Prophet Joseph Smith. At that time Adam will deliver up his stewardship to Christ preparatory to the "coming of the Son of Man" in glory.

Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our Father Adam, Michael, he will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all man, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council. This may take place before some of us leave this stage of action. The Son of Man stands before him, and there is given him glory and dominion. Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ, that which was delivered to him as holding the keys of the universe, but retains his standing as head of the human family. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 157.)

Another Appearance—to the Jews

Another great appearance of the Master will be at a time when the Jews are gathered to the Holy Land. When this happens the nations will be at war with the Jews, who since 1948 have had their own government in Israel (Palestine), to which the Jews are now gathering. The Prophet declares that when sorely besieged and part of Jerusalem is taken (Zechariah 14:1-2), two prophets or witnesses "raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days" will be killed and their dead bodies shall lie in the streets three days and a half. Life will re-enter their bodies, which will ascend into heaven. A great earthquake will cause the Mount of Olives to divide and the earth will tremble. (Rev. 11:1-13; D&C 77:15.) The Lord will then fight their battle. (Zechariah 14:3-9.) As the text of this chapter states:

And then shall the Jews look upon me and say: What are these wounds in thine hands and in thy feet?

Then shall they know that I am the Lord; for I will say unto them: These wounds are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. I am he who was lifted up. I am Jesus that was crucified. I am the Son of God.

And then shall they weep because of their iniquities; then shall they lament because they persecuted their king. (D&C 45:51-53; See also, Zechariah 13:6; 12:8-14; 13:1.)

And thus Judah shall be redeemed by acceptance of their Savior Jesus Christ. In order for salvation to be received by any people it will be through baptism by immersion for the remission of sins and the bestowal of the Holy Ghost.

Third Appearance—in Power to the World

There follows the great and glorious coming of Jesus Christ, who subdues all enemies under his feet, "and the Lord shall be king over all the earth." This is the coming for which the righteous have prayed, that wickedness might be removed from the earth. His coming in power is described in the modern revelations as "an entire separation of the righteous and the wicked" with the wicked being consumed. (D&C 63:54; 101:23-24; 133:63-64.) This chapter reveals that the nations of the earth will be afraid:

For when the Lord shall appear he shall be terrible unto them, that fear may seize upon them, and they shall stand afar off and tremble.

And all nations shall be afraid because of the terror of the Lord, and the power of his might. Even so. Amen. (Ibid., 45:74-75.)

Notice the sublime language used by President Charles W. Penrose in describing this last coming of the Christ:

. . . who can describe it in the language of mortals? The tongue of man falters, and the pen drops from the hand of the writer, as the mind is rapt in contemplation of the sublime and awful majesty of his coming to take vengeance on the ungodly and to reign as King of the whole earth.

He comes! The earth shakes, and the tall mountains tremble; the mighty deep rolls back to the north as in fear, and the rent skies glow like molten brass. He comes! The dead saints burst forth from their tombs, and "those who are alive and remain" are "caught up" with them to meet him. The ungodly rush to hide themselves from his presence, and call upon the quivering rocks to cover them. He comes! with all the hosts of the righteous glorified. The breath of his lips strikes death to the wicked. His glory is a consuming fire. The proud and rebellious are as stubble; they are burned and "left neither root nor branch." He sweeps the earth "as with the besom of destruction." He deluges the earth with the fiery floods of his wrath, and the filthiness and abominations of the world are consumed. Satan and his dark hosts are taken and bound—the prince of the power of the air has lost his dominion, for He whose right it is to reign has come, and "the kingdoms of this world have become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ." (Millennial Star, Vol. 21, page 583, September 10, 1859.)

The New Jerusalem

One of the best descriptions of the center place of Zion in the last days when the judgments of the Lord are poured out upon the wicked is found in our text:

And it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God;

And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion.

And it shall come to pass among the wicked, that every man that will not take his sword against his neighbor must needs flee unto Zion for safety.

And there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one with another.

And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand.

And it shall come to pass that the righteous shall be gathered out from among all nations, and shall come to Zion, singing with songs of everlasting joy. (D&C 45:66-71.)

The Lord has set forth in ancient and modern times that there would be two gathering places in the last days—Palestine (Israel) and America. (Micah 4:1-2; D&C 133:12-13.)

Other Events

When the Savior comes, as indicated, a general resurrection will occur, the heathen nations shall be redeemed, and Satan is to be bound as a part of the great millennial reign of Christ. (Ibid., 45:54; 43:29-35.)

Be Prepared

During his mortal ministry, the Lord spoke concerning the preparedness of believers in the last days. The parable of the ten virgins, five of whom were prepared to meet the bridegroom while the remaining five were unprepared and rejected from entrance to the marriage feast, is closed with this application: ". . . verily I say unto you, I know you not. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of Man cometh. (Matt., 25:12-13.)

Does this parable apply to the Latter-day Saints? Definitely so. Hear the words of the Lord to the Prophet Joseph Smith:

And at that day, when I shall come in my glory, shall the parable be fulfilled which I spake concerning the ten virgins.

For they that are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived—verily I say unto you, they shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day.

And the earth shall be given unto them for an inheritance; and they shall multiply and wax strong, and their children shall grow up without sin unto salvation.

For the Lord shall be in their midst, and his glory shall be upon them, and he will be their king and their lawgiver. (D&C 45:56-59.)

No one else upon the face of the earth meets the description given in these verses better than do the Latter-day Saints, for "—they have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived. . . ." (Ibid., 45:57.)
