Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 32

The Gifts of the Holy Ghost

(Section 46)

The revelation for study in this chapter was received in the spring of 1831, the day following Section 45, which was received to sustain the members of the Church as a result of many foolish stories which were circulated about them. Section 46 was given by the Lord to correct some false ideas which were entertained by members of the Church. At this period, according to the Church Historian, John Whitmer, there were some of our number who believed that nonmembers should not be admitted to the Sacrament meeting. Some members felt this practice was contrary to the instructions of the resurrected Lord to the Nephites as stated in the Book of Mormon:

And behold, ye shall meet together oft; and ye shall not forbid any man from coming unto you when ye shall meet together, but suffer them that they may come unto you and forbid them not; but ye shall pray for them, and shall not cast them out; and if it so be that they come unto you oft ye shall pray for them unto the Father, in my name. (3 Nephi 18:22, 23.)

In the first seven verses of Section 46 the Lord gives sufficient information to the Church in this dispensation to clarify this problem, and also gives the Lord's will about the meetings of the Church. First, for the profit and learning of the Elders they are "to conduct all meetings as they are directed and guided by the Holy Spirit." (D&C 46:2.) Then follows the commandment about which there was some disputation, "Nevertheless ye are commanded never to cast any one out from your public meetings, which are held before the world." (Ibid., v. 3.) In further clarification of this instruction, the Sacrament meeting is indicated as a public meeting:

And again I say unto you, ye shall not cast any out of your sacrament meetings who are earnestly seeking the kingdom: I speak this concerning those who are not of the Church. (Ibid., v. 5.)

This same commandment is given regarding the "confirmation meetings." (Ibid., v. 6.) This meeting is our fast meeting when the Holy Ghost is conferred upon the newly baptized person. There are meetings of the Church which are to be considered as private because they are special meetings to which only certain members of the Church are invited to attend, such as auxiliary prayer or officers' and teachers' meetings.

There are in this revelation instructions regarding the member of the Church and the Sacrament meeting. Church members are welcome to this meeting, but they are counseled to make reconciliation with their fellow man against whom they have sinned before they partake of the Sacrament. (Ibid., v. 4.)

"Walking uprightly before me"

One of the most important items of counsel given by the Lord appears in this revelation. It is as follows:

But ye are commanded in all things to ask of God, who giveth liberally; and that which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do in all holiness of heart, walking uprightly before me, considering the end of your salvation, doing all things with prayer and thanksgiving, that ye may not be seduced by evil spirits, or doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men; for some are of men, and others of devils. (Ibid., 46:7.)

What is there in this scripture which makes it of such great importance? Notice the several principles that are basic to the obtaining of eternal life: (a) Pray to him who giveth liberally; (b) Obtain the Spirit and accept its promptings in humility: (c) Walk uprightly before the Lord—keep the commandments; (d) Always remember that the purpose of existence is to "work out your salvation"; (e) In the spirit of prayer be grateful for blessings received. What is the promised blessing for those who practice this counsel? They shall neither be deceived by the ideas of men nor by the doctrines of devils.

Importance of Obtaining the Spirit

Learning the necessity of receiving the Spirit is of great importance to the members of the Church. The operation of the Holy Ghost in the lives of the prophets during the Old Testament period, as well as the time of the apostles of Jesus, is generally known to the membership of the Church in this dispensation. Directed by that same Spirit the leaders of the Church have counseled the Church membership throughout this dispensation, of the need to have the Holy Ghost. It is informative to know that this counsel has not only been given by the living revelators, but also by some of these brethren when they have passed beyond this life. This fact gives further strength to the place of the Spirit in guiding and assisting one on the way to eternal life. President Wilford Woodruff is on record as saying that, "One morning while we were at Winter Quarters, Brother Brigham Young said to me and the brethren that he had a visitation the night previously from Joseph Smith. I asked him what he said to him. He replied that Joseph had told him to tell the people to labor to obtain the Spirit of God; that they needed that to sustain them and to give them power to go through their work on the earth." In this same sermon, President Woodruff said that while en route to his last mission in England, Joseph Smith visited him and gave him similar instructions. In continuing his discourse on the importance of having the Spirit, President Woodruff said: "Brigham Young also visited me after his death . . . He said, 'I want you to teach the people to get the Spirit of God. You cannot build up the Kingdom of God without that.' That is what I want to say to the brothers and sisters here today." (The Deseret Weekly, Vol. 53, No. 21, Nov. 7, 1896, p. 643.)

Joseph Smith and Martin VanBuren

On November 29, 1839, the Prophet Joseph Smith and Elias Higbee in seeking redress for crimes committed against the Saints in Missouri, visited President VanBuren in Washington, D.C., as a part of this mission. In that interview, the president of the United States asked the Prophet wherein the Latter-day Saints differed from other religions of that day. His reply was that, "We differed in the mode of baptism and the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands." (DHC 4:42.)

What did the Prophet mean by this statement? It is apparent from his teachings given upon other occasions that the possession of the gift of the Holy Ghost is received only by those who submit to water baptism and the laying of hands by one who is authorized of the Lord to officiate for him. As this chapter continues, this principle is in evidence, but here is a positive statement which establishes the principle as given by Joseph Smith:

The sign of Peter was to repent and be baptised for the remission of sins, with the promise of the gift of the Holy Ghost; and in no other way is the gift of the Holy Ghost obtained. (DHC 4:555.)

Baptism is a holy ordinance preparatory to the reception of the Holy Ghost; it is the channel and key by which the Holy Ghost will be administered. The gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, cannot be received through the medium of any other principle than the principle of righteousnese, for if the proposals are not complied with, it is of no use, but withdraws. (Ibid., 3:379.)

It was a characteristic of the Church of Jesus Christ in the Meridian of Time that the gift of the Holy Ghost was received only by the convert to the true Church. (Acts 2:37-38; 8:12-23; 19:1-7). But what about the gifts of the Holy Ghost? Are these gifts, as enumerated in the scriptures, received by the worthy member of that Church? The answer is yes. The loss of the spiritual gifts following the death of the apostles is an evidence of the great apostasy. The absence of these spiritual gifts is admitted by many authorities on ecclesiastical history. The testimony of John Wesley, founder of Methodism, as quoted by Elder James E. Talmage in The Articles of Faith (p. 495), is a good example:

"It does not appear that these extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit were common in the church for more than two or three centuries. We seldom hear of them after that fatal period when the emperor Constantine called himself a Christian, and from a vain imagination of promoting the Christian cause, thereby, heaped riches and power and honor upon Christians in general, but in particular upon the Christian clergy. From this time they almost totally ceased; very few instances of the kind were found. The cause of this was not as has been supposed because there was no more occasion for them—because all the world was become Christians. This is a miserable mistake; not a twentieth part of it was then nominally Christian. The real cause of it was the love of many, almost all Christians, so called was waxed cold. The Christians had no more of the Spirit of Christ than the other heathens. The Son of Man, when he came to examine His Church, could hardly find faith upon the earth. This was the real cause why the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost were no longer to be found in the Christian Church—because the Christians were turned heathens again, and only had a dead form left."—Wesley's Works, vol. 7, 89:26, 27.

Purpose of the Gifts

For what purpose does the Lord bestow his gifts upon his true followers? Because in the world there are influences that are contrary to the plan of life and salvation. As the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary points out:

Note that some false doctrines come from men, while others are originated by the devil. The former may depend on human imperfection of perception or deductions. We do not always understand the Word of God correctly, and we are apt to draw hasty conclusions, and if we teach these for doctrine, we err. The latter are inspired by the adversary to deceive men. (p. 272.)

How will the gifts of the Spirit help one on the road to perfection?

Wherefore, beware lest ye are deceived; and that ye may not be deceived seek ye earnestly the best gifts, always remembering for what they are given; For verily I say unto you, they are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments, and him that seeketh so to do; that all may be benefited that seek or that ask of me, that ask and not for a sign that they may consume it upon their lusts. (D&C 46:8-9. Italics by author.)

The words in italics give definite information upon the question just posed. Notice that the gifts are a part of the gospel of Jesus Christ that they might be of benefit to those who love the Lord and thus keep all of his commandments. But who are these? They are the members of his Church, for they have complied with the ordinances of baptism and the laying on of hands to receive the Holy Ghost. But the member of the Church may not be keeping all of the commandments, so, what of him? The revelation states, "and him that seeketh so to do." The Lord does not condone sin, but that member of the kingdom who will earnestly strive to overcome the barriers to his salvation by sincerely endeavoring to perfect himself through the principle of repentance will receive the help necessary to aid him. (Ibid., 1:31-33.) On the purpose of the gifts of the Spirit President Joseph F. Smith once said: "The gifts of the Spirit and the powers of the Holy Priesthood are of God, they are given for the blessing of the people, for their encouragement, and for the strengthening of their faith. This Satan knows full well, therefore he seeks by imitation-miracles to blind and deceive the children of God." (Gospel Doctrine, p. 376.)

The Gifts of the Holy Ghost

What are these gifts of the Holy Ghost which are imparted to the members of the Church? In the Meridian of Time Paul provided a list of these gifts for the Saints at Corinth. (1 Cor. 12:1-11.) In his discussion, the apostle emphasizes the need for these gifts to remain in the Church in order that the members might be unified as a body of baptized believers. The place of these gifts with the authorized priesthood to continue the work of perfecting the lives of the members is thus indicated: "And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues . . . Have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret? But covet earnestly the best gifts. . . ." (Ibid., 12:28-31.)

In closing the Nephite record by admonishing the people of our dispensation that they might know of the truth of this book of scripture and also know, by the power of the Holy Ghost, that Christ lives, Moroni also indicated some of these gifts of the Spirit. (Moroni 10:1-19.)

The Saints of today are counseled to "always remember, and always retain in your (their) minds what those gifts are, that are given unto the church." (D&C 46:10.) These gifts, however, are not given promiscuously but "all have not every gift given unto them; for there are many gifts, and to every man is given a gift by the Spirit of God." (Ibid., v. 11.)

A summary of the gifts revealed in this revelation is provided in the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, as follows: "(1) knowledge; (2) faith; (3) administration; (4) recognition of the operations of the Spirit; (5) wisdom; (6) gift to instruct; (7) faith to be healed; (8) faith to heal; (9) power to work other miracles; (10) gift of prophecy; (11) gift to discern spirits; (12) gift of tongues; (13) gift of interpretation; (14) gift to discern all these gifts." (P. 274.)

Explanation of the Gifts

Gift: To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world. (v. 13.)

Explanation: This knowledge is placed first among the special gifts because it is obtained only by revelation. To believe that Jesus of Nazareth was the Anointed One, the Messiah, and that He was crucified for the sins of the world, is not to know it. Knowledge is a special gift. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 274.)

Gift: To others it is given to believe on their words, that they also might have eternal life if they continue faithful. (v. 14.)

Explanation: That faith which enables us to realize divine things and obtain life eternal is another special gift. But it is one which God is willing to bestow upon His children. (Ibid.)

Gift: And again, to some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know the difference of administration, as it will be pleasing unto the same Lord, according as the Lord's will, suiting his mercies according to the conditions of the children of men. (v. 15.)

Explanation: This is another special gift. The term, as used by Paul (I Cor. 12:5) means the different divisions of courses of the priests and Levites engaged in the temple service, and in this Revelation it may refer to the different duties and responsibilities of the Priesthood in its two divisions, the Melchizedek and Aaronic. To know this is a gift of the Spirit. (Ibid.)

Gift: And again, it is given by the Holy Ghost to some to know the diversities of operations, whether they be of God, that the manifestations of the Spirit may be given to every man to profit withal. (v. 16.)

Explanation: This refers to various spiritual influences at work, for instance such as are manifested in Spiritism, anarchism, and the numerous other "isms." To know whether an influence with a professedly moral, or reformatory aim is from the Holy Spirit, or from another source, is a special gift. (Ibid.)

Gift: And again, verily I say unto you, to some is given, by the Spirit of God, the word of wisdom. (v. 17.)

Explanation: This means a discourse or a testimony characterized by and productive of wisdom. Wisdom, according to Philo, was the highest of the divine attributes, and human wisdom is a reflection of the divine. (Ibid.)

Gift: To another is given the work of knowledge, that all may be taught to be wise and to have knowledge. (v. 18.)

Explanation: Refers to the gift to instruct others. There is a difference between wisdom, knowledge, and ability to instruct. According to Coleridge, "common sense in an uncommon degree" is what men call wisdom. It is almost a direct operation of intuition. Knowledge is a carefully-stored-up supply of facts, generally slowly acquired. The ability to instruct is the gift to impart of this supply to others. Each is a gift of God. (Ibid.)

Gift: And again, to some it is given to have faith to be healed. (v. 19.)

Explanation: This is a gift of the Spirit, and it should be earnestly sought for, because our Lord is willing both to forgive sins, if we repent of them, and to heal all diseases (Psalm 103:3), as long as the appointment to death has not been made. (Ibid.)

Gift: And to others it is given to have faith to heal. (v. 20.)

Explanation: This is also a gift. (Ibid.)

Gift: And again, to some is given the working of miracles. (v. 21.)

Explanation: A special divine power is needed for the working of miracles. The Prophet Joseph had this power in a very high degree. It was one of the evidences that he had the authority of the holy Priesthood. One of the numerous miracles God performed through him was the healing of one Mrs. Johnson, who, in company with others, visited his home in Kirtland, 1831. She had, for some time, been afflicted with a lame arm. She could not raise it to her head. The conversation turned on supernatural power, and someone in the company asked if there was anybody on Earth that could heal Mrs. Johnson for instance. The Prophet arose, walked over to Mrs. Johnson, took her by the hand and said, "Woman, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, I command thee to be whole," whereupon he left the room. Mrs. Johnson at once lifted up her arm, and the next day was able to do her washing. (History of the Church, Vol. I., p. 215. Ibid., p. 275.)

Gift: And to others it is given to prophesy. (v. 22.)

Explanation: That is, to speak in the name of the Lord, whether of things present, past, or future. This is a special gift. The Prophet Joseph had it in the highest degree. Heber C. Kimball also had the gift highly developed. At times he could see into the future as if it were an open book. During the time of famine in Salt Lake Valley in 1847, when many subsisted on roots and hides of animals, and knew not where to obtain bread or clothing necessary, owing to the devastation by crickets, President Kimball declared in a public meeting that, within a short time, "state goods" would be sold in the streets of Salt Lake City cheaper than in New York, and that the people should be abundantly supplied with food and clothing. Many who heard him refused to believe. He himself said he was afraid he had missed it. But the prophecy came true. Very soon the California gold-hunters came through the Valley. Salt Lake City became their resting-place, and they were glad to exchange their goods for whatever they could get. Many of them threw goods away, or sold them for a song, in order to lighten their wagons and be able to make better progress. (Whitney's Life of Heber C. Kimball, p. 401-2. Ibid.)

Gift: And to others the discerning of spirits. (v. 23.)

Explanation: What this means may be illustrated by relating a remarkable experience which the Prophet records. On the 9th of November, 1835, a man came to his home and introduced himself as a Jewish minister whose name was Joshua. The Prophet entertained him hospitably, as he always did both strangers and friends who visited him. One day Mr. Joshua said that he was a lineal descendant of Matthias, and a re-incarnation of this Apostle. The Prophet writes:

"I told him that his doctrine was of the Devil, that he was in reality in possession of a wicked and depraved spirit, although he professed to be the spirit of truth itself. He said also that he possessed the Spirit of Christ. He tarried until Wednesday, 11th, when, after breakfast, I told him that my God told me that his god was the Devil, and I could not keep him any longer." (Hist. of the Church, Vol. II, p. 307.) Thus the Prophet had the gift to discern spirits. (Ibid., 275, 276.)

Gift: And again, it is given to some to speak with tongues. (v. 24.)

Explanation: The Prophet Joseph says:

"Be not so curious about tongues; do not speak in tongues except there be an interpreter present; the ultimate design of tongues is to speak to foreigners, and if persons are very anxious to display their intelligence, let them speak to such in their own tongues. The gifts of God are all useful in their places, but when they are applied to that which God does not intend, they prove an injury, a snare, and a curse instead of a blessing." (Hist. of the Church, Vol. V, p. 31. Ibid., p. 276.)

Also of value are these instructions by the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning this gift:

The gift of tongues is the smallest gift perhaps of the whole, and yet it is one that is the most sought after. (DHC 5:26-32.)

I lay this down as a rule, that if anything is taught by the gift of tongues, it is not to be received for doctrine. (Ibid., 4:607.)

Tongues were given for the purpose of preaching among those whose language is not understood; as on the day of Pentecost, etc., and it is not necessary for tongues to be taught to the Church particularly, for any man that has the Holy Ghost, can speak of the things of God in his own tongue as well as to speak in another; for faith comes not by signs, but by hearing the word of God. (DHC 3:379.)

President Joseph F. Smith once said:

I believe in the gifts of the Holy Spirit unto men, but I do not want the gift of tongues, except when I need it. I needed the gift of tongues once, and the Lord gave it to me. I was in a foreign land, sent to preach the gospel to a people whose language I could not understand. Then I sought earnestly for the gift of tongues, and by this gift and by study, in a hundred days after landing upon those islands I could talk to the people in their language as I now talk to you in my native tongue. This was a gift that was worthy of the gospel. There was a purpose in it. There was something in it to strengthen my faith, to encourage me and to help me in my ministry. . . . Paul did not seem to care much about the gift of tongues either He said to the Corinthians: "I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue." (1 Cor. 14:19. Gospel Doctrine, p. 201.)

In 1952, President David O. McKay related the following personal experience:

The occasion was a conference held at Huntly, New Zealand, a thousand people assembled. Before that time I had spoken through interpreters in China, Hawaii, Holland, and other places, but I felt impressed on that occasion to speak in the English language. In substance I said, "I have never been much of an advocate of the necessity of tongues in our Church, but today I wish I had that gift. But I haven't. However, I am going to speak to you, my brothers and sisters, in my native tongue and pray that you may have the gift of interpretation of tongues. We will ask Brother Stuart Meha, who is going to interpret for me, to make notes, and if necessary he may give us a summary of my talk afterwards."

Well, the outpouring of the gift of tongues on that occasion was most remarkable. Following the end of my sermon Brother Sid Christy, who was a student of Brigham Young University, a Maori, who had returned to New Zealand, rushed up and said, "Brother McKay, they got your message!"

Well, I knew they had by the attention and the nodding of their heads during the talk. I said, "I think they have but for the benefit of those who may not have understood or had that gift, we shall have the sermon interpreted."

While Brother Meha was interpreting that or giving a summary of it in the Maori language some of the natives, who had understood it, but who did not understand English, arose and corrected him in his interpretations.

President George Albert Smith and Brother Rufus K. Hardy visited New Zealand several years after that event, and Brother Hardy, hearing of the event, brought home testimonies of those who were present, and he took the occasion to have those testimonies notarized. So it is the gift of interpretation rather than the gift of tongues, that was remarkable. (Gospel Ideals, p. 552.)

The membership of the Church is to receive blessings from God in the form of the gifts explained above (D&C 46:26), but to certain officers in his kingdom there is a gift available which is necessary that they may function in their calling. It is necessary that this gift also be sought after. (Ibid., v. 28.)

Gift: And unto the bishop of the church, and unto such as God shall appoint and ordain to watch over the church and to be elders unto the church, are to have it given unto them to discern all those gifts lest there shall be any among you professing and yet be not of God. (v. 27. Italics by author.)

Explanation: That is the great gift which the Bishops and others whom God appoints to watch over the Church must seek to obtain, lest hypocrites should go undetected. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 276.)

To have all the gifts of the Spirit is a privilege that may come to the prophet, seer, and revelator as the "head of the church." (D&C 107:92; 46:29.)

Gifts of the Holy Ghost and the Laying on of Hands

In an article written by the Prophet Joseph Smith, June 15, 1842, on the gift of the Holy Ghost, it is pointed out that sometimes people expect that at the time the Holy Ghost is conferred following water baptism, some miraculous manifestation will result. Excerpts from that article indicate an answer to this notion:

. . . more frequently there is no manifestation at all, that is visible to the surrounding multitude . . . suppose the gifts of the Spirit were immediately, upon the imposition of hands, enjoyed by all, in all there fulness and power, the skeptic would still be as far from receiving any testimony except upon a mere casualty as before, for all the gifts are not visible to the natural vision, or understanding of man, indeed very few of them are. . . . The word of wisdom, and the word of knowledge, are as much gifts as any other, yet if a person possessed both of these gifts, or received them by the imposition of hands, who would know it? Another might receive the gift of faith, and they would be as ignorant of it. Or suppose a man had the gift of healing or power to work miracles, that would not then be known; it would require time and circumstances to call these gifts into operation. Suppose a man had the discerning of spirits, who would be the wiser for it? Or if he had the interpretation of tongues, unless someone spoke in an unknown tongue, he of course would have to be silent; there are only two gifts that could be made visible—the gifts of tongues and the gift of prophecy. These are things that are the most talked about. . . . (DHC 5:28-30.)

The Holy Ghost and the Lord's Spirit

There is a difference between that Spirit which comes from God to fill all space—sometimes called the Holy Spirit, Spirit of God and Light of Christ—and the Holy Ghost and the gift of the Holy Ghost. The Spirit of the Lord is given to all people (D&C 84:43-48; 88:6-13), but the gift of the Holy Ghost is received by the members of the Church of Jesus Christ—those who obey the commandments. (Acts 5:32.) The following brief statement from President Joseph F. Smith is pertinent to these ideas:

The question is often asked, Is there any difference between the Spirit of the Lord and the Holy Ghost? The terms are frequently used synonymously. We often say the Spirit of God when we mean the Holy Ghost; we likewise say the Holy Ghost when we mean the Spirit of God. The Holy Ghost is a personage in the Godhead, and is not that which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. It is the Spirit of God which proceeds through Christ to the world, that enlightens every man that comes into the world, and that strives with the children of men, and will continue to strive with them, until it brings them to a knowledge of the truth and the possession of the greater light and testimony of the Holy Ghost, If, however, he receives that greater light, and then sin against it, the Spirit of God will cease to strive with him, and the Holy Ghost will wholly depart from him. (Gospel Doctrine, p. 67-68.)

How to Obtain the Gifts

As pointed out in this revelation the gifts of the Holy Ghost are for those who keep all the commandments or seek to do so. (D&C 46:9.) But the member of the Church must seek by asking in accordance with these divine instructions:

And it shall come to pass that he that asketh in the Spirit shall receive in Spirit. . . . He that asketh in the Spirit asketh according to the will of God; wherefore it is done even as he asketh. And again, I say unto you, all things must be done in the name of Christ, whatsoever you do in the Spirit; And ye must give thanks unto God in the Spirit for whatsoever blessing ye are blessed with. And ye must practice virtue and holiness before me continually, even so, Amen. (Ibid., vs. 28, 30-33.)
