Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 33

Records Are Important

(Section 47)

A commandment that a record should be kept was given during the meeting in which six brethren met formally to organize the Church on April 6, 1830. (D&C 21:1.) When Oliver Cowdery met the Prophet Joseph Smith for the first time in April 1829, he began to assist the Prophet as his scribe in the translation of The Book of Mormon. (D&C, Section 6.) As the companion of Joseph Smith in this work, Oliver Cowdery acted as the Church Historian and Recorder. When Section 47 was received in Kirtland, Ohio, on March 8, 1831, appointing John Whitmer, son of Peter Whitmer, Sr., as Church Historian, Oliver Cowdery's assignment ended.

John Whitmer

John Whitmer received many wonderful privileges and opportunities to become one of the truly great men of this dispensation. In addition to his call as Church Historian, he was the subject of a number of revelations—Sections 15, 26, 30, 69, 70. Some of his responsibilities in the Church were to assist in presiding over the Church in Missouri, to serve as a missionary, to help the Prophet in the compilation of the revelations in the Book of Commandments, and to assist Oliver Cowdery in superintending the printing of them.

Probably the most important responsibility placed upon him was the call as one of the eight witnesses of The Book of Mormon. With his brethren, he testified that he had seen the plates. Although John Whitmer failed to live up to his high calling, he never denied his testimony.

After his excommunication in 1838, he had the following conversation with Theodore Turley in the company of men who had sworn to kill the Prophet Joseph Smith. Turning to him, Brother Turley said:

"There are many things published that they say are true, and again turn around and say they are false." "Do you hint at me?" Whitmer asked. Turley said, "If the cap fits, you may wear it; all I know is that you have published to the world that an angel did present those plates to Joseph Smith." Then John Whitmer, in that company, made this statement, "I now say, I handled those plates; there were fine engravings on both sides, I handled them; they were shown to me by supernatural power." (Historical Record, p. 458, quoted in the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 75.)

John Whitmer, Church Historian

The call of John Whitmer as Church Historian is an example of a fulfilled desire to receive the call by revelation.

. . . John Whitmer, according to his own representations, said he would rather not keep the Church history, but observed—"The will of the Lord be done, and if He desires it, I wish that He would manifest it through Joseph the Seer." (DHC I:166, footnote.)

In the revelation he is informed of his appointment and his responsibility as historian. (D&C 47:3-4.) Within the year following receipt of this revelation, John Whitmer was instructed to accompany Oliver Cowdery to Independence, Missouri, and the revelations compiled as A Book of Commandments should be printed. In that revelation, the duties of Brother Whitmer as historian are given.

And also that he shall continue in writing and making a history of all the important things which he shall observe and know concerning my church; . . .

Nevertheless, let my servant John Whitmer travel many times from place to place, and from church to church, that he may the more easily obtain knowledge—selecting, and obtaining all things which shall be for the good of the church, and for the rising generations that shall grow up on the land of Zion, to possess it from generation to generation, forever and ever. Amen. (D&C 69:3, 7-8.)

The history of the Church written by John Whitmer was only "a mere sketch of the things that transpired." His total work consisted of eighty-five pages which included many of the revelations given while he was in office. During the period when many brethren became disaffected, he was in the Presidency of the Church in Missouri. The members of the Church in that area did not sustain him and his associates in the Presidency. Although the presiding brethren demanded that he deliver the history of the Church to them he refused. Years after his death, a copy of the history was obtained by the Church.

Church Historian's Office

The Historian's Office became recognized as a distinct part of the Church organization in 1843, when the Prophet Joseph Smith appointed Willard Richards Church Historian and General Church Recorder. Since that time the official title of Church Historian and Recorder has been used by each person succeeding him. The present Historian and Recorder is President Joseph Fielding Smith, also President of the Council of the Twelve. The first Assistant Church Historian was Elder Wilford Woodruff who received this office in October 1856. Elder A. William Lund occupies this position today.

In an article about the Church Historian's Office written by Elder A. William Lund, from which the above information was obtained, the following appears as the purpose of this office:

It is the aim of this office to gather all books, pamphlets, tracts, newspapers, records, etc., published by the Church and those written by members of the Church; those books pertaining to Western History, especially when dealing with the Mormons; also books written by non-Mormons which are friendly in their nature and those written by anti-Mormons. We have also in the Historian's Office hundreds of early records of the missions, and since 1907, all the records of births, baptisms, ordinations, deaths, and excommunications which have taken place in the Church. (Improvement Era, November 1956, pp. 853-854.)

Section 123 of The Doctrine and Covenants given March 1839, is a revelation setting forth the need for the Saints to assemble all anti-Mormon literature. The importance of the position of the Church Historian is indicated in this passage:

The position of the Church Historian is one of great importance. One of the epoch-making events in the history of the world took place when the Church was organized. But without a specially-appointed recorder, that event would have passed almost unnoticed, or it would have been described from the viewpoint of enemies. The development of the Church would have had no proper place in the annals of man but for a truthful historian, well acquainted with and instructed in that part of human history. The Prophet began his history on May 2nd, 1838, "to disabuse the public mind, and put all inquirers after the truth into possession of the facts, as they have transpired, in relation to both myself and the Church, so far as I have such facts in my possession" (History of the Church, Vol. I., p. 1), and that is the great reason for the existence of the office of the Historian of the Church. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 279.)

Historical Accuracy Essential

In harmony with the desire of the Prophet to record facts relating to his life and the history of the Church that men might know the truth, these words from the Church Historian and Recorder should give us an appreciation of the place of the Church in the world:

In regard to the recording of history, the thing that is most important is accuracy. If history is not accurate, it is harmful. It has been said that history is what historians declare it shall be and many historians write with that thought in mind. Of course this is a deplorable situation, which we cannot help. You take history written 50 years ago by some writers of the North in relation to the Civil War [in the United States] and compare it with the writings of someone from the Southern States and you will find a vast difference. . . .

The most important history in the world is the history of our Church and it is the most accurate history in the world. It must be so. It is the most important to us because that history contains the hand dealings of God direct to us through revelation as it has come in the Doctrine and Covenants, in The Book of Mormon, and in any revelation that comes to us through the servants of the Lord for our guidance. . . . In our history if there are mistakes we can say as did Moroni in The Book of Mormon, "They are the mistakes of men." (Elder Joseph Fielding Smith: "History and History Recorders," Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, Vol. 16, April 1925, pp. 53-55, 58-59.)

Is it not reasonable and consistent with our knowledge of the purpose of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as the only true Church on the earth that our history is the most accurate? Certainly the Lord would inspire his servants and help them make accurate records where it is necessary that the Church be a standard and a light for the world, as prophesied. (D&C 115:5.) The prayers of the Church membership are for the upbuilding of Zion upon the earth, a necessary part of which is the keeping of records which will redound to the blessings of the people of the world who will be attracted to the gospel. The words of Wilford Woodruff, on September 15, 1856, in dedicating the Church Historian's Office building, located on the site of the present Medical Arts Building in Salt Lake City, express the desire of the faithful member of the Church:

And by virtue of the Holy Priesthood vested in us, in the name of Jesus Christ, we do dedicate it and consecrate it unto the Lord our God, and we set it apart that it may contain holy records of the Church and Kingdom of God, and we ask in the name of Jesus Christ that it may be sanctified and holy unto Thy name, and we pray that we may be inspired by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost while acting as Historians or clerks for the Church, and may we keep a true and faithful record and history of Thy Church and Kingdom and Thy servants, and may it be kept in that way and manner that it may be acceptable unto Thee, O Lord, and unto Thy servants, the presidency of Thy Church. . . .

And we ask Thee to bless us and prosper us in all things, and we pray that Thou wilt bring to our remembrance all things which are necessary to the writing of this history. And that papers and documents and all things necessary may be brought to us, to enable us to compile a right, useful and proper history (Improvement Era, November, 1856, pp. 795, 853.)

Instructions to the Twelve

Among the instructions given by the Prophet to the Twelve Apostles after their appointment on February 14, 1835, was the necessity of keeping a record of their official acts. The Prophet Joseph Smith expressed sorrow over the fact that decisions reached on doctrine and duties relating to the kingdom of God had not always been recorded. Consequently, "We cannot bear record to the Church and to the world of the great and glorious manifestations which have been made to us with that degree of power and authority we otherwise could, if we now had these things to publish abroad." He then proceeded to instruct the Twelve to keep a record of their proceedings, declaring it to be of infinite worth and that it would be a feast to their souls. These records would also be a means of protection against the Adversary because neglect in this regard would bring about the withdrawal of the Spirit of God. (DHC II:199.)

Our Acts Are Recorded

The Prophet Joseph Smith said that "Our acts are recorded, and at a future day they will be laid before us ." (Ibid., II:26.) In a letter written to the Church concerning salvation for the dead, and after quoting Revelation 20:12, the Prophet wrote:

You will discover in this quotation that the books were opened; and another book was opened, which was the book of life; but the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works; consequently, the books spoken of must be the books which contained the record of their works, and refer to the records which are kept on the earth. And the book which was the book of life is the record which is kept in heaven; the principle agreeing precisely with the doctrine which is commanded you in the revelation contained in the latter which I wrote to you previous to my leaving my place [D&C Section 127]—that in all your recordings it may be recorded in heaven. (D&C 128:7.)

The Book of the Law of the Lord

Imbued with the need to keep records, the Prophet kept a record called The Book of the Law of the Lord in which he wrote the names of those who were true to the Lord and also to himself as the Lord's anointed. Concerning one of these persons he referred to him as "A faithful man in Israel; therefore his name shall never be forgotten." (DHC V:125.) To be thought of and to be worthy of such a comment would be the wish of all who have a testimony of the truth restored in this dispensation.

Joseph Smith's journal or diary is the accurate history of this dispensation from the beginning to the end of the Prophet's life. It is known as the History of the Church, and the Documentary History of the Church, consisting of six volumes. The seventh volume covers the period immediately following the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith to the sustaining of President Brigham Young and his counselors as the First Presidency on October 8, 1848. This vote ratified the action of the general conference held on the Iowa side of the Missouri River on December 27, 1847.

The Value of Journals or Diaries

Not only did the Council of the Twelve keep minutes of their official acts as a body, but many maintained journals of their personal activities. Many of these journals, together with those kept by others of the brethren, have been extremely important in giving information about their missionary labors, pioneer activities, and other aspects of our history. The number of these brethren runs into a very large number. Among these was Wilford Woodruff who assisted in bringing many wonderful happenings during and after President Joseph Smith's life to the attention of the Church. From this passage one will realize the way in which he was able to perform this function:

There is one subject I wish to speak upon and that is the keeping of a journal with respect to the dealings of God with us. I have many times thought the Quorum of the Twelve and others considered me rather enthusiastic upon this subject; but when the Prophet Joseph organized the Quorum of the Twelve, he counseled them to keep a history of their lives, and gave his reasons why they should do so. I have had this spirit and calling upon me since I first entered this Church. I made a record from the first sermon I heard, and from that day until now I have kept a daily journal. Whenever I heard Joseph Smith preach, teach, or prophesy, I always felt it my duty to write it; I felt uneasy and could not eat, drink, or sleep until I did write; and my mind has been so exercised upon this subject that when I heard Joseph Smith teach and had no pencil or paper, I would go home and sit down and write the whole sermon, almost word for word and sentence by sentence as it was delivered, and when I had written it it was taken from me, I remembered it no more. This was the gift of God to me. . . .

Another reason I was moved upon to write in the early days was that nearly all the historians appointed in those times apostatized and took the journals away with them. (Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, pp. 476-477.)

In 1866, a large number of missionaries received instructions from Elders Wilford Woodruff and Parley P. Pratt on the necessity of keeping an accurate record of their labors. The journals were to be full, correct and proper.

Many important reasons for keeping an accurate record of important events in one's life are provided in this advice given in 1849 by Elder Orson Pratt to the members of the British Mission.

If every elder had, during the last nineteen years, kept a faithful record of all that he had seen, heard, and felt of the goodness, wisdom and power of God, the Church would now have been in possession of many thousand volumes, containing much important and useful information. How many thousands have been miraculously healed in this Church, and yet no one has recorded the circumstances. Is this right? Should these miraculous manifestations of the power of God be forgotten and pass into oblivion? Should the knowledge of these things slumber in the hearts of those who witnessed them, and extend no further than their own verbal reports will carry them? . . . We should keep a record because Jesus has commanded it. We should keep a record because the same will benefit us and the generations of our children after us. We should keep a record because it will furnish many important items for the general history of the Church which would otherwise be lost. (Millennial Star 11:152.)

It is probably unnecessary for everyone to keep a daily journal, but it is necessary that one keep a record of important activities and events in one's life. We might raise this point, if I had kept a record of the Lord's blessings to me in faith-promoting experiences, etc., I might leave to my children a permanent record which would impress and create in them a desire to live the gospel and to assist them to be strong Latter-day Saints.

The private journals kept by our progenitors are important as a part of the general history of the Church. With this in mind President Joseph Fielding Smith said at a general conference:

. . . Moreover, there are many important private journals scattered about which we would like to obtain for preservation and for historical purposes. We discover that when these are left in the keeping of the descendants of the pioneers, they frequently are lost, or lose their value by the time they reach the third or fourth generation, and are thrown away. If they are given to us we will file them away where they will be preserved. (Conference Report, April 1934, p. 20.)

Genealogical Records

Subsequent chapters will deal with the great subject of salvation for the dead, including genealogical research as a part of that material. We should at this time, however, be mindful of the need to give encouragement to each member of the family in keeping books of remembrance, life histories, genealogical pedigrees, and the maintenance of interest in genealogical research and temple activity, where possible.

Summary

Section 47 of The Doctrine and Covenants is the revelation appointing John Whitmer as Church Historian. This brother had many opportunities to remain faithful to the high callings which came to him in the Church, but he failed in keeping the faith, notwithstanding he never denied his testimony of The Book of Mormon. Later, in 1843, the Church Historian's Office became a part of the Church organization and serves today as the repository of the vital statistics and history of the Church. The history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is intended to be an accurate history because it was and is prepared by brethren who have the Spirit of the Lord to guide them in their important duties. From the beginning of this dispensation the commandment has been given that the Latter-day Saints are to be a record-keeping people to benefit themselves as individuals and also to present to the world the truths of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. The value of life histories prepared by the individual in contributing to the general history of the Church has also been noted. The preparation of genealogical records is of extreme importance as a part of every Latter-day Saint's responsibility. The faithful Latter-day Saint accepts the Lord's will as contained in the scriptures, and accepts the obligation to participate in its varied activities. This faithfulness will bring joy and satisfaction to the participant and to his family.
