Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 35

Be Not Deceived

(Section 50)

Section 50 is one of the many informative and interesting revelations in The Doctrine and Covenants. It is different from many of the sections because of the relationship of its various ideas to the central theme—men and women may know how to detect evil powers.

Although this revelation was given because of a condition which arose in some branches of the Church during Joseph Smith's time, it is as applicable today as then. (D&C 50:1.)

As pointed out by the Lord, the instructions in this revelation are "words of wisdom." From what source is one to seek the counsel of the Lord? In another revelation, we are instructed to "teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom. . . ." (Ibid., 88:118.) These are the books of scripture which contain the truths that guide one to salvation. Is it not the admonition of the Lord that we should live by every word that proceedeth forth from his mouth? (Ibid., 84:44.)

As indicated in verse two of our text, there are "many spirits which are false spirits, which have gone forth in the earth deceiving the world."

Historical Background

What would be the reason for a revelation which, in the introduction, points out that there are many spirits in the world seeking to deceive? The elders of the Church for whom revelation was given, were also reminded that "Satan hath sought to deceive you, that he might overthrow you." In what way did the adversary attempt to deceive? The Lord says, "Behold, I, the Lord, have looked upon you, and have seen abominations in the church that profess my name." (Ibid., 50:3-4.) Here is what Elder Parley P. Pratt, one of those addressed in this revelation, said concerning this condition in some branches of the Church near Kirtland, Ohio:

As I went forth among the different branches, some very strange spiritual operations were manifested, which were disgusting rather than edifying. Some persons would seem to swoon away, and make unseemly gestures, and be drawn or disfigured in their countenaces. Others would fall into ecstasies, and be drawn into contortions, cramp, fits, etc. Others would seem to have visions and revelations, which were not edifying, and which were not congenial to the doctrine and spirit of the gospel. In short, a false and lying spirit seemed to be creeping into the Church.

All these things were new and strange to me, and had originated in the Church during our absence, and previous to the arrival of President Joseph Smith from New York. (Autobiography of Parley P. Pratt, p. 61, 1950 edition.)

Joseph Smith and Revelations

With Elder John Murdock and several other elders, Brother Pratt asked the Prophet to inquire of the Lord concerning these manifestations. In relating what happened when this revelation (Section 50) was received by the Prophet, there is available to us an account of the way in which Joseph Smith received some of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants. Following prayer, the Prophet dictated this revelation in the presence of these elders in this way:

Each sentence was uttered slowly and very distinctly, and with a pause between each, sufficiently long for it to be recorded, by an ordinary writer, in long hand.

This was the manner in which all his written revelations were dictated and written. There was never any hesitation, reviewing, or reading back, in order to keep the run of the subject; neither did any of these communications undergo revisions, interlinings, or corrections. As he dictated them so they stood, so far as I have witnessed; and I was present to witness the dictation of several communications of several pages each. . . . (Ibid., p. 62.)

In commenting upon the above testimony, Elder B. H. Roberts writes as follows:

This statement of Elder Pratt's is true in a general way, and valuable as a description of the manner in which revelations were dictated by the Prophet; and needs modifying only to the extent of saying that some of the early revelations first published in the "Book of Commandments," in 1833, were revised by the Prophet himself in the way of correcting errors made by the scribes and publishers; and some additional clauses were inserted to throw increased light upon the subjects treated in the revelations, and paragraphs added, to make the principles or instructions apply to officers not in the Church at the time some of the earlier revelations were given. . . . (DHC I:173, footnote.)

Satan's Attacks

In all dispensations of the gospel, Satan has attempted to thwart the purposes of the Lord for man. He has spread false teachings, overcome many by spurious gifts to simulate the genuine, and thus has weakened faith in truth and shipwrecked many souls by his deceptions. In the period of the meridian dispensation, Satan's efforts were successful in bringing about a general apostasy of the Church. His efforts to do this in the fulness of times will not succeed according to the word of the Lord (Daniel 2; D&C 65:2); but there have been and there will probably be many who will succumb to his attacks.

In order to insure the continuance of the kingdom of God in this last dispensation, the Saints have been informed through revelation to the Prophet that there are ways to detect the deceiver.

Key against Deception

To the elders addressed in this revelation (Section 50), and for any who are seeking for a standard against deception, the Lord made known an important truth:

And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness. That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day. (D&C 50:23-24.)

To edify means to improve morally and spiritually. Advancement upward is the planned purpose of God for his spirit children. Through the various stages of man's eternal journey, it is the Father's plan to develop his children. In terms of the salvation of his children, the Father's work is to bring about their exaltation. But there is only one way in which this can be accomplished. It is that man will accept Jesus Christ as his Savior. No other way is possible. Therefore, those principles, teachings, and works which do not conform to the Master's gospel will not accomplish the exaltation of man. It is he who endures to the end that will be saved. Nephi understood by revelation that all salvation revolves around the Christ. (2 Nephi 31:14, 16, 20, 21.)

Having a true understanding of the gospel of Jesus Christ, man knows that the path to exaltation or eternal life is observance of the commandments of God. Whenever the scriptures speak of salvation in the kingdom of God, they emphasize the necessity of following the example of Jesus. If the instructions received do not make a person better in terms of his attainment of salvation, then they are not from God. When one understands his own position in the eternal plan of the Father as a child of God, he then is capable of receiving more light and truth through strict obedience to the principles of progression. Again, all ideas, theories, commandments which are not in accordance with the teachings of Christ do not give the edification necessary to achieve the eternal life. In the following way a Book of Mormon prophet taught the necessity of patterning one's life after the Master:

. . . and if ye will not hearken unto the voice of the good shepherd [Christ], to the name by which ye are called, behold ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd.

And now if ye are not the sheep of the good shepherd, what fold are ye? Behold, I say unto you, that the devil is your shepherd, and ye are of his fold; and now, who can deny this? Behold, I say unto you, whosoever denieth this is a liar and a child of the devil.

For I say unto you that whatsoever is good cometh from God, and whatsoever is evil cometh from the devil. Therefore, if a man bringeth forth good works he hearkeneth unto the voice of the good shepherd, and he doth follow him; but whosoever bringeth forth evil works, the same becometh a child of the devil, for he hearkeneth unto his voice, and doth follow him.

And whosoever doeth this must receive his wages of him; therefore, for his wages he receiveth death, as to things pertaining unto righteousness, being dead unto all good works. (Alma 5:38-42)

Jesus Christ is the light, the truth, which is to be held up before the world. It is his atonement, his works, his example, that will make possible the greatest blessing to man—eternal life. Jesus, as the resurrected Son of God, said to the Nephites: "Therefore, hold up your light that it may shine unto the world. Behold I am the light which ye shall hold up—that which ye have seen me do. Behold ye see that I have prayed unto the Father, and ye all have witnessed." (3 Nephi 18:24.) ". . . Behold I am the light; I have set an example for you." (Ibid., 18:16.)

We follow the Savior's example when we live the gospel of Jesus Christ, which is declared to be light. (D&C 45:28-29; 14:9-10.) Men and women are truly edified when they follow the truth—the gospel of Jesus Christ. The beginning of this progression to the fulness of truth comes with the remission of sins through repentance and the atonement of Jesus. The continued blessings of forgiveness result by keeping the commandments. (Mosiah 4:26-27.)

Blessed Are the Faithful

Only to the faithful who endure to the end seeking for perfection will the greatest blessings come. (D&C 14:7.) "But blessed are they who are faithful and endure, whether in life or in death, for they shall inherit eternal life." (Ibid., 50:5.) The fight against the adversary must continue unabated by striving to overcome all of the barriers to one's salvation.

Wo unto the Deceivers

The condition which existed in some branches of the Church around Kirtland resulted, in part, because of the actions of some of the members.

. . . there are hypocrites among you, who have deceived some, which has given the adversary power; but behold such shall be reclaimed. (Ibid., 50:7.)

Who is the hypocrite? He is a pretender—one who feigns righteousness, goodness, and virtue, but his professsion is not demonstrated in living the gospel. This class is particularly susceptible to being overcome by the world. Those who have been deceived by the hypocrite, however, "shall be reclaimed."

But the hypocrites shall be detected and shall be cut off, either in life or in death, even as I will. . . . (Ibid., 50:8.)

Those who seek to deceive, and remain unrepentant, will be revealed. They will leave the truth, and darkness will ensue. If detected in this life, they are subject to being cut off from the Church. But if they are not known in this life, by their actions they have cut themselves off from the Spirit of the Lord.

. . . and wo unto them who are cut off from my church, for the same are overcome of the world. (Ibid., 50:8.)

Who is it that remains faithful? Those who walk in the light, treasuring up the Lord's word. It is those who will not be deceived. (Pearl of Great Price, Joseph Smith 1:35.) But when men and women follow the counsel of those who are not the legal administrators in the kingdom, and who do not walk in the light of the revelations of the Lord, they are overcome of the world. (D&C 50:6-9.)

The Spirit of Christ

Every man receives the light of Christ or Holy Spirit by which he may be led into truth. He receives of that Spirit in order that he may distinguish between good and evil. Mormon, the Nephite prophet, declared: "For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil. . . ." (Moroni 7:16.)

The Lord Reasons

After recognizing the source of deception in branches of the Church, the revelation continues to admonish the elders in their responsibilities as teachers of the gospel. In order that they might understand their calling and true position, the Lord posed a series of questions to these elders. (D&C 50:10-12.) The lessons to be learned are sometimes put in question form because this method of teaching carries its own point without the necessity of further explanation. Here is the first question: "unto what were ye ordained?" The answer sets forth the calling of these elders: "To preach my gospel by the Spirit, even the Comforter which was sent forth to teach the truth:" (v. 14.) But what happened to these elders? They received "spirits which ye [they] could not understand, and received them to be of God. . . ." But the Lord asks, "in this are ye justified?" Is this question answered in the revelation? "Behold ye shall answer this question yourselves; nevertheless, I will be merciful unto you; he that is weak among you hereafter shall be made strong." (v. 16.)

Although reprimanding these elders for their inability to understand the real source of these false manifestations, they were to be made strong by the key given them in this revelation. It is: "And that which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness." (v. 23.) In verses 17 through 21, the elders are instructed by questions and answers that they may know the important truth that it is by the Spirit of truth one may know the things of God. Therefore, in the words of the revelation: '. . . he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together." (v. 22.) Understanding one another depends upon the receptivity of the Holy Ghost by both speaker and hearer. This principle was expressed by Nephi in his parting testimony to us of this generation:

. . . for when a man speaketh by the power of the Holy Ghost the power of the Holy Ghost carrieth it unto the hearts of the children of men. But behold, there are many that harden their hearts against the Holy Spirit, that it hath no place in them; wherefore, they cast many things away which are written and esteem them as things of naught. (2 Nephi 33:1, 2.)

Ask and It Shall Be Done

He who serves as a preacher of truth, being ordained of God and sent forth, is to be respected in his calling as he becomes the servant of all. (Matt. 20:26-28.) He is, by his faith, the possessor of all things, for all things are subject to him as the Father through his Son Jesus Christ wills it be done. But no one may exercise such powers except as he be purified and cleansed from all sin. Then, "ye shall ask whatsoever you will in the name of Jesus and it shall be done." As it was among the Nephites (Jacob 4:6-7), so it is in this dispensation: "But know this, it shall be given you what you shall ask; as ye are appointed to the head, the spirit shall be subject unto you." (D&C 50:25-30.)

A Second Key against Deception

If he who has been ordained and cleansed from sin sees a spirit manifest which is not understood by him, sincere prayer should be offered to obtain knowledge concerning that spirit.

Wherefore, it shall come to pass, that if you behold a spirit manifested that you cannot understand, and you receive not that spirit, ye shall ask of the Father in the name of Jesus; and if he give not unto you that spirit, then you may know that it is not of God.

And it shall be given unto you, power over that spirit; and you shall proclaim against that spirit with a loud voice that it is not of God—(Ibid., 50:31-32.)

But in what way would one proclaim against such a spirit? Certainly not in pride and boasting, or in taking unto oneself the honor.

Not with railing accusation, that ye be not overcome, neither with boasting nor rejoicing, lest you be seized therewith. He that receiveth of God, let him account it of God; and let him rejoice that he is accounted of God worthy to receive. (Ibid., 50:33-34.)

The necessity for prayer by those who seek further enlightenment from our Father is well expressed by the Prophet Nephi. (2 Nephi 32:4, 8, 9.)

Summary

What did this revelation do for the Church and its members at this early period (1831)? It gave to the elders a lesson in their responsibilities as servants of the Lord. It prevented the Church from being divided into factions in following false spirits. By detecting evil influences through keys given of the Lord, the members had a means of being protected from false manifestations.

Present Application

What does this revelation mean to this generation, over 130 years later? The manifestation of spirits in the way described by Elder Pratt—unseemly gestures, contortions, gibbering, and muttering, etc.—are not present in the Church today. There are religious organizations today, however, that claim these manifestations as part of the religious life of their members. In an editorial in the Times and Seasons the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote:

. . . there was nothing indecorous in the proceeding of the Lord's prophets in any age; neither had the apostles nor prophets in the apostles' day anything of this kind. . . . Paul says, "Let everything be done decently and in order," but here (in the cases cited in the article) we find the greatest disorder and indecency in the conduct of both men and women, as above described. The same rule would apply to the fallings, twitchings, swoonings, shaking, and trances of many of our modern revivalists. (DHC 4:576.)

The members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints may know that, if such manifestations should arise, there is a way to detect evil spirits, and they also know that only that which lifts one up morally and spiritually is of God. The importance of prayer in one's life is plainly revealed, as well as the need to seek for perfection.

President Joseph Fielding Smith of the Council of the Twelve has given us counsel in some of the matters contained in this revelation, as follows:

The nearer we approach God, the better we endeavor to keep His commandments, the more we will search to know His will as it has been revealed, the less likely it will be for us to be led astray by every wind of doctrine, by these false spirits that lie in wait to deceive, and by the spirits of men. . . . We will be protected, and we will have the power to understand, to segregate truth from error, we will walk in the light and we will not be deceived. . . . I want to tell you there is much error in this world that is passed off as truth, and it behooves every man of us to seek God, and . . . [to] draw near unto Him, and the nearer we draw unto Him, and the more we seek to do His will the more light we shall receive and the less shall be he danger of our deception. (Conference Report, April 1940, pp. 98-99.)

But what of those who do not follow the counsel to draw near to the Lord?

Now the man who is dilatory, the man who is unfaithful, the man who is not willing to keep the commandments of the Lord in all things lays himself open to deception because the Spirit of the Lord is not with him to lead and direct him and show him the way of truth and righteousness, and therefore some error comes along and he absorbs it because he cannot understand and realize the difference between truth and error. (Ibid., p. 99.)

Instructions to Certain Elders

The last ten verses of Section 50 consist of counsel to Joseph Wakefield, Parley P. Pratt, John Corrill, and Edward Partridge. The first three brethren are assigned to labor in the Lord's vineyard, while Brother Partridge is told that he should not restrain Brother Corrill from his appointed calling. (vs. 37-39.) Important truths were made known to these brethren in these verses:

Behold, ye are little children and ye cannot bear all things now; ye must grow in grace and in the knowledge of the truth.

Fear not, little children, for you are of them that My Father hath given me; And none of them that my Father hath given me shall be lost. (Ibid., 40-42.)

All of us are to live by faith, in this life, being submissive to the Lord's will, as little children. We may increase in faith and knowledge and thereby be able to grow in the light of truth until that "light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day." (v. 24.)

The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

. . . Faith comes by hearing the word of God. If a man has not faith enough to do one thing, he may have faith to do another: if he cannot remove a mountain, he may heal the sick. Where faith is there will be some of the fruits: all gifts and power which were sent from heaven, were poured out on the heads of those who had faith. (DHC V:355.)

Although John Corrill was excommunicated from the Church in 1839, a question may be raised concerning verse 42 in which it is stated that "none of them that my Father hath given me shall be lost." An authoritative source suggests the following as an interpretation of this passage and also about John Corrill:

Not that the sheep cannot go astray, but the vigilance of the Shepherd is such that no wolf can slay them, as long as they remain with the flock.

. . . the question might be asked, "Was not John Corrill, who, in all probability was present when this Revelation was given 'lost,' although the Lord said, 'You are of them that my Father hath given me?'" It might seem like entering the field of fruitless speculation to consider that question. But it must be remembered that there are two entirely different classes of apostates. One class consists of members too weak to resist temptations and persecutions, wherefore they fall by the wayside, when the storms sweep over them. The other class deliberately join the forces of the adversary and make war upon Christ and His followers, because they love sin and hate righteousness. Who shall say that those who have fallen because of weakness will not ultimately be reclaimed by our Savior and given some degree of glory, although they may have lost their grandest opportunity? Who can say that they are "lost," in the same sense as the enemies who die in hatred? John Corrill at one time offered, with others, to give himself to the mob as ransom for the Church, but the mob refused the sacrifice. It was when the persecution raged at its worst in Missouri that he fell. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 295.)

The Guarantee

The revelation closes with the promises of the Father to all those who remain faithful.

And the Father and I are one. I am in the Father and the Father in me; and inasmuch as ye have received me, ye are in me and I in you. Wherefore, I am in your midst, and I am the good shepherd, and the stone of Israel. He that buildeth upon this rock shall never fall. And the day cometh that you shall hear my voice and see me, and know that I am. Watch, therefore, that ye may be ready. Even so. Amen. (D&C 50:43-46.)
