Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 36

Teach What the Apostles and Prophets Have Written

(Section 52)

The temporal and spiritual welfare of the Saints was the concern of the Lord as revelations and commandments were given to his Prophet. It was most important that as people accepted the gospel, they should learn the necessity of maintaining faith in the scriptures (at that time the Bible and the Book of Mormon), and the revelations received by the Prophet Joseph Smith. The revelation upon which this chapter is written points out the need to have such faith.

Section 52—Background

Information regarding the Fourth General Conference, which convened in Kirtland, Ohio, assists us to understand the purposes for which Section 52 of the Doctrine and Covenants was given. The Church had been organized for only fourteen months, yet there were about two thousand persons in attendance at the conference which lasted for about three days, beginning about the third of June 1831. In an earlier revelation (Section 44), the appointment for this conference was made, and the Spirit of the Lord was promised to be poured out upon the faithful who should meet on that occasion.

The literal fulfillment of this promise was received in many remarkable manifestations, including a number of prophecies. In the Prophet's journal it is recorded that "The Lord displayed His power to the most perfect satisfaction of the Saints." (DHC I:175.)

What were some of these occurrences which would call forth this evaluation of the General Conference? "The man of sin was revealed, and the authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood was manifested. . . ." John Whitmer, Church Historian, wrote concerning this, as follows:

Joseph Smith, Jun., prophesied the day previous that the man of sin would be revealed. While the Lord poured out His Spirit upon His servants, the devil took a notion to make known his power. He bound Harvey Whitlock and John Murdock so that they could not speak, and others were affected but the Lord showed to Joseph, the seer, the design of the thing; he commanded the devil in the name of Christ, and he departed, to our joy and comfort. (DHC I p. 175. footnote.)

The office of High Priest was conferred upon several brethren, this being the first time that this office was conferred in this dispensation. Among those ordained was Lyman Wight who prophesied:

. . . He said the coming of the Savior should be like the sun rising in the east, and will cover the whole earth. So with the coming of the Son of Man: yea, He will appear in His brightness and consume all [the wicked] before Him; and the hills will be laid low, and the valleys be exalted, and the crooked be made straight and the rough smooth. And some of my brethren shall suffer martyrdom for the sake of the religion of Jesus Christ, and seal their testimony of Jesus with their blood. He saw the heavens opened and the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the Father, making intercession for his brethren, the Saints. He said that God would work a work in these last days that tongue cannot express and the mind is not capable to conceive. The glory of the Lord shone around. (Ibid., I p. 176, footnote.)

Another prophecy uttered by Joseph Smith at this time, 1831, concerned the activity of John the Revelator. According to the Church historian, John Whitmer, "The Spirit of the Lord fell upon Joseph in an unusual manner, and he prophesied that John the Revelator was then among the Ten Tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, the king of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion, to again possess the land of their fathers. He prophesied many more things that I have not written." (Ibid., I p. 176, footnote.)

Thus ended a glorious General Conference, the results of which were evaluated by the Prophet in this way:

It was clearly evident that the Lord gave us power in proportion to the work to be done, and strength according to the race set before us, and grace and help as our needs required. Great harmony prevailed; several were ordained; faith was strengthened; and humility, so necessary for the blessing of God to follow prayer, characterized the Saints.

The next day, as a kind of continuation of this great work of the last days. I received the following. [Section 52.] ((Ibid., I:176-177.)

Missionary Appointments

Following the general conference, the Lord called upon many elders to preach the gospel. A number of these were to proselyte in Ohio that the Church might be strengthened further in that area.

The names of many elders appear in Section 52 as these men are assigned to their missionary labors. Many of these brethren are well known in Church history and their lives make an interesting story. Others are little known today, but their efforts in building up the kingdom of God in their time could have been considerable. On the other hand, there were those who lost their place in the kingdom because they were overcome of the world.

Important Instructions

Important for our study are some of the instructions given to these missionaries since they are as valid today as when they were received. Outstanding in this regard are the following from Section 52:

(1) ". . . preaching the word by the way, saying none other things than that which the prophets and apostles have written, and that which is taught them by the Comforter through the prayer of faith. (v. 9. Compare verse 36.)

(2) "And behold, he that is faithful shall be made ruler over many things." (v. 13.)

(3) The pattern against being deceived (vs. 14-21.)

Satan Deceives

Unto all the elders the Lord set forth a pattern by which the Church members might not be deceived, and thus the "spirits in all cases under the whole heaven" should be known. This is the pattern certifying that Satan is a real being who seeks to deceive:

And again, I will give unto you a pattern in all things, that ye may not be deceived; for Satan is abroad in the land, and he goeth forth deceiving the nations— (D&C 52:14.)

Who is accepted of the Lord?

Wherefore he that prayeth, whose spirit is contrite, the same is accepted of me if he obey mine ordinances.

He that speaketh, whose spirit is contrite, whose language is meek and edifieth, the same is of God if he obey mine ordinances. (Ibid., 52:15, 16.) [Italics added.]

In the early period of the Church there was a need, as there is today, for the members to distinguish between those who are acceptable to the Lord and those who are not. Here in plain language the key is given to make this distinction. Christian people believe in and practice prayer. In the lives of many this is the mark of sincerity and honesty regarding their everyday actions and beliefs. Only those, however, who are sufficiently contrite, or humble enough to accept the truth as taught in the Lord's revelations through the Prophet Joseph Smith and his successors, and who obey the ordinances of water and Spirit baptism are acceptable to him. Regardless of how meek and edifying a person's language may be, he is still unacceptable to the Lord unless he obeys these ordinances.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, they who believe not on your words, and are not baptized in water in my name, for the remission of their sins, that they may receive the Holy Ghost, shall be damned, and shall not come into my Father's kingdom where my Father and I am. (Ibid., 84:74.)

There are many wonderful thoughts expressed by authors, teachers, clergymen, and other people who are not members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; but the Latter-day Saint must be prepared to distinguish between true and false teachings. The standard of judging such teachings is yet to be mentioned in this chapter.

The missionaries in the early history of the Church were prepared to inform the world that the Lord had restored the Church with its principles and ordinances as they were known anciently. These brethren were to go to the world to teach and not to be taught. (Ibid., 43: 15-16.)

Deceivers among Us

The Prophet wrote that there were many false spirits abroad in the Christian and pagan world. He also said that there were some in our own Church who were possessed of this same spirit because "It is made up of all those different sects professing every variety of opinion, and having been under the influence of so many kinds of spirits, it is not to be wondered at if there should be found among us false spirits." (DHC IV:580.)

Down through the decades men have attempted to govern the affairs of the Church by instructing or commanding the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator at the head of the Church and also the Twelve Apostles. As indicated, this began in the time of the Prophet Joseph Smith, as pointed out by Elder George A. Smith:

There was a prevalent spirit all through the early history of the Church, which prompted the Elders to suppose that they knew more than the Prophet. Elders would tell you that the Prophet was going wrong. Men who thought they knew all about this work, some of them thirty or forty years before the Lord revealed it, tried to "steady the ark." The Church was constantly afflicted with such a class of men. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 290.)

More subtle ways have been and are used today by deceivers or perverters of the truth. The casting of doubt and even unbelief on the scriptures and that revelation is received by the leadership of the Church, are common ways in which these people try to undermine the Lord's work. The standard quoted above, "if he obey mine ordinances" (D&C 52:15-16), as applied to the member of the Church is not limited to baptism and the other ordinances of the gospel. It also includes other decrees of God, including instructions and rules regarding conduct.

Where to Expect False Doctrine

President Joseph F. Smith accounted for false teachings as from these two classes:

Among the Latter-day Saints, the preaching of false doctrines disguised as truths of the gospel, may be expected from people of two classes, and practically from these only; they are:

First—The hopelessly ignorant, whose lack of intelligence is due to their indolence and sloth, who make but feeble effort, if indeed any at all, to better themselves by reading and study; those who are afflicted with a dread disease that may develop into an incurable malady—laziness.

Second—The proud and self-vaunting ones, who read by the lamp of their own conceit; who interpret by rules of their own contriving; who have become a law unto themselves, and so pose as the sole judges of their own doings. More dangerously ignorant than the first.

Beware of the lazy and the proud; their infection in each case is contagious; better for them and for all when they are compelled to display the yellow flag of warning, that the clean and uninfected may be protected. (Gospel Doctrine, p. 373.)

False Teachings Exposed

In 1946, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr, of the First Presidency, told the people attending the April general conference of false teachings which were being entertained by some members of the Church. Because of the need for members of the Church to be aware of these teachings and the authoritative way in which President Clark answered these claims, they are given here:

I have said on other occasions, and I repeat now that there are being taught amongst us, unfortunately, doctrines which are utterly destructive, not only of Jesus the Christ, but even of God himself, and we must be on our watch that neither we nor our children be influenced, debauched, or polluted by such doctrines.

Recently a man of education (he holds a high scholastic degree), a worthy member of the Church, sent to me a statement of some of the teachings that now are somewhat rooted amongst some of our Latter-day Saints—a few only, I trust. I am going to read this statement to you and make some comment upon the points as I proceed. There are some ten points.

I wish to say to you as earnestly as I may, that, as you will see when I have read them, if they shall attain credence amongst us, particularly amongst our young people, they will destroy our faith.

The first of these statements reads:

"1. God is not an anthropomorphic being,"—that is, he does not have hands, or eyes, or feet, or ears, or a voice—

"and not a personal God, nor a Living God."

I remember when Dr. Talmage used to say something not dissimilar from what I shall say, but he made an actual quote, as I recollect which I can only summarize after these many years. It went about this way:

"Thrust God out of the back door, and he comes in at the front door as the First Great Cause. Thrust the First Great Cause out of the back door, and God enters the front door as a Great Force. Push him out as a Great Force, and he comes back in as a Great Intelligence."

No sane man who can think at all can deny in his heart the existence of God, the God of the Bible, and of the New Testament, and of modern revelation.

The next point:

"2. Man is a creature of the Universe and draws intelligence and ideas (inventions) from the Universe by being in harmony with it."

This statement is not only indefinite, but meaningless. It does, however, seem to postulate a Universe Intelligence, and thus we are back to our great concept of God.

"3. There is no such thing as supernatural experience among men—at any time in history. No revelation directly from God."

This denies all scriptures. It denies all divine manifestations to man. It denies his goodness and his mercy and his love. It gives the lie to the commonest experience of man, recognized from the savage to the most highly civilized man; indeed, it gives the lie practically to our very existence.

"4. Jesus Christ was a revolutionary leader—but not divine."

This, of course, denies the divinity of Jesus. It falls squarely within the observation of John who declared, as I have already read:

For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an antichrist. (II John 7.)

"5. Joseph Smith did not see God nor really experience any supernatural phenomena. He wrote the Book of Mormon without divine assistance. He also gave revelations to suit his purpose and the situation without divine assistance."

No man can honestly read the Book of Mormon and then say that this boy Prophet wrote it himself, and the most persistent search has failed to reveal that he stole the book. There is too much in the book to have been written by a boy whom his hostile critics brand as an ignoramus, and it should be said here, he had no opportunity for consulting either the little-known sources, which hostile critics have disinterred in trying to destroy him, or the more widely-known sources of which he probably had no knowledge whatever because they were inaccessible to him. No man of his age could have had in his mind, no matter how much he had studied, merely the allusions contained in the Book of Mormon to the holy scriptures, and all that we have of his that came from him when speaking or writing normally, gives not even a suggestion of his power to compose or to utter those great gems of majestic literature which are so plentifully found in the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants.

"6. The value of Mormonism is in its practice and in its system. Its origin need not be basic to one's belief in or acceptance of Mormonism for its value."

Many of us have heard this heresy before. No shallower view of Mormonism can be taken than is thus expressed. The achievements of our people, the growth of the Church, the people's endurance of hardship, misery, penury, persecution, and even martyrdom itself, would have been wholly impossible without the spirituality which lay behind and vitalized their whole lives. This people of ours had the Spirit of God to direct them. Take away from us that Spirit, take away the divinity which lies behind the gospel, and there is nothing left. Had our work not been divinely fathered, we would not have outlived our first ten years of life.

"7. The three-degrees-of-glory story is a myth."

That is, Paul was mistaken, the Prophet Joseph was mistaken, all who have thought and taught that glory might come to those who live righteously and die with a testimony, some of them as martyrs, were all mistaken and all they believed in was a myth. Such a concept destroys the teachings of the restored gospel. The words of Paul and the words of the Prophet Joseph were divinely inspired and are the eternal truth.

Here is another mean thrust:

"8. Temple work may occupy old people in pleasant pastime but it is absurd and foolish in its objectives."

Thus these antichrists would not only abandon the living but discard the dead, their ancestors and loved ones; nothing would be saved, indeed salvation would for no one be a reality. Every instinct of justice and mercy, every really rational concept of man and his being cries out against any concept such as this. Temple work is part of the restored gospel.

"9. The belief that man might become as God is equally foolish."

This doctrine would, of course wipe out the great truth of eternal progression. It would thus cut off from man even the hope of advancement hereafter; it violates every concept of the future brought to us by the restored gospel.

"10. Practically every theological idea advanced by Joseph Smith can be found in some ancient religion or in some current beliefs contemporary with his time."

There is truth in the conception that the restored gospel does contain among its truths beliefs held by ancient religions and by modern ones. However, the Prophet Joseph never had the opportunity, never had the books, never had the time to search out from these sources all these various truths from the paganism and the Christianity of the past. It was not humanly possible for him to do so at his age and with the meager facilities at his command. But we know how it came to be that these partial truths were found in pagan teachings of pre-Christian eras: the gospel was on the earth from the time of Adam, and from then on down, there appeared here and there in the world, among this people and that, recollections of the doctrines and principles of the gospel as they were taught to Adam. Some of the truths of the gospel have always been on the earth. (Conference Report, April 1946, pp. 119-121.)

The Standard of Judgment

This revelation (Section 52), in verses 9 and 36, establishes a standard which was to be used by the missionaries mentioned in this revelation. It is the same standard that has continued from the beginning and is in force today. The Lord said that these missionaries were to teach only that which the "prophets and apostles have written, and that which is taught them by the Comforter through the prayer of faith."

In 1839, the Twelve Apostles issued an epistle to the elders and members of the Church in which they set forth the same principle:

Be careful that you teach not for the word of God the commandments of men, nor the doctrines of men, nor the ordinances of men, inasmuch as you are God's messengers. Study the word of God, and preach it and not your opinions, for no man's opinion is worth a straw. Advance no principle but what you can prove, for one scriptural proof is worth ten thousand opinions. . . . When you go forth to preach, and the Spirit of God rests upon you, giving you wisdom and utterance, and enlightening your understanding, be careful that you ascribe the glory to God, and not to yourselves. Boast not of intelligence, of wisdom, or of power; for it is only that which God has imparted unto you; but be humble, be meek, be patient and give glory to God. . . . (DHC III: 395-396.)

What further counsel and blessings are pronounced upon the obedient? The Twelve Apostles continued:

And if you unitedly seek after unity of purpose and design: if you are men of humility and of faithfulness, of integrity and perseverance; if you submit yourselves to the teachings of heaven, and are guided by the Spirit of God; if you at all times seek the glory of God and the salvation of men, and lay your honor prostrate in the dust, if need be, and are willing to fulfill the purposes of God in all things, the power of the Priesthood will rest upon you, and you will become mighty in testimony; the widow and the orphan will be made glad and the poor among man rejoice in the Holy One of Israel. . . . (Ibid., III:397.)

The Counsel of Contemporary Apostles

Elder Mark E. Petersen of the Council of the Twelve has authoritatively given the position of the Church regarding the need for teachers (and others) to accept the word of the Lord in the scriptures and the authorized doctrines from the Authorities of the Church. Here are some of these statements as gleaned from Your Faith and You:

Teach only true doctrine . . . True doctrine will bring true converts when properly presented. The great importance of true conversion cannot be overemphasized. Without it there is no obedience, because unless we are converted to the laws of God, we will see no necessity for obeying them. We will never sacrifice for something to which we have not been converted. And neither will there be any salvation without conversion, and there is no obedience without conversion, and there is no salvation without obedience, then how shall we be saved? (p. 41.)

Speculation. It seems peculiar that speculative persons are not willing to accept the doctrines of the Church without endeavoring to embellish them. It seems strange, too, that such persons do not realize that in thus embellishing the doctrines of the Church, and adding some of their own, they are advocating doctrines of men, and that manmade doctrines bring condemnation from the Lord . . . . No man has any right to change the word of God, nor to add to it. That can only be done by revelation. Yet, some persons, contrary to the position of the Church, will teach . . . . manmade notions which in no way, shape, nor manner can be declared truthfully to be Church doctrine. Setting up new doctrine in this way is dangerous and wrong. It may lead to many other extremes . . . . Speculation in doctrine leads only to confusion and doubt. Speculation does not save. Neither does it convert. Then why speculate? Our work is to help bring to pass the eternal life of man. The pure, unembellished truth is required to do that. (Pp. 128, 129.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith of the Quorum of the Twelve has given us the criterion to judge truth, as that truth affects our salvation:

The key to truth. If members of the Church would place more confidence in the word of the Lord and less confidence in the theories of men, they would be better off. I will give you a key for your guidance. Any doctrine, whether it comes in the name of religion, science, philosophy, or whatever it may be, that is in conflict with the revelations of the Lord that have been accepted by the Church as coming from the Lord, will fail. It may appear to be very plausible; it may be put before you in such a way that you cannot answer it, it may appear to be established by evidence that cannot be controverted, but all you need do is to bide your time. Time will level all things. You will find that every doctrine, theory, principle, no matter how great it may appear; no matter how universally it may be believed, if it is not in accord with the word of the Lord, it will perish. Nor is it necessary for us to try to stretch the word of the Lord to make it conform to these theories and teachings. The word of the Lord shall not pass away unfilled. I realize that we are all weak, and at times may place false interpretations upon the written word, but the revelations are so clear regarding Adam, the fall, the atonement, the resurrection, the redemption of the earth when it shall again be proclaimed "good," and so many other things which fall under the ban of present-day teaching, that we need not be led astray. The theories of men change from day to day. Much that is taught now will tomorrow be in the discard, but the word of the Lord will endure forever. (The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, October, 1930, pp. 155, 156.)

Follow the Lord's Counsel

The scriptures are the basis for understanding our relationship to God, because they reveal the word of the Lord through his inspired prophets. His prophets today make known to the Latter-day Saints the will of the Lord and receive revelation for our guidance. The Prophet and President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the mouthpiece of God for the people who have made covenants with the Lord by baptism. Elder John A. Widtsoe wrote that the greatest or the most important prophet to us is the living prophet, because it is his responsibility to direct the people in solving the problems of the day by the inspiration of the Lord. Every prophet who has directed the Church in any generation has been the greatest prophet to that generation. The Latter-day Saint sustains the President of the Church in this way by accepting counsel from him and those who serve with him as prophets, seers, and revelators. (Improvement Era, November 1943, p. 689.

But how is the member of the Church to know the truth? It is by the power of the Holy Ghost. But who is entitled to this power? As this revelation points out, it is one who is humble (teachable, submissive to the Lord's will), prayerful, having faith in the Church Authorities, and remembering that in this life our principal concern should be to seek salvation through the gospel. This important fact was made known by the Lord when he said it was necessary to walk uprightly before him. (D&C 46:7.)

The Blessing of Obedience

We have now come to the third instruction given to the missionaries who were to teach the words "which the prophets and apostles have written" and that which is taught by "the Comforter through the prayer of faith." (Ibid., 52:9, 14-21, 36.)

"And behold, he that is faithful shall be made ruler over many things." (Ibid., v. 13.) As one learns to rule himself, he grows in power, and the Lord places more responsibility upon him. (Alma 12:9-11; D&C 82:3.) This life is the time for testing and trial. He who is faithful in a few things will be made ruler over many. (Luke 19:12-26.) The reward of the true disciple of Jesus is the blessing of Godhood when all things will be subject to him.

He That Is Overcome

Among the brethren mentioned in our text (Section 52) there were some who did not remain faithful to their covenants. An example is Elder Lyman Wight who was told that "Satan desireth to sift him as chaff." (v. 12.) Years later this man, as an apostle, was tried by a High Council for false teachings but he repented and was forgiven. Later, however, he left the Church and his high calling in not submitting to the counsel of his brethren. As the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary states, "The Lord told him to 'beware,' but the warning was forgotten in the hour of greatest danger." (P. 305.) Some of the missionaries named in verses 22 through 34 were also overcome of the world. (Ibid., pp. 307-310.)

Summary

Section 52 was received immediately following a general conference of the Church where great spiritual blessings were enjoyed by the faithful Saints. In the main, this revelation was given that certain brethren might know of their assignments in the ministry, together with important instructions on how to detect the influences of the adversary. There was a pattern given which, if known, would be a means by which the missionaries and the members of the Church would be able to determine who is a true disciple of the Lord, and thus accept him as the Lord's representative. The standard of judgment is whether or not the person obeys the Lord's ordinances, which means the first principles of the gospel, and the rules and regulations which have been given for the guidance of the Church. Regardless of the language, meekness, and other virtues which impress people, God demands acceptance of his ordinances as the proof of faithfulness. One of the important tests to be applied to those who profess approval of the Lord is whether their teachings are from the writings of the apostles and prophets, both living and dead. The final testimony comes to the faithful Latter-day Saint through the Holy Ghost which bears witness to the truths spoken by the living oracles. The President of the Church is the revelator of the Lord and the person, who, under the power of the Holy Ghost, is authorized to determine the doctrine of the Church. His associates in the First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve receive revelation for their callings as leaders of the Church, as do other officers in the kingdom of God.
