Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 38

Endure to the End

(Sections 53 and 55)

Throughout all scriptures, the divine message has been—seek the Lord early and remain true to the covenants made with him. If faithful in doing this, there is no blessing which will be withheld.

Algernon Sidney Gilbert

The revelation for study in this chapter was addressed to Algernon Sidney Gilbert, who was in the Church for only four years. He became a member in the year 1830 and died June 1834. Before he joined the Church he was a merchant in Painesville, Ohio, but later in Kirtland, he was the business partner of Newel K. Whitney. It was into their store that the Prophet Joseph Smith entered and introduced himself to Brother Whitney. (Chapter 25.)

A few months after the arrival of the Prophet and his party in Ohio, Brother Gilbert requested that the Prophet inquire of the Lord concerning his place in the kingdom. Section 53 was received in reply to this request. After this revelation was received, in which Brother Gilbert was commanded to accompany the Prophet and others to Missouri, these brethren left Kirtland on June 19, 1831, for the west. By this same revelation Brother Gilbert was appointed keeper of the Lord's storehouse. Later this call was to receive "moneys, to be an agent unto the Church, to buy land in all the regions about . . . in righteousness and . . . wisdom." (D&C 57:6.) In addition, he was to establish a store, the profits of which were to be used for the building up of Zion. (Ibid., v. 8.)

In July 1833, a mob of about five hundred threatened the Saints of Independence, Missouri, with whippings, the same cruel treatment which they had administered to a number of the brethren not long before this. Six of the leading brethren, including Algernon S. Gilbert and William W. Phelps, offered themselves as a ransom for the Church, even to allow themselves to be whipped to death, if necessary. These six brethren agreed that they would arrange for the Saints to leave Jackson County as soon as possible. In this transaction, Brother Gilbert and John Corrill were to remain longer than the rest of the Saints to finish the business of the Church in that area.

It is recorded that Brother Gilbert "had been known to say that he 'would rather die than go forth to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles.'" In commenting upon this remark, Elder B. H. Roberts pointed out that his refusal to preach the gospel did not arise from a lack of faith, but from diffidence and lack of confidence in his own ability to preach. In extolling Brother Gilbert's great contribution to the Church, Brother Roberts continues as follows:

He was a man of rare good sense, conservative and of sound judgment. All of which appears in the many communications drawn up in Missouri by him during the troublous times through which the Church passed in those days. Much of the correspondence between the Missouri brethren and Governor Dunklin was the work of Elder Gilbert, and it bears witness to the truth of what is here said of him. Nor did he entirely refuse to bear witness of the truth of the Gospel to others. (DHC II:119, footnote.)

In summary of this man's contribution, Elder B. H. Roberts gives this evaluation: "The Lord has had few more devoted servants in this dispensation." (Ibid., p. 118.)

Section 53

The Prophet's inquiry of the Lord in behalf of Algernon S. Gilbert brought forth a revelation consisting of only seven verses. A significant truth to be received from that first verse is that the Lord hears and answers prayer; for he had heard and answered Brother Gilbert's prayer. In the growing kingdom of God, many had requested that their place in the Church might be known through revelation. The revelations given for the members in the early period of the Church have revealed many great truths that have given encouragement, hope, and inspiration to those who live in the decades following the Prophet's period. Elder Gilbert was assured in this revelation that the Church which he had joined was raised up by the Lord in these last days.

In order that he and all who should become acquainted with this revelation might know that the purpose of Jesus crucifixion or atonement is to offer the only means of escape from sin, the Lord revealed:

Behold, I, the Lord, who was crucified for the sins of the world, give unto you a commandment that you shall forsake the world. (D&C 53:2.)

If Jesus gave his life that we, who receive this gift of remission of sins by acceptance of the gospel, might enjoy blessings in this life and an eternal reward of exaltation, there must be continued effort to forsake the world of sin. President David O. McKay said in a General Conference:

Now, what do we mean by the world? It is sometimes used as an indefinite term. I take it that the world refers to the inhabitants who are alienated from the Saints of God. They are aliens to the Church, and it is the spirit of this alienation that we should keep ourselves free from. . . . (Gospel Ideals, p. 153.)

A recognition that all of us are imperfect to some degree should stimulate us to search for ways and means to overcome those imperfections, which hinder us from reaching the goal of perfection admonished by the Savior. (Matt. 5:48.)

Three verses point out Elder Gilbert's calling in the Church. (D&C 53:3-5.) The success he had in this calling has already been pointed out in the forepart of this chapter.

Important to Elder Gilbert would be the counsel given in verse six wherein he is told that his present assignment should be accepted in faith. Through his faithfulness "in the vineyard," other responsibilities would be placed upon him. The person of faith is desirous of building up Zion as much as possible.

The closing verse of Section 53 counsels Elder Gilbert that the rich rewards of heaven come to him who remains faithful to the end.

And again, I would that ye should learn that he only is saved who endureth unto the end. Even so. Amen. (Ibid., v. 7.)

This same counsel has been given in other dispensations of the gospel. The Savior taught his disciples during his ministry that their labors would bring persecution upon them, but "he that endureth to the end shall be saved." (Matt. 10:22.)

As the resurrected Redeemer, Jesus expressed this fact to the Nephites:

Behold, I am the law, and the light. Look unto me, and endure to the end, and ye shall live; for unto him that endureth to the end will I give eternal life. (3 Nephi 15:9.)

On the day The Church of Jesus of Latter-day Saints was organized, the Savior revealed this same truth to the Prophet Joseph Smith as an admonition to all men, particularly addressed to the people of this dispensation. The first step in salvation is to accept Jesus Christ as one's Savior through faith, repentance, and baptism of the water and of the Spirit, as stated in the revelation:

And we know that all men must repent and believe on the name of Jesus Christ, and worship the Father in his name, and endure in faith on his name to the end, or they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God. (D&C 20:29.)

In order that there might not be any misunderstanding as to the fact that men are saved by the atonement of Christ, that revelation continues as follows:

And we know that justification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true; and we know also, that sanctification through the grace of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is just and true, to all those who love and serve God with all their mights, minds, and strength. (Ibid., v. 30, 31.)

And in order that those who have become sanctified (holy) by striving for perfection will not believe that their position is secure for,

. . . there is a possibility that man may fall from grace and depart from the living God; Therefore let the Church take heed and pray always, lest they fall into temptation; Yea, and even let those who are sanctified take heed also. (Ibid., vs. 32, 33.)

Meaning of "Endure to the End"

A dictionary definition of "endure" is "To continue in the same state without perishing; last; to remain firm, as under trial; to suffer or bear up patiently; to endure hardship; to withstand or bear, as pain, sorrow, or destructive force, without yielding."

What might the Latter-day Saint be required to endure? The member of the Church is susceptible to the ills which afflict mankind in general. With these ills, mental and physical, one must bear patiently. However, it is a fact that blessings of health, happiness, and even prosperity result from one's faithfulness to the gospel. We may not always recognize our faults which bring physical and mental suffering because of ignorance or unwillingness to correct our lives. The violation of health laws will bring its penalties. The Lord told Joseph Smith to: "Be patient in afflictions, for thou shalt have many; but endure them, for, lo, I am with thee, even unto the end of thy days." (Ibid., 24:8.)

Elder George Q. Cannon said:

So it is with all of us. We have great afflictions from time to time. It seems to be necessary that we should be tried and proved to see whether we are full of integrity or not. In this way we get to know ourselves and our own weaknesses; and the Lord knows us, and our brethren and sisters know us. Therefore, it is a precious gift to have the gift of patience, to be good-tempered, to be cheerful, to not be depressed, to not give way to wrong feelings and become impatient and irritable. It is a blessed gift for all to possess. (Gospel Truth, p. 198.)

The Latter-day Saints must also bear persecution patiently, whether physical or mental. The tauntings or ridicule of those who consider a Latter-day Saint as too religious or "fanatical" may be examples of the latter. That the disciples of the Master would receive such persecutions was said by Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount. (Matt. 5:10-12.)

In this life one must also endure or stand up against temptation in its numerous forms.

Sometimes we may become so general in our remarks on what we should do, that some of the help that can be extended to those who want to know what to do is not always given. The Latter-day Saint wants to know the answer to the question, "What must I do to be exalted?" He already knows that acceptance of the first principles and ordinances of the gospel is the beginning of the new life, but how may he keep on that road which leads to exaltation? If we say, "Keep the commandments," it has all been said, but there is the need to know the commandments. Furthermore, it is also necessary to know that there are some guideposts, which, when pointed out, draw attention to certain pitfalls that may ensnare even those who are trying to follow the Savior's teachings. It is not intended that the following suggestions in this chapter on guideposts are a complete list, but they are intended to be helpful.

Seek the Spirit

The counsel to seek for the influence of the Holy Ghost is always paramount as one desires to maintain faith unto the end. It is by that Spirit that one is able to discern truth from untruth. By that guidance there comes understanding of the way one should live. The principle of receiving more bounteously of the Spirit is set forth in this scripture:

Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you; seek me diligently and ye shall find me; ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. (D&C 88:63.)

Because some members of the Church had not received the peace of mind through the Spirit, and the security that accompanies it, President Joseph F. Smith said:

There are many who, not having reached this point of determined conviction, are driven about by every wind of doctrine, thus being ill at ease, unsettled, restless. These are they who are discouraged over incidents that occur in the Church, and in the nation, and in the turmoils of men and associations. They harbor a feeling of suspicion, unrest, uncertainty. Their thoughts are disturbed, and they become excited with the least change, like one at sea who has lost his bearings. (Gospel Doctrine, p. 126.)

Then the President of the Church asked: "Where would you have people go who are unsettled in the truth?" The answer is plain, he said.

They will not find satisfaction in the doctrines of men. Let them seek for it in the written word of God; let them pray to him in their secret chambers, where no human ear can hear, and in their closets petition for light; let them obey the doctrines of Jesus, and they will immediately begin to grow in the knowledge of the truth. This course will bring peace to their souls, joy to their hearts, and a settled conviction which no change can disturb. They may be well assured that "he that heareth in secret will reward them openly." Let them seek for strength from the source of all strength, and he will provide spiritual contentment, a rest which is incomparable with the physical rest that cometh after toil. All who seek have a right to, and may enter into, the rest of God, here upon the earth, from this time forth, now, today; and when earth-life is finished, they shall also enjoy his rest in heaven. (Ibid., pp. 126-127.)

One sure way of having the sense of security which comes to the faithful is by holding fast to the "rod of iron" or the scriptures, as revealed to the prophets.

Keep on the Right Side of the Line

Another President of the Church has given solid counsel on a theme upon which he spoke often. President George Albert Smith at a General Conference related some counsel given him by his grandfather, Elder George A. Smith, as follows:

He said: "There is a line of demarcation well defined between the Lord's territory and the devil's territory. If you will remain on the Lord's side of the line, the adversary cannot come there to tempt you. You are perfectly safe as long as you stay on the Lord's side of the line. But," he said, "if you cross onto the devil's side of the line, you are in his territory, and you are in his power, and he will work on you to get you just as far from that line as he possibly can, knowing that he can only succeed in destroying you by keeping you away from the place where there is safety." (Conference Report, October 1945, p. 118.)

President George Albert Smith then gave the following examples to illustrate when the member of the Church is "on the Lord's side of the line": (1) by observing the Sabbath day; (2) in the observance of secret and family prayers; (3) by expressing gratitude to God for food; (4) by loving one's neighbors; (5) by being honest in all dealings with men; and (6) in keeping the Word of Wisdom. President Smith continued:

. . . And so I might go on through the Ten Commandments and the other commandments that God has given for our guidance and say again, all that enriches our lives and makes us happy and prepares us for eternal joy is on the Lord's side of the line. Finding fault with the things that God has given to us for our guidance is not on the Lord's side of the line . . . (Ibid., p. 118.)

As always, those who find fault receive less and less of the Spirit which promotes happiness and joy. Upon this subject the counsel of the living prophets is certain. All have proclaimed the necessity for upholding those whom God has appointed as his servants. President Joseph F. Smith indicated the seriousness of not sustaining the Lord's anointed, in this way:

. . . And I cannot emphasize too strongly the importance of Latter-day Saints honoring and sustaining in truth and in deed the authority of the Holy Priesthood which is called to preside. The moment a spirit enters the heart of a member to refrain from sustaining the constituted authorities of the Church, that moment he becomes possessed of a spirit which inclines to rebellion or dissension; and if he permits that spirit to take a firm root in his mind, it will eventually lead him into darkness and apostasy. . . . (Gospel Doctrine, p. 224.)

But what if the Latter-day Saint does not understand the reason for certain measures or counsel? President George Q. Cannon had this to say regarding this question:

A faithful Latter-day Saint may not be able to understand all the movements of the Church nor all the motives of the authorities of the Church in giving counsel or in taking action upon different questions; but will a man of this character censure them, assail them or condemn them? Certainly not. He will be likely to say: "I do not understand the reasons for this action; I do not see clearly what the presiding authorities have in view in doing this; but I will wait and learn more. This I do know, that this is the work of God and that these men are His servants and that they will not be permitted by him to lead the Church astray or to commit any wrong of so serious a character as to endanger its progress or perpetuity. . . ." (Gospel Truth, p. 234.)

Be Teachable

The person who is submissive to the will of God as proclaimed in the scriptures and by the counsel of the Priesthood is teachable. This quality or characteristic of the Christ is known in the standard works of the Church as humility. Humility is the opposite of pride. Against this vice the prophets have spoken very frequently as they have admonished the seeker for salvation to acquire the virtue of humility. Neither poverty nor sorrow which does not have as its purpose to change one's life, should be mistaken for humility. Here are some of the prophets' teachings:

Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall. (Proverbs 16:18.)

Behold, are ye stripped of pride? I say unto you, if ye are not ye are not prepared to meet God. (Alma 5:28.)

And if ye seek the riches which it is the will of the Father to give unto you, ye shall have the riches of eternity; and it must needs be that the riches of the earth are mine to give; but beware of pride, lest ye become as the Nephites of old. (D&C 38:39.)

God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble. (James 4:6.)

Be thou humble; and the Lord thy God shall lead thee by the hand, and give thee answer to thy prayers. (D&C 112:10.)

Religious Hobbies Are Unwise

Among some members of the Church there is a tendency to emphasize one principle or practice above another. Such a person may assume an attitude of superiority and thus become conceited and full of pride. "Saints with hobbies," said President Joseph F. Smith, "are prone to judge and condemn their brethren and sisters who are not so zealous in the one particular direction of their pet theory as they are. The man with the Word of Wisdom only in his brain, is apt to find unmeasured fault with every other member of the Church who entertains liberal ideas as to the importance of other doctrines of the gospel." He also said that,

. . . Hobbies are dangerous in the Church of Christ. They are dangerous because they give undue prominence to certain principles or ideas to the detriment and dwarfing of others just as important, just as binding, just as saving as the favored doctrines or commandments.

Hobbies give to those who encourage them a false aspect of the gospel of the Redeemer; they distort and place out of harmony its principles and teachings. The point of view is unnatural. Every principle and practice revealed from God is essential to man's salvation, and to place any one of them unduly in front, hiding and dimming all others is unwise and dangerous; it jeopardizes our salvation, for it darkens our minds and beclouds our understandings. . . . (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 116-117.)

Strive for Perfection

Enduring to the end involves effort. That person who has before him the vision of what he may become through faithfulness, has a far better chance to endure to the end than the person who is not so minded. Constant vigilance in correcting habits or thoughts which militate against the attainment of the goal of perfection, is the road to success. The Savior instructed the Nephites in the goal to which we should all strive: "Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect." (3 Nephi 12:48. Matt. 5:48.)

These words were not said to discourage his followers in that they would consider the goal unattainable, but rather to stimulate them to make preparations, then in striving for that final perfection. It is true that we will not receive perfection in this life. We can, however, work always to that end. Elder Mark E. Petersen of the Council of the Twelve in a General Conference expressed this belief:

I believe that in many ways, here and now in mortality, we can begin to perfect ourselves. A certain degree of perfection is attainable in this life. I believe that we can be one hundred percent perfect, for instance, in abstaining from the use of tea and coffee. We can be one hundred percent perfect in abstaining from liquor and tobacco. We can be one hundred percent perfect in paying a full and honest tithing. We can be one hundred percent perfect in abstaining from eating two meals on fast day and giving to the bishop as fast offering the value of those two meals from which we abstain.

We can be one hundred percent perfect in keeping the commandment which says that we shall not profane the name of God. We can be perfect in keeping the commandment which says, "Thou shalt not commit adultery." (Exod. 20:14.) We can perfect in keeping the commandment which says, "Thou shalt not steal." (Ibid., 15.) We can become perfect in keeping various others of the commandments that the Lord has given us. (Conference Report, April, 1950, p. 133.)

President Joseph Fielding Smith said:

If we have a failing, if we have a weakness, there is where we should concentrate, with a desire to overcome, until we master and conquer. If a man feels that it is hard for him to pay his tithing, then that is the thing he should do, until he learns to pay his tithing. If it is the Word of Wisdom, that is what he should do until he learns to love that commandment. (Conference Report, October 1941, p. 95.)

Reminders

As a reminder of ways in which one may keep on the road to perfection or to endure to the end, these suggestions are given: (1) Become settled in the truth by seeking for the Spirit; (2) Hold fast to the word and will of the Lord as found in the four Standard Works of the Church; (3) Keep the commandments contained in the gospel of Jesus Christ by remaining on the Lord's side of the line; (4) Sustain the Authorities of the Church by having faith in their counsel and direction or by being responsive to instruction received; (5) Be teachable by eliminating pride; (6) Do not feel that one commandment or program of the Church is to be accepted in practice above others equally as important; (7) Work for perfection by correcting the habits or practices which stand as barriers to the realization of the goal mentioned by the Savior. Do not believe that in mortality one cannot be perfect in many ways which the Lord has commanded his children to follow.

For How Long?

Wise counsel by President Brigham Young on the subject matter of this lesson was given toward the end of his life, as follows:

There are a great many texts which might be used, very comprehensive and full of meaning, but I know of none, either in the Old or New Testament, more so than that saying, said to have been made by the Savior, and I have no doubt it was, "If ye love me, keep my commandments . . . . "

How long? For a day? Keep the commandments of the Lord for a week? Observe and do his will for a month or a year? There is no promise to any individual, that I have any knowledge of, that he shall receive the reward of the just, unless he is faithful to the end. . . . (Journal of Discourses 13:310-311.)
