Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 39

The Revelation to William W. Phelps

(Section 55)

Many men of exceptional talent joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints not long after its formal organization in the spring of 1830. The Lord knew the needs of the Prophet and the men who could help him most. Among those who had indicated a desire to join the Church at this early period was William Wine Phelps who will long be remembered by the Saints because of his contribution to the hymnology of the Church. He made his impress upon the history of this dispensation in many other ways, however.

According to the Prophet's journal, William W. Phelps and his family arrived in Kirtland, Ohio, about the middle of June 1831, as the Prophet was preparing for his journey to Missouri. Because Mr. Phelps desired "to do the will of the Lord," the Prophet inquired of the Lord concerning him and the revelation (Section 55) for study in this chapter was received. (DHC I:184-185.)

Background of Section 55

William W. Phelps was in his fortieth year when he came to Kirtland. Before this he had been active in politics in New York State and had been the editor of a newspaper for the Anti-Masonic Party. It was while thus employed in Canandaigua, New York, only a short distance from Palmyra, that he bought a copy of The Book of Mormon which had just come off the press. With an intimate knowledge of the Bible, he and his wife compared it with The Book of Mormon. A few years later (1835), he wrote this about the influence The Book of Mormon had upon him:

From the first time I read this volume of volumes, even till now, I have been struck with a kind of sacred joy at its title page. —What a wonderful volume! What a glorious treasure! By that book, I have learned the right way to God; by that book I received the fulness of the everlasting gospel; by that book I found the new covenant; by that book I learned that the New Jerusalem, even Zion was to be built upon this continent; by that book I found a key to the holy prophets; and by that book began to unfold the mysteries of God, and I was made glad. Who can tell his goodness, or estimate the worth of such a book? He only who is directed by the Holy Ghost in all things; and has kept all his Lord's commandments blameless through life.

[The above quotation, with other biographical material in this chapter, is taken from an unpublished thesis written by Walter Dean Bowen of the Church Seminary System.]

William W. Phelps' conversion to the gospel through The Book of Mormon had given to him and his wife a desire to meet Joseph Smith. This was accomplished toward the end of December 1830. Of this event, Brother Phelps recorded his feelings as follows:

Now, notwithstanding my body was not baptized into this church, yet my heart was here from the time I became acquainted with the Book of Mormon; and my hope, steadfast like an anchor, and my faith increased like the grass after a refreshing shower, when I for the first time held a conversation with our beloved brother Joseph whom I was willing to acknowledge as a prophet of the Lord, and to whom, and to whose godly account of himself and the work he was engaged in. I owe my first determination to quit the folly of my way, and the fancy and fame of this world, and seek the Lord and his righteousness, in order to enter a better world . . . .

Such was the impression made upon Brother Phelps by the Prophet. The way had been prepared, however, by the witness of the Holy Ghost to his soul.

Section 55

Six months later, the Lord, by revelation, called upon Brother Phelps to be baptized. Significantly, he would not be chosen unless he was obedient to the commandment given. The Lord calls men, but only a relatively few are chosen because their thoughts and aspirations are upon the things of this world. The essential message of the gospel for the investigator is given in verse 1 of this revelation. (D&C 55:1.)

Behold, thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant William, yea, even the Lord of the whole earth, thou art called and chosen; and after thou hast been baptized by water, which if you do with an eye single to my glory, you shall have a remission of your sins and a reception of the Holy Spirit by the laying on of hands;

Every convert receives a remission of sins by obedience to the commandment that his faith and repentance are sincere, with the intent that his act of obedience to baptism will be pointed to the glory of God. It is the Lord's work and glory to bring about the eternal life of man. Acceptance of the gospel requires that the person's efforts will be turned into furthering the Lord's work in every possible way.

Another important truth is indicated in this verse when it is understood in its historical background. Brother Phelps had already received a testimony of The Book of Mormon by the Holy Ghost; yet, he was told that if he was baptized in the water the Holy Ghost would be given to him by the laying on of hands. Why was it necessary for Brother Phelps (and all converts to receive this gift, if he had already received the Holy Ghost? The brief answer is as follows: The Holy Ghost which convinces the investigator of the truth will not remain with him unless baptism in water is accepted, and also the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Not until the authorized servant of God bestows this gift by the power of the Priesthood does the person have the "right" to retain the blessings of the Holy Ghost. (Chapter 32.)

Phelps' Baptism

There are probably many ways that the Lord has brought great persons of talent into his work. An understanding of some teachings of the gospel was a factor in the case of Brother Phelps, although he had already received the testimony of the Holy Ghost. Of his conversion, he once wrote:

I was not a professor at the time, nor a believer in sectarian religion, but a believer in God, and the Son of God, as two distinct characters, and a believer in sacred scriptures. I had long been searching for the "old paths," that I might find the right way and walk in it, and after a suitable time to investigate the work, and prove its truth by corresponding evidence from the old Bible, and by internal witness of the spirit, according to the rules of holiness, I embraced it for the truth's sake, and all honest men who seek a better world, will "go and do likewise," (Messenger and Advocate, I:115.)

Obedient to the revelation, Brother Phelps was baptized on June 16, 1831.

Because of William W. Phelps' prominence in New York State, several newspapers made note of his becoming a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

A General Assignment

Continuing the revelation, the promise is made that upon his baptism, Brother Phelps would be ordained an elder by Joseph Smith, and thus he would be able to preach repentance and baptism for the remission of sins. (D&C 55:2.) Following this promise the revelation reads:

And on whomsoever you shall lay your hands, if they are contrite before me, you shall have power to give the Holy Spirit. (Ibid., v. 3.)

This promise to Brother Phelps was not intended for him alone, but it is a blessing which may be participated in by any worthy elder of this Church. In itself, it is an important truth. These following two facts are worthy of consideration: (1) By revelation in this day man may know that the power to bestow the Holy Ghost was never intended only for the Twelve Apostles appointed in the meridian dispensation; and (2) There is a way by which the elder may be able to see the evidence of his ministry in the lives of those whom he serves.

How would Elder Phelps be able to know, on the basis of verse 3 of this revelation, that he had not been deceived? As long as he worthily performed his duties as an elder and the person he confirmed a member of the Church had prepared himself with an "eye single to my [God's] glory," there should be manifest in the lives of those converts the fruits of the Spirit. The Lord promised many gifts of the Holy Ghost to the sincere believer. (D&C 46:11, 26.) As these gifts were received and use made of them in healings, and other miracles, prophesyings, etc., the elder in the Church would be apprised of the power which he possessed as an elder. One may conclude that the steadfastness which Brother Phelps and many others demonstrated during their lives, aided by the Spirit, gave evidence of the promise given to faithful Priesthood bearers.

Specific Calling

The revelation addressed to William W. Phelps gave him an assignment which was suited to his special abilities. In these words, the Lord said:

And again, you shall be ordained to assist my servant Oliver Cowdery to do the work of printing, and of selecting and writing books for schools in this church, that little children also may receive instruction before me as is pleasing unto me. (Ibid., 55:4.)

This is the first time in the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants that mention is made of schools in the Church.

It should also be noted that this revelation (v. 5) commands Brother Phelps to accompany the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon to the land of the Saints' inheritance, (Missouri) where he would undertake the work assigned him. The last verse of Section 55 assigns Joseph Coe also to be a member of the company. Concerning this journey, the Prophet's history states that they traveled by wagon, canal boats, and stages to St. Louis, but from that point on, some members of the party, including Brother Phelps, "went by foot on land to Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, where we arrived about the middle of July, and the rest of the company came by water a few days later." (DHC I:188.)

In Jackson County, Missouri (July 1831), the Lord gave to the Prophet a revelation in which Brother Phelps was to be established as a "printer unto the church" at that place. Important in this connection is that the position of printer in that period was much more than a pressman, it also included the responsibilities of editor. It is said of such men that they had great versatility and knowledge. In Section 57 Brother Phelps is told to "obtain whatsoever he can obtain in righteousness, for the good of the saints." (v. 12.)

The Evening and Morning Star

With the call to be the printer unto the Church and work with Oliver Cowdery in publishing books for the Church, Brother Phelps purchased a printing press at Cincinnati. With the establishment of this enterprise and the issuance of The Evening and Morning Star, a monthly publication, the first periodical of the Church, there was great joy for the Saints, as the Prophet recorded:

. . . In July, we received the first number of The Evening and Morning Star, which was a joyous treat to the Saints. Delightful indeed, was it to contemplate that the little band of brethren had become so large, and grown so strong, in so short a time as to be able to issue a paper of their own, which contained not only some of the revelations, but other information also, —which would gratify and enlighten the humble inquirer after truth.

So embittered was the public mind against the truth, that the press universally had been arrayed against us; and although many newspapers published the prospectus of our paper, yet it appeared to have been done more to calumniate the editor, than give publicity to the forthcoming periodical. Editors thought to do us harm, while the Saints rejoiced that they could do nothing against the truth but for it. (DHC I:273.)

In this periodical appeared many of the revelations which are now found in the Doctrine and Covenants and also a chapter and parts of three other chapters of the book of Moses. It was published from the period June 1832, until the destruction of the press on July 20, 1833, at which time the Book of Commandments, the first compilation of revelations consisting of 65 chapters, was being printed. (In 1835, The Evening and Morning Star was re-established in Kirtland, Ohio, with Oliver Cowdery as editor.) The first issue of the Star informed its readers that its office was "situated within twelve miles of the west line of the State of Missouri; which at present is the western limits of the United States, and about 120 miles west of any press in the state. . . ." (Ibid., p. 277.)

There also appeared in the first issue, the following counsel concerning the education of children:

The disciples should lose no time in preparing schools for their children, that they may be taught as is pleasing unto the Lord, and brought up in the way of holiness. Those appointed to select and prepare books for the use of schools, will attend to that subject as soon as more weighty matters are finished.

Since that time the Church has developed an educational system that has provided for the secular and religious education of its members.

Latter-day Saint Schools

It is a matter of much satisfaction that the date, location and name of the first school established within the present limits of Kansas City are matters of historical record. This school was founded by the Mormon Prophet, Joseph Smith, in 1832, in what is now Troost Park Lake, a site 12 1/2 miles west of Independence. Parley P. Pratt was placed in charge of the school, that was named the "Colesville School" after the present Mormon Church at Colesville, New York. (Bennion, M. Lynn: Mormonism and Education, Missouri Valley Historical Society, quoted by Kansas City Journal Post, March 4, 1923, pp. 17-18.)

Beginning in February 1833, and throughout that winter the School of the Prophets was held in Kirtland, Ohio. This school was organized according to revelation. (D&C 88:119-141.) President Brigham Young said that the Prophet Joseph Smith at first taught the elders the doctrine of the Church that they might teach the gospel to the world. This instruction did not give them information on how to govern their lives temporally; consequently, he taught them "how to live, that they might be better prepared to perform the great work they were called to accomplish." (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 567.) This School of the Prophets continued in Kirtland until the Saints left that locality. There was also a school conducted there for the teaching of languages and other subjects. In Missouri, the School of the Prophets was also held.

In Nauvoo, Illinois, the first university under Latter-day Saint supervision was organized as the "University of the City of Nauvoo" for the purpose of teaching the sciences and arts.

Wherever the Saints moved, their interest was in the education of their children. The Sunday School and other auxiliary organizations came into being as the need arose. Seminaries and institutes are a part of the Church School System for the instruction of high school and college students that they may receive religious as well as secular education on weekdays. Church-operated colleges and the Brigham Young University are also a part of this system. It can be said that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints from the beginning has encouraged its members to become educated better to meet the purpose of their creation. This process of learning must always serve the Church member for the purpose for which he is responsible—his temporal and spiritual salvation.

William W. Phelps' Career

William W. Phelps was a man of great ability with varied interests. Numerous were his contributions to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and to the American frontier. His versatility of ability and interests is shown by the following occupations and offices held by him. He was "a printer, hymn writer, poet-journalist, newspaper editor, judge, orator, scribe, lawyer, educator, missionary, temple worker, member of the city council, member of stake presidency, pioneer, explorer, writer of books and pamphlets, topographical engineer, superintendent of schools, surveyor general, weather man, chaplain of lower house of representatives, and speaker of the house in the legislature of the State of Deseret."

In the years of 1837 and 1838 when many leading brethren apostatized, Brother Phelps was one of them. The members of the Church in Missouri withdrew the hand of fellowship from the local presidency of the Church, consisting of Brother Phelps, David Whitmer, and John Whitmer, because of disobedience to the word of the Lord.

Notwithstanding the action of Brother Phelps which brought about his severance from the Church in the spring of 1838, the Lord still provided an opportunity for him to return to the fold in a revelation a few months later. (DHC III:46.) Later in the year 1838, Brother Phelps, with other former members of the Church, signed an affidavit against the Prophet in a court of inquiry. At a conference of the Church in Quincy, Illinois, March 17, 1839, Brother Phelps was excommunicated. Several years later he confessed that this affidavit was made under duress and that his part of betraying his brethren was done to save his life.

The Prodigal Returns

In June 1840, William W. Phelps wrote to the Prophet asking forgiveness for the errors he had committed in Missouri. His confession and spirit shown in this letter indicated what was said earlier in this chapter, that he had received a witness of the truth, but he permitted Satan temporarily to overcome him. He wrote as follows:

. . . I am as the prodigal son, though I never doubt or disbelieve the fulness of the Gospel. I have been greatly abused and humbled, and I blessed the God of Israel when I lately read your prophetic blessing on my head, as follows:

"The Lord will chasten him because he taketh honor to himself, and when his soul is greatly humbled he will forsake the evil. Then shall the light of the Lord break upon him as at noonday and in him shall be no darkness," &c.

I have seen the folly of my way, and I tremble at the gulf I have passed. So it is, and why I know not. I prayed and God answered, but what could I do? Says I, "I will repent and live, and ask my old brethren to forgive me, and though they chasten me to death, yet I will die with them, for their God is my God. The least place with them is enough for me, yea, it is bigger and better than all Babylon."

I know my situation, you know it, and God knows it, and I want to be saved if my friends will help me. . . . I have done wrong and I am sorry. The beam is in my own eye. I have not walked along with my friends according to my holy anointing. I ask forgiveness in the name of Jesus Christ of all the Saints, for I will do right, God helping me. I want your Fellowship; if you cannot grant that grant me your peace and friendship, for we are brethren, and our communion used to be sweet, and whenever the Lord brings us together again, I will make all the satisfaction on every point that Saints or God can require. Amen. (DHC 4:141-142.)

The Prophet's Greatness

In reply to this request, Joseph Smith extended the hand of forgiveness for himself and the Saints. He referred to the suffering caused by Brother Phelps and said:

. . . the cup of gall, already full enough for mortals to drink, was indeed filled to overflowing when you turned against us. . . .

However, the cup has been drunk, the will of our Father has been done, and we are yet alive, for which we thank the Lord. And having been delivered from the hands of wicked men by the mercy of our God, we say it is your privilege to be delivered from the powers of the adversary . . . . Your letter was read to the Saints last Sunday, and an expression of their feeling was taken, when it was unanimously Resolved, that W. W. Phelps should be received into fellowship. "Come on, dear brother. Since the war is past, for friends at first, are friends again at last." (Ibid., pp. 163-164.)

Elder B. H. Roberts has very well expressed the greatness of Joseph Smith in this act of charity for this brother, as follows:

When the great offense of Elder William W. Phelps was taken into account—amounting as it did to a betrayal of the Prophet and the Church in Missouri, during the troubles of the Saints in that state—this letter is remarkable. The Prophet's frank forgiveness of his erring brother, gently chiding his wrongdoing, but at the same time remembering in a large way that brother's former devotion and labors; the Prophet's willingness to have the prodigal return and occupy his former high standing among the Saints—all this exhibits a broad-mindedness and generosity that can come only from a great soul, influenced by the spirit of charity enjoined upon his disciples by the teachings of the Son of God. One of the surest evidences of Joseph Smith's greatness of mind and of the inspiration of God upon him is to be seen in his treatment of those who had fallen but were willing to and did repent of their sins. His capacity to forgive under these circumstances seemed boundless. (Ibid., pp. 162, 163, footnote.)

Brother Phelps' faithfulness after this was evidenced in many ways during his life. His testimony of the truth was shown when he sustained the Twelve Apostles after the martydom of the Prophet. As a pioneer in the West his contribution was great as already indicated in his numerous activities.

Phelps, the Hymn Writer

Many of the accomplishments and contributions of William W. Phelps have been forgotten by the members or are unknown to them, but there is one contribution made by him which will never be unknown. It was his great gift to write hymns. It is improbable that any one person has left his impress to a greater degree upon the Church in this way than has Brother Phelps.

It will be remembered that Emma Hale Smith, the wife of Joseph Smith, was appointed by revelation to make a selection of sacred hymns, for the Lord said His "soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads." (D&C 25:11-12.) In this initial work of producing a hymnal for the Church, Emma was assisted by Brother Phelps. Of the ninety selections in that book, published in 1835, twenty-nine were written by him. One of his first hymns, "Redeemer of Israel," which appeared in the Evening and Morning Star and later in the first hymnal, continues to be one of the most popular of Latter-day Saint hymns.

In his Stories of Latter-day Saint Hymns, George D. Pyper has included several of Brother Phelps' hymns, with the remark that they breathe the spirit of the period of the restoration. The one hymn sung frequently in our services and particularly on special occasions, such as conferences and temple dedications, is "The Spirit of God like a Fire Is Burning." (first named "Hosanna Hymn.") Although it was sung by the Saints before the completion of the Kirtland Temple, "the full measure of its emotional and spiritual power was not reached until it climaxed the dedicatory services of that temple, which occurred March 27, 1836." P. 88.) ". . . The chorus is a stanza of exaltation in which the Saints join with the 'angels of heaven' in the cry which embodies the most sacred shout of the Latter-day Saints, viz: 'HOSANNA, HOSANNA, HOSANNA, TO GOD AND THE LAMB!"' (pp. 88-91.)

"Now Let Us Rejoice in the Day of Salvation," known to all Latter-day Saints, was written after mobs had destroyed the printing establishment in Jackson County and also more than two hundred homes at a later date. It came out of a situation of "defeat, frustration, homelessness, suffering, privation, hunger, even—these produced a hymn that still gives hope and sustenance to hundreds of thousands who live in better times." (P. 188.)

An event which will live long in the memory of every Latter-day Saint as an evidence of the truth of Joseph Smith's testimony is his martyrdom. It can probably be said that no one has depicted this event and the feeling which a Latter-day Saint has for the Prophet more forcefully than has Brother Phelps in his epitaphic eulogy "Praise to the Man." Great is its message, and with fervor the followers of the Prophet will sing it with "joyful sadness."

Only a few other great hymns can be mentioned, such as: "Gently Raise the Sacred Strain," the theme hymn of the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir, and also "O God, the Eternal Father," and "Glorious Things Are Sung of Zion."

W. W. Phelps' Testimony

The conversion of William W. Phelps came about from his reading The Book of Mormon. Upon meeting the Prophet Joseph Smith, he and his wife were convinced of the truth of what the Prophet had said concerning the reopening of the heavens and the revelations directing the establishment of the kingdom of God on the earth. Although there were times when he turned against the Church he had accepted as true, yet, he came through many trials and persecutions. Truly the Lord had blessed him generously with many talents which he used for the advancement of his work. He was "called and chosen" as the revelation said. (D&C 55:1.) Upon his return to the fold and until his death on March 6, 1872, in Salt Lake City, Utah, he continued firm in his testimony of the work instituted by God through the Prophet Joseph Smith. In the General Conference of April 1860, Elder Phelps

. . . held in his hand a copy of the first edition of that Book [Book of Mormon] and declared it to be the truth of the Almighty; he had heard the testimony of Joseph Smith and that of the chosen witnesses in relation to the Book of Mormon, and he with them wished to give his testimony to the world relative to its divine origin. He said that he knew this was the church of the living God, and that Brigham Young was the legally appointed successor of Joseph Smith, and that all who receive this testimony will be saved in the celestial kingdom, and he wished that he had a thousand tongues to speak of the great things of the kingdom to the nations of the earth. (Deseret News, April 11, 1860.)
