Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 41

The Center Place of Zion

(Sections 57; 58:1-14)

The year 1831 was an eventful one in the life of the Prophet Joseph Smith and, consequently, of the Church. Among many important developments of that year, the Prophet had come to Kirtland, Ohio, for the first time. Within six months he was in Jackson County, Missouri, arriving there in July.

With the publication of The Book of Mormon, the Saints began to speculate as to where the New Jerusalem of which the ancient scriptures prophesied would be located. The Jaredite prophet Ether was shown many events of the last days, including the fact that the New Jerusalem would be built upon the American Continent. (Ether 13:2-11.) Several centuries later, the resurrected Christ taught the same thing to the Nephites. (3 Nephi 20:22.) The Savior continued by explaining that with his Church established in the land of America in the last days, all of gathered Israel, including the Lamanites of that day, would build the city of the New Jerusalem. (Ibid., 21:20-29.) The Lord said to Enoch, the seventh from Adam, that he and his city which were taken into the heavens would unite with the city of Zion on the earth at the beginning of the millennium. (Moses 7:62-64.)

Interest in the location of the New Jerusalem was shown by many Saints. One of these, Hiram Page, claimed to know the place where this holy city would be built. As a result, the Lord revealed that this location was not to be known then (September 1830), but that it would be "on the borders by the Lamanites." (D&C 28:9.)

In February 1831, the Saints were told by revelation that if they prayed for information on this subject it would be revealed. (Ibid., 42:62.) In the following months it was made known that the New Jerusalem would be located in the western lands. In preparation for this, the elders were to preach the gospel and build up churches. (Ibid., 45:64-66.)

At the close of the June 1831 conference held in Kirtland, the Lord said that the Saints were to assemble in the land of Missouri. (Ibid., 52:2, 42-43.)

In the middle of July 1831, the Prophet rejoiced with his brethren, who had long awaited his arrival in Missouri. Upon arriving in the "promised land," the Prophet felt to exclaim: "When will the wilderness blossom as the rose? When will Zion be built up in her glory, and where will Thy temple stand, unto which all nations shall come in the last days?" (DHC I:189.) These questions were soon answered upon receiving Section 57 in July 1831.

Section 57 and the New Jerusalem

Verses 1 and 2 of Section 57 point out that the land of Missouri is the land for the gathering of the Saints.

Wherefore, this is the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion. (D&C 57:2.)

After revealing that the center place of Zion was Independence, Missouri, the Lord said that the land of inheritance should be purchased "even unto the line running directly between Jew and Gentile." (Ibid., 3-5.) The Jew here is the Lamanite or Indian. (Ibid., 19:27; Omni 14-19.) In this sparsely settled land the Saints were advised to obtain land by peaceful means.

The remainder of this revelation gives instructions to several brethren whose appointment to these callings had been made in former revelations (namely, Sidney Gilbert, ibid., 57:6; 53:4; Edward Partridge, ibid., 57:7; 41:9; 42:10; William W. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery, Ibid., 57:11-13; 55:4.)

The promise of revelation to guide the elders and members of the Church closes Section 57. (Ibid., 57:16.) On the first day of the next month a revelation was received in which the Lord set forth his plan for the Church in Missouri.

Background of Section 58

As the Nephites knew ancient America to be the land of promise, so also do the Latter-day Saints know that within the greater promised land, the land of Missouri is "the land of Promise" where the righteous will be gathered in the troublous days preceding the second coming of Christ. (D&C 57:1-2; 45:62-75.)

A preaching service was held the first Sunday after the Prophet and his party arrived in Jackson County when two persons were baptized. (DHC I:190-191.)

The Beginnings of Zion

Just before Section 58 was received, the Colesville (New York) Saints, more recently from Thompson, Ohio, numbering about sixty persons, arrived in Missouri by commandment. (DHC I:191.) Concerning this branch of the Church and its part in the beginning of Zion, the Prophet wrote that the first log for a house was "carried and placed by twelve men, in honor of the twelve tribes of Israel." The land was also dedicated by Elder Sidney Rigdon for the gathering of the Saints. (Ibid., I:196.)

From John Whitmer's "History of the Church" we learn that the Saints pledged to keep the commandments in their new land. (Ibid., I:196.) A description of this part of Missouri at the time of the Prophet is found in his journal. (Ibid., I:197-198.)

A Message of Hope and a Forewarning

For the Saints who had arrived in Jackson County and for those who would follow, the Lord expressed a message of hope for the future, as well as a prediction of tribulation. These messages were directly concerned with the land of Missouri.

For verily I say unto you, blessed is he that keepeth my commandments, whether in life or in death; and he that is faithful in tribulation, the reward of the same is greater in the kingdom of heaven. (D&C 58:2.)

The predictive element in this verse is strongly present. The emphasis placed upon the two propositions stated—hope and also tribulation—is announced by the use of the word "verily," which means "in very truth." Although all men are expected to live the laws of God, as they know them, the Latter-day Saint is bound by acceptance of the atonement of Christ through baptism to keep the commandments. (Ibid., 18:42-43.) Throughout the scriptures, promises are made that the blessings shall be rich for those who remain worthy even unto death. In the revelation we are now studying (Section 58:2), it is stated that continued faithfulness is required even beyond mortality. That we shall be the same persons in the spirit world that we are when we leave this life, is a part of our knowledge. (Alma 34:32-34.) In that day we shall all realize that happiness results from obedience to divine law.

With counsel concerning the necessity to be faithful in tribulation, the Saints are immediately informed that the land of Missouri would not then be known as their permanent home. Granted that the Saints may not have realized the full import of the following message, yet they were forewarned:

Ye cannot behold with your natural eyes, for the present time, the design of your God concerning those things which shall come hereafter, and the glory which shall follow after much tribulation.

For after much tribulation come the blessings. Wherefore the day cometh that ye shall be crowned with much glory; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand. (D&C 58:3-4.)

It was not long before persecution was heaped upon the Saints in Missouri. Details of the future are wisely withheld by the Father that his people may look beyond temporary setbacks to their ultimate glory.

In a subsequent chapter we shall learn more about the reasons why the Saints were persecuted. For the present, however, two causes are mentioned, first, their religious beliefs, especially concerning the restoration of the gospel with its gifts and powers. For example, the Manifesto issued by a Missouri mob on July 20, 1833, referred to the Saints pretending to receive revelations direct from heaven and to perform miracles as the apostles and prophets of old. (DHC I:374-376.) Second, that in consequence of the Saints' transgressions, they were chastened and not allowed to redeem Zion at that time. (D&C 101:1-10; 103:1-4; 105:1-6.) The prediction that the Saints would pass through tribulation was fulfilled when they were driven from Missouri, then Illinois, and then to the mountains outside the boundaries of the United States.

The manner in which most of the early Saints endured "much tribulation" is a credit to their faith. The testimony of President Young concerning his own experience could be said of many others:

. . . We have passed through a great many scenes, we may say, of tribulation, though I would have all my brethren understand that I do not take this to myself, for all that I have passed through has been joy and joyful to me. . . . I have, myself, five times before I came to this valley, left everything that the Lord had blessed me with pertaining to this world's goods, which, for the country where I lived, was not a very little. (Journal of Discourses, 18:237.)

The ability of the faithful Latter-day Saints to pass through tribulation or trials though they may come only as the normal experiences of life, may be attributed to the hope and knowledge that "the day cometh that ye [they] shall be crowned with much glory. . . ." (D&C 58:4.) One can understand as a Latter-day Saint that the testimony of the truth restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith has given and continues to give an assurance that the Lord's word will be fulfilled. Without this divine promise, many would find it difficult to endure to the end.

Glory to Come

Ultimately to all the faithful will come blessings of eternal life. There will be a happy reunion with departed loved ones, and the joy of eternal increase with its manifold blessings of dominion and honor. But the message to the Saints of our time is that the inheritance promised in Missouri [Zion] will yet be realized. "the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand." (D&C 58:4.) "It must be much nearer now than when this inspired line was first penned." (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, page 335.)

This significant truth is found in the fifth verse of this revelation:

Remember this, which I tell you before, that you may lay it to heart, and receive that which is to follow. (D&C 58:5.)

The Lord had promised his people that after much tribulation would come the blessings of much glory. At the time, however, they were not to see the redemption of Zion. For us today, we may be assured that the prophecy is to serve as confirmation of the prophet's mission and that the fulfillment will instill in the hearts of people the desire to obey the Lord's word. In the light of these purposes, what faith should the Latter-day Saint have in the future of Zion?

Reasons for the Saints Gathering in Zion

Several reasons are given for the commandment to gather to Missouri. It is clear from this revelation that the Saints were to lay the foundation of Zion. Regardless of what would happen after the Saints began their work, the time would come when Zion would prosper in the preparations made for the return of the Savior to the earth. The redemption of Zion would come only as the people knew and fully accepted in their lives the reasons which follow:

Behold, verily I say unto you, for this cause I have sent you—that you might be obedient, and that your hearts might be prepared to bear testimony of the things which are to come. (Ibid., 58:6.)

The Church of Jesus Christ is divinely directed. Strict obedience is essential for salvation. The direction of the Church requires the directing will of the Father through inspired prophets.

This important commentary is found in an authoritative source:

Obedience is absolutely necessary for the furtherance of the kingdom of God. There must be one directing will. This is necessary in earthly concerns—a factory, a ship, a railroad system. It is equally necessary in the kingdom of God. His will must be supreme there.

To render obedience to lawful authority, is not humiliating or degrading. Even the Son learned obedience (Heb. 5:8), before He became the author of eternal salvation. Disobedience, or rebellion, is as bad as idolatry. (I Sam. 15:23.) The Lord does not stand personally in the midst of the people to direct their affairs but He speaks to them through His inspired servants. When we obey their counsel, we obey God. Those who refuse to obey them, would refuse to obey the Lord, even if He spoke to them Himself, in person. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 336.)

In verse 6 we have also another purpose in that the obedient would bear testimony of the truth revealed through the Prophet.

In addition to keeping the commandments as stated, the Saints of 1831 were to be honored in laying the foundation of Zion. (D&C 58:7.) The Prophet Joseph Smith records that on the third day of August 1831, he dedicated the temple site, a little west of what was then Independence, Missouri. As a part of this service, the 87th Psalm was read. When one thinks of the glory which will yet surround this place and the purpose of the temple prophesied centuries ago, he can well understand the Prophet's comment: "The scene was solemn and impressive." (DHC I:199.)

The fourth reason for the Saints coming to Zion, as given in verse 7 of this revelation, was to bear record of the land itself.

Another purpose of God in establishing Zion is given in verses 8 to 10 which was realized at some period after laying the foundation of that city.

The Day of the Lord's Power

Further information regarding the glory of the Zion of the last days is brought to our attention in verses 11 and 12 of this revelation. The interpretation of these verses indicates events which usher in the millennial reign of the Savior.

Zion will be built. The Temple will be reared. Enoch's Zion, the "Jerusalem which is above," will meet the Saints who have part in the first resurrection, and those who will be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and they will all be united. Then will come the day of God's power. The poor and the lame, the blind and the deaf will all be invited to partake of the blessings of the Millennium. The Earth will not be freed from all defects at once. The work of redemption will be gradual. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 337.)

The assurance of the fulfillment of God's word brings forth the Lord's last reason for the building of Zion. (D&C 1:37-38.) It is that his testimony or law is to go forth from Zion to enlighten the world. (Ibid., 58:13.)

The Future Glory of Zion

President Brigham Young in these words referred to the time when he saw the return of the Saints to build up Zion in Missouri:

. . .Before we were driven out of Missouri I had a vision, if I would dare to say that I had a vision, and saw that the people would go to the east, to the north and to the west; but we should go back to Jackson County from the west. When this people return to the Centre Stake [place] of Zion, they will go from the west. (Journal of Discourses, 11:17.)

Because of the conditions which prevented the Saints from building the temple in Zion, the Lord released the Saints from performing this important duty at that time. (D&C 124:49-51.) When the call comes from the divinely appointed servants of the Lord, the city and temple will be built as commanded for this generation. (Ibid., 84:4-5.)

Due to the driving of our people from the land of their inheritance, being thus moved out of their place, they will return to build unto the Lord the long-predicted Zion. (Ibid., 101:17-19.) When this task is undertaken the Saints will be led with power. In the meantime, the Lord's people must become great and sanctified before him. (Ibid., 105:11-13, 31-32.) The laws and commandments, including the living of the law of consecration, will be lived "after her [Zion's] redemption." (Ibid., 105:34.)

When the Prophet Joseph Smith first viewed the land of Missouri, his vision was not on the then advantages of that place but upon the greatness of the Zion to be. Here is his message:

But all these impediments vanish when it is recollected what the Prophets have said concerning Zion in the last days; how the glory of Lebanon is to come upon her; the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box tree together, to beautify the place of His sanctuary, that He may make the place of His feet glorious. Where for brass, He will bring gold; and for iron, He will bring silver; and for wood, brass; and for stones, iron; and where the feast of fat things will be given to the just; yea, when the splendor of the Lord is brought to our consideration for the good of His people, the calculations of men and the vain glory of the world vanish, and we exclaim, "Out of Zion the perfection of beauty, God hath shined." (DHC I:198; cf. Isaiah 60:12-22.)
