Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 42

Engaged in a Good Cause

(Section 58:15-65)

In the year 1831, the Prophet Joseph Smith received a revelation designating Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, as the site for the city of Zion or the New Jerusalem. Hundreds of years before this the Lord had decreed that his holy city, to which the faithful would come in the last days, would shine forth as a light to beckon earth's inhabitants to accept the gospel. This city will become the capital of the world government when the Savior comes to establish his kingdom at the time of the millennium.

Although the Saints were driven from the center place of Zion, their belief in the restoration of the gospel, and their own inability, at that time, to live the gospel as required, brought about the persecutions which drove them from Missouri. (Chapter 41.)

Notwithstanding what happened in 1834 when our people were ejected from Missouri, the promises of the Lord concerning that land are still to be fulfilled. The leadership of this Church has always understood and taught that the New Jerusalem will become all that the Lord has said it would be. President George Q. Cannon, one of the apostles close to the events of Missouri, expressed the feelings of the Saints concerning these matters. After twenty years in the west, he said:

We talk about going back to build up the centre stake [place] of Zion; it is the burden of our daily prayers. The aspirations of thousands of the people ascend in the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth [hosts] in behalf of the redemption of Zion, and that the purposes of God may be forwarded, and that the time may soon come when the centre stake [place] of Zion shall be build up and the people be prepared to go back and inhabit that land. Why do we wish this? Because we anticipate when that day shall come that we will be that much nearer the day of triumph, the day when Jesus will come and reign among his Saints . . . we look forward to that land with indescribable feelings, because it is the place where God has said His city shall be built. It is the land where Adam, the Ancient of Days, will gather his posterity again, and where the blessings of God will descend upon them. . . . (Journal of Discourses 11:336-337.)

Preparations must be made for the building of Zion as commanded. The Lord revealed in this revelation (Section 58) why the Saints should go to Missouri, beginning in 1831 as well as in the future. (Chapter 41.) What is necessary today to realize the blessings of building the City of Zion? This question is answered in this chapter.

President Cannon said:

. . .We expect when that day shall come that we will be a very different people to what we are today. We will be prepared to commune with heavenly beings; at any rate, the preparation will be going on very rapidly for Jesus to be revealed. We expect that a society will be organized there that will be a pattern of heavenly society, that when Jesus and the heavenly beings who come with him are revealed in the clouds of heaven, their feelings will not be shocked by the change, for a society will be organized on the earth whose members will be prepared through the revelations of God to meet and associate with them, if not on terms of perfect equality, at least with some degree of equality. (Journal of Discourses, 11:337.)

Edward Partridge

Our discussion of Section 58 begins with verse 14 in which we are reminded that Edward Partridge, who received his appointment as bishop by revelation (D&C 41:9), was to place his full trust in the things pertaining to the kingdom of God. This counsel is applicable to every person who has entered covenant relationship with God. Putting one's emphasis on worldly objects to the exclusion of God's purposes is to have "unbelief and blindness of heart." (Ibid., 58:15; Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, pp. 338-339.)

Bishop Partridge's duties were known to him. He and bishops who have succeeded him are to be judges among the Saints. He was to appoint to the Saints their inheritances—land—as it was appointed in ancient Israel. (Cf. Exodus 18:13.)

The bishop is "to judge his people by the testimony of the just, and by the assistance of his counselors, according to the laws of the kingdom which are given by the prophets of God." (D&C 58:18.) In order for the Lord's representative, the bishop, in this case, to understand his position as a judge, the Law of the Church (Section 42) is to be his guide in morals and plans for the welfare of the members. (Ibid., 58:19.) No bishop, however should consider that he is a "ruler." The only ruler in the kingdom of God is Jesus Christ. Officiators in his kingdom are servants. (Ibid., 58:20.)

The Law of the Land

Not only are the Saints of God to accept the rulership of Christ and to follow his divinely appointed servants, but they should be obedient to the laws of the land.

Let no man break the laws of the land, for he that keepeth the laws of God hath no need to break the laws of the land. (Ibid., 58:21.)

The principle of law observance did not have its origin in this dispensation. Obedience to law is necessary that order and stability may exist. Judges who administered the law were known among ancient Israel. In Moses' day a just judgment was to be meted to those who transgressed the law. (Deut. 16:18; 1 Chron. 23:4.) Elder James E. Talmage pointed out how Christ acknowledged the existing laws of the land, both Jewish and Roman, although the Roman law was sometimes exercised unjustly. A strong case for obedience to law was given by Jesus when he performed a miracle to provide tax money.

When the tax-collector called for the tribute money demanded by the hierarchy, Christ, though not admitting the justice of the claim, directed that the tax be paid, and even invoked a miraculous circumstance whereby the money could be provided. Of Peter he asked: "What thinkest thou, Simon? Of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? Of their own children, or of strangers? Peter saith unto him, Of strangers. Jesus saith unto him, Then are the children free. Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up; and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece of money: that take, and give unto them for me and thee." (Articles of Faith, p. 416.) The well-known reply to those who attempted to trap the Messiah as one who stood against the ruling powers was: ". . . Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's." (Matt. 22:21.)

The apostles followed their Master's example in teaching that observance of the law of the land was necessary for the full living of the religious life. (Acts 23:1-5; Titus 3:1; Rom. 13:1-7; 1 Tim. 2:1-3; 1 Peter 2:13-17. For the application of these and other examples, consult James E. Talmage, Articles of Faith, pp. 418-421.)

As for our dispensation, by revelation and instruction from the leaders of the Church, the message is clear—to be a Latter-day Saint strict observance of the law of God and the law of the land is imperative. The Twelfth Article of Faith is well known to all. (Ibid., page 3; Pearl of Great Price, page 60.)

Obedience to law is a test of a man's religion. As Elder Talmage expressed it:

Religion is essentially a matter of every-day life. It has as much to do with the adjustment of the individual to his material environment as with his abstract belief in matters spiritual. A man's religion should be a concrete demonstration of his conceptions concerning God and the Divine purposes respecting himself and his fellows. Anything less lacks both the form of godliness and the power thereof. . . .

Loyal citizenship is at once a characteristic and a test of a man's religion; and as to the incumbent duties of citizenship, the voice of the people, as expressed through the established channels of government, must determine. (The Vitality of Mormonism, 1948, pp. 180-181.)

That the Constitution of the United States was divinely established and thus to be obeyed by its citizens is a revealed part of our religion. (D&C 98:4-10; 101:76-80.)

Christ Shall Reign

Distinctive in Latter-day Saint belief is our understanding of the eventual reign of Christ on the earth. The following verse carries the same truth expressed in the Tenth Article of Faith:

Wherefore, be subject to the powers that be, until he reigns whose right it is to reign, and subdues all enemies under his feet. (Ibid., 58:22.)

When the Savior returns to the earth in power, his kingdom will be established. The inauguration of his rule will bring all of his enemies under control. Some of these enemies of God and man are tyranny, despotism, other evils of Satan, and for man, the last enemy, death. (1 Cor. 15:26-28.) When the King of Kings comes, there will be no other king. (D&C 38:21-22.)

When that glorious day comes, earth's inhabitants will be governed by laws which are righteous; freedom will then be enjoyed by all.

Latter-day Saints, Law-Abiders

In order that no Latter-day Saint shall misunderstand his obligation to the law of the land and the law of the gospel, the revelation continues:

Behold, the laws which ye have received from my hand are the laws of the church, and in this light ye shall hold them forth. Behold, here is wisdom. (Ibid., 58:23.)

To Be Commanded in All Things?

The next several verses of Section 58 (verses 24-33) are directed to Edward Partridge, his counselors, and Sidney Gilbert (Ibid., 57:6-9) to attend to their assignments in Missouri. Important instructions to these brethren are (1) that they are not to be commanded in all things; (2) they must have initiative; (3) they have power within themselves to do much good; and (4) the revocation of commandments by God and loss of blessings. As we examine these scriptures it is apparent that the Lord desires all men to know these principles because they apply to all.

For behold, it is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant; wherefore he receiveth no reward. (Ibid., 58:26.)

The underlying principle in this scripture is that man is a free agent. In all stages of his endless life, man exercises his right of choice. Among the many prophets discoursing on this aspect of man's life was Lehi. (2 Nephi 2:16, 26-27.)

Elder James E. Talmage wrote:

The predominant attribute of justice, recognized as part of the divine nature, forbids the thought that man should receive promises of reward for righteousness, and threats of punishment for evil deeds, if he possessed no power of independent action. It is no more a part of God's plan to compel men to work righteousness than it is His purpose to permit evil powers to force His children into sin. . . . (Articles of Faith, p. 53.)

Given his free agency, why should man be compelled in all things? Man grows by exercising his right to solve his own problems. There would be no growth if man were to act only as an automaton or robot. Guidance, however, eliminates waste of time and energy.

When a person has a position in the Lord's kingdom, it is expected that he will use his initiative and not be told precisely what to do in all things. Some people do only the bare minimum required of them without exercising their talents beyond duty. He is a slothful servant lacking in wisdom who expects to be compelled in all things.

The good that men do will live after them. Their righteous purposes will bring a sure reward from the Father who knows all and will judge all men by their works. (D&C 19:3.)

Power Is within Men

Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness;

For the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. And inasmuch as men do good they shall in nowise lose their reward.

But he that doeth not anything until he is commanded, and receiveth a commandment with doubtful heart, and keepeth it with slothfulness, the same is damned. (Ibid., 58:27-29.)

It is true that men should engage themselves in causes which contribute to the happiness of their fellow men. Only the Church, however, is committed to programs that advance man's joy and is able to give him happiness in the eternities to come. At the time this revelation was given, the Saints were commanded to lay the foundation of Zion. (Ibid., vs. 6-7.) Counsel regarding this had been given at the beginning of this dispensation. If one would seek "to bring forth and establish the cause of Zion," and seek for wisdom then the mysteries of the kingdom would be his and, if faithful, eternal life. (Ibid., 6:6-7.)

Diligent service based upon a true desire to build up the cause of Zion is accepted by the Lord. Weak faith or a doubting heart brings weak effort characterized as slothful.

Is This the Work of God?

Some people believe that because blessings are not answered on their heads, although a try may have been made at keeping the commandments, although not fully and only halfheartedly, the Lord's promises are not fulfilled. To such, as well as to all, the Lord addressed some questions:

Who am I that made man, saith the Lord, that will hold him guiltless that obeys not my commandments?

Who am I, saith the Lord, that have promised and have not fulfilled?

I command and men obey not; I revoke and they receive not the blessing.

Then they say in their hearts: This is not the work of the Lord, for his promises are not fulfilled. But woe unto such, for their reward lurketh beneath, and not from above. (Ibid., 58:30-33.)

The important question for every Latter-day Saint is, "Am I living the commandments so faithfully that the Lord will bless me as I am entitled to his blessings? On the other hand, should I complain against my Maker because of my own lack of diligence?"

The lesson to be learned by all is found in this significant comment:

The Saints sometimes fail to do their duty and to keep the commandments of God. But they expect Him to make good to them the promises He has given to the faithful. If He does not, they complain. They neglect their prayers; they absent themselves from their meetings; they break the Word of Wisdom; they withhold their tithing; but when sickness comes and falls like a dark, terrifying shadow across their path, they expect immediate Divine interference in their behalf, through the administration of the Elders. If their expectations are not realized, they say, in a rebellious spirit, "His promises are not fulfilled." The reply of the Lord to that is, "Their reward lurketh beneath." They must look "beneath" for their reward; they have no claim on heaven. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 340.)

If the Saints have an opportunity to live a commandment to further their eternal progression and they fail, or conditions develop which do not allow them to keep that commandment, the law may be revoked, or put in abeyance, until the Saints are able to live the commandments. An example is the Law of Consecration, studied in Chapter 28. In ancient Israel, the Lord, through Moses, sought to give his people higher laws, but they refused them. As a result, a lesser law was given, and thus Israel lost its great opportunity at that time.

Further Directions Concerning Zion

The remainder of this revelation (D&C 58:34-65) deals with specific directions to some elders and also to the members of the Church concerning Zion. Counsel to these individuals is applicable to all members of the Church as a warning not to fall into similar errors.
