Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 43

The Day of Rest and Devotions

(Section 59:1-14)

On Sunday, August 7, 1831, the Prophet Joseph Smith attended the funeral of Polly Knight, wife of Joseph Knight, Sr., who had given material substance to the Prophet. (D&C 12; 23:6.) Their son, Newel K. Knight, wrote that his mother insisted upon traveling from Kirtland to Missouri, notwithstanding the fact that she was very ill. Her greatest desire, to stand on the land of Zion, was granted her. Of Polly Knight, the Prophet wrote that she was the first to die in the land of Zion, and as "a worthy member sleeps in Jesus till the resurrection." (DHC I:190, footnote.) By the 7th of August the land of Zion was consecrated as a gathering place for the Saints, the temple site was dedicated, and the first conference was held in Zion, this being the Fifth General Conference. The Colesville Branch members were present at this conference.

They Shall Rest from Their Labors

The Lord promised blessings to those who were to come up to the land of Zion, provided that they would have an eye single to God's glory. As Section 59:1 points out, "an eye single to my glory" requires that one keep the commandments. Consistent with this thought is the verse which follows:

For those that live shall inherit the earth, and those that die shall rest from all their labors, and their works shall follow them; and they shall receive a crown in the mansions of my Father which I have prepared for them. (D&C 59:2.)

One may reflect upon this scripture with joy, realizing that when men and women follow the Lord's plan of life here, then righteous labors will be rewarded when mortality ends.

Following the necessary sojourn in the spirit world where advancement is made toward the ultimate glory of the resurrection, a place is received in the mansions of the Father—the celestial kingdom, for those who have had their minds single to God. (Ibid., 88:20-22, 66-68.)

Revelations Are Blessings

The good things of the earth are promised those who obey the gospel. This is a blessing discussed in Chapter 41 concerning Zion. In addition to these temporal blessings, the Saints are to be blessed with commandments and revelations.

And they shall also be crowned with blessings from above, yea, and with commandments not a few, and with revelations in their time—they that are faithful and diligent before me. (Ibid., 59:4.)

There is the fact that one's spiritual welfare is greatly enhanced by obedience to all of God's commandments. There are some people, and their numbers are great, who believe that commandments are restrictive, little realizing that the gospel frees people from bondage. (John 8:31-32; D&C 84:40-53.) Real freedom consists of a clear conscience toward God and man.

Commandments come by revelation. Revelations also provide the faithful with hope, peace, and courage to continue on to the end.

Great Commandments

Only the Father can say that one of his commandments is greater than another. This he has done through his Son by saying that one should love God as the first commandment and second, that one should love his neighbor as himself. (Matt. 22:37-40.) In the revelation comprising this chapter, notice the important information given about these two great commandments.

Wherefore, I give unto them a commandment, saying thus; Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy might, mind and strength and in the name of Jesus Christ thou shalt serve him.

Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. Thou shalt not steal, neither commit adultery, nor kill, nor do anything unto it. (D&C 59:5-6.)

In this revelation specific reference is made to certain commandments the violation of which clearly indicates that one does not love his fellow man. These laws condemn stealing, adultery, murder, or anything like it. All one needs to do to verify the importance of these laws in relation to the second great commandment is to ask: "Does one love his neighbor if he commits any one of these infractions of the moral law?" (Chapters 26 and 27.)

Thanksgiving and Humility

Thanksgiving is to be shown to the Lord in all things. For what should the Saint be thankful—life with its opportunities to prove oneself? the fulness of the gospel that brings purpose into life? that divine direction is received today by inspired prophets? the joy of knowing that great blessings accrue to those who are faithful? These and countless other blessings should be acknowledged to the Father in prayer. But this is not the only way that gratitude is to be expressed. When one keeps the commandments he prays, and he also loves the Father and the Son. (John 14:15; D&C 46:7.) Prayer offered in humility with a thankful heart assists one to continue in the faith. Humility is the quality of being teachable, of responding fully to the Lord's will. The humble person, one who has a broken heart and contrite spirit, will demonstrate his gratitude for all things, and he will be made glorious. (D&C 78:19.)

The Sabbath Commandment

All of the foregoing truths from Section 59 were given in preparation for the Sabbath day commandments as follows:

And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day.

For verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High.

Nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times.

But remember that on this, the Lord's day, thou shalt offer thine oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord.

And on this day thou shalt do none other thing, only let thy food be prepared with singleness of heart that thy fasting may be perfect, or, in other words, that thy joy may be full.

Verily, this is fasting and prayer, or in other words, rejoicing and prayer. (D&C 59:9-14.)

Shown in the form of "thou shalt," or what is required on the Sabbath day, these commandments may be stated as:

Sometimes members of the Church absent themselves from the Sacrament meeting because they feel that they hear the same messages often or for some other reason. President Heber J. Grant had this to say on this thought:

There are some who say they will not go to meeting because they know just who will talk and what they will say. I realize that such persons are becoming indifferent to the spiritual things of the kingdom. I know people who in the old world would go many miles to a meeting because they were in love with the gospel. They will not cross the street now because they have lost that love just as failing to eat will cause our physical frames to shrink and die. Just so sure neglect to supply our spiritual natures will bring death to them. (Gospel Standards, p. 98.)

On the Sabbath, the Saints should be in the house of prayer and offer up their sacraments, that is, present their devotions before the Lord, in the form of songs of praise, prayer and thanksgiving testimonies, partaking of the Sacrament and contemplation of the Word of God. All this is meant by the word "sacrament" which, in its widest range, stands for any sacred rite or ceremony whereby we affirm our allegiance to our divine Lord. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 351.)

In the words of President Joseph F. Smith:

Men are not showing zeal and ardor in their religious faith and duty when they hustle off early Sunday morning on the cars, in teams, in automobiles, to the canyons, the resorts, and to visit friends, or places of amusement with their wives and children. They are not paying their devotions in this way to the Most High. (Gospel Doctrine, p. 246.)

I would assume that we are to confess all our sins unto the Lord. For transgressions which are wholly personal, affecting none but ourselves and the Lord, such confession would seem to be sufficient.

For misconduct which offends another, confession should also be made to the offended one, and his forgiveness sought.

Finally, where one's transgressions are of such a nature as would, unrepented of, put in jeopardy his right to membership or fellowship in the Church of Jesus Christ, full and effective confession would, in my judgment, require confession by the repentant sinner to his bishop or other proper presiding Church officer—not that the Church officer could forgive the sin (this power rests in the Lord himself and those only to whom he specifically delegates it) but rather that the Church, acting through its duly appointed officers, might with full knowledge of the facts take such action with respect to Church discipline as the circumstances merit.

One having forsaken his sins and, by proper confession, cleared his conduct with the Lord, with the people he has offended, and with the Church of Jesus Christ, where necessary, may with full confidence seek the Lord's forgiveness and go forth in newness of life, relying upon the merits of Christ. (Conference Report, October 1955, p. 125.)

Upon the Sabbath, even the food should be prepared "with singleness of heart"; that is to say, in simplicity. Our hearts, our desires, on that day should not be elaborate feasts, whereby some are prevented from having a Sabbath. A simple meal should suffice. To that extent every Sabbath should be a fast day. One bringing perfect joy. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 352.)

Latter-day Saints should not permit these commandments regarding the Sabbath to slip from their minds. All during this, the Last Dispensation, the Prophets of the Lord have urged Sabbath observance upon the people. Different concepts of Sabbath observance have been urged upon us by unbelievers, partial believers, and by the thoughtless, concerned primarily with the pleasures of the world, sometimes under the guise of recreation, sometimes by activities the Lord has told us were sinful.

The Sabbath is not just another day on which we merely rest from work, free to spend it as our lightmindedness may suggest. It is a holy day, the Lord's Day, to be spent as a day of worship and reverence. All matters extraneous thereto should be shunned.

We must bear in mind all these principles. We must remember particularly actual Sabbath breaking labor which might be required from a great number of Lesser Priesthood members in any Sabbath breaking activities, including interference with their duties and attendance at quorum meetings. For all these and for many other reasons affecting injuriously the religious duties and activities of the whole Church membership. Latter-day Saints, with a testimony of the Gospel and a knowledge of the spiritual blessings that come from keeping the Sabbath will never permit themselves to make it a shopping day, an activity that has no place in a proper observance of the Holy Day of the Lord, on which we are commanded to pour out our souls in gratitude for the many blessings of health, strength, physical comfort, and spiritual joy which comes from the Lord's bounteous hand. (Deseret News, Saturday, June 20, 1959.)

Parental Example

The Lord established the Sabbath as a holy day that man might benefit spiritually. Unto Moses, Israel's prophet, the Sabbath was known as a sign between the Lord and Israel. (Exodus 31:13-14; Ezekiel 20:19-24.)

The counsel to keep the Sabbath holy is as applicable today as when it was given. The observance of Sunday as the Lord's Day is a fact of modern revelation. (D&C 59:12.) The keeping of the Sabbath today will have the same effect as was promised anciently, the sanctification of the person.

How will the world know the Lord's people today? One way is by their observance of the day of rest. The testimony of the truth comes to the obedient. A witness of the gospel must be based upon the faith of the individual. Every parent should ask, "Is my attitude toward Sabbath observance reflected in the faith of my children?" In other words, if the parents break the law, will the children feel that they may disregard the Lord's commandment? Observance of the Sabbath day by the parents brings forth fruits of faith in the lives of the children and the testimony of truth through keeping the other commandments.
