Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 44

Rewards of Keeping the Commandments

(Section 59:15-24)

In the last chapter we learned that on the day the Prophet Joseph Smith attended the funeral of Polly Knight, the Lord gave a most important revelation for the comfort of the Saints. It was a message of hope concerning the future life where the deceased continue to find joy in activity. The Saints also learned that they would be blessed with commandments received by revelation through the Prophet. One of these commandments was the proper observance of the Lord's day of rest. Eight positive requirements of Sabbath day observance were enumerated in the lesson. An official statement by the First Presidency was also given concerning violation of the Sabbath. (Chapter 43.)

"Inasmuch As Ye Do These Things with Thanksgiving"

If we follow the commandment concerning the Sabbath day and are faithful in keeping the other commandments, our harvest will be rich. But what is expected of the member as he obeys God's will? Gratitude, yes, as we learn from verse 7 of Section 59. Then what? As a member follows the commandments in keeping the Sabbath day holy, joy is received, and rich blessings are promised. (D&C 59:15-19.) Keeping the commandments brings the favor of heaven. In the foregoing verses there is stated the purpose for which the things of the earth—food, clothing, and shelter—are provided, to strengthen one physically and spiritually. Implicit in these verses is the same thought expressed in an earlier revelation. All laws and commandments thought of as temporal are spiritual. (Ibid., 29:34-35.)

The important fact is that the bounties of the earth are for all men (Ibid., 49:19), but not in excess. An equitable distribution of the products of the earth is the ideal. Those who receive more of these materials are not only to use judgment in their use, but also to see that advantage is not taken of their fellow men.

And it pleaseth God that he hath given all these things unto man, for unto this end were they made to be used with judgment, not to excess, neither by extortion. (Ibid., 59:20.)

Moderation and honesty are to guide man's use of God's creations provided for man's sojourn on the earth. Riches are to be used for the benefit of man. (Ibid., 49: 20; Jacob 2:18-19.) President David O. McKay has emphasized that life should not be centered on wealth. (Gospel Ideals, p. 30.) President Heber J. Grant has pointed out that riches in themselves may be blessings if used in the way the Lord intended. (Gospel Standards, p. 108.)

Man's Offenses

God's wrath is kindled against those who disregard his commandments when they know his will. His wrath or anger will be demonstrated at his coming in power to the world. (D&C 1:9-10.) The wicked will feel his wrath because they have brought his displeasure upon themselves due to violation of law. (Ibid., 124:48.) The demands of justice will be met by all those who remain unrepentant. (3 Nephi 28:34-35.)

When the Lord stated the temporal blessings received by the faithful who obey the Sabbath, he expressed a truth which emphasizes the necessity of man's full acceptance of God's sovereignty and his dependence upon the Creator. It is:

And in nothing doth man offend God or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things and obey not his commandments. (D&C 59:21.)

Is man to acknowledge the earth and the things of the earth for his benefit as coming from the Father in heaven? President Joseph F. Smith taught that man should acknowledge all truth from God. (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 5-6.) For one who has felt the divine goodness of God, as did King Benjamin the Nephite, of the Book of Mormon, the answer must be yes. He labored to serve his subjects, for which they expressed gratitude. Using this as an opportunity to show wherein the Nephites were to thank their heavenly king, he said that if men should serve God with all their hearts, they would still be unprofitable servants. (Mosiah 2:20-21.) To acknowledge the Lord as the Creator who has given man life and provided the bounties of the earth for his benefit does not seem to be for many a part of present-day belief and practice.

We should as Latter-day Saints learn a lesson from the Nephites. When the bounteous blessings of the earth are received, we are to be stewards over them, realizing that they are given to us by the Lord. A lesson that we should learn is that pride was the downfall of the Nephite nation. (Ibid., 38-39.)

Obey His Commandments

The Nephites were given specific promises that if they did keep the commandments they would prosper in the land. (1 Nephi 4:14; 2 Nephi 1:20; 3 Nephi 5:22.) This same promise is given to the Saints of the latter-days. (2 Nephi 10:19; D&C 10:57.) Although one acknowledges the hand of the Lord in the blessings of life, he is still not completely acceptable to God unless he keeps his commandments. The keeping of the commandments is based upon faith in the Lord Jesus as the Savior and Redeemer. The strength of one's motivation to keep the commandments is determined, in large measure, by his attitude toward the Savior and the Father. Are we dependent upon them for life, for the opportunity to use earth's resources as stewards? Do we genuinely believe that we should give thanks to the Lord for these blessings? Is there a direct relationship between one's keeping the commandments and one's temporal and spiritual welfare? According to the prophets, as shown above, those who do not show their gratitude by keeping the commandments offend God and against them his wrath is kindled. (D&C 59:21.) The time will come when all men will confess that God is sovereign, and they will acknowledge him as the Giver of life with its opportunities for proving oneself a true disciple.

A Great Truth

One of the outstanding truths given sacred literature concludes Section 59. That all believers might know the pathway to successful living, the Lord revealed:

But learn that he who doeth the works of righteousness shall receive his reward, even peace in this world, and eternal life in the world to come.

I, the Lord, have spoken it, and the Spirit beareth record, Amen. (D&C 59:23-24.)

This truth expresses the most important promise the Father can give to any of his children. The greatest measure of salvation attainable is eternal life. When one thinks of rewards as blessings from the Father, one should remember that the Lord favors those who keep his commandments. (1 Nephi 17:35.)

Specifying "Works of Righteousness"

What are the works of righteousness required of one to receive the rewards mentioned in the text quoted above? (D&C 59:23.) One might summarize the answer by saying, "Keep the commandments!" But we don't always gain our objective by such a general statement. When the prophets by inspiration tell the people that they should keep the commandments, it is assumed that the Saints are acquainted with the commandments. Not all of us are sufficient readers of the scriptures and the works of the living prophets to have specific knowledge of the Lord's will. It seems necessary, therefore, that we speak with some detail about the works of righteousness. Perhaps this restatement may serve as a review for many, and to others it may bring a greater understanding. For all it should be an opportunity for taking inventory of one's own status before God. Appropriate to this thought is the admonition that the member of the Church should learn his duty in all diligence. (Ibid., 107:99.)

Without considering the following suggestions of works of righteousness as complete or of their importance in the order in which they are given, let us consider some significant items.

Seeking Perfection

One of the first steps toward righteousness in the sight of the Lord is to accept baptism in his kingdom. (Matt. 3:15; 2 Nephi 31:5-10.) Having taken this step, an important work of righteousness for the member of the Church would be to continually have in mind the objective of life, that is, to strive for perfection. (Matt. 5:48 3 Nephi 12:48.) The genuine desire for perfection suggests that the member will rid himself of all ungodliness. (Moroni 10:32.) The most successful method of accomplishing this goal is to love the Lord with all one's heart, might, mind, and strength. (D&C 59:9.) Develop a love for Christ that "worketh by faith." Such love will engender the same emotion toward all men, but intrinsically, it must come in the realization of one's dependence upon Christ for all things, for what he has done in behalf of the individual through his redeeming sacrifice. (2 Nephi 31:18-20.)

A second great step toward righteousness is to help perfect the lives of the members. In the process of working out one's salvation, interest in others is a necessary part. Instructing others in the gospel contributes to perfecting the life of the teacher as well as of the person taught.

Missionary Work—Righteousness

What other responsibilities come to a member of the Church in his acceptance of Christ? If one answers this question in terms of the purposes of the Church, the missionary program stands out before most. The individual members have the responsibility, a work of righteousness, to teach the gospel. If this is not performed, the salvation of our fellow men is upon our heads. (D&C 88:81-82.) In addition to the formal missionary program to which one may be called, there are other opportunities for the member. Referring names of nonmember friends to stake and foreign missionaries, as well as discussing the gospel with nonmembers is one way. The keeping of a missionary in the field or contributing with others to the maintenance of a missionary is another way. By teaching the gospel in the auxiliary organizations of the Church, one may have an opportunity to perform missionary service. If the teacher, however, is to make a "convert" his attitude must be that of the missionary. Elder Mark E. Petersen has pointed out the need for conversion of members of the Church, as follows:

Conversion is all-important in the classroom. Each member of the Church must be thoroughly converted. But conversion is dependent on good teaching, and good teaching must include good doctrine. Good doctrine may be found in the official sources of the Church, and from such sources we should obtain it.

Conversion is so important to the whole future life of an individual that all care must be taken to have him converted to correct doctrine and practice and not to mistaken views of some persons, no matter how sincere. (Your Faith and You, p. 40.)

Labor for the Dead

The responsibility of the Church to provide the facilities for the members to discharge their own responsibility to their kindred dead is a work of righteousness. This activity is one of the most direct ways to participate in the salvation of others. One may be a "savior" of the living, but he may also become the "savior" of countless dead. This work of righteousness includes the genealogical research as well as temple service, where possible.

Service to Others

Every principle of the gospel lived, every Church activity engaged in, serves as an example for others.

This kind of service cannot be overemphasized, for "when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) One provides for continued works of righteousness through the Church organization by contributions of material means in the form of tithing, fast offerings, ward or branch budget, building fund, and other assessments. In a practical sense, if there is a work of righteousness that contributes to the service of others, it is the giving of one's own self in terms of such contributions.

Participation in worthy Church projects for the advancement of others, such as Welfare projects by the Priesthood members and the Relief Society members stands high among the works of righteousness. This is the organizational way that a member may, in part, retain a remission of his sins from day to day—by imparting of his substance to the needy. (Ibid., 4:26-27.)

Obey Leadership

With the Church as the divine institution through which the foregoing purposes for man may be realized, it is evident that full confidence is to be shown in the counsel given by those who preside over us. Continuous revelation is received that the member may reach perfection by obedience to the Lord's will through his servants. There is salvation in no other way.

Everyday Religion

The works of righteousness are to be shown forth on all days and not only on the Sabbath. (D&C 59:11.) In the words of President Joseph F. Smith, we learn:

Now I want to tell you that the religion of Christ is not a Sunday religion. It is not a momentary religion; it is a religion that never ends and it requires duties of its devotees on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and all of the days of the week just as sincerely, just as strongly as it does on the Sabbath day. (Gospel Doctrine, p. 394.)

Rewards of Righteousness

The first reward of righteousness given in our text (D&C 59:23) is peace in this world. Certainly this peace does not mean that war will end before the second coming of Christ. (Ibid., 1:35; 87:6; 97:22-23.) Peace as a reward to the righteous may be enjoyed always regardless of the turmoil, strife, and tribulation in the world. It is a peace of mind, a sense of security, a settled conviction, a joy to the soul which comes only through the Holy Ghost because works of righteousness have and are being performed. (Smith, Joseph F., Gospel Doctrine, pp. 126-127; Chapter 38.) Isaiah expressed it as a "quietness and assurance forever." (Isaiah 32:17.)

The second reward of righteousness and the greatest gift to be conferred by the Father upon his children is eternal life. (D&C 14:7.) The quality of living forever is possessed by the eternal spirit of man, but to live forever as a soul, that is, with the spirit and body united, through the resurrection, is known as immortality. (Ibid., 88:14-16.) Immortality is conferred on all of the earth's inhabitants, but eternal life is reserved for those who become like God. (Ibid., 29:43; Moses 1:39.) Eternal life or exaltation is to live in God's presence, to become like him, with the powers of spirit procreation. (Ibid., 132:15-17, 19-22.) What greater blessings may one have than the assurance of well-being in this life and eternal life in the world to come?

Rewards for Sabbath observance are numerous, but these blessings come not because of Sabbath-keeping alone but also by keeping the other commandments. Thus, the Lord declared that his people are to acknowledge his hand in all things and to keep the commandments, and the rewards will be peace of mind in this world and eternal life in the world to come.
