Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 45

Talents and Testimonies

(Sections 60 and 62)

The time came for the Prophet Joseph Smith and some of the brethren to leave Jackson County, Missouri. They had been there for only two months, but the foundations of Zion had been laid by dedication of the land as a gathering place for the Saints, and, also, as a site for the temple. Other instructions were given concerning the people and their settling in the promised land.

Instructions about Travel

Several elders approached the Prophet to learn what the Lord desired of them. These elders were instructed to return to their homes in the East. (D&C 60:5.) Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Oliver Cowdery, and the others were to go to St. Louis by water, whence the brethren named were to journey to Cincinnati. The rest were to go "two by two, and preach the word, not in haste, among the congregations of the wicked." (Ibid., 60:8.)

"Congregations of the Wicked"

Section 60 mentions "congregations of the wicked" twice. (Ibid., 60:8, 13.) The definition of the expression was given a few days later. While on the bank of the Missouri River en route to St. Louis, the Prophet and his party were met by some elders on their way to Jackson County. In the revelation dated August 13, 1831, these elders were told to declare the gospel to the inhabitants of the earth, or in other words, to the congregations of the wicked. (Ibid., 62:5.) "Congregations" in these revelations are not necessarily church gatherings only, but they may be. By definition of "wicked," the student of the modern revelations understands that they are the (1) morally corrupt and (2) those who have not accepted the fulness of the gospel. (Ibid., 35:12; 84:49-53.) Consequently, "congregations of the wicked" are those who have not accepted the true gospel. But these people are to have an opportunity to receive the gospel either in this life or in the spirit world. (1 Peter 3:18-20; 4:6; D&C 128:5.)

"I Am Not Well Pleased"

With the elders who had come to Missouri, the Lord was pleased, but those who lacked courage and diligence to open their mouths did not receive the same commendation. (Ibid., 60:1-2.) These elders had failed to exercise their talents in behalf of the Church. Talents are natural endowments or gifts. These talents constitute our ability to make contributions to the welfare of our fellow men, through music, poetry, drama, and other arts, in mechanics, and in the professions. Some people have talent or aptitude in leadership, organization, in speech, and in getting along with people.

Since talents or gifts are natural endowments, then every person possesses them. It is also true that some people are gifted to a greater degree than others.

Source of Talents

Latter-day Saints are blessed with a far better understanding of themselves, their origin, and the answers to many perplexing situations in life than are those who do not believe in the gospel. Accepting the truth that we lived as intelligent beings in a pre-earth life and that we developed ourselves during those eternities, it follows that we had our "natural" endowments in that life. This point of view is interestingly developed in correspondence between Elder Orson F. Whitney of the Council of the Twelve and President Joseph F. Smith. In the words of Elder Whitney, we learn:

Spirit Memories.—Writing one day upon the subject of spirit memories, and the influence exerted upon the affairs of this life by the awakened recollections of a former experience, I found myself indulging in the following reflections:

Why are we drawn toward certain persons, and they toward us, independently of any known previous acquaintance? Is it a fact, or only a fancy, that we and they were mutually acquainted and mutually attracted in some earlier period of our eternal existence? More than once, after meeting someone whom I had never met before on earth, I have wondered why his or her face seemed so familiar. Many times, upon hearing a noble sentiment expressed, though unable to recall having heard it until then, I have been thrilled by it, and felt as if I had always known it. The same is true of music, some strains of which are like echoes from afar, sounds falling from celestial heights, notes struck from the vibrant harps of eternity. I do not assert pre-acquaintance in all such cases, but as one thought suggests another, these queries arise in the mind.

The Shepherd's Voice.—When it comes to the Gospel, I feel more positive. Why did the Savior say: "My sheep know my voice"? Can a sheep know the voice of its shepherd, if it has never heard that voice before? They who love Truth, and to whom it appeals most powerfully, were they not its best friends in a previous state of existence? I think so. I believe that we knew the Gospel before we came here, and it is this knowledge, this acquaintance, that gives to it a familiar sound.

Very much in the same vein, I once wrote to President Joseph F. Smith—he at the time in Utah, and I on a mission in Europe. Here is his reply:

President Smith's View

I heartily endorse your sentiments respecting congeniality of spirits. Our knowledge of persons and things before we came here, combined with the divinity awakened within our souls through obedience to the gospel, powerfully affects, in my opinion, all our likes and dislikes, and guides our preferences in the course of this life, provided we give careful heed to the admonitions of the Spirit.

All those salient truths which come home so forcibly to the head and heart seem but the awakening of the memories of the spirit. Can we know anything here that we did not know before we came? Are not the means of knowledge in the first estate equal to those of this? I think that the spirit, before and after this probation, possesses greater facilities, aye, manifold greater, for the acquisition of knowledge, than while manacled and shut up in the prison-house of mortality. I believe that our Savior possessed a foreknowledge of all the vicissitudes through which he would have to pass in the mortal tabernacle. . . .

If Christ knew beforehand, so did we. But in coming here, we forgot all, that our agency might be free indeed, to choose good or evil, that we might merit the reward of our own choice and conduct. But by the power of the Spirit, in the redemption of Christ, through obedience, we often catch a spark from the awakened memories of the immortal soul, which lights up our whole being as with the glory of our former home. (Saturday Night Thoughts, pp. 294-296. See also, Gospel Doctrine, pp. 12-14.)

Among other things from the foregoing, we understand that talents were a part of ourselves in pre-mortality, that character-traits were formed there, that abilities, such as to believe in or accept truth, are brought to this life. The great truth, allowing for environmental factors here, is that we are very much the same as we were in the pre-existence.

Improve Each Moment

Each stage of our eternal existence—pre-existence, earth-life, and the spirit world—is an opportunity stage to develop talents. We are here, but we are now body and spirit. The talents we bring with us must also become a part of the whole person. Our knowledge of the pre-earth life is presently gone, but the influence of that life is felt. Nevertheless, we are to take what we have and grow and develop. It is the use we make of our natural endowments that will determine whether we shall eventually be called a wise or slothful servant.

Although each person is what he was in pre-existence and, thus, different from others, all have talents to use in the Lord's work. It doesn't matter what we may think of our abilities; we have ability which should be used.

Parable of the Talents

The Savior gave two parables that emphasize the need to develop one's talents. The parable of the Entrusted Talent tells of the man who gave talents (goods) to his servants. To one he gave five talents, to another two, and to the last, only one. The doubling of their talents by the first two brought forth the same commendation.

. . .Well done, good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. (Matt. 25:23.)

These two servants had used their talents wisely, though they were different. But the servant who received one talent had buried it in the ground, fearful that it might be lost. The reply of the master was ". . . thou wicked and slothful servant. . . ." (Ibid., v. 26; Talmage, James E., Jesus the Christ, pp. 580-584.)

Latter-day Saints may think of talents as blessings, since we have an opportunity to develop them in the Church, which provides the means for us to increase all good gifts. When we fail to take the opportunities to assist in the furthering of the Lord's work, we are slothful servants. The Prophet Joseph Smith said:

. . . Blessings offered, but rejected, are no longer blessings, but become like the talent hid in the earth by the wicked and slothful servant; the proffered good returns to the giver; the blessing is besowed on those who will receive and occupy; for unto him that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundantly, but unto him that hath not or will not receive, shall be taken away that which he hath, or might have had. (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 257.)

The Gift of the Holy Ghost

Every Latter-day Saint has the privilege of receiving one or more gifts of the Holy Ghost. (D&C 46:11-12; Chapter 32.) He does not know his latent talents nor the gifts of the Spirit; consequently, he must earnestly seek after the best gifts, remembering the purposes for which they are given, that he may not be deceived. If he does this, he will exert his best efforts to advance his own salvation and that of his fellow men. (Ibid., 46:7-10.)

In the case of the elders with whom the Lord was displeased because they feared man and therefore would not use their talents to preach and testify (Ibid., 60:1-2), he said:

And it shall come to pass, if they are not more faithful unto me, it shall be taken away, even that which they have. (Ibid., v. 3.)

One can believe that if these elders had courageously taught the gospel, the Lord would have sustained them as he told Joseph Smith he would uphold him against the Adversary. (Ibid., 3:7-8.)

He who does not develop his talents and gifts is declared by the Lord to be an idler. Those who were to come to Zion in 1831 were told that they should not idle away their time, nor bury their talent. (Ibid., 60:13.)

The Lord Rules

All scripture proclaims the truth that God is sovereign in this world. The revealed fact that God is all-knowing and all-powerful, that he knows the destiny of individuals and nations, makes him supreme. It is this assurance that gives to the believer the faith to put his full trust in the ultimate victory of truth. The Lord rules among the armies of the earth, and the day will come when all men shall know of his power. (Ibid., 60:4.) In 1831, this truth served to bolster the courage of those who were weak in not testifying to the truth; but this is not its only purpose, for one realizes that God shapes the destinies of man and nations. God has promised peace and prosperity to those who serve him diligently, but wrath and indignation upon those people who transgress his laws. (Ibid., 59:23; 39:16-18.)

The power of the Lord will be known when his fury is unleashed upon the unrepentant. (Ibid., 29:17-20; 88:88-92.) When the last great conflict is ended at the close of the millennium, the Lord's power will be fully demonstrated. (Ibid., 43:22-30; 88:111-116.) At the time Christ declares his work finished, his jewels, the people of God, will have been gathered together for time and eternity. (Ibid., 60:4; 88:106.)

Shake Dust Off Feet

The testimony of the Spirit is powerful. Its consequences are always expressed with power. A testimony rejected leads eventually, unless repented of, to loss of great blessings. For the first time in The Doctrine and Covenants we learn about an ancient practice of testimony and its attendant power. The law is given in Section 60:15 as shaking the dust off one's feet against those who do not accept the missionary. This ceremony is to be performed in secret. The washing of the feet is a testimony against the person in the day of judgment. (Ibid., 60:15; 1:8-10.) Thus the missionary has power to seal up the rebellious until the time of wrath. This was true in the Old Testament period as well as in the time of Jesus and the apostles. (Nehemiah 5:13; Matt. 10:14; Luke 10:10-11; Acts 13:51; 18:6.) The testimony of warning is a part of the plan in this dispensation. (D&C 84:87-95; 75:20-21; 99:4.)

When should this ceremony be performed? The answer must be given at the time and according to the circumstances. The missionary is to be guided by love and patience in all things. It would seem that the elder would follow the counsel given to Hyrum Smith, that he should be directed by the Spirit in all things. (Ibid., 11:12.) In the final analysis, the gospel is one of love, but there may be conditions such as persecution or violence toward the elder, that would give rise to the use of the ceremony, if directed by the Spirit.

Section 62—Testimony

It was from Section 62 that we learned the meaning of "congregations of the wicked." The Lord reminds his people that his knowledge includes an understanding of man's weaknesses and also that he knows the way that man may be rescued from falling into temptation. (Ibid., 62:1.) Concerning the few elders on their way to Zion in 1831, he would have them know that they were blessed in bearing their testimonies to the world. But wherein were they blessed?

Nevertheless, ye are blessed, for the testimony which ye have borne is recorded in heaven for the angels to look upon; and they rejoice over you, and your sins are forgiven you. (Ibid., v. 3.)

This passage points up the importance of being in the service of one's fellow men. In this dispensation the Lord has emphasized the need for missionary work, a service of love for fellow man. (Ibid., 15:6.) When a person speaks by the power of the Holy Ghost, that Spirit testifies to the truth spoken. (2 Nephi 33:1.) When such testimonies are uttered they are recorded in the heavens. Why should angels rejoice in this? Holy beings are concerned with the salvation of men. The testimony is a means to an end—the salvation of the testator and the convincing of others of God's truth. "Happy is the man, indeed, who can receive this soul-satisfying testimony, and be at rest, and seek no other road to peace than the doctrine of Jesus Christ." (Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 158.)

Service to God and Man

When one is using his talents for the salvation of men, he is serving God and advancing his own salvation. (Mosiah 2:17.) The Lord admonishes his Saints to develop their talents and use the gifts he has bestowed upon them by his Spirit. Viewed from the perspective of man's eternal nature, there is no more important work in life than to work for one's salvation and that of his fellow beings. The greatest influence that the Latter-day Saint can exert upon others is to be a living testimony of God's truth as revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

In concluding this revelation the Lord reminds his servants that,

. . . I, the Lord, promise the faithful and cannot lie. . . .

Behold, the kingdom is yours. And behold, and lo, I am with the faithful always. Even so. Amen. (D&C 62:6, 9.)
