Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 46

The Waters and the Land

(Section 61)

As pointed out in the last chapter, the Prophet Joseph Smith and a party of elders left Independence landing for St. Louis by canoe. In the Prophet's own words, we read:

. . . In company with ten Elders, I left Independence landing for Kirtland . . . at McIlwaine's Bend, Brother Phelps, in open vision by daylight, saw the destroyer in his most horrible power, ride upon the face of the waters; others heard the noise, but saw not the vision.

The next morning after prayer, I received the following: [D&C Section 61.] (DHC I:202-203.)

It appears that the elders in the party were greatly humbled because of the dangerous water and because of the great noise and the horrible power of the adversary on the waters, as shown in vision to Brother W. W. Phelps. This is suggested in the opening verses of Section 61, where the Lord declares that their sins are forgiven. It continues to make known the reason for the blessing, as follows:

. . . for I, the Lord forgive sins, and am merciful unto those who confess their sins with humble hearts. (D&C 61:2.)

Bear Record by Testimony

These elders were permitted to travel upon the waters that they might bear record of their experiences. Some of the elders traveling by water needed to preach to the people on both sides of the river who were perishing in unbelief. (Ibid., 61:3-4.)

What was there in this experience about which they could bear testimony? One important fact was the existence of Satan, the destroyer. His power on the waters were known to these brethren. They could also be thankful that the Lord was all-powerful for the benefit of the faithful. (Ibid., 61:5-6.)

An outstanding example of protection to the faithful is that of Helaman's two thousand sons. (Alma 53:10-28; 56:41-57.) True faith in God will bring preservation to a people. (Alma 44:4.)

President Wilford Woodruff, who was appointed by President Brigham Young to gather Saints living in New England and Canada, said:

. . . I did as he told me. It took me two years to gather up everybody, and I brought up the rear with a company. When I got into Pittsburg with this company it was dusk, and I saw a steamer just preparing to go out. I walked right up to the captain and asked him if he was ready to go out. He said he was. "How many passengers have you?" "Two hundred and fifty." "Can you take another hundred?" "I can." "Then," said I. "I would like to go aboard with you." The words were hardly out of my mouth when the Holy Ghost said to me, "Don't you nor your company go aboard that steamer." That was enough; I had learned the voice of the Spirit. I turned and told the captain that I had made up my mind not to go at present. That steamer started out. It was a dark night, and before the steamer had gone far she took fire, and all on board was lost. We should probably have shared the same fate, had it not been for that monitor within me. (The Deseret Weekly, Vol. 53, No. 21, Nov. 7, 1896, cf. Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, p. 295.)

The Lord Reasons

The Lord said he would reason with these elders as he had done with men in days of old. (D&C 61:13.)

A modern revelation showing forth the reasoning of the Lord with his servants is Section 50, vs. 10 through 24. (Chapter 35.)

Why did the Lord give this revelation; was it for these few elders only? It is apparent from the following verses that the counsel concerning the waters was for all Saints in the latter days:

Behold, I the Lord, in the beginning blessed the waters; but in the last days, by the mouth of my servant John, I cursed the waters.

Wherefore, the days will come that no flesh shall be safe upon the waters.

And it shall be said in days to come that none is able to go up to the land of Zion upon the waters, but he that is upright in heart: (D&C 61:14-16.)

In the beginning the Lord saw that his creations were good. (Gen. 1:10.) The waters were blessed for the use of man. But in the last days the waters are cursed. It was John the Revelator who saw the judgment of God poured out upon the world in the last days. Among the vials of wrath, the second angel poured his vial upon the sea and every living soul died in the sea. With the release of the contents of the vial upon the rivers carried by the next angel, they became blood. (Rev. 16:3-4.)

As a part of the Plan conceived in the heavens before the world was formed, men were to learn from the prophets that judgments or calamities would visit the earth if the laws of God were not observed. Amos announced the truth that the Lord would do nothing but what he would reveal it to his prophets first. (Amos 3:7.) The Lord's objective is to save and not to destroy or curse. As pointed out in Proverbs, the Lord's object is to bless, even in chastisement. (Proverbs 3:11-12.)

Waters Cursed

Attention is called to verse 5 of Section 61 in which the brethren in Joseph Smith's party were informed that many destructions would occur on the Missouri and Mississippi rivers. It is virtually impossible to give specific data regarding the destruction on these two rivers and their tributaries since the time that this revelation was given. That the number of lives lost has been great and the property damage enormous is known. During his lifetime, the Prophet Joseph Smith mentioned great losses in lives and property damage. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, pp. 362-363.)

An informative article by Elder B. H. Roberts entitled "Joseph Smith's Prediction of Destruction upon the Waters; More Especially of the Inland Waters of North America and of Western Missouri," gives data on this subject up to 1903. (A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Vol. 1, pp. 275-278.)

Destructions upon the Waters

Not only were the waters of the Missouri and Mississippi cursed in the last days, but also other waters. (D&C 61:4-5.)

It states that the days would come when no flesh would be safe upon the waters except the upright in heart. (Ibid., vs. 15-16.) One need only think of the great sea disaster caused by striking icebergs, collisions, burnings, tossing on rocks or other objects during peace times, to bring forcefully to one's mind destruction upon the waters. The tremendous property damage and loss of life during the last two World Wars are staggering. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 365.)

A Contrast and the Lord's Assurance

In the last days the waters are cursed. Nevertheless, there would be traffic on the waters. The elders for whom Section 61 was given specifically, were to travel by water, after a little while, or by land. Other brethren were, however, to be warned about the Missouri and Mississippi rivers.

And now I give unto you a commandment that what I say unto one I say unto all, that you shall forewarn your brethren concerning these waters, that they come not in journeying upon them, lest their faith fail and they are caught in snares;

I, the Lord, have decreed, and the destroyer rideth upon the face thereof; and I revoke not the decree. (D&C 61:18-19.)

The Lord, however, gave assurance to his Saints that they would not perish by the waters, although the day would come that only the upright in heart would come to Zion by water.

Nevertheless, all flesh is in mine hand, and he that is faithful among you shall not perish by the waters. . .

Wherefore, the days will come that no flesh shall be safe upon the waters.

And it shall be said in days to come that none is able to go up to the land of Zion upon the waters, but he that is upright in heart. (Ibid., 61:6, 15-16.)

Emigration to Zion in Earlier Days

To come to Zion was the desire of the Saints almost as soon as the gospel was preached in Great Britain, the first European mission to be opened. This movement of the members to assist in the building of settlements and temples in selected areas of the Western United States was encouraged by providing funds for the converts from the Emigration Fund.

The success of this emigration movement under the direction of the General Authorities of the Church is history. The pioneer period was ended with the coming of the railroad to Utah in 1869. In this same year the emigrant voyages by sailing vessels ceased, as the steamship took the place of the slower vessel. It would take from five to six weeks by sailing vessel from Europe. An interesting notable description on one of these "packet" ships was given by the noted English author Charles Dickens, who went on board the Mormon emigrant ship to testify against the Saints but came off the ship praising the character of them.

"Mr. Uncommercial" in the following is Charles Dickens:

Behold me on my way to an Emigrant Ship, on a hot morning early in June. . .

I go aboard my Emigrant ship . . . But nobody is in an ill-temper, nobody is the worse for drink, nobody swears an oath or uses a coarse word, nobody appears depressed, nobody is weeping, and down upon the deck in every corner where it is possible to find a few square feet to kneel, crouch, or lie in every unsuitable attitude for writing, are writing letters.

Now, I have been in emigrant ships before this day in June. And these people are so strikingly different from all other people in like circumstances whom I have never seen, that I wonder aloud, "What would a stranger suppose these emigrants to be!"

The vigilant bright face of the weather-browned captain of the Amazon is at my shoulder, and he says, "What, indeed! The most of these came aboard yesterday evening. They came from various parts of England in small parties that had never seen one another before. Yet they had not been a couple of hours on board, when they established their own police, made their own regulations, and set their own watches at all the hatchways. Before nine o'clock, the ship was as orderly and as quiet as a man-of-war! . . .

"A stranger would be puzzled to guess the right name of these people, Mr. Uncommercial," says the captain.

"Indeed he would."

"If you hadn't known, could you ever have supposed—?"

"How could I!" I should have said they were in their degree the pick and flower of England."

"So should I," says the captain.

"How many are they?"

"Eight hundred in round numbers." . . . Eight hundred Mormons.

I afterwards learned that a Dispatch was sent home by the captain before he struck out into the wide Atlantic, highly extolling the behavior of these Emigrants, and the perfect order and propriety of all their social arrangements. . . . But I went on board their ship to bear testimony against them if they deserved it, as I fully believed they would; to my great astonishment they did not deserve it; and my predispositions and tendencies must not affect me as an honest witness. I went over the Amazon's side, feeling it impossible to deny that, so far, some remarkable influence had produced a remarkable result, which better known influences have often missed. (Dickens, Charles: The Uncommercial Traveller, pp. 200-211.)

The writer's maternal grandparents were among the more than 800 Saints described by Charles Dickens on the vessel "Amazon" that left London, England, on June 4, 1863. It is traditional in the family that the ship was saved from destruction by heavy storms through the prayers of the ship's passengers.

Among the many accounts of this kind, the following one concerning Harrison Burgess, a missionary to England in 1850, indicates fulfillment of the Lord's promise that they who traveled to Zion in the last days would not perish by the water:

We sailed along quite comfortably until the twenty-sixth of the month (January, 1850) when a terrible storm arose. About two o'clock in the afternoon the sea began to swell and show its power, and the vessel lay first on one side and then on the other. Water came in upon us on both sides of our ship. We lost our sails and yard-arms, and the chains in the rigging on the ship broke. In the evening, when everything looked most dismal, our president called together his counselors and all joined in prayer to the Lord to cause the winds to cease. Scarcely had the brethren ceased their supplications when there was a calm, so sudden in fact that the captain and the officers of the ship were greatly surprised, and they came and inquired of us how it was that we felt so happy and gay amid the great danger through which we had just passed. They could not realize that the Lord removed all fear from the hearts of his faithful Saints when they were endeavoring to do their duty. (Labors in the Vineyard, Twelfth Book of the Faith-Promoting Series, pp. 72-73.)

When the time comes for the Saints to gather to Zion, the Lord's power will be manifest in their behalf.

Land Blessed

In the beginning the land was cursed (Gen. 3:17), but in the last days it is blessed for the use of the Saints. (D&C 61:17.) The complete fulfillment of this prophecy is reserved for the millennium when the earth will be renewed and receive its condition of terrestrialization and become as a beautiful garden. Elder George A. Smith made this observation concerning the way the Lord blessed the land of Utah for his Saints:

We came to this land [Utah] because it was so desert, desolate and God-forsaken that no mortal upon earth ever would covet it; but, as Colonel Fremont reported that at the mouth of the Bear River, in the early part of August, his thermometer stood at 29 degrees Fahrenheit, three degrees below the freezing-point, which would kill grain, fruit, or vegetables, our enemies said, "You Mormons may go there and welcome," chuckling to each other over what seemed to them our annihilation. . . . The newspapers recorded the joy, and gratification felt at the utter end of "Mormonism.". . . Notwithstanding, however, the many drawbacks and difficulties encountered in the shape of drought, crickets, grasshoppers, and the cold, sterile climate, the Spirit of the Lord was hovering over the Great Basin . . . and the climate became genial and soft. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 359.)

Prophetic Utterance

Verses 24 through 29 of Section 61 give instructions concerning the course the Saints were to travel en route to Zion. In the main they were to journey by land and not by these waters, the Missouri and Mississippi rivers. By the spirit of revelation they were to be led as the children of Israel were led anciently by Moses. (D&C 8:2-3.)

Section 61 Concluded

The Lord counseled his servants in their traveling to Cincinnati, Ohio, and beginning in Cincinnati, to be diligent in testimony. (Ibid., 61:30-35.) In concluding the revelation, encouragement is given to these brethren by reminding them that they are little children who should be cheerful, for the Lord is with them. He has not forsaken them. (Ibid., vs. 36-37.) Finally, there comes this admonition, applicable to all Saints.

Gird up your loins and be watchful and be sober, looking forth for the coming of the Son of Man, for he cometh in an hour you think not.

Pray always that you enter not into temptation, that you may abide the day of his coming, whether in life or in death. Even so, Amen. (Ibid., vs. 38-39.)

"Gird up your loins . . ." is a common statement among Latter-day Saints. It means "Be Prepared." For what? The coming of the Lord. What should be one means of preparation? Praying that one will have the strength and courage to resist temptation. If so, the Saints will surely abide the day of Jesus' coming, whether in death or in life.
