Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 48

Give Heed to Warnings and Trifle Not With Sacred Things

(Section 63:22-66)

The center place for the city of Zion (Jackson County, Missouri) had been designated by revelation. Members of the Church desired to know what they should do in relationship to it; therefore the Lord made known his purposes to his Saints. They were to gather to that place if they desired to do the will of the Lord. As stated in verses 22 and 23 of Section 63, they were not to consider this a commandment. The Lord gives revelation for the benefit of all who will obey, but he knows that some members, if commanded in all things, will bring condemnation on themselves by disobedience. Consequently, in this revelation, he leaves it up to the individual to obey his will or not to obey. Those who love the Lord will obey his will as if it were a commandment. (Matt. 7:21; D&C 84:44-45; Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 378.)

Mysteries as Blessings

Latter-day Saints know that to meddle in the things which have not been revealed brings disappointment and sometimes loss of faith in fundamental beliefs. Speculation does not contribute to salvation. Rationalization of the scriptures may destroy faith. There are mysteries of the kingdom which may be known by all who seek in faith. (Alma 12:9-11.) These revealed truths further one's salvation, for they are essential to soul-growth. As one learns the truth contained in the revelations, it becomes "a well of living water, springing up unto everlasting life." (D&C 63:23; John 4:10-14.) It should be clear that individuals differ in their knowledge of gospel truths and the application of them in their lives. There is ample opportunity for the Latter-day Saint to learn the mysteries revealed in the scriptures.

Concerning the gathering to the land of Zion, the Saints were to learn this mystery: do not undertake the journey in haste, lest pestilence follow. (D&C 63:24.) Sickness could result by taking a long journey without proper food and suitable clothing, a lesson learned later by the American army in the Spanish-American War. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 379.)

Render unto Caesar

During the ministry of Christ there came some who sought to trap him by asking him whether one should pay tribute to Caesar. His reply then and also in this dispensation stresses the necessity for the Saint to follow the laws of the land. "Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's." (Matt. 22:15-22; D&C 63:26; 58:21-32.) This truth is emphasized when one understands that Jesus is the Creator of the earth, yet he respects the laws of the land. The Saints who were to go to Zion were to follow legal practices in purchasing the land, although it was to be their inheritance. Only by this means would they have an opportunity to live in peace with their neighbors. Enough opposition would come to the Saints from Satan stirring up the hearts of their enemies, without their tempting them to shed blood. (Ibid., 63:25-28.) When the Lord commanded the Saints to purchase the lands and there should be no shedding of blood, he was saying what had been said of old—"Thou shalt not kill." (Exodus 20:13.) In fact, what follows in the revelation is a warning to comply with the commandment to purchase the land promptly, or else they would be scourged from place to place. (D&C 63:29-31.) Elder B. H. Roberts wrote the following on this prophecy:

. . . And so the event turned out. The saints failed to respond with becoming promptness to the commandment to purchase the land of Zion; and all that was predicted in the revelation befell them. The passage then was a warning to the saints, not a threat directed at the old settlers of Jackson county; and if blood was to be shed, clearly it was to be the blood of the saints rather than that of their enemies. (A Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1:264.)

Wars Decreed

Immediately following this prediction of distress among the Saints because of negligence in following counsel, the Lord declares that the wicked in the world shall slay the wicked, for they lose his spirit by their unrighteousness. (D&C 63:32-33.) Destruction follows when that spirit is withdrawn from men. (2 Nephi 26:11; Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 380.) Fear will come upon all men in that day because men will be fighting amongst themselves and the Saints will hardly escape. (D&C 63:34-35; cf, 1:34-36.) The Saints in 1831 and later, during the time of the Prophet Joseph Smith, were counseled to come to the land of Zion that they might not be engulfed in these tribulations. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 380.) Those who should come to Zion were to be the faithful, serving God in righteousness and faith. It was the solemn duty of the Saints to declare a warning voice to the world that judgment awaited the unrepentant, and the only escape would be through following the will of the Lord. (D&C 63:36-37.) That the Saints would "hardly escape" was commented upon by the Prophet on September 29, 1839, as follows:

. . . Explained concerning the coming of the Son of Man; also, that it is a false idea that the Saints will escape all the judgments, whilst the wicked suffer; for all flesh is subject to suffer, and "the righteous shall hardly escape"; still many of the Saints will escape, for the just shall live by faith; yet many of the righteous shall fall a prey to disease, to pestilence, etc., by reason of the weakness of the flesh, and yet be saved in the Kingdom of God. So that it is an unhallowed principle to say that such and such have transgressed because they have been preyed upon by disease or death, for all flesh is subject to death; and the Savior has said, "Judge not, lest ye be judged." (DHC IV:11.)

Instructions to Kirtland Saints

From verses 38 to 47 in Section 63, instructions are given to members of the Church in Kirtland, Ohio. Specific directions are given that the Titus Billings farm should be disposed of and some were to go to Zion. (vs. 37-39.) The money thus received was to be used for the purchase of land in Missouri. (v. 40.) Newel K. Whitney was to continue the operation of his store, and funds from this source were to be sent also. (vs. 41-44.) He was to take charge of these operations and also to act as an agent of the Church, since some members were not to go to Zion at this time. (vs. 45-46.) The counsel given in this revelation suggests a pattern for the future when the city of the New Jerusalem will be built. Only those who are worthy and receive a call to assemble in that area will have the privilege of participating actively in that endeavor. Only he who is faithful overcomes the world. Constancy in the work of the Lord brings the blessings of having overcome. (v. 47.)

"Blessed Are the Dead That Die in the Lord"

The Latter-day Saint's concept of death is stated in these words:

He that sendeth up treasures unto the land of Zion shall receive an inheritance in this world, and his works shall follow him, and also a reward in the world to come.

Yea, and blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, from henceforth, when the Lord shall come, and old things shall pass away, and all things become new, they shall rise from the dead and shall not die after, and shall receive an inheritance before the Lord, in the holy city. (D&C 63:48-49.)

Several important facts concerning the faithful dead are found in these verses: (1) Righteous works follow the faithful in building a mansion of glory. (2) The dead that die in the Lord are blessed. Death is a blessing for it opens the way to the faithful for further progression on the way to eternal life. Great blessings of communion with loved ones and the realization of having fought a good fight on the earth bring joy. (3) Those that "die in the Lord" need have no fear for the future. Uncertainty and doubt of the period after death flee from those who have and are sincerely overcoming the world. (4) The greatest blessings are not available in the spirit world because that sphere of life is only intended as temporary in preparing one for the resurrection. (5) The departed Saints look forward to the second coming of Christ when they shall rise from the grave to obtain an inheritance in the place prepared for them. Even "the holy city" (New Jerusalem) will be a part of their inheritance. (6) The faithful dead will have a resurrected body free from diesase, pain, and sorrow. This union of spirit and body in the resurrection will remain forever. Death will never again separate them.

The Millennium

In continuation of events following death of the body and the coming of the Lord in judgment upon the wicked, several ideas about the thousand year period of peace and righteousness on the earth are indicated. The present telestial condition of the earth will pass away, and a terrestrial state will prevail. Death is one of the most real events of mortality. It must come to all. Notwithstanding the millennium is known as the time when death shall not bring sorrow, death will come when man reaches the "age of a tree," which is the millennial "age of man." (D&C 101:29-30; 63:50.) Death during this period will consist of being changed immediately from mortality to resurrection. (Ibid., 63:51-52.)

Look forward to "these things" —death, spirit world, resurrection, second coming of Christ, millennium, an inheritance in the earth. In 1831, speaking as the Lord views time, the second coming of Christ was near at hand. In the assurance that his coming is nearer than at the beginning of this dispensation, Saints should follow the counsel to look forward even to "the day of the coming of the Son of Man." (Ibid., 63:53.) The Lord knows that there will be many among the Saints who will not be prepared by righteous living to receive the Savior when he comes. These have been called "foolish virgins among the wise." They are foolish because they had the law, they knew of these things and yet this knowledge was taken lightly in not letting the doctrine of the second coming have an influence upon their lives for repentance. They shall, however, be separated from the righteous, for the Lord will take judgment upon them. (Ibid., 63:53-54.)

That there is great need for a call to repentance is known by all who have a knowledge of the bondage of sin which holds so many people in the world. The Lord is not to be mocked by those who themselves have not received the benefit of release from sin through accepting his atonement. (Ibid., 63:58; Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, page 384.)

Even though this condition exists today as a result of the apostasy, men should know that the Lord is all-powerful and that in time all things shall be subject unto him. (D&C 63:59-60.)

Do Not Blaspheme

Wherefore, let all men beware how they take my name in their lips—

For behold, verily I say, that many there be who are under this condemnation, who use the name of the Lord, and use it in vain, having not authority.

Wherefore, let the church repent of their sins, and I, the Lord, will own them; otherwise they shall be cut off. (Ibid., 63:61-63.)

To blaspheme is to speak irreverently of God or sacred things. The name of Deity should be held in the greatest respect. To take the name of the Lord in vain has been condemned from the beginning. (Exodus 20:7; Lev. 22:32; Deut. 5:11.) Ancient Israel understood that to curse or blaspheme Deity was an offense so serious that death was the penalty. (Lev. 24:16.) But how far has the world departed from the divine injunction that the Lord's name should be used reverently? The vulgar person often delights in blaspheming the name of the Lord, consciously or designedly, to verify his oath or word. In commenting upon this practice of the world, President Joseph Fielding Smith has said:

. . . Some individuals have become so profane that it appears almost impossible for them to speak two or three sentences without the emphasis—as they think—of a vulgar or blasphemous oath. A person is known as much by his language as he is by the company he keeps. . .

. . . How strange it is that some people, and good people at that, think that to use some expression involving the name of the Lord, adds interest, wit, or power to their stories! How often this is seen in the moving pictures, even in shows that otherwise are commendable.

Above all other peoples on the earth, the Latter-day Saints should hold in the utmost sacredness and reverence all things that are holy. The people of the world have not been trained as we have been in such matters, notwithstanding there are many honest, devout, and refined people in the world. But we have the guidance of the Holy Spirit and the revelations of the Lord, and He has solemnly taught us in our own day our duty in relation to all such things. (Improvement Era, July, 1941, p. 525.)

Sacred Things Made Light Of

The people of the world are not the only ones who make light of sacred things. In the days of the Prophet some members of the Church did so, and there are members today who do not sense its seriousness. The word of the Lord in the scriptures, the principles, ordinances, and practices of the Church are to be spoken of with care, for they are sacred. Mockery of sacred truths is blasphemy in the sight of the Lord. The Nephites in the pride of their hearts sinned grievously and lost their strength for the Spirit withdrew from them. One of their sins was "making a mock of that which was sacred." (Helaman 4:11-13.)

Two thoughts emerge from the truth that man is not to mock sacred truths. In the first place, the person who professes belief and practice and at the same time does not live the principles, is making light of sacred things. All should determine that the best life is the life of conformance to God's will. The second thought is the too prevalent poking fun at or jesting about Church teachings and practices. An editorial in a Church publication written by Elder Mark E. Petersen of the Council of the Twelve poses the following pertinent questions as well as others on this point.

How many people joke about the Word of Wisdom when in social groups?

How many joke about sobriety or the lack of it?

How many make light of our teachings on modest dress, and flaunt their standards by persistent violations?

How many make light of the dress requirements of those who go to the temple?

What is our attitude toward the Sabbath? Do we make light of it, and at times do we make fun of it as we proceed to violate it?

There follows the admonition to self-examine our attitudes on these matters, and a stern reminder of the seriousness of trifling with sacred things:

The Lord will not be made light of. He will not be laughed at, nor ridiculed, nor ignored by those who are under obligation to Him.

Self-examination on these matters can be a wholesome thing. And self-determination will be likewise. Determination of what? Determine whether we want to be in the good graces of the Lord or not. Whether we want to be "fence straddlers" or not. Whether we want to carry water on both shoulders, or not. Whether we want to be sincere or not. Whether we are willing to compromise our principles or not. Whether we are willing to sin a little for business sake or for social prestige. . . .

If we trifle with sacred things, we not only disobey, but we ridicule as well. . . .

We may do it thoughtlessly, you say. But that very thoughtlessness is itself an evidence of lack of interest, lack of concern about it all. It is itself proof positive that we are taking lightly the things of God, that we therefore trifle with them.

Without sincerity there is no salvation, regardless of any show of obedience. (Church News Section, Deseret News, March 29, 1958.)

Now is the day to determine to whom obedience will be given. If we have been negligent in the past, the Lord is gracious and kind to the repentant.

These things remain to overcome through patience, that such may receive a more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, otherwise, a greater condemnation. (D&C 63:66.)

Remember that that which cometh from above is sacred, and must be spoken with care, and by constraint of the Spirit; and in this there is no condemnation, and ye receive the Spirit through prayer; wherefore, without this there remaineth condemnation. (Ibid., 63:64.)
