Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 49

The Law of Forgiveness

(Section 64:1-14)

With the designation of western Missouri as the land of Zion, and Independence, Jackson County, as the center place of the Zion of the last days, preparations were underway for the Saints to secure that land as their inheritance. In the early part of September 1831, preparations were made for Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon to go to Hiram, Ohio, where the Prophet was to reside at the home of Father John Johnson. Their special work was to continue in the revision of the Bible, which the Prophet had commenced while in Fayette, New York, but because of other duties the Lord had commanded him to wait until he got to the Ohio. (D&C 37:1; 45:60-61.)

Just before leaving for Hiram, the Prophet received the revelation from which this chapter is prepared. (DHC I:211.)

"Ye Should Overcome the World"

To the elders who were preparing to leave for Jackson County, the Lord gave the comforting message that their sins were forgiven. (D&C 64:3.) Notwithstanding that the Church was only eighteen months old and the members were all converts who had received a remission of sins through baptism, some had sinned in some things, although perhaps not grievously. (Rom. 3:10.) The thought expressed in verse 3 of Section 64, "verily I say, for this once, for mine own glory, and for the salvation of souls, I have forgiven you your sins," suggests the important truth that elders must so live to retain the remission of their sins that their own salvation will redound to God's glory and that their effectiveness in the work of the Lord will bring others to salvation. The purpose of the gospel is to make men perfect through their obedience. When an elder strives with all his heart to keep the commandments, he enjoys the Spirit that convinces others of the truth (D&C 50:21-22), and he retains a remission of his own sins. (Mosiah 4:26.) Forgiveness of sins is dependent upon how well one overcomes the world.

To enjoy the fellowship of the Spirit, one must eschew evil in all of its forms. Following the ways of the world by partaking of customs, practices, and ideas incompatible with what the Lord has revealed, brings loss of true happiness and the protecting companionship of the Holy Ghost. It is just as true today, as in 1831 when the first four verses of Section 64 were given, that the kingdom has been given to those who have received Jesus Christ in baptism, and therefore, the wonderful opportunity is theirs to receive the blessings of salvation by overcoming the world, always striving to retain a remission of sin.

The Keys of the Kingdom

The members of the Church belong to the kingdom, but only one person holds the Priesthood keys which entitle him to direct the work of the kingdom. Joseph Smith is told in this revelation that he would continue to hold the keys of the mysteries of that kingdom as he observed the commandments. (D&C 64:5.) In an earlier revelation Joseph Smith was informed that if he did not prove faithful he could appoint another in his place. (Ibid., 43:1-10; Chapter 18.) In the Prophet's case he had sinned as all men sin, although apparently not grievously. Because he had erred did not give cause for anyone to have "occasion against him without cause." (Ibid., 64:6.) President George A. Smith said that throughout the history of the Church a spirit developed among many elders "to suppose that they knew more than the Prophet," and that he "was going wrong." (Journal of Discourses 11: 7.)

The Steps of Repentance

Throughout the revelations, repentance and forgiveness are spoken of in connection with the Church membership as a whole and also with individuals. We should keep in mind that repentance is for everyone. Sins of omission as well as commission are condemned by the Lord. An example is from Section 58 where we learn that William W. Phelps was admonished to cease from seeking to excel and become humble. (vs. 40-41.) The following verses express the law of forgiveness as it applies to the member of the Church:

Behold, he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord, remember them no more.

By this ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them and forsake them. (Ibid., 58:42-43.)

Several significant points are made in these verses. First, the soul that sins shall receive forgiveness, provided the repentance is sincere, and they shall no longer be remembered. Second, an important element of repentance is confession, and third, there is no repentance and consequently no forgiveness without forsaking sin.

Elder Spencer W. Kimball has outlined the steps of repentance as (1) sorrow for sin, (2) abandonment of sin, (3) confession of sin, (4) restitution for sin, and (5) doing the will of the Lord. (Conference Report, October 1949, p. 127.)

It is probable that at no time does one lose completely his sensitivity to sin, but the full impact of the sin in bringing one to repentance is lessened by continued sinning. When the person repents, remorse of conscience brings the urge to abandon the sin and seek the Lord's forgiveness. The principal step to forgiveness is to forsake sin. In the language of Elder James E. Talmage:

Repentance, to be worthy of its name, must comprise something more than a mere self-acknowledgement of error; it does not consist in lamentations and wordy confessions, but in the heartfelt recognition of guilt, which carries with it a horror for sin and a resolute determination to make amends for the past and to do better in the future. If such a conviction be genuine it is marked by that godly sorrow which, as Paul has said, "worketh repentance to salvation, not to be repented of; but the sorrow of the world worketh death." (2 Cor. 7:10) Apostle Orson Pratt has wisely said: "It would be of no use for the sinner to confess his sins to God unless he were determined to forsake them; it would be of no benefit to him to feel sorry that he had done wrong unless he intended to do wrong no more; it would be folly for him to confess before God that he injured his fellow man unless he were determined to do all in his power to make restitution. Repentance, then, is not only confession of sins, with a sorrowful, contrite heart, but a fixed, settled purpose to refrain from every evil way." (The Articles of Faith, p. 112.)

In an earlier revelation, the Lord revealed that offenses committed with public knowledge should be confessed in public, while those committed in secret should be rebuked in secret. (D&C 42:88-93.) Confession of sin is a part of repentance—confession to God in the name of the Savior, always. Those sins, however, that may affect the member's status in the Church are to be confessed to the Lord's representative, the bishop. In a commentary on Section 58, verse 43, Elder Spencer W. Kimball says:

Especially grave errors such as sexual sins shall be confessed to the bishop as well as to the Lord. There are two remissions which one might wish to have. First, the forgiveness from the Lord, and second, the forgiveness of the Lord's Church through its leaders. As soon as one has an inner conviction of his sins, he should go to the Lord in "mighty prayer" as did Enos and never cease his supplications until he shall, like Enos (of the Book of Mormon), receive assurance that his sins have been forgiven by the Lord. It is unthinkable that God absolves serious sins upon a few requests. He is likely to wait until there has been long sustained repentance as evidenced by a willingness to comply with all His other requirements. No priest nor elder is authorized to thus act for the Church. The Lord has a consistent, orderly plan. Every soul in the stakes is given a bishop who, by the very nature of his calling and his ordination, is a "judge in Israel." The bishop is one's best earthly friend. He will hear the problems, judge the seriousness thereof, determine the degree of repentance and decide if it warrants an eventual forgiveness. He does this as the earthly representative of God, the master physician, the master psychologist, the master psychiatrist. If repentance is sufficient he may waive penalties which is tantamount to forgiveness. The bishop claims no authority to absolve sins, but he does share the burden, waive penalties, relieve tension and strain and he may assure a continuation of activity. He will keep the whole matter most confidential. ("Be Ye Clean," BYU Speeches of the Year, May 4, 1954.)

To the elders (and to all members of the Church) referred to in Section 64, the Lord said that he would forgive whomsoever he would, but of us it is required to forgive all men. (D&C 64:10.) In other words, ultimate forgiveness is in the hands of the Lord, but he has promised, as indicated above, that he will, when, in addition to sorrow for sin, there is abandonment and confession of sins, by the one seeking forgiveness, forgive the sinner upon sincere repentance. Then, what more is required of the person seeking forgiveness? The next step is restitution insofar as this is possible. There are some things for which complete restitution cannot be made. The murderer and the one who takes virtue cannot restore what is taken, but there are some things that might be done to mitigate the offense. In the case of the latter, complete and full devotion to the cause of Zion in bringing souls to Christ is a part of possible restitution. "And James indicated that each good deed, each testimony, each proselyting effort, each safeguard thrown about others is like a blanket over one's own sins, or like a deposit against an overdraft in the bank," said Elder Kimball. This leads us to the final step in repentance.

Doing the Father's Will

Since every person needs to repent (1 John 1:8), some because of serious sins, we learn of another reason for keeping the commandments. The fullest measure of salvation is available to those who obey the Lord in all things, which includes repentance. (D&C 133:62.) In the Lord's Preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, we find this sublime truth:

For I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance;

Nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven. (Ibid., 1:31-32.)

A Law of Forgiveness

Throughout the Savior's ministry emphasis was put upon man's relationship with his fellow man. His admonitions against murder, adultery, stealing, slander, and other vices were intended to bring peace to individuals and a reign of peace for all men. But, in general, mankind has not accepted the way of peace, and in these last days, the world is ripened in iniquity and is in need of great repentance. (See General Conference sermons by Elders Spencer W. Kimball and Delbert L. Stapley, Improvement Era, December 1961.)

The Lord's forgiveness is withheld until the person can also forgive his fellow men. Elder James E. Talmage forcefully brings this point to the reader's attention by reference to several instances in Jesus' teachings, including the parable of the talents (Matt. 18:23-35; Articles of Faith, pp. 110-111.) In commenting upon a part of the Lord's Prayer, as given in the Bible (Matt. 6:9, 12), and the emphasis given in the Book of Mormon, Elder Kimball says, "Then in the Lord's prayer to the people in Jerusalem, he said: 'Our Father which art in heaven . . . forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.' Did he not mean in the same manner and in the same degree, perhaps, as we forgive our debtors? He made it a little more clear, even, to the Nephites, for after he had said; 'forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors' (3 Nephi 13:11) he said, 'For, if ye forgive men their trespasses your heavenly Father will also forgive you;

"But if ye forgive not men their trespasses neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." (3 Nephi 13:14-15; also Mosiah 26:31.) Condemnation, then, comes to you who will not forgive, probably even greater than to him who gave the offense." (Conference Report, October 1949, p. 128.)

Section 64 and Forgiveness

In this dispensation, the Lord has revealed, with emphasis, the law that,

. . . he that forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin.

I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men. (vs. 9-11.)

There were occasions when the disciples were guilty of offenses against one another and failed to forgive in their hearts, and for this the Lord said "they were afflicted and sorely chastened." (v. 8.) It is consistent with gospel teachings that disobedience brings unhappiness, loss of the Spirit with its many blessings, and thus afflictions follow. Sometimes we think that the blessings of the gospel and also condemnations come only in the future existence. King Benjamin taught that the Lord's blessings come bounteously in this life to those who remember him in faith. (Mosiah 2:24.) What greater blessing can be received than to have happiness here and eternal life in the world to come? (D&C 59:23.)

The living prophets have counseled the saint to follow the Savior's teachings in not setting up one's self in judgment against his neighbor. The common offenses that bring ill will, malice and hatred are ofttimes due to misunderstandings. To eliminate this possibility, the Lord admonished his followers to be the first to make reconciliation when offenses arise. The injured should go to the one who injured him and seek reconciliation! President David O. McKay has given us the Savior's teaching regarding forgiveness of fellow men in these words:

If we would have peace as individuals, we must supplant emnity with forbearance, which means to refrain or abstain from finding fault or from condemning others. "It is a noble thing to be charitable with the failings and weaknesses of a friend; to bury his weaknesses in silence, but to proclaim his virtues from the house tops." We shall have power to do this if we really cherish in our hearts the ideals of Christ, who said:

"If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift." (Matt. 5:23-24.)

Note that Savior did not say if you have ought against him, but if you find that another has ought against you. How many of us are ready to come up to that standard? If we are, we shall find peace. Many of us, however, instead of following this admonition, nurse our ill-will until it grows to hatred, then this hatred expresses itself in fault-finding and even slander, "whose whisper over the world's diameter as level as a cannon to its mouth, transports its poison shot." Back-biting, fault-finding, are weeds of society that should be constantly eradicated. Gossip, too, brings discord and thrives best in superficial minds, as fungi grows best on weakened plants. "Bear ye one another's burdens," but do not add to those burdens by gossiping about your neighbors or by spreading slander. Diogenes was asked one day to name that beast, the bite of which is the most dangerous. The old philosopher replied: "Of tame beasts, the bite of the flatterer; of wild beasts, that of the slanderer." (Conference Report, October 1938, pp. 133-134.)

The law that the injured one make the first step to be reconciled with his brother does not remove the responsibility from the person who injured another to take the first step to reconciliation.

The Evil One rejoices when bitterness and hatred abound among men, for his purposes are opposed to peace and happiness. (3 Nephi 11:29-30.) When the spirit of Christ is with the Saints because they obey the commandments, President Joseph F. Smith said:

. . .we shall be a power in the world for good; we shall overwhelm and overcome all evil, all opposition to the truth, and bring to pass righteoueness upon the face of the earth. For the Gospel will be spread and the people in the world will feel the influence which will be shed forth from the people of Zion, and they will be inclined more to repent of their sins and to receive the truth. (Conference Report, April 1915, p. 120.)

Herein lies the secret to success as individuals and as a Church. We are commissioned by covenant to work for the cause of Zion in the world. (D&C 6:6.) Our effectiveness in this is determined by the extent that we possess the Spirit of the Lord. That Spirit will not abide with those who are unforgiving of their brothers and sisters, and who carry grudges that canker their souls, that gossip and back-bite. How can we find forgiveness of our sins through repentance if we neglect the essential ingredient of repentance—namely, to extend forgiveness to our brothers and sisters which includes the elimination of criticism and gossip? We must remember that judgment lies in the Lord's hands and not in ours. (Ibid., 64:11.)

He Shall Be Cast Out

The information concerning the unrepentant in Section 64 is an extension of what an earlier revelation said about "casting" the member from the Church because of disobedience to gospel principles. (D&C 41:5-6; 42:20-28.)

One of the laws given in Section 42 is the law concerning transgressors. This law provides that the unrepentant shall be brought before a Church court and, if found guilty, he shall be dealt with according to the law of God. (Ibid., 42:80-83.) When the Lord said that we were not to judge our fellow man, he did not mean that judgment must not be made by the officers of his Church. The bishop is a judge in Israel. (Ibid., 58:17; 65:40; 107:71-75.) It is his calling to make many judgments as to the worthiness of those who seek recommends for patriarchal blessings, temple service, priesthood advancements, etc. The penalty of excommunication or disfellowshipment is not used as a means of destroying the individual, and every effort is made to save the person before such a penalty is administered. As Elder James E. Talmage said:

The Lord hath declared that there must not be iniquity in his Church, and He has provided officers whose specific and specified duty it is to hunt out iniquity, to run it down, so that every case may be dealt with, and the afflicted ones perchance, be saved. He has not told us to cover up sin in the Church. That is not the Lord's will, nor purpose nor plan. (Conference Report, Oct. 1920, p. 62.)

That God May Be Glorified

Why does the Lord command that the unrepentant sinner be cast out of his kingdom?

And this ye shall do that God may be glorified—not because ye forgive not, having not compassion, but that ye may be justified in the eyes of the law, that ye may not offend him who is your lawgiver—

Verily I say, for this cause ye shall do these things. (D&C 64:13-14.)

We know what the law of the gospel demands for members of the Church who evidence by their actions that they no longer want to remain in God's kingdom. But wherein is God glorified by the application of this law? An answer to this question is found in the mission of the Church in the last days. With the restoration of the gospel the last and greatest dispensation was ushered in. This is the last time that the Lord will call upon the inhabitants of the earth to prepare for the culmination of his work. In these times when Israel is gathered to fulfill the Lord's purposes for the salvation of men, the members of the kingdom of God must show the world by their lives that this is the day of fulfilled prophecy and that there is little time remaining until his work will be completed. Ezekiel foresaw the last days when Israel would be returned to her own land and she would become clean, capable of enjoying the Lord's spirit. (Ezekiel 36:16-38.)

But I had pity for mine holy name, which the house of Israel had profaned among the heathen, whither they went.

Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God; I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy name's sake, which ye have profaned among the heathen, whither ye went.

And I will sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the heathen, which ye have profaned among the heathen, which ye have profaned in the midst of them; and the heathen shall know that I am the Lord, saith the Lord God, when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes.

For I will take you from among the heathen, and gather you out of all countries and will bring you into your own land. (Ibid., 36:21-24; italics added.)

How shall the "heathen" (world) know the Lord? By the lives of those who represent him as citizens of his kingdom. Is God holy or unholy? Is the Lord to be known by the lives of those who flaunt his laws in wickedness, or by the humble, sincere, faithful followers of the Prince of Peace?

We who have accepted the benefits of the atonement of Christ must seek by earnest effort the perfection which God and Christ enjoy. (3 Nephi 12:48.)
