Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 50

"Ye Are on the Lord's Errand"

(Section 64:15-43)

From the last chapter we learned that Section 64 of the Doctrine and Covenants was received so that certain elders who were preparing to leave for Jackson County, Missouri, might understand the purposes of the Lord concerning themselves and the glories to be received by the faithful.

Because some of these elders lacked a forgiving spirit, the Lord revealed anew his law of forgiveness with a warning that members of his kingdom who would not repent would lose their citizenship in that kingdom by disobedience to the commandments.

Ezra Booth and Isaac Morley

As if to present an object lesson in the principles that had just been made known, Section 64 continues by referring to two individuals—Ezra Booth and Isaac Morley. The former is known as one "who was my servant," while the latter retains his membership in the Church, for "I have forgiven my servant Isaac Morley." Both of these men "kept not the law, neither the commandment. . . . They condemned for evil that thing in which there was no evil. . . ." (D&C 64:15-16.) It is evident, from the counsel concerning forgiveness in this revelation, that Brother Morley repented of his sin, while Ezra Booth decided to leave the kingdom of God. At the time of this revelation Isaac Morley was counselor to Edward Partridge, Presiding Bishop of the Church, and remained so until 1840 when Bishop Partridge died.

An indication of the depth of their conversion to the gospel and of the character of these two men is plainly apparent from the Lord's acceptance of one and his rejection of the unrepentant. Isaac Morley accepted the meaning of "Ye are on the Lord's errand." When Brother Morley accepted the gospel in 1830, his life thereafter was dedicated to the furtherance of the cause of Zion. One can believe that he accepted the commandment to sell his farm, as mentioned in verse 20 of Section 64. He is described as a man of loyalty to God's servants who was willing to consecrate all of his wealth to building up Zion while participating in numerous Church positions. (Romney, Thomas C.: The Gospel in Action, pp. 113-118.)

On the other hand, Ezra Booth lives in infamy in the annals of the Church. He is sometimes mentioned as an example of one who was converted by a miracle. The wife of Father Johnson was unable to raise her arm for two years. As a friend of the family, Ezra Booth, a Methodist priest, was present when the Prophet Joseph Smith and the elders administered to her, restoring her arm to instant use. Soon after this healing, Booth was baptized. President George A. Smith said that when Booth had to preach without purse or scrip, he felt that there were better ways of "earning a livelihood." The Prophet reported that when Booth learned,

. . .that faith, humility, patience, and tribulation go before blessing, and that God brings low before He exalts; that instead of the "Savior's granting him power to smite men and make them believe," (as he said he wanted God to do in his own case)—when he found he must become all things to all men, that he might peradventure save some; and that, too, by all diligence, by perils by sea and land, as was the case in the days of Jesus—then he was disappointed. (DHC I:216.)

Under these circumstances Booth apostatized and, as is true with many apostates, he sought to justify himself by publishing a series of lying letters as evidence against the Church. His apostasy contributed to the organization of a mob that tarred and feathered Joseph Smith, and caused the death of one of his adopted children. (Ibid., 1:260-265.)

Edward Partridge at this time was guilty of "unbelief and blindness of heart." "'Unbelief,' in this case means 'weak faith' (as in Mark 9:24), and it was, perhaps, the cause of the blindness of heart." (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 339.) Again, the faithful, diligent member who errs, corrects his life, and learns that the Lord is merciful and forgiving. (D&C 64:17.)

A Stronghold in Kirtland

During this period the establishment of the Church in two general areas was begun. Kirtland, Ohio, became the headquarters of the Church. With the designation of western Missouri as Zion, and the dedication of the land and the temple site, that area began its part in the growing Church. Many Saints felt the urge to assemble in Missouri. Sidney Gilbert was commanded to establish a business in Zion (D&C 64:18), while Frederick G. Williams was to retain his holdings in Kirtland that a stronghold might be maintained there. (Ibid., v. 21.) This verse is a prophecy that was literally fulfilled by subsequent events. In verse 26, Newel K. Whitney and Sidney Gilbert are counseled to retain their store and their possessions so that the Lord's purposes for Kirtland might be fulfilled. After five years "any with an open heart" was free to assemble in the land of Zion. (Ibid., v. 22.)

What did the Lord have in store for Kirtland in five years from then? On April 3, 1836, the Kirtland Temple became the most important edifice on the earth at the time. By the labor of the Saints, amid poverty and persecution, the Lord had commanded that this holy house should be reared to his name, that he might visit his people in that structure. It was there that the capstone of Priesthood was received by Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery from personages from beyond the veil. (Section 110.) The events of April 3, 1836, brought a turning point in world events by the restoration of keys of Priesthood pertaining to the gathering of Israel from the corners of the earth. As a result of this authority, Latter-day Saints have come out of the world into a life of "being on the Lord's errand." The gathering includes the restoration of the Jewish people to their homeland, long predicted by Bible and Book of Mormon prophets. (Jer. 30:3; 2 Nephi 30:7-8.) The great missionary movement of the Church began its world-wide activity after Moses restored these keys. The bringing of the gospel of Abraham with the keys of the restoration of all things (D&C 110:12), and, finally, the keys of sealing powers for the living and the dead, with the important work of salvation for the dead by Elijah, began a tremendous activity for the salvation of man. (Ibid., vs. 13-16.)

The Lord Jesus Christ visited his temple at that time to accept it as his house with the message that this would be the beginning of the blessings to be received for the benefit of his people. (Ibid., vs. 1-10.) When one considers the impact of these events upon the future of the Church and the world, one can easily understand why some of the Saints were commanded to continue their daily activities in Kirtland. Their work was also to help the Saints "obtain an inheritance in the land of Zion." (D&C 64:30.)

Counsel on Debt

The members of the Church mentioned in Section 64 (and the other Saints) were counseled to keep out of debt to their enemies. (vs. 27-28.) For the Church to be in debt to those who were unfriendly might have brought failure to the cause of Zion in that area. The instructions given about retaining material possessions and keeping out of debt remind the Latter-day Saint that the Lord provides his people with counsel in their temporal affairs. As to individuals, the authorities of the Church have advised our people against the burden of debt. Elder Marriner W. Merrill told a general conference of the Church that a financier gave him the key to getting out of debt. "It was simply this: 'Stop immediately from going into debt. Don't go into debt another dollar until you get out and are free."' (Conference Report, April 1899, p. 15.)

"Ye Are Laying the Foundation"

As one studies the beginning of this dispensation, he sometimes wonders if the membership of the Church realized the full significance of these words:

And behold, I, the Lord, declare unto you, and my words are sure and shall not fail, that they shall obtain it.

But all things must come to pass in their time.

Wherefore, be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great. (D&C 64:31-33.)

In 1833, Wilford Woodruff met the Prophet for the first time. He attended a meeting where many of the brethren bore testimony of the restoration. Brother Woodruff said at a general conference in 1898:

. . .when they got through the Prophet said, "Brethren I have been very much edified and instructed in your testimonies here tonight, but I want to say to you before the Lord, that you know no more concerning the destinies of this Church and kingdom than a babe upon its mother's lap. You don't comprehend it." I was rather surprised. He said "it is only a little handful of Priesthood you see here tonight, but this Church will fill North and South America—it will fill the world." Among other things he said, "it will fill the Rocky Mountains. There will be tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints who will be gathered in the Rocky Mountains, and there they will open the door for the establishing of the Gospel among the Lamanites, who will receive the Gospel and their endowments and the blessings of God. This people will go into the Rocky Mountains; they will there build temples to the Most High. They will raise up a posterity there, and the Latter-day Saints who dwell in these mountains will stand in the flesh until the coming of the Son of Man. The Son of Man will come to them while in the Rocky Mountains."

I name these things because I want to bear testimony before God, angels and men that mine eyes behold the day, and have beheld for the last fifty years of my life, the fulfillment of that prophecy. I never expected to see the Rocky Mountains when I listened to that man's voice, but I have, and do today. (Conference Report, April 1898, p. 57.)

It was not only the brethren of 1831 who were laying the foundation of the great work, but the Priesthood of 1833 and 1836 and of the entire period of this dispensation, even in our time of 1964. Each Latter-day Saint who accepts the "Lord's errand" is building a foundation of a great work which will eventually fill the whole earth. Every program of the Church participated in, every contribution given, every work performed with a willing heart and obedient spirit will find rich rewards in assisting the new generation to carry on in building for the ultimate victory of eternal life. Should not every Latter-day Saint feel encouraged that out of small things proceedeth that which is great? The contribution may appear small but in the aggregate it builds for the future.

"For The Tithing of My People"

We have learned that the Lord instituted the law of consecration for the benefit of the poor among the Saints in the early part of this dispensation. (Chapter 28.) Although it was lived in Thompson, Ohio, and the Saints were later commanded to practice it in Missouri, the apparent failure of the Saints to live that law was foreshadowed in Section 64. The law of tithing is known as a schoolmaster to bring people to the greater law of consecration. Elder Francis M. Lyman pointed out in a general conference that,

. . . any person who is not able to observe this law [tithing] faithfully and well will never, worlds without end, be able to observe the law of consecration. The law of tithing is a stepping stone, and it is a law that will abide forever, because a great majority possibly of the children of God will not be able to reach the higher law. (Conference Report, October 1899, p. 34.)

It was in July 1838, that the Lord commanded his people to observe the law of tithing. Yet, in 1831, the Saints were informed that certain judgment would come upon those who did not observe this law when it was introduced. Tithing also has the connotation of sacrifice as suggested in the following:

Behold, now it is called today until the coming of the Son of Man, and verily it is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people; for he that is tithed shall not be burned at his coming. (D&C 64:23.)

On the law of tithing and obedience, President Joseph F. Smith said:

"Obedience is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams." It is the heart and the willing mind that the Lord requires of His people, and not so much their substance. He does not need our obedience. But we need to be obedient; for it is through obedience that we will receive the reward.

So I come to the conclusion that the principal thing about tithe paying is obedience to the law, and that more good will come to us through that obedience than to anybody else. We may be worth our tens of thousands, and pay an honest tithing on our income, making our tithing a large amount; yet the good that will come to ourselves by being obedient to the law of God will be far greater in the end than the good which our substance may do to the poor. (Conference Report, April 1899, p. 69.)

"The Heart and a Willing Mind"

The heart is associated in scripture as the seat of emotions, and when applied to this scripture it probably means that only those who love the Lord intensely will reap the blessings.

Behold, the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind; and the willing and obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days. (D&C 64:34.)

The Saints of 1831 were no different from the Saints of 1964 in the Lord requiring whole-souled devotion to the labor of the kingdom.

Those who are "on the Lord's errand" all the days of their lives will not come under the condemnation of the rebellious who shall be cut off from the land of Zion, for these are not of the chosen blood of Ephraim and must be plucked out. (Ibid., 35-36.) In commenting upon the context of these verses, President George Q. Cannon said:

From the beginning of this Church until the present the men and women who have been obedient to the counsel of God's servants have always been the most favored. President Brigham Young, during the lifetime of the Prophet Joseph, was always noted for his strict obedience to the prophet. Brother Joseph never made any requirement of him that he did not strictly comply with. The same may be said of the other faithful men who, during his lifetime, were associated with him. But the disobedient and rebellious have been, as the Lord said they should be, cut off. Oliver Cowdery was with Joseph when John the Baptist came to them and ordained them to the Aaronic Priesthood. He was the second apostle in the Church also, and a witness of the Book of Mormon, the angel of the Lord having shown him the plates. But he was disobedient to the prophet and he could not stand. It might be thought that he was so near to Joseph and so favored of God that it was not necessary for him to do exactly as the prophet told him; but not so. There is an order in the church of Christ which all must observe, and no one can be disbedient without bringing the displeasure of the Lord upon him. This is a principle which all should learn. (Juvenile Instructor, Vol. 10, 1875, p. 222.)

In the historical content of Section 64, these verses are prophetic:

Behold, the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind; and the willing and obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days.

And the rebellious shall be cut off out of the land of Zion, and shall be sent away, and shall not inherit the land.

For, verily I say that the rebellious are not of the blood of Ephraim, wherefore they shall be plucked out. (D&C 64:34-36.)

When the Saints were expelled from Jackson County in 1833, they had not fully subscribed to the law which the Lord had given, because of carelessness, neglect, and wickedness. Therefore, they were "plucked out" of the land, and were "sent away."

False Prophets to Be Known

The principle laid down in verses 37 through 39—the children of Zion shall judge all things pertaining to Zion—is consistent with verse 5, because Zion's inhabitants know how to detect the deceivers. False prophets are known by Latter-day Saints because of the keys against deception which the Lord has provided for their use. First, their spurious revelations are to be judged by the criteria given in Sections 28 and 43; namely, there is only one person at a time who is empowered to receive revelation for the Church. (Chapters 18 and 49.) Second, the false teachers may be judged by the standard set forth in Section 52:9, by the teachings of the ancient and modern apostles and prophets in the true Church of Jesus Christ. (Chapter 36.)

The Lord declares that all things pertaining to Zion will be judged by the Church, and, eventually, the nations will be judged by the Church. In the due time of the Lord judgment will be meted out to all.

"Ye Are on the Lord's Errand"

As the early Saints were told not to be weary in well-doing for they were laying the foundation of a great work, so also they were told that their work would eventuate in the building of a Zion upon this continent that would be the admiration of the world.

For, behold, I say unto you that Zion shall flourish, and the glory of the Lord shall be upon her:

And she shall be an ensign unto the people, and there shall come unto her out of every nation under heaven.

And the day shall come when the nations of the earth shall tremble because of her, and shall fear because of her terrible ones. The Lord hath spoken it. Amen. (Ibid., 64:41-43.)

To the brethren mentioned in Section 64, the Lord said that, as his agents, they were "on the Lord's errand." (v. 29.) We are all agents of the Lord and are all on his errand. By covenant we are committed through faithful, loyal devotion to build on the foundation laid in the past, eventually to terminate in the Zion that shall flourish, where the glory of the Lord will be there.

But how shall we measure up to being on the Lord's errand? Elder George Teasdale of the Council of the Twelve, suggested this idea:

We are the redeemed of the Lord. We have accepted of the principles of redemption, and consequently have been sanctified in the precious blood of Christ. Those who love God and keep his commandments represent Him and the Lord Jesus Christ. They love one another, and they are known by their works. Their faith is manifested by their works. (Conference Report, April 1898, p. 52.)
