Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 54

Missionary Service

(Section 71)

Following the four November 1831 conferences, Oliver Cowdery and John Whitmer left for Jackson County, Missouri, in obedience to revelation. (D&C Section 69.) Joseph Smith resumed the revision of the Bible with Sidney Rigdon acting as scribe. (DHC I:238.) A month before this, Ezra Booth, mentioned in Chapter 50, apostatized and set out to bring harm to the Prophet and to the Church. His efforts to do both of these apparently met with partial success. In the first instance, it was some of his efforts and his participation in mob action against the Prophet that brought physical harm to the Prophet. (DHC I:261-265.) His attack against the Church and its members was made in a series of nine letters published by the Ohio Star (Ravenna, Ohio). They consisted of slanderous denunciations and falsehoods concerning Joseph and the Church. (Section 71.)

In view of these efforts of Satan to thwart the work of the kingdom, the Prophet and Sidney were called by revelation to preach the gospel in the regions adjacent to Kirtland. (D&C 71:1-3.) An indication of the message delivered by these two missionaries on this special mission from December 1831 until the 10th of January 1832 is given in the Prophet's journal. He said it was a vindication of the cause of the Redeemer, that the day of vengeance was coming upon this generation, and that prejudice and darkness caused some to persecute the true Church. Much of the bigotry caused by the apostate's letters was allayed through this mission.

The revelation counseled these brethren to confound their enemies both in public and private, with the promise that their opponents would be shamed. (Ibid., v. 7.) It is worthy to note that when the Lord's servants are attacked, it is tantamount to attacking the Lord. (Ibid., v. 8.)

Preach the Gospel

The commandment to participate in debate was given to the Prophet because of the unusual circumstances noted above. The Lord, on the other hand, had counseled his servants to preach the first principles, to obtain the Spirit that it might convey the truth to the hearer, and thus make known the message of the dispensation. (D&C 33; 34; 42:12-17.)

An experience of the Prophet in October 1833 is an excellent example of the present counsel of the General Authorities that missionaries should not indulge in debate or argument, but they should preach the simple principles by the Spirit.

While in Canada with Sidney Rigdon at the house of Freeman Nickerson's brother, the latter desired to match his Bible learning with that of the Prophet in an attempt to disprove Joseph Smith as a prophet. One night the opportunity came when Freeman Nickerson placed the Bible on the table and said, "There! Now, go to it!" The Prophet took up the challenge by telling the simple but powerful and convincing account of the restoration of the gospel. The Spirit of the Lord was so manifest in his testimony that opposition no longer remained. By the aid of Freeman's brother, meetings were held that resulted in fourteen baptisms, including the Nickerson who was determined to show the Prophet wrong. (Evans, John Henry: Joseph Smith an American Prophet, pp. 86-88.)

Lack of Success in Opposition

The Lord's work was not restored to fail. As pointed out earlier (Chapter 51) the kingdom of God is on the earth in the form of the Church, and the Lord has planned that it shall never be destroyed nor given to another people, but it shall stand forever. (Daniel 2:44.) In Section 71, an aspect of this foreknown eventuality is given in verses 9 and 10:

Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you—there is no weapon that is formed against you shall prosper;

And if any man lift his voice against you he shall be confounded in mine own due time.

It is apparent that this assurance of defeat for those who lift their voices in opposition to the Prophet includes not only the experiences of the missionaries of 1831-32, but of any time. To speak against the Prophet of this dispensation is the same as warring against the Church which he established, and also against God.

Published opposition was not the only "weapon" used against the Prophet and the Saints. Physical persecution has been a common means of attempting to thwart the purpose of the Lord. Despite the adversary's "weapons," the work of God has rolled on until today the voice of opposition is largely submerged by the prophesied, inevitable progress of successful endeavors.

The missionary today can be as confident of victory as those to whom the foregoing revelation was given. The testimony of President Heber J. Grant concerning those who have fought against the Lord's work is appropriate in this regard:

Our enemies have never done anything that has injured this work of God, and they never will. I look around, I read, I reflect and I ask questions, where are the men of influence, of power and prestige, who have worked against the Latter-day Saints? Where is the reputation for honor and courage, of the governors of Missouri and Illinois, the judges, and all others who have come here to Utah on special missions against the Latter-day Saints? Where are there people to do them honor? They cannot be found. . . . Where are the men who have assailed this work? Where is their influence? They have faded away like dew before the sun. We need have no fears, we Latter-day Saints. God will continue to susutain this work; he will sustain the right. If we are loyal, if we are true, if we are worthy of this Gospel, of which God has given us a testimony, there is no danger that the world can ever injure us. We can never be injured . . . by any mortals, except ourselves. (Conference Report, April 1909, p. 11.)

Commandments Are True

Obedience to truth is the prescription for happiness here and eternal joy in the life to come. The Lord admonished the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon to keep the commandments for they are true. (D&C 71:11.) The knowledge of truth is given by the Spirit which the missionary is counseled to receive and to teach by. President Joseph F. Smith stated the importance of adhering to the truth in these words:

Our hope of salvation must be founded upon the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, for we cannot build upon error and ascend into the courts of eternal truth and enjoy the glory and exaltation of the kingdom of our God. That cannot be done. (Conference Report, October 1917, p. 3.)
