Roy W. Doxey, Doctrine and Covenants Speaks, vol. 1 ( 1964)

Chapter 55

Stewardships; A Review

(Sections 70 and 72)

During the first twelve days of November 1831, four special conferences were conducted by the Prophet Joseph Smith. A part of the proceedings of some of these conferences has already been noted in Chapter 52. One of the principal orders of business concerned the publication of the revelations into a volume to be known as the Book of Commandments. At this time the Prophet gave an evaluation of the revelations, which is worthy of notice by all people. His first point was that they were the foundation of the Church in the last days. The Prophet also said that these revelations were of such great benefit to the world because they brought eternal life within the reach of everyone who was willing to live by every word which the Lord had revealed. When one thinks of this fact, he immediately remembers that: first, divine directions were given to organize the Church, with the powers of the Priesthood restored for this purpose. Second, these revelations point out the clear pathway of salvation with its principles and ordinances to lead the faithful to exaltation. Third, they also give an understanding of man's purpose in life, with specific directions on how covenants may be kept inviolate. Fourth, the Lord's will is revealed regarding present world conditions and what one may expect in the future. Fifth, the great blessing of how to achieve joy in this life through physical and spiritual well being is indicated. These and other contributions to man's knowledge give abundant support to the Prophet's evaluation.

The first conference that convened in November voted, after approving the printing of the revelations, that

. . . they prize the revelations to be worth to the Church the riches of the whole earth, speaking temporally. The great benefits to the world which result from the Book of Mormon and the revelations which the Lord has seen fit in His infinite wisdom to grant unto us for our salvation, and for the salvation of all that will believe, were duly appreciated. . . . (DHC I:235-236.)

Following this statement the Prophet wrote that Section 70 was received upon his inquiry.

Section 70

Several elders were named in verse 1 of Section 70, and their responsibilities regarding the revelations to be printed were outlined in verses 2 through 9. In addition to taking care of the revelations, they were to see to their printing and distribution. The books were to be sold, and the surplus was to be placed in the hands of the bishop and placed in the Lord's storehouse to be consecrated to the faithful inhabitants of Zion.

In the minutes of the conference it was recorded that four of the brethren named in this revelation—Oliver Cowdery, Martin Harris, John Whitmer, Sidney Rigdon—had, from the beginning, labored with the Prophet; consequently, they, with the families of several others, according to the laws of the Church, were worthy of an inheritance from the bishop in Zion. (DHC I:236.)

Stewardships

The brethren mentioned in Section 70 were told that their obligation in caring for the revelations, as given above, referred to as a stewardship. As stewards, these elders were to discharge their responsibilities to the letter. The importance of caring for their stewardship in this manner is thus indicated:

And an account of this stewardship will I require of them in the day of judgment. (D&C 70:4.)

The application of this truth, when applied to all members of the Church in what the Lord has given them, is discussed by President Brigham Young, in these words:

. . . What is our duty? It is our duty to improve upon every blessing the Lord gives to us. If He gives us land, improve it; if He gives us the privilege of building houses, improve it . . . if He gives us the privilege of gathering together, let us sanctify ourselves. In His providence He has called the Latter-day Saints from the world, has gathered them from other nations, and given them a place upon the earth. Is this a blessing? Yes, one of the greatest the people can enjoy, to be free from the wickedness of the wicked, from the calamities and clamor of the world. By this blessing we can show to our Father in Heaven that we are faithful stewards; and more, it is a blessing to have the privilege of handing back to Him that which He has put in our possession, and not say it is ours, until He shall say it from the heavens. (Journal of Discourses 2:304-305.)

All of us are stewards over the things of this earth which are ours legally, but, in fact, they are the Lord's. (Mosiah 2:20-26.) An accounting of what we do with these blessings, including offices in the Church, will be required of us in the day of judgment. During the period when Section 70 was given and for some time later, all members of the Church were under obligation to abide by the law of consecration. This exempted no one. (D&C 70:10-11.) Under this law, all were to be equal, but the equality was not of a dead-level nature. Each was to receive according to his needs and circumstances. (Ibid., 14-18; 42:32; 51:3.)

Worthy of His Hire

When the Lord instructed his Seventy, who were to precede him into the village where he would preach, he counseled them to receive such assistance as was needful from those who would offer it. (Luke 10:1-8.) Jesus taught the Seventy that "the labourer is worthy of his hire." (Ibid., verse 7.) This truth has been given in this dispensation, and under the law as stated, those who work for the welfare of their fellow Church members are to receive in accordance with their needs. This law not only applies to those appointed to administer in the temporal but also in the spiritual concerns of the Church. (D&C 70:12-13.) It will be recalled that soon after the Church was organized, a revelation was received giving the three branches of the Church the opportunity to provide material support to the Prophet Joseph Smith, since he was required to tend to his duties as the Prophet. (Ibid., 24:3-4.) Remuneration for services or temporal assistance has been given to certain groups at different times during this dispensation. (DHC I:220.) What may be termed the law of remuneration was also revealed in Section 42, verses 70 through 73, and mentioned in 43:13. Where individuals must give of their full time to accomplish their callings which would not allow them to make a livelihood otherwise, a just remuneration is allowed. In the main, however, the male members of the Church function in the Priesthood without benefit of monetary help. All Church members are expected to contribute of their time, talents, and material possessions for the advancement of the kingdom of God. The spiritual rewards of such service are known to all those who have thus participated.

Section 72

The Prophet and Sidney Rigdon undertook a mission as commanded. (Section 71.) While in Kirtland, Ohio, several elders and members raised questions which apparently required the Lord's answer; whereupon, Section 72 was received. (DHC I:239.)

When the Prophet had arrived in Kirtland, almost one year before this, the Lord revealed that Edward Partridge should be appointed as the bishop unto the Church. (D&C 41:9-10.) Not long after that Bishop Partridge and others, including Joseph Smith, went to western Missouri, where the bishop was to take up his duties under the law of consecration. (Ibid., 58:7, 14-15.) The temporal and spiritual needs of the Church in Kirtland were such that the Lord appointed a bishop in Kirtland. The appointee was Newel K. Whitney. (Ibid., 72:2, 8.) An interesting story of his call is related by his grandson, Orson F. Whitney, an apostle of this dispensation:

Newel K. Whitney, staggering under the weight of the responsibility that was about to be placed upon him, said to the the Prophet: "Brother Joseph, I can't see a Bishop in myself."

No; but God could see it in him. He was a natural Bishop—a first class man of affairs. Probably no other incumbent of that important office, the Presiding Bishopric, to which he eventually attained, has been better qualified for it than Newel K. Whitney. But he could not see it, and he shrank from the responsibility. The Prophet answered: "Go and ask the Lord about it." And Newel did ask the Lord, and he heard a voice from heaven say: "Thy strength is in me." That was enough. He accepted the office, and served in it faithfully to the end of his days—a period of eighteen years. (Conference Report, June 1919, pp. 47-48.)

The duties of Bishop Whitney were set forth as: (1) to receive an accounting of the stewardships of the elders in that area; (2) to keep the Lord's storehouse; (3) to receive funds; (4) to administer to the wants of the elders; (5) to render an accounting to Bishop Partridge in Zion of those who were unable to pay for what they received of the Church. (D&C 72:5-13.)

Although Bishop Whitney was required to look after the stewardships of the elders in that area, each steward would have to give an accounting of his own stewardship, in time and in eternity. (Ibid., v. 3.) Agreeable to the law that obedience brings forth the blessings of heaven (Ibid., 130:20-21), we are told that

. . . he who is faithful and wise in time is accounted worthy to inherit the mansions prepared for him of my Father. (Ibid., 72:4.)

An Application

As one looks at the foregoing list of responsibilities of the bishop in Kirtland and thinks of their application to the present-day ward bishop he sees the same or similar duties to this office. Verse 12 of Section 72 states that the bishop is to take care of the poor and needy. The calling of the bishop was well explained by President Joseph F. Smith as not only taking care of the poor, the sick and the afflicted, but also these duties:

. . . It is also the duty of these presiding officers [bishopric] in the Church to look after the spiritual welfare of the people, to see that they are living moral, pure and upright lives, that they are faithful in the discharge of their duties as Latter-day Saints, that they are honest in their dealings with one another, and with all the world. It is their business to see that spiritual light exists in their hearts, and that the people under their presidency and direction are living the lives of Saints, as far as it is possible for men and women in the mortal body, beset by the weaknesses and imperfections of mankind, can be Saints. Great responsibility rests upon these, and we have to work in the Church, in this relation, a vast corps of efficient men who are laboring diligently for the welfare of mankind. (Conference Report, October 1904, p. 3.)

Conclusion of Section 72

Further information was given about the operation of the law of consecration with special emphasis upon the necessity for members of the Church in Kirtland, going to Zion, to take with them a certificate showing that they were worthy members. (D&C 72:16-26.) The same procedure is followed today in what is known as the membership certificate.

The conclusion of this revelation suggests that wise stewards are to follow the counsel given in the revelation. (Ibid., vs. 25-26.) In the ultimate sense, the member who follows the words of the Lord will place the interests of the Church first. Brigham Young's life of dedication to the cause of Zion is a splendid example of the faithful steward.

Brigham Young is a striking illustration of wise management. In September, 1833, he came to Kirtland, absolutely destitute, a widower with two children to take care of. He had borrowed a pair of shoes and some other articles of clothing, and he had spent every dollar he had on missionary labors. Of the thirty or forty Elders who came to Kirtland that fall, he was the only one who remained there during the winter. The others went wherever they could obtain higher wages than in Kirtland. He went to work for Brother William F. Cahoon, one of the trustees of the Temple. As wages, Brother Cahoon divided what little he had with Brigham Young. But, when the work was done, the balance due was paid, and it was subsequently found that none of those who had left Kirtland for higher wages had been able to save as much as he had. He stayed in Kirtland till the year 1837, and then he practically abandoned property valued at $5,000. In Nauvoo he also left some houses, and came to Utah without a farthing, except a span of horses, a carriage and harness, all of which had been given him in payment for a house in Nauvoo. See Journal of Discourses, Vol. XI pp. 295-6; Brigham Young was a wise steward, because he always placed the interests of the Kingdom of God first. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 428.)

Do we individually meet the requirements of the wise steward?

What of the Past?

Section 72 was the last revelation received during the year 1831. It was the most fruitful year in terms of the number of revelations received as shown in the "Chronological Order of Contents" in the forepart of each copy of the Doctrine and Covenants.

A review of the sections will indicate that, because of the growth of the Church during the latter part of 1830 and the year 1831, many problems arose in this fast-growing Church. At the beginning of the year, the Lord took cognizance of the poverty of the Saints and promised that he would give his "law" which, if lived, would bring temporal relief to the citizens of his kingdom and would prepare them for spiritual unity. This would result in the blessing of each person enjoying equally the bounties of the earth. (Section 38.) Officers were added to the Church, such as the High Priests of the Melchizedek Priesthood; the bishop, the presiding officer of the Aaronic Priesthood; and a Church Historian. (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, p. 205; D&C Sections 41, 72, and 47, respectively.) The promised "law" (Section 42) included commandments regarding (1) preaching the gospel; (2) moral conduct; (3) consecration; (4) administration to the sick; (5) sundry duties; (6) remuneration for services; and (7) the law concerning transgressors.

The fundamental principle that only one man may receive revelation for the Church, while others may receive individual guidance was also given. (Section 43.) There followed the great revelations on signs which would precede the Lord's second coming and the events associated with that coming. (Sections 43 and 45.)

A series of revelations contains the keys against being deceived, for the benefit of Church members of 1831 and in subsequent years. These sections include counsel on the benefits accruing to members because of receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost, with the many gifts that strengthen one against deception. (Section 46.) Due to the presence of a sect known as the Shaking Quakers (Chapter 34), to whom the Lord directed missionary work, the Saints were given enlightenment on the purpose of the earth, the necessity of marriage, the keys against false Christs and other impostors, with the ultimate movement of the Church to the Rocky Mountain area. (Section 49.) A lesson is learned in Section 50 when manifestations of false spirits seek to deceive the unwary. Direction is provided to test false teachings out of the Church as well as in it. (Section 52.)

In counsel given to individuals who sought for guidance, there are some universal truths enunciated which point up these three facts: (1) those who seek the Lord early will find rich benefits that prepare them for a full and long life here and for the blessings of eternity (Section 54); (2) exaltation is earned by enduring to the end through constancy in living the commandments (Section 53); (3) to take up one's cross involves a large number of commitments by the covenant child of God. (Section 56.)

The anticipation of the Saints in knowing the location and the destiny of the prophesied New Jerusalem is realized. The objective to work for the establishment of Zion upon the earth is made known. (Sections 57 and 58.)

The Sabbath day observance and the rich benefits to be received by the obedient is made known during this period. (Section 59.)

A promise of "much tribulation" (Section 58), and a warning concerning the waters of the last days was also received. (Section 61.) Instructions to missionaries in exercising their talents and bearing testimony, also form a part of the year's counsel. (Sections 60 and 62.)

There is renewed the fate of the sign seeker; and counsel against falling into lightmindedness toward sacred things is given emphasis. (Section 63.)

The sections of this year's study complete the year's revelations—forgiveness and repentance, the ultimate triumph of God's work, further additions to our knowledge of Church organization—the bishopric, and, finally, the responsibility of parents in the rearing of their children.

In commenting upon the revelations received during the year 1831, the Doctrine and Covenants Commentary gives some important observations that bear testimony of the truth received by Joseph Smith.

There is a wonderful feature connected with these Revelations—their Unity. Although neither the Prophet Joseph nor his associates had any pre-arranged plan regarding the work in which they were engaged, every Revelation fits into its place perfectly, as does each separate stone which the skillful architect lays in the walls of his magnificent cathedral, and as we follow the development from Section to Section, we perceive that there is a plan so grand, so beautiful, and so well adapted to human needs, as to leave no room for doubt concerning its divine origin. Each Revelation, considered by itself, though full of beauty, may be but a stone detached from the building to which it belongs, but seen as a part of the entire structure, it speaks with convincing eloquence of the wisdom, power, and love of the Divine Builder of the Church, our Lord Jesus Christ. (p. 429.)

As one takes into consideration the foregoing evaluation and brief summary of the revelations received in the year 1831, the following general contributions emerge:
