# LDS Women and Education

### LDS Women and Education
David Read, Jacob Werrett, A Twenty-Something's Guide to Spirituality (Salt Lake City 2007)
 
 

LDS Women and Education

Emily Mabey Swensen

Master of Writing and Publishing, Emerson College (Boston)

Question:

My
dad has had more formal education than my mom, but I learned more about continuing education
from her. She was always reading a book, even while she ate her morning bowl of
cereal. She has always belonged to book groups, study groups, quilting groups,
and even an investment group, and has kept her nursing license current. She
reads the newspaper, news magazines, and Church magazines. Like her mother
before her, she is a student of life and always ready for a heated discussion.
I admired my dad’s study of the law, but it was my mom’s constant informal education that
drove me on to extensive formal education.

Though my parents had four daughters and no sons, I don’t
think it occurred to them to limit our aspirations to domestic pursuits. We
talked around the dinner table about serving missions, going to graduate
school, and dreaming big dreams as much as any family of boys might have. We
also talked about getting married, having kids, and being home with them. In
our house and in our minds, these goals were not mutually exclusive. I wasn’t
sure how I’d manage the details, but I was sure I could be a Supreme Court
Justice, Relief Society President, and Terrific Mom all in time, if not all at
once. I always understood Latter-day Saint doctrine to back up what I
was learning at home. After all, I knew Brigham Young had said that, forced to
choose, he would educate his daughters rather than his sons.1

Continuing my education through college and beyond was about
the pure love of learning, more than career goals. I remember thinking when I
finished my bachelor’s degree at BYU, “Am I done already?” I didn’t feel all
that smart, and I still felt that unquenchable desire to keep learning. I
decided to pursue a master’s degree in writing because at the time it scared me
more than anything else. I thought I had a wee knack for writing, but I was
terrified to test it, and I knew only formal education could force me to do so.
Graduate school did challenge me, emotionally, spiritually, and creatively.
Obviously, to be a married Mormon girl at a very liberal graduate school in
Boston made me stand out. (I was even present in a class once when a fellow
student used Mormonism as an example of a peculiar modern philosophy.) But it
was worth every odd look. I learned to think and read more critically and to
understand my beliefs and my own experiences well enough to present them to
others in a way they could relate to and understand. Now, five years later, I
find myself wanting to continue my education and to expand my mind again.

At thirty, I have been Relief Society president of a
struggling ward, and am working at the Mom part. After a few years home with my
children, I find that the Supreme-Court-Justice desire still
lives within me. And now I stand at a crossroads. As I consider law school, I
am torn between the desire to follow that dream and the needs to support my
husband in these important years of his career and to spend my hours with my
small children.

I realize what a great gig it is to be the
full-time parent, and I’m not willing to give it up. I guess I’m
still hoping to have it all. But 
can I?

An LDS woman once referred derisively to my oldest sister,
who has a Master’s of Fine Arts in acting, as an “expensive waitress,” alluding
to the cost of her graduate school versus her ability to earn money at the
time. We as LDS women often judge rather than support each other in this subtle
balance between aspiration and family. So, from time to time my confidence is
shaken and I find myself wondering: Should I continue my educational pursuits,
even if I can’t be sure how I’ll use them throughout my life?

***

Camille Fronk Olson

Associate Professor of Ancient Scripture at Brigham Young University

Answer:

Several
years ago, I visited high school business classes as a representative for LDS
Business College. My presentation focused on the importance of education,
independent of one’s life path. At one school with a high concentration of
Latter-day Saint students, I asked an accounting class whether they
deemed post–high school education as important for women as
men. I have not forgotten the spontaneous response by one young man, “Are you
kidding? How much education do you need to run a washing machine?” From the
erupting laughter and high-fives that followed, I sensed that he was
not alone in his opinion.

Education has always been encouraged and valued in the LDS
faith both for the here and now and for eternity. The Lord instructed Joseph
Smith that “if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life
through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the
advantage in the world to come” (D&C 130:19). Similarly, B. H. Roberts
wrote, “The Mormon point of view in education . . . has regard not only to 
the preparation of man for the duties and responsibilities of the moment of time
he lives in this world, but aims to prepare him for eternal life in the
mansions and companionship of the Gods.”2

Do these statements apply to women as well as men? Does God
desire His daughters to be educated, or do scriptures and counsel from
latter-day prophets discourage education for women? Furthermore, are
certain disciplines more or less appropriate for women according to
Latter-day Saint directives?

With a university faculty position in a predominantly male
department, my bias on this subject is hard to disguise. But my life’s
experiences have also exposed me to reactions that create mixed messages about
the value of education for women. Observations from those opposed to women
earning advanced degrees and working in disciplines traditionally pursued by
men are particularly curious in light of Latter-day Saint
teachings. A sample of such comments illustrates types of disparaging messages
young women may receive pertaining to education and career and the potential
confusion that these opinions create.

• From an institute teacher when I was
twenty-three years old and considering a master’s degree: “You
already have two strikes against you (completion of a bachelor’s degree and a
full-time mission). If you complete a graduate degree, no LDS man
will want to marry you.”

• From a fellow seminary teacher when I was a new Church
Educational System hiree and the only full-time female seminary
teacher in the state: “I’ve been trying to figure out why you were hired to
teach seminary. The only reason I can think of is to protect the Church from
discrimination lawsuits.”

• From a student: “I’m struggling to know whether I should
take a class from you. You obviously chose education and a career rather than
marriage and family as prophets have admonished women.”

• From a student at the end of a semester: “You’re not
married? And you have a Ph.D.? But you’re happy—how can that
be? I understood that women can be happy only when they marry.”

Because such assumptions have questioned the direction and
confirming witness I received at the time from the Spirit, I have sought
answers and explanations from authoritative sources. The findings are most
encouraging. Affirming statements are plentiful and deepen one’s appreciation
for the reasons why education in general is valuable and, for women,
particularly beneficial.

Scriptural Evidence of Educated Women

During His mortal ministry, the Savior actually sought out
individual women to whom He could teach His gospel. His approach indicates that
He knew these women could understand truths that went beyond their cultural religious
teachings. For example, when He met a Samaritan woman at a well, Christ taught
her spiritual truths of deep import, by which she recognized Him as the
Messiah. She became the first person in recorded scripture to hear the Savior
verbally identify Himself as the Redeemer. Armed with this intelligence, she
returned to her village and taught her neighbors of Christ. The Savior did not
command the Samaritan woman to “tell no man,” but confirmed her witness when
the villagers subsequently sought Him to hear Him themselves (John 4).

Likewise, Christ taught two sisters from Bethany named Mary
and Martha. While Martha was involved in a stereotypical activity for women
(preparing a meal), she complained to Jesus that her sister should be
helping her rather than sitting, pondering, and learning at Jesus’ feet.
Without denigrating Martha’s service, Jesus assigned virtue to Mary’s choice to
quietly listen to learn during dinner preparations, an activity typically
ridiculed in women. Jesus complimented a woman’s choice to study and learn when
He taught, “Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from
her” (Luke 10:42).

Missionary efforts in the early Christian Church support the
existence of educated women among the first believers. Paul the Apostle found
rare success among the intellectuals of Athens, but a woman, Damaris, was among
those converted (Acts 17:34). Similarly, Paul found appreciative minds in
Thessalonica among the “chief women” (17:4), the “honourable women” of Berea
(17:12), and a seller of expensive purple dye—a businesswoman
named Lydia—who was his first convert in Philippi
(16:14–15).

From the beginning, God’s sons and daughters have reflected
educational influence, as recorded in scripture. Our first parents taught
literacy to their children. “Adam and Eve . . . called upon the name of the
Lord, and they heard the voice of the Lord. . . . And he gave unto them
commandments. . . . And Adam and Eve . . . made all things known unto their
sons and their daughters” (Moses 5:4–5, 12). As ones who “called upon
God,” Adam and Eve were “given . . . to write by the spirit of inspiration; and
by them their children were taught to read and write” (6:5–6). And
Huldah, a “prophetess” during the reign of Judah’s King Josiah, read a newly
uncovered manuscript and declared it to be the word of God 
(2 Chronicles 34:21–28).

Rationale for Women’s Continued Education

Exploring reasons why education benefits women provides
motivation and conviction to women of all ages to pursue meaningful
learning. I will discuss four of many reasons why education blesses a woman and
her family and community.

### 1. To Fulfill Our Foredesignated Assignments

President Brigham Young pursued a view not popular in his
day when he encouraged women to extend their efforts outside the daily
maintenance of the home to vocational and academic pursuits. He recognized that
such efforts prepared women for God’s greater purpose for them.

We believe that women are useful, not only to sweep houses, wash
dishes, make beds, and raise babies, but that they should stand behind the
counter, study law or physics, or become good bookkeepers and be able to do the
business in any counting house, and all this to enlarge their sphere of
usefulness for the benefit of society at large. In following these things they
but answer the design of their creation.3

Each individual, man or woman, has a different mission to
fulfill. Education will substantially help individuals to prepare for their
unique situations in life.

The Lord instructed us to allow for Christ’s enabling power
in learning the gospel and all other disciplines: “Teach ye diligently and my
grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more perfectly in theory, in
principle, in doctrine. . . . ” The study list continues with a multitude of
subjects in the sciences, history, law, and current world affairs; then the
Lord gives this explanation for our study: “That ye may be prepared in all
things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling whereunto I have
called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned you” (D&C 88:78–80).

President Spencer W. Kimball reminded men and women of these
premortally assigned responsibilities that require mortal preparation:

Remember, in the world before we came here, faithful women
were given certain assignments while faithful men were foreordained to certain
priesthood tasks. While we do not now remember the particulars, this does not
alter the glorious reality of what we once agreed to. You are accountable for
those things which long ago were expected of you just as are those we sustain as
prophets and apostles!

. . . This leaves much to be done by way of parallel
personal development—for both men and women.4

Without knowing the specifics of our unique, foredesignated
missions, education is a fundamental part of our preparation. When we possess
the appropriate tools and hold fast to our faith in Christ, God can direct His
sons and His daughters where He wishes. That is why in the end we will discover
that our education is not for our own merits and pursuits but for the Lord’s
purposes.

### 2. To Enhance Financial Security

A practical rationale for a woman to receive education is
the most commonly expressed, but considered alone, it is not particularly
convincing. Learning skills to prepare for a salaried occupation is a side
benefit of education, not the core purpose.

Elder James E. Faust addressed Brigham Young University
students with a message he prepared for his granddaughters to “help bring
[them] identity, a sense of value, and happiness as a person.” He spoke about
the unique endowments given to women so that “becoming like men is not the
answer; being who you are and living up to your potential and commitment is.”
Continual education helps us learn who we really are. With education and faith
in Christ, we are more confident in becoming our true selves rather than
compensating for fears by attempting to acquire masculine characteristics.
Elder Faust encouraged his granddaughters to go to college, but to use that
time wisely by learning a marketable skill:

Your grandmother and I urged your mothers to get an education,
not only to help them in their homemaking but also to prepare them to earn a
living outside the home if that became necessary. Going to college is a
wonderful experience, but the dollars, the effort, and the time are much better
used if the education also prepares the student with a marketable skill.5

As BYU president, Dallin H. Oaks spoke to students and to
faculty after “conversations with . . . women students and with faculty, administrative,
and staff women” led him to detect “some uneasiness and confusion about where
we stand on education for women, especially vocationally oriented education.”
Without marginalizing the blessings of motherhood, which he called women’s
“highest calling and opportunity for service,” President Oaks described the reality
of our world:

Many of our young women will need to earn a living for
themselves because they do not marry, because they do not marry until after
some years of employment, or because they have been widowed or through other
circumstances have been compelled to assume responsibilities of the family
breadwinner. A mother who must earn a living for the family in addition to
performing the duties of motherhood probably has as great a need for education
as any person in the world.6

No one can predict when and how a woman will need skills and
degrees. A woman who values marriage and family must exercise faith to
pursue advanced schooling when marriage or motherhood could take precedence at
any time. Assigned research, homework, writing deadlines, and examinations are
not often as “fun” as the alternatives nonstudent friends receive. At least for
a moment many young women are tempted to avoid the challenges, discipline,
and often criticism that accompany the pursuit of more schooling in the hopes
that a strict focus on home décor and preparing for a family will bring the
marriage proposal sooner and negate her need to prepare for a career. President
Oaks recognized the frustrations that young women face in planning their
educational future when the future holds so many unknowns. He requested
improved educational advisement for women students as a result.

It is clear that we need better educational counseling for our
young women than for our young men, because a young woman has a much wider
range of contingencies than a young man who is obligated to take the initiative
to marry and support a family. Despite the preferred alternative of marriage
and children, a young woman never knows whether she will remain single, or be
married and childless, or widowed—or what special educational
needs she may have in the years after her family is raised.7

From President Gordon B. Hinckley’s recent address to young
women, these frustrations and questions still exist. With the expanding
vocational opportunities available to women and with successful women role
models in nearly every field, a young woman finds increased options to balance
her hope to become a mother one day. President Hinckley admonished:

Find purpose in your life. Choose the things you would like
to do, and educate yourselves to be effective in their pursuit. For most it is
very difficult to settle on a vocation. You are hopeful that you will marry and
that all will be taken care of. In this day and time, a girl needs an
education. She needs the means and skills by which to earn a living should she
find herself in a situation where it becomes necessary to do so.

Study your options. Pray to the Lord earnestly for
direction. Then pursue your course with resolution.

The whole gamut of human endeavor is now open to women.
There is not anything that you cannot do if you will set your mind to it. You
can include in the dream of the woman you would like to be a picture of one
qualified to serve society and make a significant contribution to the world of
which she will be a part.8

Earning credentials and developing skills to secure a
salaried job, if needed, will reduce stress in times of uncertainty and
increase confidence to face unforeseen challenges.

### 3. To Encourage Active Participation in the Church

An added benefit of education for Latter-day Saint
women is the motivation toward deeper involvement in their faith.

In response to secularization theory, which claims that
people become less religious as society becomes more modern and industrialized,
researchers Stan L. Albrecht and Tim B. Heaton conducted a study in the early
1980s on education level and religiosity for Latter-day Saints in the
United States in contrast to Christians in general.9
Their study focused on one key aspect of the theory, which links a decline in
religion with the rise in science, empirical testing, and rational thought. A
review of similar studies conducted among other U.S. Christian communities led
them to summarize that “the most prevalent view [among Christians in general] .
. . seems to be that educational achievement impacts negatively on religious
commitment and that increased levels of education often lead to apostasy as
individuals encounter views that deemphasize spiritual growth and elevate
scientific and intellectual achievement.”11

Table 1: Relationship
between Education and Religiosity Indicator10

 Weekly Attendance (%) - Full Tithing (%) - Daily Prayer (%) - Gospel Study (%) - Beliefs Important
(%) - Number

 Male - Female

Grade School 34-48 - 40-50 - 52-72 - 3-56 - 71-95 - 94-102

Some High School 48-52 - 51-48 - 44-61 - 37-45 - 75-82 - 181-265

High School Graduate 43-54 - 42-49 - 44-58 - 37-44 - 70-85 - 620-919

Some College 65-71 - 57-59 - 54-63 - 46-53 - 81-88 - 620-795

College Graduate 71-82 - 68-73 - 60-75 - 48-52 - 81-93 - 241-205

Graduate School 80-76 - 71-73 - 68-62 - 61-48 - 87-83 - 377-131

Correlation .24*-.20* - .22*-.14* - .15*-.02 - .17*-.04 - .12*-.02 

*P<.05

In contrast to Christians in general, who show a decrease in
religious devotion with increased education, Albrecht and Heaton found a
positive relationship between level of education and various indicators of
religiosity among Latter-day Saints. Overall, Latter-day
Saints (especially those with a college degree) had the highest church
attendance of any other denomination considered. The correlation between higher
religiosity and increased education continued to hold independent of whether or
not the respondents attended a Church university or resided in Utah or another
part of the country.

The Church’s lay clergy and the expectation that
every adult member would serve in a Church calling proved to be a “key link”
between education and Church attendance among Latter-day Saints in
this study. Certainly the volume of literature Latter-day Saints are
encouraged to study would arguably be less intimidating for the more educated
than those who have little exposure to foreign languages, literature from
earlier eras, or research requirements. Literacy is highly valued among
Latter-day Saints because members are expected to regularly “study”
all four standard works of scripture. The objective for such study is not
merely to report that you have read them all, but to discover gospel insights
and connections to personal life that bring relevance to God’s word in our
modern world.

One anomaly emerged in the Albrecht-Heaton study.
When comparing Latter-day Saint men and women in various education
levels, religiosity measures were always higher for women than for
men—with one exception: postgraduate women. In other words,
when Latter-day Saints achieve a high school diploma, some
college, or even a bachelor’s degree, the attendance level, payment of a
full tithing, degree of gospel study, frequency of daily prayer, and stated
importance of their religious beliefs all increase as the amount of education
increases—and these things are also all higher for women than
for men. Only when LDS women pursue postgraduate education do they
collectively manifest a reversal in the trend toward greater religiosity. By
contrast, LDS men with graduate-school education manifest the highest
evidence of religiosity in comparison to any lower level of educational
attainment.

No hypothesis was given or test reported in the
Albrecht-Heaton study to explain why LDS women with advanced college
degrees show a slight decline in religiosity. I offer a few suggestions for
contemplation. Perhaps LDS men in Church callings sense greater encouragement
from fellow members to draw on their educational training than LDS women do in
their auxiliary callings. Perhaps women who complete graduate degrees are more
likely to be single or marry later, finding themselves in yet another way to be
different from the traditionally described LDS woman. Highly educated women may
be judged as choosing school over family when Church leaders often identify
family as a woman’s greatest responsibility and opportunity.

A scholar who studies communication patterns that differ
between men and women has described women as seeking for common ground to
establish comfortable societies, while men identify a linear hierarchy among
them. She described a woman’s typical connection with the world to more likely
be “where individuals negotiate complex networks of friendship, minimize
differences, try to reach consensus, and avoid the appearance of superiority,
which would highlight differences.”12 If specifically
Latter-day Saint women reflect this tendency to identify
commonalities among themselves, perhaps they are less likely to feel sisterhood
with women who place such a high priority on formal education.

Perhaps women with graduate school experience tend to ask
more questions dealing with women and religion where answers are not accessible
or addressed, which in turn gives them a sense of unimportance. Then again,
perhaps LDS women with advanced degrees are more likely to marry out of the Church
as the probability of meeting a compatible, single LDS man dwindles.

Whatever the reason, the prophetic encouragement for
Latter-day Saint men and women to study and comprehend their Church
doctrine remains, as this 1903 admonition by President Joseph F. Smith
reflects: “The word and the law of God are as important for women who would
reach wise conclusions as they are for men; and women should study and consider
the problems of this great latter-day work from the standpoint of
God’s revelations, and as they may be actuated by his Spirit, which it is their
right to receive through the medium of sincere and heartfelt prayer.”13

The tie between college education and Church participation
was further stressed by then BYU President Dallin H. Oaks:

One of the most important purposes of a university
education is to prepare men and women to be responsible and intelligent leaders
and participants in the life of their families, their Church, and their
communities. That kind of education is needed by young men and young women
alike. In short, we make no distinction between young men and young women in
our conviction about the importance of an education and in our commitment to
providing that education.14

### 4. To Cultivate the Mind for a Lifetime of Learning

Arguments for education that see beyond the vocational and
financial benefits are most compelling to me. Certainly the highest salaries
earned are neither a reflection of the highest level of education attained
nor the greatest intellect developed. What happens to a society when skills are
learned merely for the economic return associated with that skill? Credentials
to earn money are not the only benefits gained through a good education.
Discipline to sit still and read thoughtfully, ability to do critical thinking,
exposure to different perspectives and viewpoints, and capacity to broaden and
deepen our understanding of the world are among the greatest strengths of a
sound education. These are also skills associated with recognizing personal
revelation from the Spirit.

“Will education feed and clothe you, keep you warm on a cold
day, or enable you to build a house?” President Brigham Young inquired. “Not at
all. Should we cry down education on this account? No. What is it for? The
improvement of the mind; to instruct us in all arts and sciences, in the
history of the world, in the laws of nations; to enable us to understand the
laws and principles of life, and how to be useful while we live.”15

As mindless activities become increasingly available, the
attraction to “veg out” in front of the TV, surf the Internet, or endlessly
telephone (or Internet) chat for no particular reason can be intoxicating.
Thinking and visualizing from words and abstract ideas is hard when one is
accustomed to finding life’s answers through fashion trends, pop culture, and
neighborhood gossip. Likewise, it is easier to attend a fireside or class where
emotional stimulation is the draw than one where the audience is invited to
consider a different perspective and explore what they really understand and
believe. For example, educational maturity is evident in the ability to become
completely engaged in a lecture where the presenter has a completely opposite
viewpoint from mine. Yet I can come away fed and enlightened because the
presenter’s cogent thinking helped me to better crystallize my own beliefs by
contrast and to articulate them more clearly.

Cultivating the mind is much more than memorizing facts to
pass an exam. It is beyond fulfilling the requirements for a degree. Developing
reading, thinking, and researching skills are priceless, because the greatest
learning takes place independent of a formal educational setting. Formal
schooling’s greatest contribution may therefore be teaching the skills and
developing discipline to find answers to questions we will encounter long after
the final school bell sounds, when no one is around to assign a deadline and a
grade. Learning to recognize the beauty and power in the abstract, the uncommon
in the natural world around us, and the magic and clarity in the world of words
are gifts from learning to study and think.

Additionally, failure to value education for the joy of
learning creates unnecessary roadblocks in our life’s progression and
potential. What a tragedy to hear a bright young college student agonize over
choosing a major because she can’t find a discipline that can be mastered now
and remain unchanged twenty years later when her family is reared and she
finally wants to apply her knowledge in a career. Does she think insight will
not be gleaned and heightened in every discipline every year? Does she think
that her mind will go into cold storage and the world won’t change while she is
at home with her family? Does she think that school is the only place one can
learn?

By contrast, one of the brightest and most capable women I
know has not received any formal college education, yet she has learned how to
learn. She is disciplined, quick to observe, and confident that answers are
found when you ask and seek. She always has a book or two that she is
reading—on health, nutrition, nature, Church doctrine, history,
relationships, psychology, human development, and more. Her children know that
she is fascinated in what they are learning, and she encourages them to share
their new insights with her. She is a frequent patron of the local library and
quickly finds ways to apply her new knowledge into her personal or family
life. Most of all, she generously shares what she learns with a humble
confidence that draws many people to seek her sage advice. True education isn’t
teaching a specific vocation; it is teaching someone how to learn
independently, how to find answers to life’s unique challenges that are never
discussed in any textbook.

BYU President Oaks stressed reasons to become educated for
more than merely financial motives, such as my friend reflects. “Education is
more than vocational,” he taught. “Education should improve our minds,
strengthen our bodies, heighten our cultural awareness, and increase our
spirituality. It should prepare us for greater service to the human family.
Such an education will improve a woman’s ability to function as an informed and
effective teacher of her sons and daughters, and as a worthy and wise counselor
and companion to her husband.”16

President Gordon B. Hinckley has long encouraged young women
to develop lifelong learning skills. “Educate your hands and your minds,” he
advised. “To you young women may I suggest that you get all the education you
can. Train yourselves to make a contribution to the society in which you will
live. There is an essence of the divine in the improvement of the mind. . . . 

“In the process of educating your minds, stir within
yourselves a greater sensitivity to the beautiful, the artistic, and the
cultivation of the talent you possess, be it large or small.”17

Influences That Encourage Education 
in Women

Much can be done to reinforce the value that
Latter-day Saint tenets place on education for women. Knowing and
citing prophetic and other authoritative teachings on the subject is an
important start, but reflecting those teachings in our daily attitudes and
behavior will go far to influence future generations.

In the mid-1990s, a BYU study was conducted to test various
family and religious influences on current and expected post–high
school academic achievement in Latter-day Saint teenagers.18
No attempt was made to design a model considering every possible reason for a
youth’s academic success or failure, but the researchers, Brent L. Top and
Bruce A. Chadwick, noted that “peer and family influences” are key indicators
of success in school.19  More specifically, they
considered the father’s educational level; public and private religious
practice and attitudes; peer influence; parental regulation; parents’ use of
psychologically controlling behaviors; family connection; whether or not the
mother was employed outside the home; and family structure (reside in a
two-parent, stepparent, or single-parent home).

Of all the influences tested, private and public religiosity
proved to be the strongest predictor of academic performance in
Latter-day Saint teenagers. The more active teenagers were in their
religion, the higher their actual and expected academic achievement. Peer
influence was significant only if the teen’s friends were low academic
achievers. “None of the family factors were directly related to school
performance for young men, and only family connection and granting of
psychological autonomy were significant for young women.”20
The researchers were surprised that the father’s education proved insignificant
in the equation, since it has been particularly important in research with
national samples of American teens.

The study provokes suggestions beyond those tested in their
model for influencing academic success among Latter-day Saint youth.
For example, I am curious about the influence of a mother’s education. More
important, what about a mother’s attitudes about education and current
educational practices? How often does she read for her own satisfaction? What
does she read? How varied are her interests? How confident is she in her
ability to find answers? How often does she read to her children? How motivated
and disciplined is she to learn?

Whether a mother found biology or math her favorite subject
in school or whether it was child development and home economics is
insignificant. If she develops a passion for learning, she will undoubtedly
influence her children to enjoy the process. Whether or not she uses her degree
in a salaried career, she will bring unparalleled relevancy to any subject that
her children learn in school when they come home and see her still enthusiastic
to learn.

Conclusion

In summary, education for women is clearly supported in
authorized Latter-day Saint teachings. Consequently, rank and file
members can significantly help by refraining from disguising or misrepresenting
that message. As a young woman seeks direction for her education through
personal revelation from God, she will build confidence and faith that will
lead her through the even more important decisions that will surely come her
way.

Attention to several actions and attitudes can make this
message easily accessible to Latter-day Saint young women. First, we
can help both young men and young women see that marriage and motherhood are
not the end of education for a woman but in many ways the beginning of her need
to apply educational skills to finally study in the most meaningful ways.
Second, we can communicate that education is as valuable for women as for men,
whether a woman marries early in life, later, or not at all. Encouraging the
importance of cultivating the mind and finding purpose in education far beyond
the financial value will promote greater joy in learning.

Third, we can teach and model sincere religious devotion and
activity. Regular and meaningful scripture study that spills into exploring
teachings of modern prophets, establishing a historical context, and learning
definitions of words will instill a contagious joy into gospel study.
Furthermore, as we establish a personal testimony of Christ in our youth, the
gospel becomes an integral part of learning every other subject or
discipline.

Finally, let us communicate that every family benefits from
two parents who have developed the skills and motivation to continue their
education when no homework is assigned and no public recognition is promised.
In so doing, we will be prepared to answer in the affirmative whenever and in
whatever capacity God calls us to serve, knowing He will continue to teach us
along the way.

Notes

1. Gordon B.
Hinckley, “Our Responsibility to Our Young Women,” Ensign, September 1988, 10.

2. B. H. Roberts,
“The Mormon Point of View in Education,” Improvement
Era, December 1898, 126.

3. Brigham Young, Discourses of Brigham Young,
edited by John A. Widtsoe (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1973), 217.

4. Spencer W.
Kimball, “The Role of Righteous Women,” Ensign,
November 1979, 102. 

5. James E. Faust,
“A Message to My Granddaughters: Becoming ‘Great Women,’” Ensign, September 1986,
19. 

6. Dallin H. Oaks,
BYU Devotional, February 12, 1974; “Statement on the Education of Women at
BYU,” BYU President’s Assembly, September 9, 1975.

7. Oaks, “Statement
on the Education of Women at BYU,” September 9, 1975.

8. Gordon B.
Hinckley, “How Can I Become the Woman of Whom I Dream?” Ensign, May 2001, 95. 

9. Stan L. Albrecht
and Tim B. Heaton, “Secularization, Higher Education, and Religiosity,” in
Latter-day Saint
Social Life: Social Research on the LDS Church and Its Members,
edited by James T. Duke (Provo, Utah: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1998),
293–314.

10.  Ibid.,
305; used by permission.

11.  Ibid.,
298.

12.  Deborah
Tannen, You Just Don’t
Understand: Women and Men in Conversation (New York: Ballantine
Books, 1990), 26.

13.  Joseph
F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine
(Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1977), 290. 

14.  Oaks,
BYU Devotional, February 12, 1974; “Statement on the Education of Women at
BYU,” September 9, 1975.

15.  Brigham
Young, in Journal of Discourses, 26
vols. (London: Latter-day Saints’ Book Depot, 1854–86), 14:83. 

16.  Oaks,
BYU Devotional, February 12, 1974.

17.  Gordon
B. Hinckley, “Rise to the Stature of the Divine within You,” Ensign, November 1989,
96.

18.  Brent
L. Top and Bruce A. Chadwick, “Seek Learning, Even by Study and Also by Faith:
The Relationship between Personal Religiosity and Academic Achievement among
Latter-day Saint High School Students,” The Religious Educator, vol. 2, no. 2,
2001, 121–37.

19.  Ibid.,
125.

20.  Ibid.,
130.

### The Lord’s Plan for Learning

John LeBaron

Master of Social Work, Columbia University (New York)

Question:

I have never been a fan of teachers who
propose subjective questions to a class, while inwardly relying on an arbitrary
set of objective answers to make their point. In preparing to teach my Old
Testament Gospel Doctrine class on birthright blessings, I wondered if the
“golden nugget” I planned on conveying would inadvertently set up the kind of
“I’m asking questions that only I
know the answers to” scenario that predictably rubs me the wrong way as a
student.

Then it happened. My class was gathered in the basement of
the chapel in a poor Brooklyn neighborhood. I had just set up the
million-dollar question: “Why was Abraham so insistent that Isaac marry a woman
from his kindred rather than from the Canaanites, in whose land Abraham and
Isaac lived?” A brother at the back of the class raised his hand and delivered
the golden nugget more beautifully than I could have imagined. He articulately
explained how Noah had cursed his grandson Canaan, the son of Ham, and thus, by
mixing his seed with the Canaanites, Isaac (a descendant of Noah’s second son,
Shem) would be unable to perpetuate the Abrahamic covenant. Indeed, the
descendants of Japheth (Noah’s eldest son) were not able to receive that
covenant until the meridian of time (Acts 11:7–18), and Ham’s descendants
had to wait until this dispensation (D&C Official Declaration 2).

The brother who answered the question was a descendant of
Ham. He and I did not share the same native tongue. He was born into the
poorest country in the Western Hemisphere; I was 
born into the richest. I was certain that we did not share the same educational
or economic upbringing. I now faced my own million-dollar question: Why was I
so surprised that he, despite our apparent differences, knew the answer?

More, what did my surprise really say about me? Was my
higher education truly making me a “more educated” person? Or was it slowly but
convincingly blinding my eyes and heart to the source of all true education and
light—the Spirit?

Up to that point, I had focused primarily on the tangibles
of my education. Painfully aware of my small mortgage of mounting tuition, I
had often grappled with questions like, “As a future family provider, how do I
reconcile pursuing a vocation that might fail to provide?” Or, “Is it reckless
to get an education that you might not ever use?” Or, “How do I justify this
kind of debt for a second
college degree?”

That Sunday in Gospel Doctrine, I was reminded to look
beyond the peripherals of my education and focus on the process. This intense
self-reflection led to questions such as, “How do I avoid thinking that I am
better or smarter than someone else?” “As a future provider, how will my
educational experiences help me provide for my family’s temporal and spiritual welfare?”
“Is it reckless to get caught up in popular opinions of self-determination and
social justice when the Lord has made it clear that they are against His plan?”
“How do I justify the kind of spiritual debt I might incur if I allow my education
to instill pride in my heart instead of charity?” (2 Nephi 9:42–43). And
ultimately, “When I am inclined to believe that there is an arbitrary set of
objective answers to my subjective educational dilemmas, in whose plan am I
really trusting?”

***

Kim B. Clark

President, BYU–Idaho

Answer:

Latter-day
Saints are committed to learning and education. For us, it is a commandment to
seek knowledge, to enlarge our understanding, to learn throughout our lives.
This certainly includes learning about the scriptures and the gospel, but the
reach of this responsibility includes knowledge of all kinds. Coupled with the
scriptural mandate to develop and strengthen our faith, this means that the
Lord’s word to the Latter-day Saints is clear: be educated and be faithful.

This is a challenging mandate. To be educated means more
than attending school or acquiring credentials. By “educated” I have in mind
something Henry Rosovsky, former dean of the faculty of Arts and Sciences at
Harvard, wrote several years ago:

An educated person must . . . be able to communicate with
precision, cogency and force; should . . . be trained to think critically . . .
have a critical appreciation of the ways we gain knowledge . . . an informed
acquaintance with 
the . . . methods of the . . . sciences; the historical and quantitative
techniques needed for investigating . . . modern society; with some of the
important scholarly, literary and artistic achievement of the past; and with
the major religious and philosophic conceptions of mankind; . . . cannot be
provincial in the sense of being ignorant of other cultures and other times; .
. . have some understanding of
. . . moral and ethical problems; . . . should have achieved some depth in some
field of knowledge.1  

To be educated in this sense is much more than knowing facts
or having skills. It is also about habits of mind, approaches to problems, and
perspective on our lives and the world around us. Likewise, to be faithful is
more than attending church and participating in religious worship. For
Latter-day Saints it also means being obedient to the commandments, following
the counsel of a living prophet, seeking and listening to the Spirit of the
Lord in making decisions, devoting priority time and energy to family, being
honest, serving others, paying tithing, living the Word of Wisdom, and in
general living the gospel in practice. It, too, is about habits of mind, but
faithfulness is also about heart, about approaches to problems, and about our
perspective on our lives and the world around us.

Neither being educated nor faithful is easy to achieve in
its own right. Doing them both is yet more difficult. As I have reflected on
that challenge over the years, I have seen in my own life and in the lives of
my Latter-day Saint colleagues a pattern of behavior, a set of practices, that
if followed raise substantially the likelihood that challenge will be met. This
essay is about that challenge and those patterns. My hope is to shed some light
on what it means for Latter-day Saints to be “educated and faithful.”

Education in LDS History and Doctrine

The
emphasis on education among the Latter-day Saints has roots both in the
doctrines of the Church and in its history. From the founding of the School of
the Prophets by Joseph Smith in 1833, to the creation of the Church Educational
System for high school and college students, to the ongoing support of the
three campuses of Brigham Young University, the leaders of the Church have
created an institutional history of commitment to learning and education.2 Moreover, the prophets and Apostles
have created in their personal lives a living witness of the importance of
learning, knowledge, and education. We have, of course, the example of Joseph
Smith and Brigham Young, both of whom were largely self-taught and invested in learning
throughout their lives. Among the current First Presidency and Quorum of the
Twelve Apostles, a college education is common, and many of these leaders have
advanced degrees in medicine, engineering, law, education, business, political
science, and the humanities. Gordon B. Hinckley, President of the Church,
framed his personal commitment this way:

I love to learn. I relish any opportunity to acquire knowledge.
Indeed, I believe in and have vigorously supported, throughout my life, the
pursuit of education, for myself and for others. I was able to obtain a
University education during the Great Depression and from that time forward I
have never been satiated with the pursuit of knowledge. From my point of view,
learning is both a practical matter and a spiritual one.3

A commitment to learning and education plays an important
role in the daily lives of members of the Church. In fact, Latter-day Saints
spend a lot of time in classes. I know this from personal experience. Consider
what a bird’s–eye view of a fairly typical Mormon household (ours)
reveals about this commitment to education: As the sun creeps over the horizon
twenty LDS teenagers (sixteen to eighteen years old) show up at the house; it
is 6:15 a.m. They are there for
early morning seminary, a fifty-minute class on the scriptures (this year it is
the New Testament) that meets every school day. Later that day the family
gathers for family home evening where the lesson is on the plan of salvation.
As the week progresses, we see the mother preparing her lesson and activity for
her nursery class on Sunday; the teenage daughters heading off to a Tuesday
night class on service in the community; and the father preparing for a talk he
has to give on Sunday evening at the LDS institute of religion, which serves
multiple college campuses in the area. For the children in the family, this
participation in Church classes and lessons comes in the midst of hours spent
in college and high school, completing research projects and working on
homework (for parents too!). If we extend the view a bit we can see a beautiful
new Latter-day Saint temple close to the family’s home, where the adults in the
extended family gather early on Saturday morning to complete an endowment
session in the temple. Here, in what for them is the most sacred place on
earth, the central activity is learning: about the purpose of life, God’s plan
for our eternal progression, and the eternal nature of the family.

Indeed, it is precisely in these principles of eternal
progression that we find the doctrinal roots for the Church’s commitment to
education. We are commanded to learn and to gain knowledge because that is an
important part of our purpose here on earth and in the eternities. In a
revelation given to Joseph Smith in 1843, the Lord connects knowledge and our
eternal progression:

Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life,
it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge
and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another,
he will have 
so much the advantage in the world to come (D&C 130:18–19).

In addition to their impact on our personal progression,
knowledge and learning allow us to more effectively serve God and His children,
including our families. Brigham Young taught the Latter-day Saints that
education was important in building the kingdom of God and had the power to
improve the lives of people in the world. It should be sought for those
purposes. Quoting Brigham Young, Hugh Nibley made clear this connection between
education and strengthening God’s kingdom (the words in quotation marks come
from Brigham Young):

“The business of the Elders of this Church (Jesus, their elder
brother, being at their head), is to gather up all the truths in the world
pertaining to life and salvation, to the Gospel we preach, to mechanisms of
every kind, to the sciences, and to philosophy, wherever they may be found in
every nation, kindred, tongue and people, and bring it to Zion.” The
“Gathering” was to be not only a bringing together of people, but of all the
treasures surviving in the earth from every age and culture; “Every accomplishment,
every polished grace, every useful attainment in mathematics, music, in all
science and art belong to the Saints, and they rapidly collect the intelligence
that is bestowed upon the nations, for all this intelligence belongs to Zion.
All the knowledge, wisdom, power, and glory that have been bestowed upon the
nations of the earth, from the days of Adam till now, must be gathered home to
Zion.” “What is this work? The improvement of the condition of the human
family.”4

The Lord’s Plan for Learning: “Even by 
Study, and Also by Faith”

A commitment to education is in our history and in our
beliefs. But in the passage of scripture noted above, the Lord also makes clear
that in His calculus education and faith are connected: one gains knowledge and
intelligence through diligence: digging, seeking, studying; and through
obedience: exercising faith by keeping the commandments of the Lord. Indeed,
whenever the Lord talks to us about education He always connects study and
faith. Consider, for example, these words from a revelation given to Joseph
Smith in 1835, in which the Lord lays out instructions for those who would
embark in His service:

Call a solemn assembly, even of those who are the first laborers
in this last kingdom. . . . And I give unto you, who are the first laborers in
this last kingdom, a commandment that you assemble yourselves together, and
organize yourselves, and prepare yourselves, and sanctify yourselves. . . . And
I give unto you a commandment that you shall teach one another the doctrine of
the kingdom. Teach ye diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be
instructed more perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of
the gospel, in all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are
expedient for you to understand; of things both in heaven and in the earth, and
under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must
shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the
wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the
land; and a knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms—that ye may be
prepared in all things when I shall send you again to magnify the calling
whereunto I have called you, and the mission with which I have commissioned
you. . . . And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another
words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek
learning, even by study and also by faith (D&C 88:70, 74, 77–80,
118).

Preparation for the work involves the mind and the spirit.
It is about building a life of faith and obedience, and a life of learning.
Gaining knowledge of all kinds is important (notice the connections
between Doctrine and Covenants 88 and Rosovsky’s description of an educated
person above), and that knowledge is to be had through reason (study) and
revelation (faith).

Why does the Lord connect study and faith in this way? Why
this linking of reason and revelation, of the intellect and the spirit? It
might have been different. He could have said: “Study is study and that you do
in school; faith is faith and that you do in church.” But he didn’t. He
connected them. Why? Part of the answer is that inspiration from God is a
powerful way to gain the kinds of knowledge and intelligence essential to our
education here on earth. Latter-day Saints believe in personal revelation, that
God can speak to us in many ways to help us in our lives. We believe in the
power of prayer and that these times of personal meditation and reflection can
yield new understanding and insight. A life of faith can, therefore, create
habits of prayerful contemplation and quiet reflection that open our minds and
our hearts to revelation and inspiration.

Many times I have sat in Church and listened to faithful
Latter-day Saints talk about walking out after an exam, or solving a
particularly knotty research problem, or finding a way to write something
quite difficult, and feeling they had been blessed with insight and
understanding beyond their capacity. I have had these experiences myself, and I
am confident they would not have happened without a lot of studying and work
(this is what I emphasize to my children). But I also believe that faith plays
an important role in what are very important learning moments.

So, part of the purpose for connecting faith to study is the
Lord’s desire to help us learn through inspiration. But it is also true that
using our minds to actively seek knowledge in the way that the Lord outlines
helps prepare our minds to receive that inspiration. This principle is at the
heart of the reprimand received by Oliver Cowdery, who served as scribe to
Joseph Smith during the translation of the Book of Mormon. Oliver had
sought permission to try to translate and had not had success. The Lord said:

Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would
give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold,
I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me
if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn
within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right (D&C 9:7–8).

The Lord promises confirmation, but only after hard thought
and study. Joseph Smith taught the same principle and emphasized the connection
between the intellect and the spirit:

We consider that God has created man with a mind capable of
instruction, and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and
diligence given to the light communicated from heaven to the intellect.5

And again:

The things of God are of deep import; and time, and experience,
and careful and ponderous and solemn thought can only find them out. Thy mind,
O man! If thou wilt lead a soul unto salvation, must stretch as high as the
utmost heavens.6

The Prophet thus taught that our intellect receives “light
from heaven”; that we can expand our capacity to learn from that light if we
are diligent; and that our minds are essential to finding out the things of
God, as we ponder and learn from our experience; but they must be connected to
heaven if we are to achieve all that God has in store for us. There is no
distinction here between secular and religious knowledge or between the spirit
and the intellect.7 We may have separated the spirit and the
intellect into different compartments of our lives, but according to the
Prophet, that is not our true nature. In that sense, connecting study and faith
is the Lord’s plan for learning because it is precisely the best way to learn.
The process He gives us for gaining knowledge–study, seek, ponder, pray,
keep the commandments—is thus intended to help us integrate the intellect
and the spirit.

Dangers in the Search for Knowledge

The Lord’s plan does more than give us a powerful way to
learn. It also serves as a protection against the dangers that lie in the path
of our search for knowledge. And there are dangers. Jacob, an ancient prophet
on the American continent, had this to say about knowledge and learning:

O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the
frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they
are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside,
supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and
it profiteth them not. And they shall perish. But to be learned is good if they
hearken unto the counsels of God 
(2 Nephi 9:28–29).

To be learned, to search for and attain knowledge is good,
but things can go terribly wrong if one is not careful. Some of the dangers one
faces are matters of the mind and some affect our hearts. I will discuss four
here: shallow thinking, cynicism, pride, and greed. Each poses a serious
challenge to being educated and faithful.

### Danger: Shallow Thinking

Acquiring education, really searching for knowledge the way
the Lord has commanded us, can be hard and difficult work. It takes time and
energy and focus. One of the great dangers we face in this journey is never to
start. Or if we start, to be content with a surface understanding of things, or
worse, with an imitation of the real thing.

Part of the difficulty here lies in the fact that some ideas
we might encounter on our journey are uncomfortable. Sometimes those who write
and teach about “the wars and the perplexities of the nations, and the
judgments which are on the land” or things “in the earth, and under the earth”
may proclaim ideas that contradict (or appear to contradict) things we learned
(or thought we learned) in Sunday School or in the scriptures or in the
teachings of the prophets. And some that proclaim such ideas may actively seek
to undermine religious faith.

The learned, particularly those who uncover new ideas and
create new knowledge, “think they are wise” for a reason: the ideas they create
do have power to explain and illuminate. From the earliest days of the Church
the prophets have taught that the gospel encompasses all truth, whether
religious or secular, and that we should seek after it. In this sense reason
and revelation are two paths to the same end. In the end, there will be no
conflict between revealed truth and truth established through reason. But in
the meantime, some ideas created through reason create real dissonance, as well
as, sometimes, doubt and discomfort.

For those who would be educated and faithful, there really
are two dangers here. One is to avoid discomfort by not searching at all, never
embarking on the journey, or if embarking, never getting beyond the surface of
things. One may be comfortable on the surface, but shallow thinking does not
fulfill the Lord’s mandate. The other danger is to give so much allegiance to
new, uncomfortable ideas (they are, after all, powerful) that one abandons
one’s religious faith. But in our day when new ideas supplant old ones at a
significant rate, basing one’s behavior, let alone one’s life, on such ideas
amounts to putting one’s faith in the “wisdom of men” 
(1 Corinthians 2:5).

Neither staying on the surface of ideas nor abandoning
religious faith is attractive. If Latter-day Saints follow the Lord’s plan
they do neither one. Rather, the solution is to forge ahead. 
Jeffrey R. Holland, writing at a time when he served as president of BYU (he is
now a member of the Quorum of the Twelve) captures the essence of this forging
in mind and spirit:

If we knew all that God knew and we had all the light and all
the truth, I am confident it would be both perfectly rational and perfectly revelatory.
The rub is we do not have all the truth and the light. It is in that ignorance,
in that falling short, that we have challenges. We grope and we grasp. . . . We
ought to feel free to use any tool we can to pursue any avenue we find, to
employ any process that is legitimate in order to stretch, to grow, and move
ahead. . . . We want to have faith and . . . rigorous scholarship. We hope to
have wide-open inquiry and strong religious faith.8

### Danger: Cynicism

As we forge ahead on the path of knowledge and learning,
there are other dangers lurking on the journey, perhaps more subtle and
potentially more difficult to see and overcome. The very process of education
is one of them. Sometimes people learn in very passive ways. They read or
listen to someone else or watch a teacher solve a worked-out problem. But
active modes of learning—writing papers, formulating hypotheses, running
experiments, developing evidence and argument, presenting ideas and discussing
them, opening up oneself and one’s ideas to critique—are far more
effective and thus are widely used. This is especially true where teachers seek
to impart a deeper understanding of fundamental principles and to develop
critical habits of mind, rather than simply to transmit certain facts. In that
context, prevalent in colleges and universities, students and teachers treat
each other’s ideas with a practiced skepticism.

I have lived and taught and learned in such an environment
for over thirty years. All of my experience has taught me the importance of
carefully scrutinizing ideas, of attention to methodology, of asking hard
questions about evidence and logic. Putting students through such educational
experiences helps them become what William James called “tough minded.”9
But early in my years as a student I saw the dark side of this process, a side
that can have serious consequences for one’s spiritual welfare. I once
participated in a seminar in which a doctoral student presented the results of
his research to other students and to faculty. It did not take long to realize
that the students in the seminar were primed to find the flaws in the work
(and, as is often the case, there were flaws to be found). But the comments
from some were sharp and biting. They attacked the methods, as they should, but
their sarcasm, even when tinged with humor, cut the person as well. I left that
seminar with an uneasy feeling, because I realized how easy it would be for me
to fall into that pattern of behavior.

As the years passed, I became a teacher and witnessed (and
lived) the tension between the value of a rigorous examination of ideas and the
development of a climate of respect for each other in the learning process.
Without strong attention to the latter, a misguided emphasis on the former can
turn healthy skepticism into cynicism and a mean-spiritedness that can, if not
recognized and addressed, become a canker on the spirit, affecting not only
one’s behavior in the world of the classroom, but in everything one does.

Such cynicism and meanness is not productive of real
learning, and it surely is not what Latter-day Saints are required to develop
if they are to serve God. The Lord said it clearly in these words:

Wherefore, be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the
foundation of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is
great. Behold, the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind; and the willing
and obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days (D&C
64:33–34).

The challenge for Latter-day Saints (and anyone else for
that matter) who would be educated and faithful, then, is to be tough-minded,
but not hard-hearted. I shall return to that challenge below.

### Danger: Pride

We have talked about the dangers in the search for
knowledge; we now must look more closely at the possession of knowledge itself.
Here, Jacob was most emphatic: a little learning goes a long way to make one
proud and arrogant. If such were the case several hundred years before Christ’s
birth in the society depicted in the Book of Mormon, it is certainly true in
the world of the early twenty-first century.

Knowledge is wonderful. When my son hurts his shoulder (as
he did) and needs a difficult operation (also true), I want the very best
surgeon with the most advanced knowledge to perform the operation. The
difference between the best and the average is enormous, all the more so when
the problem is challenging and difficult. For those individuals who have such
knowledge, it is natural to feel an intrinsic sense of accomplishment: one has
to work hard to acquire it, having it expands one’s perspective and sense of
purpose, and knowledge allows one to deliver real solutions.

But this sense of accomplishment may be a slippery slope;
one also must deal with what the scriptures call “the honors of men” (D&C
121:35). Learning brings recognition from society and from the communities of
practice (engineers, lawyers, doctors, leaders, scientists, artists, officials,
teachers, and so forth) one may aspire to join, or to which one already
belongs. Moreover, within such communities there is often a hierarchy of status
and influence based on knowledge and expertise.

Communities of practice with knowledge-based influence and
status can have a very positive impact on society. Those with significant
knowledge and learning can offer to society service of great value and can help
to establish high standards of practice that, when transferred to others, can
lift up the quality of work everywhere. But such a position in a community and
in society can breed in those who possess such knowledge a self-importance and
conceit that may degenerate into willful pride and arrogance. The scriptures
describe such people as “stiffnecked” (Jacob 2:13). In effect, those who
receive great honor from their colleagues, who receive accolades from society,
begin to believe their own press releases. And “the honors of men” may, in
particular, lead them to place their own wisdom or understanding ahead of the
words of the prophets and the counsels of God.

The challenge is to have high standards without being
stiff-necked.

### Danger: Greed

Society confers status and honor on those who are
knowledgeable. It has ever been thus. But in our day, society goes even
further. We live in an economy that places increasing economic value on
knowledge, at least on the kinds of knowledge that are critical to the creation
of new technologies, new forms of entertainment, and new products and services.
And with a modern capital market that translates future value into current
wealth, some in our modern society have accumulated wealth on a truly
remarkable scale. And they have in turn become the models for many, many
others. When one lives in a knowledge economy, Jacob’s warning becomes even
more salient. Because now, in addition to “the honors of men,” learning and
education could—and likely will—bring wealth as well.

This is dangerous ground. Here again Jacob cuts to the heart
of the problem:

But wo unto the rich, who are rich as to the things of the
world. For because they are rich they despise the poor and they persecute the
meek, and their hearts are upon their treasures; wherefore, their treasure is
their god. And behold, their treasure shall perish with them also (2 Nephi
9:30). 

And the hand of providence hath smiled upon you most
pleasingly, that you have obtained many riches; . . . ye are lifted up in the
pride of your hearts, and wear stiff necks and high heads because of the
costliness of your apparel, and persecute your brethren because ye suppose that
ye are better than they.

. . . Before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom
of God. 

And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain
riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do
good—to clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the
captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted (Jacob 2:13, 18–19).

If education becomes the brass ring, if it becomes a ticket
to wealth and nothing more, then it becomes a way, albeit a socially acceptable
way, to give expression to greed. If, however, one’s search for knowledge and
learning has a higher purpose—to serve others and God—then one may
use the wealth that comes along for good purposes. But the danger is clear. The
challenge, then, is always to do good, whether one does well or not.

Following the Lord’s Plan for Learning

These are the dangers on our journey to acquire learning and
knowledge. We may encounter uncomfortable ideas and stop searching altogether,
or we may fail to dig deep. We may lose our way, paradoxically placing too much
faith in the wisdom of men. Moreover, the process of education and the
possession of knowledge may breed within those who learn a cynicism, a pride
and arrogance, a greed that can be destructive of the spirit and of faith. If
your own voice, or the voice of your colleagues in your circle of practice, or
the many voices of the world, are so loud that you cannot hear the Lord, you
will fail to learn all you can and will fall prey to the “cunning plan of the
evil one” as Jacob warned long ago.

The Lord’s plan for the Latter-day Saints to “seek learning,
even by study and also by faith” is designed to help us avoid the dangers and
overcome the challenges, so that we can be both educated and faithful. So, how
does this work in practice? Over the years I have observed a set of practices
and a pattern of behavior in the lives of many of my Latter-day Saint friends
and colleagues that help to make the Lord’s plan a reality. This is an ideal
type based on a personal assessment, of course, but I believe a close look at
Latter-day Saints who are educated and faithful would highlight the kinds of
practices I lay out here. And for Latter-day Saints still on the journey, they
are simply good advice.

### Humility

I begin with a short but important story. Early in my
college years my uncle told me a story and taught me what I will call “the
sacrament meeting test.” It was designed to help one, especially one seeking
learning, to maintain perspective and avoid both cynicism and pride. First the
story: Many years ago my uncle (who at the time was a professor at a prominent
university) was sitting in sacrament meeting listening to a talk given by a
member of his congregation. As the man talked, my uncle noticed several errors
of grammar and very poor sentence structure. The man’s delivery was awkward,
and the logic of his talk was at best incomplete. These problems attracted my
uncle’s attention. By the time the man finished his talk, my uncle had
developed a devastating critique of the logical structure of the argument and
the methods of presentation.

As he walked from the meeting, however, my uncle’s
conscience kicked into gear and he heard that “still, small voice” telling him
that something was wrong. On reflection, he realized that he had brought the
tools and methods of his classroom into sacrament meeting and had failed to
hear the man’s message. Then he remembered that his father had taught him that
the really important questions are always these: What is the message of this
talk? What is the speaker trying to teach me? What would the Lord have me
learn? This is a far more productive approach to sacrament meeting in general.
But it also helps to avoid cynicism and intellectual arrogance. For my uncle
this was a defining moment. The lesson stayed with him. For me, sacrament
meeting has become a litmus test: Whenever I find myself analyzing
sacrament meeting talks rather than listening for the message in them, I know I
am on dangerous ground and need to focus on what the Lord wants me to learn.

My uncle’s story motivates the first element in the pattern
I want to describe. Those Latter-day Saints who succeed in combining study and
faith seek to develop humility. No matter what the circumstance, they ask: What
can I learn from this experience? What is the Lord trying to teach me? What
does He want me to learn? They accept and embrace opportunities to serve others
(especially as home teachers) because they know that in doing so they serve
God. And they attend the temple, not only because it is the Lord’s house and a
house of learning, but because they leave behind the distinctions of the world
and stand equal before God with all their brothers and sisters. An attitude of
humility is important in helping us maintain high standards while avoiding a stiff
neck.

### Focused Prayer

Being teachable, serving others, making the temple a central
part of one’s life—these are the activities that foster an attitude of
humility. And humility helps us to not take ourselves too seriously and ignore
the counsels of God. The second element in the
pattern—prayer—also protects against intellectual arrogance
and cynicism. 

Prayer is an essential part of a life of faith. But I have
in mind here a particular kind of prayer, a prayer that brings to God the
specific, practical, mundane issues and problems of one’s study. In this
pattern, one lays before God the specific issues with which one is wrestling
and seeks His guidance. The wrestling and the seeking are important. One goes
before God without all the answers and acknowledges that God has them, all of
them. It does not matter what the subject is or how big the issues are, the
prophets tell us to take them to the Lord in prayer.

A specific prayer to God for help acknowledges our need for
Him. But it is incomplete. It is also very important to thank Him for His mercy
and blessings. Such specific, focused prayers of thanksgiving evoke in us a
sense of gratitude. Gratitude is the foundation for treating others with
respect and for approaching our journey of learning with a sense of optimism.
Both help guard against cynicism and allow us to be tough-minded without being
hard-hearted.

### Lifelong Learning

Where the first two elements focus on spiritual dangers, the
last two address our need to keep our minds active and engaged in the kind of
searching, seeking process that the Lord outlines in His plan. And this seeking
must be lifelong. Thus, the third element of the pattern is a commitment to
lifelong learning, especially to rigorous study of the scriptures. Consider
this counsel from Hugh Nibley, a legendary Latter-day Saint scholar (the
passages in quotation marks are from Joseph Smith):

Our search for knowledge should be ceaseless, which means that
it is open-ended, never resting on laurels, degrees, or past achievements. “If
we get puffed up thinking that we have much knowledge, we are apt to get a
contentious spirit,” and what is the cure? “Correct knowledge is necessary to
cast out that spirit.” The cure for inadequate knowledge is “ever more light
and knowledge.”10

Such a commitment to learning throughout our lives is not
the traditional pattern we find in modern society. That pattern is one in which
education occurs early in life, followed by many years focused on applying that
education to earning a living and raising a family, followed by years of
retirement in which one may offer some service to the Church or community. This
so-called “Learn-Earn-Serve” model of life is now obsolete (there is some
question whether it ever had much application to the Latter-day Saints, who
serve extensively throughout their lives). One cannot possibly hope to sustain
a productive life of work and service on the basis of a few years of education
early in one’s life. Knowledge simply is increasing so fast that one must plan
on a lifetime of learning in order to be effective and productive in the world.

The world, therefore, has now caught up with the Lord. For
it has never been the Lord’s plan that we would learn a lot in school and then
put our minds to rest and work only on applying what we had learned for the
rest of our lives. A careful review of the scriptures about study and faith
reveals absolutely no time limits, no deadlines, and no calendar constraints on
learning. It is to be lifelong. And those Latter-day Saints who are educated
and faithful do exactly that, in a variety of ways, including through formal
programs, continuing education, reading widely, and so forth. But a litmus test
of this element of the pattern is their approach to the scriptures.

For the Latter-day Saints, the scriptures include the Bible
(both Old and New Testaments), the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants,
and the Pearl of Great Price. We also believe in continuing revelation and that
when modern prophets speak under the direction of the Spirit of God, what they
say is scripture. These records of God’s dealings with His children and His
revelations to His prophets can be read at many levels. But educated and
faithful Latter-day Saints take seriously the Lord’s plan for learning (which
applies to all kinds of knowledge), and they study His word rigorously.
The Lord commands us not just to read the scriptures, but to “search” them, to
“feast” on them (John 5:39; 2 Nephi 31:20). This requires that we use our
minds, indeed, every bit of our mental capacity, to study the scriptures deeply
and rigorously. Doing so may reveal new patterns, new connections we had never
seen before. It may give us new understanding of the context in which
revelation has occurred, new insight into the purposes of the Lord’s
commandments, new ways to think about one’s responsibilities.

Of course, the Lord wants us to bring our hearts and our
spirits with us on our search. Indeed, studying the scriptures this way helps
us to integrate the spirit and the intellect. That is what makes our approach
to the scriptures such a powerful litmus test of our adherence to the
Lord’s plan for learning. Of course, the scriptures are special and come with
special promises from God. He provides extra help in teaching His children
about His word. But, if Latter-day Saints study the scriptures this way, they
develop a capacity for learning—using reason and revelation in an
integrated way—that can be used in every context.

### Serving the Lord on the Frontier

The final element of the pattern involves service to the
Lord. It is connected to humility and to the emphasis on our purpose in the
Lord’s plan for learning: to prepare for service in the kingdom of God. In the
passage from Doctrine and Covenants 88 that I quoted earlier, the Lord makes
clear that the purpose of His plan of learning is to prepare the laborers in
his kingdom to go out and do His work. It is in the nature of that work that
the Lord is always at its frontier. In the early days of the Church, the
frontier was always right at hand. There were few “laborers,” much to be done,
and much that had to be done that had never been done before. The Latter-day
Saints of that day were stretched and pushed and challenged almost every
day of their lives. And the Lord was always there, because they were at the
frontier, where He always works.

Today the Lord’s plan of learning and His focus on the
frontier are the same, but we face a very different situation. We find
ourselves part of a Church with 12 million members worldwide, with a large and
capable organization, full of people who know how to do much of what needs to
be done. Indeed, there are many, many Latter-day Saints who are so experienced
and capable that they can accomplish what they are asked to do without the
Lord’s help. At least they can when they are not working at the frontier but
are back in the more settled parts of the kingdom where things are familiar and
comfortable.

There is a frontier today, perhaps not as obvious as the one
in 1830, but it is there in the individual lives of God’s children (including
our own), and in the great work of the Lord occurring all across the world. It
is at this frontier that we find the Lord at work, and it is at this frontier
that Latter-day Saints can accomplish what must be done only with the Lord’s
help. That is why service at the frontier of the kingdom is a distinctive
element in becoming educated and faithful. It is here, in the unfamiliar
territory of the frontier, that one’s stock of knowledge and one’s intellect
and one’s spiritual wisdom are inadequate. They are absolutely vital,
necessary, but in the end, not enough. One has to turn to the Lord and rely on
Him for help. And thus, one has to grow, sometimes spiritually, sometimes
intellectually, but always in ways that serve God’s children and move His work
forward. Thus, service at the frontier adds to one’s capacity in the Lord’s
way.

Conclusion

Commitment to education among the Latter-day Saints is an
important aspect of the faith. It is deeply rooted in both the history and the
doctrine of the Church. And it shapes in a powerful way the lives of its
members. Revelation and commandment link this commitment to religious faith:
Among the Latter-day Saints the ideal is to be both educated and faithful.
Pursuing that ideal in practice is not just a matter of one’s habits of mind,
but of the practical pattern of activities that define one’s life. In this
realm in particular, being an educated, faithful Latter-day Saint is a way of
life.

In this chapter I have tried to sketch out a pattern of
activities that are characteristic of Latter-day Saints who have successfully
pursued education and faith. They cultivate an attitude of humility, take their
specific challenges in learning to God in prayer, pursue rigorous study of the
scriptures as part of their commitment to lifelong learning, and serve the Lord
at the frontier. These activities keep them on the Lord’s plan for learning and
help them avoid the dangers of shallow thinking, cynicism, pride, and greed.
Moreover, following this pattern expands their capacity for learning; it also
gives meaning and focus to their pursuit of knowledge more generally. We learn
in order to be of service to God and because seeking knowledge and intelligence
is part of the Lord’s great plan of eternal progression for His children. Of
course, sometimes we learn because that is part of our plan to get a degree or
advance in our profession, so we can build a career and nurture a family. But
working at the frontier in serving the Lord, and talking to God every day about
our work, helps keep all of this worldly activity in perspective. It guards
against cynicism and greed taking root, and it gives righteous motivation to
the journey of learning.

Notes

1. Henry Rosovsky, The University: An Owner’s Manual (New
York: W.W. Norton and Co., 1990), 105–7.

2. For a brief
review of this history, see David P. Gardner, “Education,” in Daniel H. Ludlow,
ed., Encyclopedia of
Mormonism (New York: Macmillan, 1992), 441–46.

3. Gordon B.
Hinckley, Standing for
Something (New York: Times Books, 2000), 59.

4. Hugh Nibley, Brother Brigham Challenges the
Saints, edited by Don E. Norton and Shirley S. Ricks (Salt Lake City
and Provo: Deseret Book and Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies,
1994), 316–17.

5. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph
Smith, selected by Joseph Fielding Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret
Book, 1976), 51.

6. Ibid., 137.

7. Hugh Nibley, Approaching Zion, edited
by Don E. Norton (Salt
Lake City and Provo: Deseret Book and Foundation for Ancient Research and
Mormon Studies, 1989), 72.

8. David P. Gardner
and Jeffrey R. Holland, “Education in Zion: Intellectual Inquiry and Revealed
Truth,” Sunstone
(Jan.–Feb. 1981), 59–60, 61.

9. William James, Writings 1902–1910
(New York: The Library of America, 1987), 491–93.

10.  Hugh
Nibley, Approaching Zion
(Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989), 70–71.

 
 
© 2007 The Perpetual Education Fund, Inc 

Printed from Gospelink.com
