# 10 Commandments for Balancing the Life of the Mind and Spirit on Campus

### 10 Commandments for Balancing the Life of the Mind and Spirit on
Campus
David Read, Jacob Werrett, A Twenty-Something's Guide to Spirituality (Salt Lake City 2007)
 
 

10 Commandments for Balancing the Life of the Mind and Spirit on
Campus

Lorin Pace

Bachelor of Arts in Economic Sociology, Stanford University; 
Master of Business Administration, Harvard University

Question:

The
case-teaching method at Harvard Business School is unique: the
professors ask the questions and the students provide the answers.
Following an effective case, participants depart with more questions than
answers. The chief assumption underlying the case method is that asking the
right questions is more challenging than producing acceptable answers. This may
be true in the business world, but when I find myself troubled with spiritual
questions, answers can seem incredibly elusive.

I have come to realize that I feel neglected not for lack of
correct answers but rather due to my inability to accept and commit to one of
many right answers. Success is possible only when we are willing to take the
first step down a good path, even when we are not completely sure it is the
best path. This is the natural predicament of a faithful Saint, at once guided
by the Spirit but required to exercise autonomy. There are simply too many good
causes in which we can be “anxiously engaged” (D&C 58:27) for us to have
only one right answer to every question.

Certain transcendent truths are particularly helpful not
only in guiding us to the right questions, but also in auditing our array of
hypothetically acceptable answers. One true principle has particularly
influenced my scholastic experience: “For unto whomsoever much is given, of him
shall be much required” (Luke 12:48).

This truth harmonizes perfectly with one of the fundamental
tenets of neoclassical economics. Neoclassicists assert that human beings are
rational creatures who seek to maximize the “utility” or value that they can
achieve within a given set of constraints. While we may not be able to measure
spiritual activity such as charity in terms of utility, the concept of
“economic rationality” is no less useful as a construct for holistic self-evaluation.
We succeed to the degree in which we take full advantage of our opportunities,
both secular and religious.

Asking the right questions, accepting the imperative to act
despite ambiguity, and referencing sublime truths to adjust one’s course make
up a model that will help with key decisions. But as the collegiate barrage of
ideas and impressions intensifies, tradeoffs become opaque. The intuition
required to thrive amidst this chaos must be forged in the confluence of the
mind and the spirit. How does one cultivate balance between the intellectual
and the spiritual?

***

Philip Barlow

Professor of Theological Studies at Hanover College (Hanover, Indiana)

Answer:

People
enroll in college with diverse and mixed motives. Some go for sheer love of
learning. Others go to find themselves or to open doors on the universe and
society. Some go to stall, to look or feel respectable while they cast about
for direction or until they find a job. Some go to party or to court, pleased
at the freedom offered on campus and by large numbers of eligible and
attractive others.

There are those who enroll to get a
degree—literally. The credential they pursue will, they
believe, widen their chances for obtaining a better paying job. Because
graduation is their primary goal, they approach it in the most efficient way
they can envision: taking the fewest and easiest courses they can get by with,
or taking implausible overloads during several terms (while working
considerable hours for pay) to shorten the process. They seek a certificate,
not an education, and they value grades more than wisdom. Such “students” are
not really “in” but merely “at” college. They will have little interest in the
essay that follows.

Another class of students enters school more earnestly. Like
the credential-seekers, they think of college primarily as a stepping
stone to a career, but they are serious about acquiring the specific skills
they will need to do their jobs well. They may study business, engineering, or
education, accounting or pre-law or pre-med. While their
leading motivation is pre-professional training, many of them are
hardworking by nature and thus do their best in each class. Some may attend a
vocational school in which most of their courses focus on immediately practical
skills such as would sustain a future welder, nurse, or computer technician.
But if they attend a college or university, they will encounter, at least
briefly, a wider world. No matter what their focus, they will be required to
take courses touching upon the basics of science and social science. They will
be introduced to the world of humanistic ideas, formal logic, the study of
other cultures and languages—the ways and minds of people quite
foreign to the world and beliefs with which they are familiar.

A final type of student comes to understand that colleges
have other purposes beyond job training. These purposes point toward implied
(though often unspoken) questions: What does it mean to be human? How have
individuals and civilizations gone about it, and how shall we? What is the
nature of the universe we inhabit? These are questions about which the gospel
has things to say, of course, but from angles of vision, intent, detail, and
method apart from (not necessarily incompatible with) those of the academy.
Often trivialized by the term “general education,” courses of study looking at
aspects of these questions have emerged from specialized disciplines invented
to pursue them. At least brief exposure is required of all who would
graduate.

Some students become more thoroughly engaged than others in
these issues and disciplines. Hence they may “major” in physics or geology,
psychology or political science, history or philosophy. They are aware of the
eventual need to find jobs, and some will retain their pre-professional
majors; they may also have interest in dating; their aspirations are composite.
But when they come to care about critical thinking, evidence, and the nature of
“knowing” not simply for job skills but also for what Socrates called “the examined
life,”1
they are going to have questions—and they should have
questions—about how all this relates to what they have learned
at home and in church.

Some of these questions may be by-products of
study not focused on religion. For example, how shall I respond when I
encounter overwhelming scientific evidence pointing to the evolving nature of
the physical and biological universe over millions of years if this seems at
odds with my understanding of scripture or what I was taught in seminary? What
should I do if historical study of even such restricted topics as Stalinist
Russia, Nazi Germany, or twentieth-century Cambodia or Ethiopia
conjures haunting images and prompts questions about faith in a God who could
allow such terror and death to millions of innocent children and adults? What
if anthropological or historical study of the world’s varied cultures makes me
wonder about the plausibility of “one true church”? Sometimes religion as such
may be treated with condescension or derision.

There may even be times, especially if one enters college
where there are many Latter-day Saints, when the Church itself comes
directly under fire. When I returned from my mission and entered Weber State
College in northern Utah, I enrolled in a certain philosophy class for which
only six students had signed up. Even by professorial standards, Professor
Olson was a distinctively learned man, a sensation on campus and in some
circles in Utah. He may have possessed something of a photographic memory; at least
he seemed able regularly to recite the library’s call numbers of many books to
which he called my attention in our later conversations. On the first day of
class the professor, who had a reputation as a threat to students’ faith,
offered comments that seemed to disdain the Church. As this continued, I at
last raised my hand. He and I then began an exchange (with Professor Olson
doing most of the talking) that lasted three weeks. On the second day of class,
to my discomfort, the professor arrived carrying a formidable armful of books,
pressed up against the bottom of his chin and spanning a vertical line
downwards to his hands, extended below his waist. He placed them ceremoniously
on the table before us, and I noticed the Book of Mormon among the titles, as
well as Teachings of the
Prophet Joseph Smith, Doctrines
of Salvation by Joseph Fielding Smith, works by other modern
authorities of the Church, and many titles I did not recognize. It seemed the
teacher’s central concern was to promote honesty, enlightened critical
thinking, and a regard for scholarship. These he was convinced the Church did
not foster. He presented many issues with which I was unfamiliar: principles of
epistemology; alternate accounts of Joseph Smith’s First Vision; bigoted
published defenses of priesthood policy; and ecclesiastical denigration of credible
and loyal Latter-day Saint scholars, such as Juanita Brooks, who had
published on important but sensitive topics.

I later became a teacher myself, a formal student of
religion. In subsequent years I have watched, counseled, taught, learned from,
and corresponded with students who have ignored or engaged such issues as
these. Some of them have lost—and some of them have retained or
found—their faith through encounters in college. Because I
believe the loss of the foundations of faith to be unnecessary and tragic, I
have fashioned Ten Commandments for LDS students attempting to balance faith
and learning while at college.

My “commandments,” of course, represent my own
understanding; they have authority only for me. For interested others, they
amount to suggestions: an approach to formal learning, in the context of faith,
to be adopted only as you may be prayerfully and thoughtfully persuaded. You
may disagree with aspects of my commandments. If so, I hope you are stimulated
to fashion your own. It should go without saying that other
commandments—those we hold to have a divine
source—ought not be discarded on account of anything I say
here. The reader will also do well to be suspicious of the convenient number
“ten”; the list could of course grow long. Finally, I stress that the
principles behind the “commandments” are interactive and connected. They must
be applied in relation to one another. Failure to do so will distort their
meaning and their effect.

### 1. Seek truth, seek good, and bind them together.

I regularly encounter students (Latter-day Saints,
Baptists, Muslims, atheists—students of all sorts) who are so
determined to shield their faith and their perspectives that they seem closed
to fundamental discovery. They believe it their job to hold onto their secular
or religious faith as if holding their breath, no matter what they experience.
Some avoid, fight, or tip-toe through certain courses, not really
engaging them, afraid or angry that they may confront a topic or a fact that
threatens their understanding. The threat they perceive has various potential
sources. The subject may be biology or geology, philosophy or history or
religion; or it may have less to do with a subject than with a particular
professor or peer.

Faith is a necessary and precious thing, the first principle
of the gospel. I sympathize with this impulse to protect it at any cost.
However, spiritual and mental tragedy can come not only through loss of faith,
but also through inauthenticity, ignorance, and fear.

Faith does not exist in a vacuum, and not all faith is
healthy or righteous. After all, terrorists, on the basis of faith, fly
airplanes into tall buildings filled with innocent people. What is wanted is
not the rigid, uninformed, closed, and cocksure faith-assertions of
the fanatic, but a thoughtful and open trust, an organic and living faith, born
of love and welcoming of growth, inquiry, new perspectives, and
adjustment.

In this light, it helps to remember that our Father in
Heaven is the Lord of Truth. “Yea, Lord, I know that thou speakest the truth,
for thou art a God of truth, and canst not lie”
(Ether 3:12). God’s “Word” is “the way, the truth, and the life”
(John 1:1; 14:6). My faith in the Lord of Truth is prompted not only by
scriptural proclamation, but by something deep within me. This sense would
thrive even if scripture did not declare it. For if our God were not a God of
truth, He would, as the Book of Mormon puts it in another context, “cease to be
God.” Even if powerful, such a god would be worthy of neither our trust nor our
worship. “But God ceaseth not to be God” (Alma 42:23). Among other things, this
means that God is unafraid of truth, including any human truths we might
encounter in our study.

Of course, alleged facts can be dangerous for inexperienced
minds lacking sufficient context and means of testing and explaining them. It
is essential to realize that what we take to be facts are properly contested in
the academy. One purpose of an education, indeed, is to deepen the ability for
informed and critical thought that is increasingly able to discern the
credibility of arguments, alleged facts, and their proper contexts. Moreover,
to accept something as “fact” is not the same as assigning that fact a meaning.
“So what?” is an excellent question. We should be wary of our own and others’
(including our teachers’) perceptions, weaknesses, tendencies to leap to
conclusions, or sneering or condescending attitudes that may cast a false pale
over even legitimate facts. But the proper response to all this is further
study, conversation, testing, experience, thought, discipline, and
prayer—not avoidance. The ongoing pursuit of
truth—rather than an expressed or unstated boast that we
already possess and comprehend it in its fullness—can and
should be at one with hungering and thirsting after righteousness. God and
truth are perfectly aligned.

Joseph Smith taught that our Heavenly Father invites us to
become whom we should and can become in relation to Him, to each other, and to
the universe in which He has placed us. We ought, then, to study what we can of
Him, of each other, and of our world and universe. Doing so in the formal and
relatively demanding setting of college is not the only way to progress, of
course. Family, the Church, and the privately bended knee exist for a
purpose. But higher education can be an enormous boost if its resources
are rightly engaged.

In the university we may find ourselves uncomfortable with
some or another new truth we encounter—as do many children when
they discover how humans come into the world, when they confront the nature of
Santa Claus, or when they glimpse the reality of suffering and death. But such
truths do not embarrass the Lord of Truth. We are threatened by them only in
relation to our own understandings, which are subject to change, correction,
and growth. Dedication to reality (and the perpetual, faithful, and critical
exploration and amendment of our internal maps of reality) is basic to mental
and spiritual health and growth. To avoid the work, pain, challenge, and
adjustment demanded by this process tends to result in damnation (the blocking
of spiritual and mental progress) or emotional, spiritual, and mental illness
(which, as imperfect people, we have all tasted at least in mild forms). Our
perceptions and capacities should evolve in a great upward spiral. There is no
truth one will encounter at the university that is unknown to God. What, then,
shall we fear? Adult naiveté is not generally a virtue. The scriptural mandate
(Matthew 10:16) is that we “be wise as serpents, and harmless as
doves”—not harmless as doves and just as dumb.

One difficulty with this quest for truth is that what we
mean by “truth” and how we obtain it is not always obvious or uncontested.
While we should try to shed our defensiveness and remain open to new truth and
growth through experience, study, and prayer, it helps also to remember that
“truth,” like “knowledge,” is always partial, always situated in a context
informed by competing values, always presented in one of many possible
frameworks of interpretation. This is readily apparent in the study of politics,
religion, history, or philosophy. In some respects it is true even of
scientifically established knowledge, as academic debate in recent decades has
made more evident. An impressive comparative objectivity exists in the
sciences, but humans seeking knowledge are not objects. Despite the welcome
advances in scientific method and results in recent centuries, values and
contests are at work in the fabric of the enterprise, even in the types of
questions that are shaped and followed. No human knowledge is pursued
without context. This is not the place for a technical discussion of such
issues, which can be explored on any college campus. It is, though, an
invitation to consider the relation of “truth” and “goodness”; failure to do so
in the academy can seduce rather than bless us.

One of history’s great writers, Fyodor Dostoevsky, implied a
provocative understanding of this relation in a private 1858 letter to a
friend, Mme. Natalya Fonvizina. Writing about his faith from an agonized exile
in Siberia, where he experienced cruelty and evil and witnessed much death,
Dostoevsky wrote that “if someone proved to me that Christ were outside the
truth, and in reality the truth were outside of Christ, then I should prefer to
remain with Christ rather than with the truth.”2
At first hearing, that statement may disappoint; it seems an act of cowardice,
an instance of Freud’s assertion that all religion is
wish-fulfillment. Scrutiny of Dostoevsky’s life, character, and mind,
however, make such an assumption problematic. This genius, who could have
avoided Siberia by surrendering his conscience, was no coward.

While we must include truth among our deepest values, its
pursuit in the abstract must exist in relation to an even more
pressing—and unavoidable—concern: How shall I
live in this moment, this day? What I think Dostoevsky was getting at was this:
there is a point at which it is not merely “truth” that defines all other
reality, ethics, and wisdom. Instead, there is a point at which something even
more fundamental brings “truth” into being, gives it its nature and meaning.
For Dostoevsky, that “something” was Christ—what Christ
represented and embodied. Irrespective of people’s historical, metaphysical,
and ontological claims and perceptions about Christ, the quality or character
of what Christ existentially was, as Dostoevsky experienced him, gave meaning
to what was “good,” “true,” and “beautiful.” In the realms of values, quality
of soul, the making of meaning, and how to place oneself in the world, this
“quality” defined “truth,” rather than the other way around. I believe, said
Dostoevsky, that “nothing is more beautiful, profound, sympathetic, reasonable,
[courageous], and more perfect than Christ; and I tell myself with a jealous
love not only that there is nothing, but that there cannot be anything higher.”3
For Dostoevsky, Christ is truer than “truth,” not in the sense of some
metaphysical or doctrinal fact, but because “truth” gains its meaning in
relation to the quality of being that was Christ as experienced in Dostoevsky’s
spiritual life.

All this could, of course, involve us in a complex
conversation. For a full, persuasive, and enjoyable exploration of the idea
that “quality” defines “truth” even apart from religious contexts, I invite you
to examine or reexamine Robert Pirsig’s classic novel, Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance.
A related and briefer thrust, however, is offered by Moroni as he brings to a
close the records we call the Book of Mormon. Immediately following his famous
exhortation to future readers to pray concerning the truth of the records in
his custody (Moroni 10:4), the prophet seems virtually to equate the quality of
goodness with the concept of truth: “And whatsoever thing is good is just and
true” (Moroni 10:6). As with Dostoevsky, this has nothing to do with “lying for
a good cause,” any more than does trying to represent a
three-dimensional object by a two-dimensional drawing. That
which is genuinely good . . . is true.

Let us be unafraid of truth, but let us also distinguish
truth from mere fact. Let us think carefully about alleged implications of both
truth and fact. And let us tether our quest for “truth” to the quest for
“good.” The one will help disclose the other.

### 2. Do not disparage the intellect.

We Latter-day Saints hold spiritual matters as
precious. We believe in inspiration and revelation. Of course, these realities,
like any good thing, can be abused. And the realities have counterfeits. Even
authentic inspiration has to be received by human beings, and everything
filtered through human beings has limitations. In our stage of things, as Paul
observed, “we know in part, and we prophesy in part.” In a future realm, he
says, “when that which is perfect is come,” it will not be so. “For now we see
through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then
shall I know even as also I am known” (1 Corinthians 13: 9, 10, 12).
Latter-day Saints remain unashamed and grateful, nonetheless, to
believe there is such a thing as authentic contact with the divine. As a people
and in many cases as individuals, we believe we have experienced this
contact.

Unfortunately, because of such blessings and loyalties and
the consciousness they spawn, we sometimes make the mistake of trying to
elevate the spiritual by denigrating the intellect. Indeed, the word
“intellectual” seems to carry a largely negative connotation in popular LDS
discourse. Perhaps, however, we confuse “intellect” or “intellectual” with
other difficulties.

Several problems attach to this confusion. I will mention
three. First, our own scriptures instruct us that “to be learned is good if
[we] hearken unto the counsels of God” (2 Nephi 9:29). Some learned people fail
to heed God, of course, just as some unlearned people fail to heed God. The
problem, however, is not in learning itself, but in growing spiritually inert
while learning, or in selective laziness. Perhaps it lies in insufficient
wisdom. Often its roots are nourished by pride (2 Nephi 9:28).

All manner of things—including beauty, wealth, talent,
reputation, power, and authority—can, if our response to them goes awry,
sponsor pride. As the Prophet Joseph said, “We have learned by sad experience
that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a
little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise
unrighteous dominion” (D&C 121:39). The problem, though, rests not in
authority as such, nor in beauty, wealth, talent, learning, or a keen
intelligence, but in a misunderstanding and distortion of their nature, limits,
source, and proper ends. Although beauty can lead one astray, a handsome young
man or woman does not draw inherently closer to God by seeking to become
unattractive. We must be wary of vanity, but we ought not confuse vanity with
beauty. Just so, a good mind by nature aspires to become a better
mind—and college can help. This remains true despite the fact
that one can go astray by mutating into an intellectual peacock rather than
flourishing as a wise, humble, and knowledgeable servant of God and
humanity.

Another problem with disparaging the intellect is that we
are, in our essential natures, intellects (intelligences) fully as much as we
are spirits. According to the Prophet Joseph, our Father in Heaven also is an
intelligence—more intelligent than all the intelligences that
were organized by Him before this world was created. Joseph taught that
intelligence cleaves unto intelligence, that it cannot be created or destroyed
but only organized and developed, that it constitutes the glory of God, that
whatever principle of intelligence we gain in this life will rise with us in
the hereafter (D&C 88:40; 93:29, 36; 130:18; Abraham 3). To disparage the
intellect or intellectuals (those who are intellectually accomplished or who
have high regard for the intellect) is to show contempt for our own natures,
created in the image of God, and to disparage those who have most fully
developed themselves in this regard as God commands. To attack the intellect
constitutes an indirect form of blasphemy. Intellectual progress is an
essential dimension of eternal progress. The mandate upon us is to love the
Lord with all our heart, soul, mind,
and strength (Mark 12:30). Intellectual sloth is no more admirable than any
other kind.

A third motive for honoring rather than demeaning the
intellect is that the spirit and the mind are entwined. One may suffer from
spiritual insensitivity, just as one may fail to develop one’s mind, but where
both mind and spirit are robust, they are inseparable. Study, pondering, and
prayer are linked, and frequently so in the scriptures. Joseph taught that his
revelatory experiences often consisted of receiving “sudden strokes of ideas”
from the Spirit and that the “Holy Ghost has no other effect than pure
intelligence.”4
If one is spiritually healthy, one is mentally healthy. If one is mentally ill
(disregarding its physiological components), one is spiritually ill. “Let us,”
as President McKay urged, “seek to live intellectually.”5

### 3. ‑Understand that reason is not 
the only avenue to truth.

Because
the academy specializes in, excels at, and rewards the important realm of
rational thought, it can intentionally or inadvertently foster the illusion
that this is the only source of enlightenment. While we must seek truth,
however, it is a mistake—an intellectual as well as a spiritual
mistake—to misunderstand human reason (much less formal Western
logic, empiricism, and science) as the sole avenue to truth. “Life, divided by
reason, leaves a remainder,”6 as
the German writer Goethe observed.

One cannot think too well. Yet one can think too much, as
does an athlete or singer who, under pressure, remains too deliberate, too
conscious, too rational, failing to release their bodies and unconscious selves
to other kinds of knowing. One cannot in general know too much, but one can
confuse knowledge with wisdom and fact with understanding. One cannot reason
too keenly, but one can by injudicious and relentless abstraction deter the
Spirit, obscure intuition, stifle imagination, and unhinge the heart. One can
persuade in debate while failing to discern deeper realities. One can be an
impressive lawyer and a poor judge, a dazzling scholar and an inept lover. One
can, as the scripture says, be “ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth” (2 Timothy 3:7).

That rational calculation is neither the sole nor sufficient
path to the kind of truth required for successful living is evident in everyday
experience. We do not learn to swim or to ride a bike without gaining a feel
for the task—a “feel” that transcends reason. We do not produce
art worthy of the name through mere rationality. We do not experience faith and
the “knowing” of friendship and love merely through scientific experiment and
empirical scrutiny. Our physical senses are not our only senses. No one has
ever seen a feeling; no one has seen a thought. Yet our feelings and thoughts
are where we fundamentally live.7 Instincts, intuitions, and
promptings of the Spirit are in a similar category. These invisible realities
are not to be dismissed merely because science is not prepared to deal with
them. Reason absorbs no dishonor by a recognition of its limits, and belief in
inspiration need not be an embarrassment on campus.

If our radar is fully functional, we can experience
inspiration directly, thus requiring no exterior proof of its dimensions. When
I was in college, I began to pay close attention to “ordinary, everyday life”
as not so ordinary, as full of clues about how I should live most meaningfully.
In that state of mind, the following incident left an impression. It is not its
drama but rather its apparent simplicity that captured my attention, for it
helped me see that inspiration could work through the ordinary course of
everyday living. One Sunday morning, my roommate and lifelong close friend, who
was also the man to whom I served as counselor in the elders quorum presidency,
unexpectedly stood in the middle of a quorum meeting, in our college ward, to
speak. I was seated next to him. As he rose, he leaned toward me, shook his
head, and whispered under his breath, “I don’t know why I’m doing this.” He
then proceeded to ask the quorum if there was an “Adult Aaronic” brother
present who would like to participate in an ordinance we were about to perform.
A young man about our age, near the back of the room, promptly stood and came
forward. For some reason he had been waiting that morning for just such an
invitation—something that would suggest that the Lord was aware
of him and would encourage his impulse to come back to church and get involved.
I was subsequently assigned as a home teaching companion to this brother, whom
I came to know reasonably well. His life was turned in a new direction,
cultivated by the gentle bit of inspiration that came to my roommate.

I have no urge to use the story as proof for skeptics. This
is not the sort of thing that proves anything to anyone else, and the episode
could of course be assigned a naturalistic explanation. But as I witnessed and
participated in it, this gentle encounter with grace left an imprint. It
anticipated, for me, a pattern of later experiences which keep my spiritual
antenna up. I work as hard as I am able at disciplined, critical thought; I am
also satisfied through direct experience that we have access to resources
beyond the rational intellect. Unbelievers and believers alike can readily
access at least some forms of this through, for instance, dreams and other
manifestations of the unconscious mind. It is not at all uncommon for me to
wrestle with this or that problem, often under severe time
constraint—and then to awake in the night or morning with
solutions or ideas for approaches that my rational self was not successfully
addressing.

Other kinds of encounters also remind us of the limits of
rationality when accounting for things we can come to know. The celebrated
psychiatrist Scott Peck, before he submitted to a Christian baptism, wrote of
such an instance:

Having arrived after dark on a vacation in Singapore for the
first time, my wife and I left our hotel for a stroll. We soon came to a large
open space at the far end of which, two or three blocks away, we could just
make out in the darkness the vague shape of a sizable building. “I wonder what
that building is,” my wife said. I immediately answered with casual and total
certainty, “Oh, that’s the Singapore Cricket Club.” The words had popped out of
my mouth with utter spontaneity. Almost immediately I regretted them. I had no
basis whatever for saying them. I had not only never been in Singapore before,
I had never seen a cricket club before—in daylight, much less
in darkness. Yet to my amazement, as we walked on and came to the other side of
the building, which was its front, there by the entrance was a brass plaque
reading Singapore Cricket
Club.8

How did Peck know that which he could not know? He
implicitly rejects this explanation, but perhaps he had glimpsed a picture of
the place at some earlier point, had permanently forgotten doing so, while the
label of the building came unconsciously to mind at the moment he describes.
Perhaps it was an instance of what the French call déjà vu, or a matter of what the Hindus
understand as reincarnation. Maybe it was what we Latter-day Saints
would be comfortable calling a spiritual prompting—for some
purpose yet unknown to Peck. Peck’s own conjecture is that he may have been
affected by what psychiatrist Carl Jung called “the collective unconscious,” in
which we inherit the wisdom of the experience of our ancestors without
personally having had the experience. (Peck links this collective with God.) It
is not for me to declare the source or explanation of Peck’s experience. My
point is only that humans are not restricted to rational processes in their
authentic knowing, and that this is easy to forget when one is immersed in the
academy. There need be nothing embarrassing about the idea of revelation or
inspiration. A belief in inspiration, as part of nonrational knowing, is not a
silly notion.

Of course, one can use alleged
inspiration—or even the idea of
inspiration—illegitimately. One can indulge in superstition.
Or, in the teeth of a difficult intellectual challenge, one can repeatedly
assert one’s faith and reject the hard mental work required of growth in
understanding. While this may be appropriate in certain situations, since faith
can precede and outrank knowledge, the problem with resting permanently and
frequently in such unthoughtful confidence is that this is a common posture for
contradictory religious and secular purposes of all stripes, including those by
apparently sincere critics who bear “testimony” against The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints. What some people take as spiritual
promptings, indeed, sometimes seem to seasoned outsiders as perhaps projections
of inner hopes or fears. For example, a beautiful, earnest, and spiritually
sensitive young Latter-day Saint woman once confided to me, with
considerable confusion and unease, that she had had multiple suitors each
declare his assurance that the Lord had designated her as his eternal mate.
Beyond this, it is not difficult to point to episodes where people have
committed heinous acts justified by a sense of personal revelation. Ron and Dan
Lafferty’s gruesome 1984 murder of their sister-in-law, Brenda,
and her fifteen-month-old daughter, in the Utah town of American
Fork, is one such instance.

None of this negates the importance of legitimate faith born
of spiritual promptings. Receptivity of spirit, heart, and mind is at the core
of authentic living. But we do well to remember, especially in an academic
setting, that an informed and thoughtful faith is best sustained by a healthy
and balanced input for our faith, including checks and balances. What might
these checks and balances look like?

The Book of Mormon prophet Moroni offers a much-cited
promise: that “by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all
things” (Moroni 10:5). Just how the Holy Spirit will do this is not spelled out
by Moroni, nor is everything that may be required of some of us to receive and
sustain this blessing. The passage does indicate that we must read, ponder, and
ask of God with sincerity. Other scriptures suggest additional elements for
faith. Alma 32 proposes an “experiment,” with “the word” (in which one is to
have faith) sprouting as a nurtured seed whose goodness and life can take
organic root in, and thus become self-evident to, one’s heart, soul, and
understanding. In addition, we should carefully observe those who allege truth,
for “by their fruits ye shall know them” (Matthew 7:15–20). We should
participate in and thereby test such principles as are proclaimed to us (John
7:17: “If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it
be of God, or whether I speak of myself”). We must give away our sins. We must
yearn “to be called [God’s] people”; “to bear one another’s burdens”; “to mourn
with those that mourn,” “comfort those that stand in need of comfort,” and
“stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places”
(Mosiah 18:8–9). By these and other elements—prayer,
study, pondering, experiment, following the counsel of wise leaders,
repentance, observation, participation, and active service—we
may come to know the truth of all requisite things. Our growing faith will then
not remain a tissue of gossamer, vulnerable to the next intimidating professor,
book, acquaintance, or troubling discovery potentially around each corner.
Instead, a resilient and flexible fabric will comprise our faith, one that is
welcoming to growth and truth of all kinds.

### 4. ‑Realize that the Church has always consisted of human
beings—flawed and wondrous—who are trying to
respond to the divine with which they have been touched.

If you are authentically enmeshed in your work at college,
you are going to engage conceptual thickets. You are going to learn new ways of
thinking. Where your study impinges on faith and your understanding of reality,
you are going to encounter facts and alleged facts—or
interpretations and seeming implications of real or alleged facts and
events—that are new to you. Apparent or genuine problems may
surface directly or indirectly, from conversation and reading inside or outside
of the classroom. In some circumstances, you are apt to run into questions
directly involving The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints.

Such questions may range widely: What of the dark stain of
the massacre that occurred at Mountain Meadows in southern Utah in 1857? Does
the Church have a racist past or present? Did it not, and does it not, fully
respect the separation of church and state? Was not polygamy a licentious
affair, or at least an uneven and sexist one damaging to the lives of women,
children, and men? Does Latter-day Saint culture confuse authority
with authoritarianism? Is the Church not naive about modern methods of scriptural
study? Does it fully respect freedom and intellectual rigor? Is it honest in
its study of its past and in all its dealings? Is it authentically Christian?
What of past and present uses of the Church’s vast financial resources? Does
not the Book of Mormon show evidence of nineteenth-century
authorship? Do angels delivering gold plates and divine messages to a teenage
boy constitute a plausible basis for religious adherence? Why was I not told
this or that in Sunday School, seminary, or institute? Varieties of these and
additional questions may beset an earnest student.

Often enough such questions, posed by others, are informed
by ill-will or personal hang-ups rather than a desire to
understand; this should prompt in us love, faith, prayer, and patience more
than intellectual engagement. Sometimes the questioners are
ill-informed or conceptually ill-equipped; this should
invite a similar response of love and patience, as well as the gentle use of
better factual and conceptual information readily available to most Church
members. But there may be times at college where potentially more substantive
questions and problems arise, ones not easily dismissed. As always, this
requires love, faith, prayer, and patience, but it also may demand acquired knowledge
and wisdom. Such questions warrant real responses, not ones that avoid the
issues. Toward such circumstances as these, this book suggests an array of
constructive and faithful options.

The principle under immediate consideration is simple, but
crucial—and frequently not fathomed: to apprehend that the
Church on earth consists of human beings. Church leaders and Church members are
human beings, with all that that entails. They are human beings who are trying
to respond to revelation, to a call to something higher and better, to an
authority and a responsibility to foster eternal life, to comfort the sick and
the weary, to build faith, invite repentance, live healthily, turn the hearts of
the children to their forebears, build Zion, and promote love and mercy. This
is a sacred enterprise, one to be proud of. Those who serve and lead its cause
in diverse and complex contexts deserve our deep respect, our loyalty, our
readiness to serve, and our openness to counsel.

This vast and holy project also deserves our prayerful
thoughtfulness. To forget that it is humans (rather than flawless Saints of our
imagination) who are attempting to respond to this divine call risks a diluted
idolatry and makes for a brittle faith, subject to the next discovery of
historical, philosophical, or scientific difficulty. For the historical record
holds no shortage of human traits and failings, just as the records of ancient
Israel do. And we need honestly to study, be informed by, be inspired by, but
also be chastened by and generally to learn from this historical record. Not to
do so is to court amnesia, to detach our vision from its context, to see
falsely.

If we fully apprehend, however, that it is we humans who
comprise the Church, we will not be surprised by foibles, and we will not be
lured to a judgmental posture. If we apprehend our own humanity, we will be
better positioned to take weakness for granted and then to marvel at the
inspiration that touches the Church, at the immense resources for edification
and service and care that it constantly enacts. We ought not allow
imperfection to drive us away from a cause so great as Joseph Smith
envisioned.

If we are to be humble before the Lord, we as a people need
to be self-critical, forgiving, authentic, and eager to sense how we
can improve. We must study and learn from the past. All of us, from prophets to
the newest converts, are humans trying to respond to the divine with which we
have been touched. As one thoughtful Saint puts it: “The Church I believe in is
not an ascending hierarchy of the holy. It is millions of ordinary people
calling one another ‘brother’ and ‘sister’ and trying to make it true.”9

### 5. Know that character affects I.Q.

Joseph
Smith taught that “a man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge.”10 This is a striking doctrine, surprising to
other Christians. It connects with several commandments offered here,
especially the first two. By inverting the Prophet’s phrase, however, prominent
Latter-day Saint historian Richard Bushman once offered a complementary
truth: “A man gains knowledge no faster than he is saved.”11 Bushman was conversing with historians,
but I will borrow his phrase for my own purposes here. What I mean is this: Just as knowledge
affects character, character affects knowledge—and even
intelligence.

Knowledge affects our character at the most basic level.
Most people, for example, admire courage, kindness, and honesty. As
abstractions, who wouldn’t? Yet knowledge—what we believe we
know—colors what courage, kindness, and honesty actually mean
to us in practice. Two sets of parents are “loving” and “kind” in their
intentions. With contrasting “knowledge,” however, one set manifests this love
by readily giving their child everything the child demands. The result is a
spoiled child, retarded in development by indulgence masquerading as
“love”—a pseudo-love based on errant “knowledge.” Thus
knowledge conditions our character—who we
are—because it determines how we interpret what we experience
and thus, in part, how we respond to it.

A less obvious truth is that our character conditions what
we know. In fact, our character is a lens that filters our awareness as a
whole. Let me offer an example. When
I am grateful, I am smarter than when I am not grateful. It is not
simply that being grateful is a good thing because it is “nicer,” true as that
may be. It is also that my grateful mental state lets in a different view of
reality than is otherwise possible. Grateful
comes from the same verbal root as graceful.
When I am grate-ful, I am grace-full: full of grace; fully
aware of the “grace” or “giftedness” of each breath I take, the giftedness of
my life and your life and everything about us (Mosiah 2:20–21). And when
I am thus conscious of my life and the world as a gift, I am less preoccupied
with self. My attention focuses elsewhere. I am more alert to other people’s
needs and virtues. I find my wonder awakened by just about everything: the
engineering behind the physique of a cricket or a fly, for instance, or the
beauty in even a pebble. In other words, when I am grateful, I tend toward a
higher mental (and spiritual) state. I take things—people,
order, air, roundness, everything—less for granted. Hence I
notice things otherwise invisible to me. It is as if I have a sixth sense,
taking in more context, more reality. If my temporary taste of gratitude
becomes a disciplined habit, an ongoing attitude and state of mind, I am
“smarter,” more aware, than if this were not so. To the extent that I become a
habitually grateful person, I engage a different and richer reality than the
“me” who is less grateful.

Courage works similarly. Courage does not mean “fearless”;
many threats exist that we would be foolish not to fear. Courage, rather, is a response to fear, a
willingness to absorb and address fear. Unchecked fear paralyzes, constricting
my awareness as I shrink from real or perceived threats. Courage in the face of
my fears, by contrast, opens me to the world and extends the radar by which I
navigate reality. If the university presents me with new theories and knowledge
and paradigms that seem threatening to my map of reality, courage enables me to
think critically and imaginatively about this purported new knowledge. Striving
for this trait works better for me than assuming that I already possess all
necessary truth merely because I have a testimony. It works better than
adopting the heads-down posture of the ostrich—and
misconstruing this cowardice for faith.

Humility is another example. When you learn things in
college, humility may be undermined. You may be tempted to think you know more
than you know and that you are subtly better than those around you who have not
learned what you have.

It is practically always the case that we know less than we
think we do. However, if your knowledge actually does grow deep in some
particular specialty, such as medicine or history or literature, you may, in
Church settings, genuinely understand some problems, facts, and concepts that
are invisible to the faithful around you. With restraint, care, wisdom,
modesty, and love, you may be able at points to draw on some of this
understanding constructively to enliven your own mind and spirit or the minds
and spirits of those about you. You may be tempted to think yourself superior
when in conversation, Church classes, and worship, as academics and others are
sometimes tempted to do whenever they engage in subjects in which they have
training. Remember that God’s project entails an invitation to the divine,
which leaves little room for preening, artifice, self-promotion,
inert or arrogant intellectualism, or one-upsmanship. Understand that
you are always surrounded by people, even when they appear simple, who are
better at some things than you are—often without conceit. Some
of them are expert at fixing the engine of your car, at removing your tonsils,
at growing or preparing food, at making music; in none of their superiorities
is aloofness or condescension appealing, admirable, or helpful. Many Saints
with whom you attend church or among whom you live are expert at disciplined,
courageous, intelligent (or innocent) loving, which generally matters more than
whatever academic perspectives you bring. Moreover, as with a lack of
gratitude, conceit is not merely off-putting; it actually constricts
your consciousness—inhibits your radar for learning surprising
things from surprising sources. So it is that the quality of our characters and
souls helps define the caliber of our minds. Such traits as humility, courage,
and gratitude make us smarter and wiser. That is a good thing in college, as in
life.

### 6. ‑Claim a wise mentor and good conversation partners.

If you are studying seriously
and considering the things that matter most, you will generate questions and
challenges to your understanding. If you do not, you are not growing. Questions
are not cause for alarm. Issues exist whether or not we discover them, and an
authentic grapple with them is one avenue toward growth. No matter how bright,
well-grounded, independent, and faithful you deem yourself, however,
you would do well to be in ongoing conversation with thoughtful and
wise conversation partners who are encountering or who have encountered similar
issues. It is easy to get lost in complex terrain, and sometimes we get lost
without knowing it.

The give and take of verbalized exploration can give better
form to vague concerns and can yield concrete questions to address, as well as
provide specific ideas about how to approach them and who might be able to help
you. Cultivate, share, and exchange with at least one or two
friends—make new friends as needed—who are
working in the realms you are. Such people do exist, even if finding them takes
imaginative effort.

Above all, in the midst of your learning and stretching and
questioning, find a mentor whose mind, character, and spirituality you
thoroughly trust. Ask around. The mentor should be one with whom you can grow
comfortable posing any
question and sharing any anxiety. Much faith is unnecessarily undermined
because candor is aborted for fear of disapproval. At least one such mentor
should be a Latter-day Saint who is knowledgeable about areas that
concern you and who has succeeded in relating his or her field to a
constructive, deep, and honest faith. This does not necessarily mean, of
course, that your ultimate answers will at last align wholly with those of your
mentors. But God deserves a faith and a devotion from you that is schooled by
the best thinking and best examples we have to offer. Even if your questions
are about God, you yourself deserve the best thinking and counsel. Although it
may surprise you, few of your questions concerning the great issues will be
new. This means there are always mentors and conversation partners to be found,
including those who have left record from years and ages past.

### 7. ‑Do not forsake the wisdom of the thirteenth Article of
Faith.

When I went to Cambridge, far from my Utah home, to study
religious history in graduate school, I grew more conscious of a fact that
should have dawned on me earlier. I found myself surrounded by people (from
history and in the present) who seemed inspiringly good, astoundingly
bright, and who often were more informed and experienced in the world than I.
Yet these people were happily committed to religious traditions apart from my
LDS faith.

In some ways I was pleased and
fascinated—drenched in opportunity for learning and exhilarated
by edifying diversity. Yet some part of me also found this unsettling. How was
it that I belonged to “the one true church” and yet lived, studied, and worked among
people who had so much to teach me, people whose spiritual, moral, mental, and
social inferiority I could less and less discern? I know that many students,
Latter-day Saints and others, similarly encounter in college a world
of learning that introduces them both to difficulties among their own people,
ideas, and history, as well as to ennobling dimensions of lives and notions
toward which they had earlier condescended or remained oblivious.

Humbled by my encounter in Cambridge, I grew quickly more sensitive
to parts of the scriptures and the gospel I had earlier ignored. I continued to
sense the divine within passages of modern scripture that moved me. I remained
grateful for the marvelous work and wonder, the light and love and service and
faith that unfold through the mechanism of the Church. I could still appreciate
Joseph Smith’s vision of Zion and the religious confusion and hypocrisy that he
experienced at the time of his initial vision. What I could no longer do was to
prop up my perspectives with caricatures of people and traditions of which I
had been so ignorant.

I discovered and rediscovered, indeed, that a cluster of
prophets forbade my chauvinism. Both experience and scripture taught me that we
Saints, in possession of treasured and distinctive truths, have no monopoly on
truth itself. God is God to all of His children, as the Book of Mormon insists.
Through Nephi, for example, the Lord condemns a self-satisfied
attitude too constricted to value God’s word wherever it takes form. “Know ye
not that there are more nations than one?” He asks.

Know ye not that I, the Lord your God, have created all men, and
that I remember those who are upon the isles of the sea; and that I rule in the
heavens above and in the earth beneath; and I bring forth my word unto the
children of men, yea, even upon all the nations of the earth? . . . I command
all men, both in the east and in the west, and in the north, and in the south,
and in the islands of the sea, that they shall write the words which I speak. .
. . I shall speak unto the Jews . . . and I shall also speak unto the Nephites
. . . and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of Israel . . .
and I shall also speak unto all nations of the earth (2 Nephi 29:7, 11–12).

Alma similarly decries religious conceit:

Now the place was called by [the Zoramites] Rameumptom,
which, being interpreted, is the holy stand. Now, from this stand they did
offer up, every man, the self-same prayer. . . . We thank thee, O
God, for we are a chosen people unto thee, while others shall perish (Alma
31:21–22, 28).

Standing against this narcissistic Zoramite arrogance, I
love this declaration by the Prophet Joseph, who adapted the language of Paul
while couching what we now call the thirteenth Article of Faith: “If there is
anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after
these things.” Later prophets elaborated similar themes: that which is good,
virtuous, noble, and beautiful is to be sought out. Rather than being a threat
to gospel truth, such things are to be embraced as a part of our religion,
whatever their immediate source.

We have much to share with the world; we have much to take
from the world and its people of diverse persuasions. Who can fail to be
inspired by a Gandhi or a Galileo, a Mother Teresa, a Martin Luther King, an
Einstein? To see and be edified by truth and nobility within and outside our
Latter-day Saint tradition is not an erosion of faith. It is humility
before the Lord of all creation.

### 8. ‑Serve, pray, and remain active in the Church while you study and
search.

Some
years ago a widely-regarded historian, David Brion Davis, reviewed
for an academic journal a landmark in scholarship: the three-volume Encyclopedia of
the American Religious Experience. Davis praised the overall accomplishment, the
most formidable summary of American religious scholarship to date. He was
vexed, however, that believers among the scholars who had written the work had
cloaked their own religiosity. Most contributors had so thoroughly distanced
themselves from partisanship that religion, in their rendition, seemed either
colorfully eccentric or inert and cold. Davis could scarcely trace among the
authors much sense of the sacred, of spirituality, of the mystery of life and
being. Given this rift between the one hundred contributing scholars and the
subject they so coolly analyzed, the reviewer contemplated the Encyclopedia’s most likely readers:
religious people. A startling analogy then took shape as an image in Davis’s
mind: the specter of “countless numbers of married couples consulting one
hundred celibate monks and nuns for their wisdom on the American sexual experience.”12

An equally silly image emerges when I picture times in my
life when I have fancied myself intellectually clever and have been critical of
something in the Church—while failing to magnify my
calling, failing to take the practical and tangible steps to transcend the
trivial, the routine, or the errant, failing to transform what seemed busywork
or wrongheaded conceptions into the fostering of Zion and assisting as I
can “to bring to pass the . . . eternal life of man” (Moses 1:39). My failure,
I now recognize, was a failure of my own imagination and dedication. Such a
failure, if sustained, is a recipe for losing one’s sense of proportion, losing
one’s way, losing generosity, losing the Spirit.

I suggested earlier that it is impossible to think too well.
I reiterate that it is, nonetheless, possible to deliberate too much. It is
similarly possible to think too abstractly, or at least disproportionately
abstractly, with too little hands-on involvement and “gut feeling”
for one’s subject. When the subject under scrutiny is my very self and faith
and life, it is crucial that I complement my abstract thought and my book
learning with active loving and giving to my brothers and sisters, and also with
prayer, wherein my deepest yearnings reach out to the Lord. Short of this, I
literally “lose touch.” I need to experience in my cells a kind of “body
knowing” and, in my heart and mind and soul, a “spirit knowing” that derives
naturally from doing,
from active participation and giving. Short of this, my rejection of faith or
activity in the Church will be a rejection of something I have either forgotten
or have never known in the scriptural sense of the term. To the ancient
Hebrews, the word we commonly translate as “know” in the English Bible entailed
more than “to comprehend.” It meant “to experience.”

When one is authentically blessing other lives through
teaching the Beehives or Scouts or some other form of service, one needs little
exterior verification that this is good and true. The verification is direct,
intrinsic to the activity; one feels, experiences, and lives the truth. If I am
ineffectual as a home teacher to those who will at least receive me, if the
experience collapses to a form of role playing, it is apt to be me who is in
part at fault, unable to create a bridge to friendship. If I do not trivialize
but, instead, magnify my calling, I “taste,” “feel,” and “know” the truth by
direct intuition and experience. If I find myself struggling in a calling that
does not induce this spiritual awareness, conviction, and satisfaction, it may
be that I should discuss things with my bishop so that I can serve in ways to
which I am genuinely committed. There have been times when I have struggled
with how to relate to routinized public prayer, socially scripted class
discussions, unrestful and meeting-laden Sabbaths, and assumptions of
those about me that I did not share. In the long run I have found that if I
look inward and prayerfully renew my efforts, I can see that my lack of faith
and spiritual satisfaction in my calling is apt to be at least in part a
product of my own laziness, lack of imagination in making things relevant, or
poorly arranged priorities. School is a good place to explore questions; my
ward is a good place to practice mercy, humility, spiritual
self-scrutiny, and service.

To analyze and critique other people—their
lives, their practices, their beliefs and institutions—is a
fairly easy exercise. Anyone can do it of almost anyone and anything. To do so
seems much easier if one remains remote, free of a genuine and participating
feel for the life-pulse of the people and all their struggles and the
amazing workshop for love that constitutes the Church. The problem
is—if one’s goal is an active faith rather than an academic
exercise—analyzing from afar is like a tone-deaf
instructor teaching me to sing or like a coach, who has not played the game
successfully himself, who yet confidently and urgently berates his team to
better play and conquer. There is something missing here, namely a “feel” for
that which is distinct from and more than a merely intellectual knowledge.

Along with your acquisition of the important knowledge that
derives from books and thought and abstraction, it is essential that you not
surrender this other, more basic kind of knowing, this feel for the ongoing
life of faith. To lose this feel is automatically to distort. Be with people;
serve them; join the institute of religion; keep physically active; stay alive—not
merely bookish. “If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself” (John 7:17).

### 9. ‑Think of boredom as a sin; cultivate an attitude of faithful
inquiry.

Speaking through the Prophet Joseph Smith, and explicitly
refusing to distinguish much between “sacred” and “temporal” commandments, the
Lord challenged His people into an education:

Teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom. Teach ye
diligently and my grace shall attend you, that you may be instructed more
perfectly in theory, in principle, in doctrine, in the law of the gospel, in
all things that pertain unto the kingdom of God, that are expedient for you to
understand.

He then laid out the breathtaking scope of the things “that
pertain unto the kingdom” and “are expedient for [us] to understand”:

Of things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth;
things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to
pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and the
perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a
knowledge also of countries and of kingdoms—That ye may be
prepared in all things when I shall send you again 
to magnify the calling whereunto I have called you, and 
the mission with which I have commissioned you (D&C 88:77–80).

If we are to be prepared to serve the Lord in the world at
our highest capacity, we have our work in learning cut out for us!

In light of that injunction, one can imagine that, in the
modern world, a formal college education might help to equip us. What obstacles
to such an education present themselves? Insufficient funds?
Ill-equipped teachers? The inaccessibility of a good college or
university? In our affluent society, these are not insurmountable problems. A
more common barrier is internal: laziness, a lack of passion, and a premature
lust for practical security. Often the problem is, in fact, a form of overt or
disguised boredom. We are “not interested” in this topic; we do not like that
teacher; “I don’t see how I will ever use this.”

It is a spiritual and intellectual mistake to be bored. Like
everyone else, I have encountered what I thought was a dull book, an
uninspiring teacher, a tedious task. But I cannot recall the last time I was
bored. This is a relief because boredom is a failure of imagination, a passive
indulgence in self-pity, an abdication of responsibility, a
willingness to let our development and experience depend on happenstance, such
as the personality of a teacher. I am tempted even to construe boredom as a
sin, because it is a kind of blockage: a damming (or damning) of what should be
eternal progress in probing, learning, service, and growth. This harsh judgment
may not apply to all peoples in all conditions, for life under political
oppression or material deprivation can be onerous. But it may be true for a
person so privileged as to be in college in a country where freedom of
expression is a constitutional right.

Two principles have essentially dissolved for me the
experience of boredom. The first is to recognize that while there are boring
approaches to subjects, practically no subject is intrinsically boring. If the
teacher is failing, I may need to bring some creative extra work to the task.
The second principle is that if I feel trapped in circumstances that threaten
to bore—if I am bagging potatoes on a production line, for
instance, as I did each morning before my classes in high school—I
have an entire universe to contemplate and people all around me about whom I
might imagine ways to help. That is, my interior life need not remain hostage
to my physical surroundings. I am not wholly responsible for encountering
boring circumstances; I am
accountable for my response to them. Even the very concept of “boredom” is
interesting to work through when necessary, as is the attempt to understand and
love any person or subject that strikes me as bored or boring.

Never did it occur to me while in college to study such a
subject as geography; this evidently seemed too obviously tiresome and
irrelevant to consider. I now see, however, that it is not geography that was
by nature boring. Instead, the “boringness” was in me: in my ignorance, in my
presumption, in my lack of initiative even to explore why such a field had come
into being. By contrast, I now see that competing understandings of “space” and
“place” condition our consciousness. In the realm of religion, for instance
(let alone politics, law, history, art, and many other domains), geography
controls much. One does not understand the Bible without grasping the
covenantal foundation of the promised land. One does not know Islam without
meditation on the role of pilgrimage to sacred ground or of facing Mecca five
times each day in prayer. One does not know Christian history without wrestling
with the geographical basis for Eastern Orthodoxy and Roman (Western)
Catholicism, nor Hinduism nor Judaism without grappling with the richness of
zones of meaning in and of cities like Benares or Jerusalem. Traditional Native
American religion would unravel entirely apart from its understanding of the
land. Latter-day Saint history would be a different thing were it not
for the nineteenth-century geographical commandment to “gather,” the
sacred space of the temple, the Church’s Utah homeland, its original American
context, and its shifting international consciousness. The Book of Mormon
itself is in one sense an edited tract arguing the Lord’s intent for America.
Within the religions of the world, “chosen people, promised lands, sanctified
cities, sacred rivers, taboo forests, holy mountains, hallowed
directions—all suggest an intricate mesh of religion and
‘interpreted space.’”13 This sort of surprising importance for what
many presume to be a dull and secondary discipline applies, as I keep learning,
to every field I encounter.

A fundamental culprit allowing boredom to squelch our
incentive may be a stunted sense of curiosity. If one’s curiosity is
sufficiently healthy and passionate, I fancy that one can overcome even fear:
the fear of hard work, of looking foolish, of self-exploration, of
change. When in my classes I encounter a person whose dwarfed curiosity fails
them, someone who has come to my classroom for some reason other than an
education, I observe them and wonder, “How did this happen to you?” After all,
curiosity is native to children; it is prominent before they can walk or
talk.

When I was very young, I often found myself “lost” in the
color—the “orangeness”—of even a Wheaties box that faced
me at the breakfast table, let alone the more compelling colors of nature or
the more common experience of losing myself in the odd feel and appearance of
tree bark, or in the fact that grass seemed to grow “up” instead of sideways,
or in the peculiar beauty I discovered in the human face. That there could be such a thing as
orangeness (or texture or direction or beauty) astonished and delighted
me.

Perhaps the process of anesthetizing this
God-given curiosity involves something basic. For instance, I recall
taking my nephew David, age one, out for walks in the forest that lay behind
our family home in Utah. Together we took pleasure in implausible wonders:
November air crisp as an apple; red ants and black ants resolving some dispute
that was no doubt the result of ethnic prejudice; three distinct trees somehow
grown together as one; blue-brown beetles visually more formidable,
up close, than any dinosaur. As we walked, we named. I would say “robin” or
“lily” or “dirt”; David would approximate the sound. I cheered and
hugged—David was reinforced. He learned language.

But in time I noticed a change. The focal point of his
attention, fostered by my cheering, subtly shifted from the bird itself or the flight of the
bird to David’s
own ability to attach conventional sounds to the bird—to name
it. Now acquiring language seems to me a good idea, but in the process of
becoming himself in this way, David
diluted—distorted?—another part of himself: his
unvarnished sense of relation with the world. Over time, alas, we may come to
care less about experiencing and understanding the universe and more about
getting A’s in school.

What forces like this constrict our curiosity?
Socialization? Pain? False confidence? Punishment, arrogance, stupidity,
routine, resentment, insecurity, comfort, bad teachers, cheap distractions,
lack of nurture, hormones? Who-knows-what? As for my own children
and my own students, I hope everything in the universe seems partly strange,
bulging with events, dynamics, people, and phenomena that beg exploration. The
Lord has placed us in a peculiar, fascinating world. Whatever else college
teaches us, it ought to teach us disciplined wonder. And disciplined wonder is
fostered through asking questions.

In the realm of faith and the Church, fundamental questions
can be misconstrued as a disloyal act. Of course, questions can indeed be
wrongheaded if laced with cynicism, anger, or conceit. And there is a time and
a place for different types of questions, and that place is not always in
church meetings. However, it is an error to militate against authentic and
probing inquiry as such—a truth suggested by the ancient story
of Job, which is rich and layered with meaning and truths that transcend its
simple plot. The Lord does not chastise Job for asking authentic questions, but
for pressing accusations against God in the guise of rhetorical questions.
For this the Lord puts Job in his place—for four long chapters
(Job 38–41). Yet in the end God esteems Job above his friends, even
though, on the surface, the friends’ words seem pious and faithful. These
friends defend God’s justice but ask no questions of God or of themselves. Rather than inquire, they pronounce.
In smug self-righteousness they are sure—and they are
wrong—that they know God’s ways and intent. “The Lord said to
Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two
friends: for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my [now
repentant] servant Job hath” (Job 42:7).

In the academy, one will grapple with a more complex,
problematic, and suffering world than one was aware of without the experience.
Neither Job’s angry accusations against God nor the dubious certainty of Job’s
friends are apt to serve Latter-day Saints well on campus. Nor, as we
have already suggested, is the morally detached perspective of science
sufficient. The fundamental attitude I recommend for a Saint in the academy is
one of “faithful inquiry.” “Faithful” ought not to be confused with zeal or
with mere intellectual belief. “Inquiry” must be earnest, persistent, and
humble. Both aspects of the admonition to “faithful inquiry” should be informed by others of our
“ten commandments.” The resulting orientation may have something in common with
what the medieval writer Anselm meant when he described his intellectual quest
as “faith seeking understanding.”14

### 10. Remember the point.

President Gordon B. Hinckley has correctly noted, when
speaking to the young people of the Church, that we

are moving into the most competitive age
the world has ever known. All around you is competition. You need all the education
you can get. Sacrifice a car; sacrifice anything that is needed to be
sacrificed to qualify yourselves to do the work of the world. That world will
in large measure pay you what it thinks you are worth, and your worth will
increase as you gain education and proficiency in your chosen field.15

Becoming professionally competitive is one important reason
for entering college, and it is not one that tends to be lost on students and
on the families that support them.

A contributing element to this practical success that
college tends to promote is also an element with far wider applications and
implications than being a good provider to self and family. Proper
training at a good college develops critical thought, clear expression, the art
of discovering and weighing evidence, a hunger for knowledge, and the ability
to solve problems. These are skills that help in almost any profession, and
they are skills that come into play in one’s life as a whole.

If your education has been successful, then it has just
begun. Because of it, you will better have learned how to learn. You will think
differently than before you entered college. You will better distinguish the
permanent from the transient. You will see things differently, in new and wider
contexts, and you will see issues, dynamics, and relations that formerly were
invisible. When you see differently in these respects, you judge and respond
differently; you become a different person than you otherwise would be. When
you achieve an authentic liberal education, you are better equipped to function
as a free and responsible citizen, in negotiation with the world, with enhanced
angles of vision, theory, and context for weighing not only good and evil, but
good and bad quality generally.

The personal stakes in this educational enterprise thus are
high. They are high for you, they are high for those who may come under your
influence, and they are high for the Lord who loves you.

Conclusion

These,
then, are ten commandments—ten words of counsel for balancing
the life of the mind and the spirit in an academic setting. As noted earlier,
one should not invest too seriously in the number ten; other principles warrant
attention, including social ones. But these at present serve as my “top ten”
suggestions for those students to whom serious questions arise in the course of
their studies. If we will honestly seek truth and appreciate its relation to
goodness and “quality”; respect the intellect; know the limits of reason, the
situated nature of all knowledge, and the reality of the Spirit and other
supra-rational ways of knowing; remember that the Church on earth
consists of humans who are imperfectly trying to respond to the divine; understand
that our character affects how smart we are and filters what we can know; find
a wise and faithful mentor and good conversation partners; embrace truth and
virtue from whatever source; remain active in prayer, service, and the Church
while magnifying our callings and experiencing directly the goodness and
fulfillment this brings; cultivate an attitude of faithful inquiry; and
remember that the point of college eclipses professional
preparation—then the hard work of education may promote spiritual
as well as mental growth. Reality and opportunity are apt never to look quite
the same and quite as small as they did before. The adventure of college may
become, in the end, a cause of celebration.

Notes

 1. Socrates’s phrase recorded in Plato, Apology 38a, in Plato in Twelve Volumes, vol.
1, translated by Harold North Fowler (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1966).

 2. New York Times Review of Books,
January 1, 1984, 33.

 3. Ibid.

 4. Joseph
Smith, History of The Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City:
Deseret Book, 1967), 3:380, 381.

 5. David
O. McKay, in Conference Report, October 1920, 42.

 6. A
paraphrase of an insight Goethe’s fictive narrator proffers in book iv, chapter XVIII, stanza 5, of Wilhelm Meister’s Apprenticeship
(New York: The Harvard Classics Shelf of Fiction, 1917), 274.

 7. See
Houston Smith, The Soul of
Christianity (San Francisco: Harper/San Francisco, 2005).

 8. M.
Scott Peck, The Road Less
Traveled: A New Psychology of Love, Traditional Values, and Spiritual Growth
(New York: Touchstone, 1980), 251–52.

 9. Laurel
Thatcher Ulrich, “Lusterware,” in Philip Barlow, ed., A Thoughtful Faith (Centerville, UT:
Cannon Press, 1986), 200; originally published in Exponent II (Spring 1985). 

10.  Joseph
Smith, History of The Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, edited by B. H. Roberts, 7
vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1902), 4:588. The core thought is
expressed variously by several scribes who recorded Joseph Smith’s King Follett
sermon.

11.  Richard
Bushman, “Faithful History,” Dialogue:
A Journal of Mormon Thought, 4, no. 4 (Winter 1969): 25.

12.  David
Brion Davis, “Review Essay,” Religion
and American Culture 1 (Winter 1991): 119–27.

13.  Edwin
Gaustad and Philip Barlow, New
Historical Atlas of Religion in America (New York: Oxford, 2002),
xxi. 

14.  “Faith
Seeking Understanding” was the original title of Anselm’s famous Proslogion.

15.  Gordon
B. Hinckley, “A Prophet’s Counsel and Prayer for Youth,” New Era, January 2001,
8.

 
 
© 2007 The Perpetual Education Fund, Inc 

Printed from Gospelink.com
