# On the Strength of Learning by Faith

### On the Strength of 
Learning by Faith
David Read, Jacob Werrett, A Twenty-Something's Guide to Spirituality (Salt Lake City 2007)
 
 

On the Strength of 
Learning by Faith

Eric Sorte

Master of Physics, Columbia University

Question:

As
a student of science and a rationalist, religion has always posed a
philosophical dilemma for me. I deeply fear becoming a moral
hypocrite—on the outside, telling people that I possess the
ultimate truth and urging them to follow on the one hand; but inside, too timid
to question seriously my own beliefs out of fear of societal and familial
repercussions. My ecumenical studies dating back to early childhood have
attempted to impress upon me a certain approach to
epistemology—an approach given to a priori knowledge, divine edict, and the
validation of the role of feeling and impression in the search for truth. This
approach to the problem of knowledge seems to directly contradict the
Aristotelian methods of inquiry taught by my professors, which generally
rejects the acceptance of feeling, revelation, or any other spiritual method of
obtaining knowledge, allowing only externally verifiable means derived directly
from the five senses, augmented by logical deduction. My religion,
conversely, suggests I regard my human intellect and logical powers as nice,
but ultimately superfluous, and encourages me to focus instead on my
feelings, impressions, and on trying to “lean not unto [my] own understanding”
(Proverbs 3:5).

So where does that leave those of us who demand the best and
most rational within ourselves and who remain ambivalent about the seemingly
unverifiable assertions of Sunday School? Could God really be asking me to
suspend my reason and mind to accept what many may say amounts to a stock of
unbelievable stories substantiated only by theocratic dictate? Could God really
be commanding me to follow blindly and not
to think as religion makes seemingly implausible claims about
supernatural visitations; divine healings; and new, proprietary apostolic
authority? Wouldn’t our God of boundless reason and immeasurable intelligence
want me to follow the advice of my teachers and educated authors, withholding
judgment on faith-based and unsubstantiated beliefs until they can be
tangibly verified? Wouldn’t a God who continually exhorts me to “study
[problems] out in [my] mind,” who tells me that “knowledge . . . shall greatly
enlarge [my] soul” (see D&C 9:8; 121:42)—wouldn’t He tell me that
until I can formulate logical arguments to validate what I profess to “know”
(the same way I know everything else) that I cannot be honest in saying that I
know it? Is a witness from the Holy Ghost really the evidence needed to say, “I
know”?

I do not wish to accept ideas that are not true simply
because they are culturally fashionable. Neither do I wish to fall prey to the
trap of accepting the fallacious philosophies of men (Colossians 2:8), such men
as Paul warned of, who wander about trying to obtain knowledge, “ever learning,
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth” (2 Timothy 3:7). My
studies reveal disturbing and thought-provoking opinions of those
like Karl Marx, who allege that “religion is an opiate of the masses”1
and a tool of repression to wield arbitrary control over the uniformed and
uneducated, which make me question my reasons for believing; and yet I likewise
shrink from second-guessing an All-Wise God who must have reasons for
asking for my trust, faith, and patience.

These questions can be answered from either side of the
aisle, but always with a directional bias. In my perspective, religion resolves
the conflict by telling me to abandon as youthful hubris the wish to have an
immediate, logic-based foundation for my ideology; science tells
me to abandon faith and feeling and to be consistent in my methodology of
establishing truthful premises—that is, to use the same
heuristic in establishing the existence of God as I would use to establish the
existence of a table. Can I be entirely consistent in myself by unconditionally
accepting revealed religious truth, while continually seeking for a rational
and scientific explanation for all that I am being taught? Or am I destined to
be the eternal incarnation of a divided soul unable to accept transcendental
truth because of my inability to articulate the appropriate arguments, yet
always yearning to believe what so many find easy and natural to
accept—the unmistakable truth of the divine?

***

William Hayes Pingree

Visiting Professor of International Studies and Political Thought at the

University of Utah

Answer:

Understanding
how individuals come to know things is a fascinating and uniquely human
endeavor. Comprehension and knowledge of the world in which we live strikes a
balance; on the one hand, it is an encounter only with what is in some manner
understood, and on the other, it is mystery. The resolution of this balance,
the desire to produce certitude with respect to absolute understanding,
requires exertion in a mysterious world and has often become an effort to abate
mystery rather than to achieve definitive understanding. The study of the human
condition has long been fascinating to both the natural sciences and the
humanities. Both disciplines have produced countless essays on this subject,
using a variety of epistemological methods in which mankind’s nature has been
probed, researched, and catalogued with respect to how human beings process
information and how this information shapes our understanding of our own
world.

These studies have tended, in recent years, to focus on the
scientific method, with emphasis on being able to reproduce
experiments and thus prove, in a scientific way, the premise under
investigation. Universities have been the repositories of these
accumulative efforts, and countless journals have detailed the development
of our understanding of both human behavior and human conduct. As a result of
these empirical inquiries, it is clear that the world has become one in which
technological information on the human condition is readily available and
abundant.

Normal science in which human beings are the subject is a
puzzle-solving undertaking and consequently is a highly cumulative
enterprise, eminently successful in its aim, by which the steady extension of
the scope and precision of scientific knowledge regarding behavior is extended.
In this process, as each study builds on the previous one, new and unsuspected
phenomena are repeatedly uncovered by scientific research, and radical new
theories have again and again been invented by scientists to explain the human
condition. History even suggests that the scientific enterprise has developed a
uniquely powerful technique for producing surprises of this sort. With the
invention of the Internet, science has linked together experiments regarding
human behavior, and a seamless web of greater and greater scientific knowledge
tends to overwhelm other realms of inquiry, such as reason and the pursuit of a priori knowledge, or
knowledge beyond the senses. This realm of inquiry, a rational or reasoned
approach to discover knowledge that is not apprehendable by the senses, is
transcendental and is called the process of thought approach. If the
epistemological characteristic of science, the object of sense, is to be
reconciled with a parallel discipline, the process of thought, then research
under each paradigm must be particularly sensitive to the claims of the other.
One must not be sacrificed in pursuit of the other.

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints are in a unique position to pursue both paradigms.
President David O. McKay taught, “The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints makes an appeal to all men to seek the higher life,
intellectual and spiritual, and to
incite them to a greater intelligence in striving for the abundant life.”2
As an undergraduate student many years ago, I had the opportunity of attending
a debate held at the institute of religion. The topic to be discussed was the
relevance of “creationism” as it was positioned against “scientific evolution.”
As I listened, it seemed as if those devoted to science and those devoted to
scripture talked past each other. Each side made assumptions that the other did
not accept. The debate clearly was about how we come to know things: the
creationists were relying heavily on a
priori knowledge and the processes of reason and thought, while
those devoted to scientific evolution apprehended truth only by the object of
sense. The debate was resolved in favor of science because the members of that
team “proved,” by the use of then extant genetic theory, that a gene pool
created by two people was insufficient to produce the entire human species with
all its variations. Imagine my surprise when some twenty years later, on the
cover of a national magazine, it was announced that science, through DNA
research, had concluded that a female individual who lived ten thousand years
ago, code-named “Lucy,” was the genetic type whose DNA was now
contained in all individuals of the human family.

As I read the article, my thoughts reflected back on the
debate. I realized that a scientific inquiry into the human condition was
indeed a rendezvous with phenomena only partially understood in time and that
“facts,” which had delved into the mystery of creation clearly deduced by an
empiricist epistemology twenty years ago, were only valid for a short period of
time and certainly were not absolute.

This event prompted reflection and further review. The Lord
has clearly told us in Doctrine and Covenants 9 that His method of coming to
know things involves both study and prayer. He states in verses seven and
eight:

Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would
give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me. But, behold, I
say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if
it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within
you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right.

The above verse has been become platitudinal and is quoted
repeatedly to tell us how we come to discover truth in a spiritual sense. The
ability to have this “burning in the bosom” has become an indication, even a
litmus test, of the magnitude of our own spirituality; the ability to “feel”
truth has become a measure not only of our commitment to the gospel of Jesus
Christ but also of our standing before the Lord. This verse has caused great
confusion and some difficulty with Latter-day Saints who are familiar
with both methods of understanding truth, namely, the empirical
object-of-sense method and the transcendental method, or the
process of rational thought. Many devotees of the empirical method, when
hearing of another’s conviction based on the “burning in the bosom” phenomenon,
may caustically remark, “That sounds like angina to me.” Others, who eschew the
scientific method as a total repudiation of faith, are taken in a sense of
“blind obedience” to such truth without any reflection, and thus disciples of
both regimens talk past each other just like the creationists and the
evolutionists did decades ago.

In considering these two methods, however, there can be
little doubt that a priori
knowledge, produced by direct revelation, if true, produces a certitude that is
beyond question. For example, knowledge produced by direct revelation, such as
the knowledge Joseph Smith took with him from the First Vision, becomes
absolute for Joseph, who received such direct knowledge. Notwithstanding
Joseph’s experience, there needs to be a means or methodology whereby those who
did not likewise receive such a vision can come to know that such knowledge is
true. This can be an epistemology that relies on the use of sense, which in the
case of revelation is never completely satisfying; or conversely, and perhaps
in connection with using our senses, it can be an epistemology that relies on
the process of thought, study, and prayer to come to know if the revelation is
true. The Lord stated in Doctrine and Covenants 88:118: “As all have not faith,
seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; . . . seek learning,
even by study and also by faith.”

And further, in Doctrine and Covenants 46:13–14: “To
some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God,
and that he was crucified for the sins of the world. To others  it is given to believe on their words,
that they also might have eternal life if they continue faithful.”

It is clear that for those who receive direct revelation and
declare such to the world, the issue of certitude is resolved; however, for the
majority who do not have such direct experiences, even for prophets, the need
to find certitude by a means of inquiry that will enable them to apprehend such
knowledge as is produced by unique experience still remains. The prerequisite
of such a method is an ability to seek certitude by means of acquiring a priori knowledge on
our own, “even by study and . . . faith,” so that we can believe the words of
those who have the direct a
priori experiences that also produce certitude.

Thus the debate, the quest of how to learn truth, is
fundamental to Latter-day Saints and is age old. Contrasting views on
how to come to know the truth were established by the central epistemological
approaches of Plato and Aristotle many years ago. Plato was convinced that
absolute knowledge was discovered by transcendental means, by argument,
thought, and reason, while Aristotle, the world’s consummate biologist until
the 1850s and the advent of Charles Darwin, believed that absolute truth was
discovered by observation of phenomena, further study to form a hypothesis of
truth, testing said hypothesis, and proving the postulate by an experiment that
relied on the senses. In this age of scientific discovery, this second method,
the method of sense, the one followed by Aristotle, has become the preferred
way to prove all things; indeed, it was used by those debaters devoted to
evolution to “prove” their point.

However, as time inexorably marched on, in many instances,
the point “proved” so long ago was “unproved” as scientific inquiry matured. As
methodology expanded the realm of truth available to scientific examination,
knowledge fell within the grasp of science that was previously unattainable. So
the conclusions drawn so many years ago, in light of new evidence, became
hollow and were shown to be contingent. To those who prefer the other method,
the method of thought and feeling, it might be tempting to blindly jump to the
“burning in the bosom” phenomenon and state, “If those scientists back then had
simply prayed about it, with faith, they would know that their conclusions were
wrong.” This kind of jump is fraught with great danger. It leads those who would
advocate such a view to ensnare themselves in a pit of contingent relativism.
Those who advocate this jump trap themselves into the belief that the canon of
scripture, the process of continuing revelation, has also been closed. How
often has the Lord given us further light and knowledge on subjects we thought
were forever tenets of our faith? The manifesto of Wilford Woodruff changed our
view on plural marriage; the revelation of Spencer W. Kimball that gave the
priesthood to all worthy males suggests that revelation, the supreme
transcendental method of capturing truth, is conditional as well. Our
understanding of the revelations of God develops and matures with further
study, prayer, and revelation. It would thus be folly to make such a jump.

A Bridge between Two Approaches

Michael
Oakeshott suggests an approach that is beneficial to both realms of inquiry and
provides a middle ground, a bridge between the two. Oakeshott examines a
familiar analogy from Plato’s Republic. Plato uses prisoners in a cave
to explain an important principle relative to comprehending truth. In his
analogy, Plato explains that these prisoners use shadows on the walls of the
cave to explain their world, little realizing that the source of light that
comes from the entrance to the cave, if explored, will change the reality of
the truth examined in shadows.

In his analysis of Plato’s “Analogy of the Cave,” found in
Plato’s Republic,
Oakeshott explains:

The cave-dwellers, who inhabit a “hollow in the
earth,” occupy a platform of conditional understanding. They recognize
their world in terms of identified and named occurrences understood as
compositions of characteristics. It is, thus far, a world of intelligibles and
they move within it confidently. . . . And the more intelligent among them are
admired by the rest, and sometimes rewarded with small prizes for the reliable
information they have acquired and are able to impart about the connections and
correlations of at least some of these occurrences, and for their ability to
forecast their appearance upon the scene.

This platform of understanding is, however, a “prison.” Its
inhabitants are “prisoners,’” not merely because they are wholly ignorant of
its conditions but because the level of their understanding excludes even the
recognition that it is conditional. In short, in Socrates’ phrase, they are
“like ourselves,” only more so than Plato will allow. Distracted by his
exclusive concern with the engagement of theoretical understanding and with the
manifest shortcomings of this platform of understanding, the intelligibility of
the cave-dwellers world seems to him at once so complete and so
minimal. . . . This, I think, is a mistake. It is a conditional understanding
of the world, valuable as far as it goes, and indispensable in the engagements
of practical life, but not fully in command of itself because it is unaware of
its conditionality.3

Oakeshott points out that all knowledge, in any larger
sense, arrived at by any epistemological method brings us to a platform of
understanding that is wholly conditional. Time is needed to “season” knowledge
on its “platform of understanding” and bring it into context with other
knowledge contingent to it. As time passes, events will lead us to a greater
awareness of the fact that the knowledge on our “platform” remains conditional;
or time moves our knowledge closer to a contingent, unconditional state that is
either refuted by additional new knowledge or, through experience
(transcendental or empirical), moved closer to certitude. Such is the nature of the “prison” of
conditionality, and so it is with all knowledge arrived at by both methods. The
cave-dwellers were able to measure their world and apprehend truth by
their senses. They were also able to reason from a position beyond their senses
and draw conclusions about their environment based upon the experience of their
senses, as well as upon their ability to think and reason. What they did not
realize was that their entire knowledge of their world, whether derived from
either the method sense or of thought, was completely conditional, dependent
upon their existence in the cave.

My experience with the evolutionary debate dealt with the
scientific method, an object of sense, and was resolved by scientific
evidence that, at the time, was not refutable. However, as time passed, it
became clear that the debate was indeed not “resolved” in any absolute sense.
It was the “best synthesis” available at the time, but over time, it was
clearly shown to be a conditional synthesis. The scientists were confident then
that this answer, if not the entire solution, would be part of the foundation
for further research; they certainly did not expect that research to refute
their claim. It was considered “the answer,” a conclusion drawn as a result of
the object of sense. However, at the time, as Oakeshott pointed out, all of us
were unaware of its conditionality. Likewise, with the process of thought and
with matters informed by revelation and a
priori knowledge, it is evident there is a conditional
component.

At the end of the nineteenth century, Wilford Woodruff
announced the end of plural marriage. Before, it was considered an absolute
tenet of our faith. Celestial marriage was interpreted to mean plural marriage
even though a minority of members lived the new and everlasting covenant of
plural marriage. Those that entered into the practice of plural marriage have
given abundant testimonies of its divine sanction; similarly, there are
testimonies of many pioneer women whose hearts were broken by its observance.
President George Q. Cannon observed the following concerning the practice of
plural marriage in the 1890s:

I know (I speak it almost with a feeling of shame) that there
have been serious abuses of that doctrine [plural marriage]. I believe that
both men and women have been guilty of many things that are offensive in the
sight of God. I have said that if there were no other reason than this, it
would be sufficient, to my mind, for the Lord inspiring His servant to give
that manifesto. But there were other reasons for this, and as a people we
should be prepared by the assistance and testimony of the Spirit of God that
the manifesto should be given.4

President Cannon, a practitioner of plural marriage, knew
that circumstances had changed and that the introduction of plural marriage in
the 1840s by the Prophet, later interpreted by Brigham Young and John Taylor,
had brought the Church to a crossroads. The Lord revealed to President Woodruff
the consequences to the Church of the continuing practice of plural marriage
and he acted upon that further light and knowledge. In our zeal to defend plural
marriage, the membership of the Church had overlooked the Book of Mormon’s
counsel regarding this practice. Upon careful examination of Jacob 2:24,
27–28, 30, we see that the Lord himself explained that plural marriage
was a conditional commandment. Jacob explains:

Behold, David and Solomon truly had many wives and concubines,
which thing was abominable before me, saith the Lord. . . . Wherefore, my
brethren, hear me, and hearken to the word of the Lord: For there shall not any
man among you have save it be one wife; and concubines he shall have none; for
I, the Lord God, delight in the chastity of women. And whoredoms are an
abomination before me; thus saith the Lord of Hosts. . . . For if I will, saith
the Lord of Hosts, raise up seed unto me, I will command my people; otherwise
they shall hearken unto these things.

The Lord shows us that the rule of heaven with respect to
the plurality of wives, at the time of Jacob and indeed at the time of the
Prophet Joseph Smith, was one man and one wife. However, He further explained
that if He desired to raise up seed unto Himself, He would command otherwise.
The Lord did command Joseph to introduce plural marriage, and then He commanded
Wilford to pull it back. Both men were great prophets and both had followed the
practice outlined in Doctrine and Covenants 9 and 46. Both had followed the
Lord’s admonition to “study it out in their minds” and then put the matter to
the Lord. Both prophets had received the “correct answer” as a product of the
process of thought. They had received a
priori knowledge from the Lord that was both times conditional. The
historical record shows that plural marriage is indeed conditional. The Lord
sanctioned the plural wives of Abraham and Israel, as well as those of Moses
and Job. These prophets were conspicuously omitted from Jacob’s condemnation of
plural marriage. Yet they belong to the times when the Lord explicitly
commanded His people to “raise up seed” to himself.

There are those yet today who regard plural marriage as an
essential gospel tenet, one that might once again be reintroduced. The
conditional nature of plural marriage and its status as an eternal doctrine of
the Church were clearly established by James E. Talmage shortly after President
Woodruff’s manifesto. In the 1901 October general conference of the Church,
Elder Talmage explained that plural marriage was never a vital tenet of
salvation. He stated:

The Latter-day Saints were long regarded as a
polygamous people. That plural marriage has been practiced by a limited
proportion of the people, under sanction of Church ordinance, has never since
the introduction of the system been denied. But, that plural marriage is a
vital tenet of The Church is not true. What the Latter-day Saints
call celestial marriage is characteristic of the Church, and is in very general
practice; but of celestial marriage, plurality of wives was an incident, never
an essential. Yet the two have never been segregated in the popular mind. . . .
As the Church had adopted the practice under what was believed to be divine
approval, they suspended it when they were justified in so doing.5

Elder Bruce R. McConkie put it even more succinctly when he
wrote, “Plural marriage is not essential to salvation or exaltation.”6

In an interesting footnote, President Gordon B. Hinckley
supported Elder Talmage and further showed the conditionality of plural
marriage when he answered a question regarding its exercise in the Church. He
referred to plural marriage as a practice of the nineteenth century when asked
about it during his first interview with Larry King, an interview that aired on
national television on CNN, September 8, 1998. He did not call plural marriage
a doctrine, which would imply its immutability. This reference caused some
consternation among the members of the Church and prompted many to write to
President Hinckley concerning his remarks. During the subsequent semiannual
conference of the Church, in October 1998, at general priesthood meeting,
President Hinckley told the brethren he had received many letters about his
comments and informed us that he knew the doctrine of the Church and his
comments were not in conflict with that doctrine.7

As it has been illustrated, both methods of
inquiry—the object of sense and the process of
thought—initially produce conditional results. In light of
these observations, a question naturally arises concerning each method. Does
each of these methods provide a degree of certitude with respect to the
knowledge acquired by each method? Our society has answered this question in
the affirmative for those who use solely the object of sense to acquire truth.
The empiricist apprehends knowledge through experience by creating repeatable
and verifiable tests, which thereby produce conclusions upon which we can,
apparently with a great degree of certainty, rely. Books of science are filled
with experiments that have produced the laws of science and that have been verified
through measurement, observation, and through our other senses. In the modern
world, as has already been noted, this method of exploration has become the
preferred method, almost to the exclusion of the other. Truth obtained through
the object of sense is proclaimed with certitude to be absolute, even though it
has been established that this claim is always, in the beginning,
conditional.

On the other hand, those who come to know things by the
process of thought, while not rejecting truth comprehended by the object of
sense, discover a priori
knowledge that is deduced by discussion and reason. Our modern world is filled
with the alleged certitude of science, and there seems to be little room and
certainly less appreciation for those who come to know truth by the process of
thought. Yet there is a considerable amount of truth that science has perceived
through the process of thought that has no empirical basis. This is best
illustrated by a question Albert Einstein answered in a press conference held shortly
before his death in 1955. He was asked how he had “discovered” the theory of
relativity. Science would have expected Dr. Einstein to have illuminated
several previously tested theories as a basis for his new theory. Science would
have expected this new theory to have risen out of experiments previously
conducted. Dr. Einstein simply stated, “It came to me as I boarded a bus in
Zurich in 1905.”8
It is clear that the direction of Einstein’s research was “revealed” to him
from an a priori
source. He did not question this enlightenment, nor did he reject it on the
grounds that he could not prove its origin as an object of sense; on the
contrary, he accepted it and used it as the basis to complete his theory of
relativity. This theory moved physics in an opposite direction to the
well-known and well-tested Newtonian laws of physics still
used today. What, then, are the boundaries of each domain, and how do they
enhance and complement each other?

An answer to this question is given by David Hume:

Nothing is more usual than for writers, even on moral,
political, or physical subjects, to distinguish between reason and experience,
and to suppose, that these species of argumentation are entirely different from
one another. The former are taken for the mere result of our intellectual
faculties, which, by considering a
priori the nature of things, and examining the effects, that must
follow from their operation, establishing particular principles of science and
philosophy. The latter are supposed to be derived entirely from sense and
observation, by which we learn what has actually resulted from the operation of
particular objects, and are thence able to infer, what will, for the future
result from them. . . . The same distinction between reason and experience is
maintained in all our deliberations concerning the conduct of life. . . .
Though it be allowed, that reason may form very plausible conjectures with
regard to the consequences of such a particular conduct, it is still, supposed
to be imperfect, without the assistance of experience, which is alone able to
give stability and certainty to the maxims derived from study and
reflection.9

Hume strikes a balance between a priori knowledge, ascertained through
the process of thought, and knowledge that is discovered as an object of
science. He explains that information obtained by both methods needs to be
subjected to the test of experience, which alone will give such knowledge
permanence and certitude.

However, with respect to science and empirical analysis,
Hume reasons that there are specific bounds to truth obtained as an object of
sense. He argues as follows:

It follows then, that all reasonings concerning cause and effect
are founded on experience, and supposition that the course of nature will
continue uniformly the same. We conclude that like causes, in like
circumstances, will always produce like effects. It may now be worthwhile to
consider what determines us to form a conclusion of such infinite consequence.
It is evident that Adam, with all his science, would never have been able to
demonstrate that the course of nature must continue uniformly the same, and
that the future must be conformable to the past. . . . All probable arguments
are built on the supposition that there is conformity betwixt the future and
the past, and if it must be proved, will admit of no proof but from experience.
But our experience in the past can be a proof of nothing for the future, but
upon supposition that there is a resemblance betwixt them.10

Hume’s resolution concerning the experience of science shows
that continued experiments conducted by the scientific method verify those
conducted in the past. These verifications confirm the data so gathered, and
the conclusions thus presumed seem to confer an absolute quality to the
knowledge thus deduced. Hume warns us that in fact knowledge arrived at in such
a manner, and repeatedly tested, really only confirms a greater and greater
probability
of truth and not a certitude regarding either the causes of such observations
nor the reason for such. Hence, Hume confirms Oakeshott’s view that all truth,
especially scientific truth (particularly in the discovery stage), is
conditional. Science does not confer certitude in any absolute sense, but only
a greater and greater probability that the truth so arrived at is
unconditional. In fact, with greater repetition of experiments, certitude is
assumed but never proven.

Truth that is confirmed by the object-of-sense method is
restricted by this method of inquiry largely due to its own methodology. In
order to provide a value-free verity, this method removes all normative
elements from its analysis. Normative elements are the biases and values of the
tester. Truth so discovered—by the very method of object of
sense—is not prejudiced by preconceived ideas about what the results
ought to be. While this approach provides the truth-seeker with a great
service, it also constricts the field of experience so that some truth
inevitably escapes its examination. The value-free analysis thus blocks an
avenue to certitude and confirms Oakeshott’s original premise that any
knowledge arrived at by any method of inquiry produces a “prison,” a platform
of understanding that has produced conditional knowledge. In truth, the
scientific method is designed not only to remove values, but also to avoid the
fooling of the senses, which would lead to unwarranted conclusions. Even with
the efforts of the scientific method of investigating truth, René Descartes
shows that this can be dangerous. Descartes was a great proponent not only of
mathematics and scientific investigation but also of rationalist thought,
which underscores the likelihood that senses can be deceived. In his
“Sixth Meditation” on philosophy, Descartes states:

Later on, however, I had many experiences which gradually
undermined all the faith I had in the senses. Sometimes towers which had looked
round from a distance appeared square from close up; and enormous statues
standing on their pediments did not seem large when observed from the ground.
In these and countless other such cases, I found that the judgements of the
external senses were mistaken. And this applied not just to the external senses
but to the internal senses as well. For what can be more internal than pain?
And yet, I had heard that those who had had a leg or an arm amputated sometimes
still seemed to feel pain intermittently in the missing part of the body.

[A] reason for doubt was that since I did not yet know the
author of my being (or at least was pretending not to), I saw nothing to rule
out the possibility that my natural constitution made me prone to error even in
matters which seemed to me most true. . . . But now, when I am beginning to
achieve a better knowledge of myself and the author of my being . . .
everything I seem to have acquired from the senses . . . should be called into
doubt.11

The
scientific method, as an expression of the object of sense, produces a prison
of conditional knowledge, which prison sets a boundary that is not overcome in
any systematic way by the object-of-sense method. Descartes even
raises the possibility that knowledge discovered as an object of sense can be
shown to be an illusion, a fooling of the senses into a condition of a
false certitude that is later, upon future inquiry, refuted. The use of the
senses as the only epistemological method dooms truth so obtained to be placed
in a realm where the boundaries and limitations of such knowledge cannot be
overcome. This is indeed what happened to me in the evolutionary debate
discussed earlier in this essay. In fact, the conditionality of such
conclusions is only confirmed by their inability to transcend the methodology
used to produce knowledge. Therefore, the scope of truth found through the
value-free scientific approach is relegated to establishing only a
greater and greater probability
of absolute truth, which probability is racked with doubt and with the
possibility that the senses can be deceived. As such, the
object-of-sense method never achieves the promise of certitude
so touted by its advocates.

This
doubt, this lack of being able to overcome the conditionality of knowledge
established by the Oakeshottian prison of conditionality, presents a challenge
to truth apprehended by the process of thought as well. Knowledge captured by
the object-of-sense method has clearly been shown to be
conditional, and the bounds of that conditionality, due to the methodology
inherent in the scientific method, are not overcome. Does knowledge produced by
the process of thought, the transcendental method, also suffer from a similar
methodology, one that does not allow the boundary or prison of conditionality
to be overcome? The answer to this question is that it does not. It has been
clearly shown that the scientific method is extremely useful and necessary in
discovering truth. It suffers from a methodological limitation, however. In
removing the biases and prejudices of the testor, the scope and vision of this
method surrenders certitude to the methodology. Truth-seekers gain greater and
greater probabilities, but in the name of avoiding the duping of the senses,
the truth-seeker is permanently disabled in the quest to discover absolute
truth. Scientific examination,
in order to remove values and clarify any possible duping of the senses,
surrenders certitude to skepticism and leaves the truth-seeker
permanently disabled in the quest to discover absolute truth. As the Apostle
Paul said of those who exclusively use the object-of-sense
method, they are “ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth” (2 Timothy 3:7). The pursuit of truth by the process-of-thought method
seeks to overcome this difficulty.

Truth As the
Subject

There must be another way
to comprehend absolute truth, a new method of inquiry that will provide an
escape from the Oakeshottian prison of conditionality. As new ontological views
have been forthcoming in the twentieth century, even such modern existential
thinkers as Soren Kierkegaard realize that new epistemological approaches must
either be revived or created in the search to produce certitude. Kierkegaard,
in his Christian existential approach, requires a “leap of faith” to transcend
the prison walls imposed by the methodology of science. For Kierkegaard, this
leap is not rational; in fact, he calls it absurd, for in science, truth is
always an object of effort, never the subject.
He explains his “leap of faith” in the following manner:

The subjective reflection turns its attention inwardly to
the subject and desires in this intensification of inwardness to realize the
truth. And it proceeds in such fashion that, just as in the preceding objective
reflection, when the objectivity had come into being, the subjectivity had
vanished, so here the subjectivity of the subject becomes the final stage, and
objectivity a vanishing factor. Not for a single moment is it forgotten that
the subject is an existing individual, and that existence is a process of [that
individual] and therefore the notion of the truth as identity of thought and
being is a chimera of abstraction. . . . 

If an existing individual were really able to transcend
himself, the truth would be for him something final and complete, but where is
the point at which he is outside himself?12

Hume offers insight to Kierkegaard’s question. For Hume, it
became very clear that the scientific epistemological approach, or the approach
to truth apprehended as an object of sense, is just that, an object. This
condition is a universal one, especially given the fact that the senses can be
deceived. The truth so perceived must be one that is discovered through or
confirmed by the senses and accordingly must be objective. There are many great
thinkers who objectify truth. But Kierkegaard points to a new path, one where
truth is obtained as the subject and not the object. Philosophers of the
Enlightenment such as Locke, Kant, and John Stuart Mill drew heavily on reason
to dispel the mystery and superstition rampant in the Middle Ages. In so doing,
however, limits on other methods of exploration that long produced a priori truth were
ignored. Hence, it is not possible to transcend oneself by the
object-of-sense method, as Kierkegaard asks. There needs to be
another path of inquiry that enables this to happen.

With the process of thought, truth can be grasped not only
objectively, but also subjectively, transcendentally, and indeed personally in
ways that escape the boundaries placed by scientific inquiry. Kierkegaard’s
“leap of faith” permits the breaching of the prison walls of objective
conditionality and allows the other domains of truth to be explored. The method
of the process of thought does not return the truth-seeker to a
conundrum of myth but allows for truth that can be a priori. Max Weber, a father of
sociology, explains that the use of the processes of thought leads the
truth-seeker to a greater and greater level of understanding
(“verstehen”) that is clearly not medievalism.13 Weber allows us to build
on Oakeshott’s analogy of the platforms of understanding and the conditionality
of knowledge and shows that the process of thought can actually transcend the
prison boundaries established by the platforms of understanding. The process of
thought, in contrast to the methodology produced by the repeated testing of
science, which only confirms the probability that the senses may not have been
deceived, leads to a path of transcendental escape from the Oakeshottian
prison. This path is highlighted by Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart’s
understanding of pornography when he said, “I shall not attempt further to
define the kinds of material [pornography]. . . . And perhaps I could never
succeed in intelligibly doing so. But, I know it when I see it.”14

The process of thought allows for an equally valid method of
inquiry that further defines us as human beings. Such a method allows us to
transcend the world of determinism and recognizes the fact that humans can find
truth apart from discovery as an object of science and sense grasped only by
empirical analysis. Charles Taylor clarifies Weber’s concept of understanding
(“verstehen”) and strengthens the Weberian insight into the additional
superstructure that is built on Michael Oakeshott’s foundational bridge between
the two realms of inquiry. Taylor shows that this superstructure also provides
the truth-seeker a ladder over the prison walls of conditionality
established by science when he also revisits Plato’s “Analogy of the Cave, as a
prelude to his analysis:

In
terms set out above, Plato offers us a view of moral sources. He tells us where
we can go to accede to a higher moral state. And we might say that the site he
shows us is the domain of thought. . . . What we gain through thought or reason
is self-mastery. The good man is “master of himself.” Plato sees the
absurdity of this expression unless one adds to it a distinction between higher
and lower parts of the soul. To be master of oneself is to have the higher part
of the soul rule over the lower, which means reason over the desires.

And
so, we become good when reason comes to rule, and we are no longer run by our
desires. But the shift in hegemony is not just a matter of one’s set of goals
taking over the priority from another. When reason rules, a quite different
kind of order reigns in the soul. Indeed, we can say that order reigns there
for the first time. By contrast, the realm of desire is that of chaos.15

Taylor
explains that reason has allowed humankind to accede to the higher moral state
of self-mastery, which leads the truth-seeker to a new
domain, the domain of thought. Descartes began to point in this direction when
he noted, in his second reason for doubt in truth obtained through the senses,
that he needed a better knowledge of himself and the author of his being if he
hoped to be able to come to certitude. This knowledge of self is indeed a key
element in our ability to find certitude. Socrates said, “The unexamined life
is not worth living.”16 It is the knowledge of self that permits a
hierarchical ordering of knowledge, or an establishment of the fact that all
truth is not of equal value. The hierarchical ordering of knowledge organizes
it in such a way that permits knowledge to be valued; such information can then
produce the understanding discussed by Weber. Taylor uses this discovery of the
ordering of the soul into a higher moral state of self-mastery to
escape the boundaries of conditionality, which binds inquiry by the object of
sense to the conditionality of being only an object.

He
then makes the following observation regarding Plato’s “Analogy of the Cave”:

And
Plato does turn to an image of this kind at the culmination of his great
allegory of the Cave. Some people think, he says, that education is a matter of
putting true knowledge into a soul that does not have it. The model here would
be the virtues and capacities of the body, which Plato agrees should be seen as
things we acquire by habit and practice. We incorporate them in us, as it were,
and put them where they didn’t exist before. But specific virtue of thought
doesn’t come to be in this way. Rather we should see ourselves as having
something like a capacity of vision which is forever unimpaired, and the move
from illusion to wisdom is to be likened to our turning the soul’s eye around
to face in the right direction. Some people, the lovers of sights and sounds
and beautiful spectacles, are focused entirely on the bodily and the changing.
Making those people wise is a matter of turning the soul’s gaze from the
darkness to the brightness of true being. But just as swiveling the whole body
can only turn the physical eye, so the whole soul must be turned to attain
wisdom.17

Truth can thus be apprehended as a subject as well as an
object, because there is now a capacity for vision that can move beyond an
illusion—that the only reality is the one confined and measured
within the cave—to a wisdom that transcends the probability
produced by measuring shadows. It is accomplished by facing the source of
light, and thus the gaze of the soul is changed from looking within the
confined prison boundary of the objective search for truth to the brilliance of
light that comes from a source that lies beyond experience. The soul, the self,
becomes the vehicle of transmission of this light, and thereby this kind of
truth no longer is objectified but becomes the subject in which this a priori truth is
contained. Einstein’s experience of having his theory of relativity “come to
him” as he boarded that bus in Zurich so long ago attests to the fact that he
himself was able to transcend the boundaries 
of Newtonian physics and become the subject capable of both receiving and
transmitting the light of truth, which light was apprehended by a source
outside the grasp of the senses. No one would call Einstein a mystic. He used
both methods, the object-of-sense and the process-of-thought
methods, to discover truth. He had replicated numerous experiments and was
satisfied that the truth so discovered, which was the object of these
experiments, displayed a greater and greater probability of certitude with
respect to Newtonian physics. However, within himself, he felt that there was
yet an undetected direction that would further explain phenomena not yet
grasped by these experiments. He needed to place himself in a position to
receive truth by becoming the subject, the vehicle itself that would both receive
and transmit this a priori
truth not yet discovered precisely because it lay outside the prison boundaries
of the Oakeshottian walls.

The prerequisite conditions to being able to become the
subject—the vanishing objectivity that Kierkegaard suggests,
the vehicle for both receiving and conducting this
truth—involve ordering the soul. Both Plato and Taylor suggest
that chaos, which seems to be present at first in the
process-of-thought approach, is overcome by ordering the soul
and attuning it to the “higher part.” This ordering conditions the individual
and allows the self the strength to transcend the Oakeshottian walls of
conditionality. Taylor’s contribution is to acknowledge Oakeshott’s prison of
conditionality and to suggest a way by which this conditionality can be
overcome. By becoming the subject of truth and not only the object, the
truth-seeker finally finds certitude with respect to truth within his
reach and his grasp.

“I Am the Truth”

As Latter-day Saints, we see clearly in Christ the
example of how to become the subject of truth. The central mission of Jesus
Christ and His atonement become the core doctrine by which all absolute truth
is measured. The Lord realized this when he told his disciples:

Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If ye
continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make you free. . . . If the Son therefore shall make
you free, ye shall be free indeed (John 8:31–32, 36).

Later, He explained that He was the subject and He was the
truth. He said, “I am the way, the truth, and the life” (John 14:6). The Lord
has pushed away the objective query of discovery, “Is it the truth?” and
replaced it with the subjective declaration, “I am the truth.” By so doing, He
has become the primary subject of a
priori truth and, as such, has transcended the bounds of the
Oakeshottian prison of conditionality—and He likewise invites
us also to transcend those boundaries. As part of His example, He has told
truth-seekers that it is not possible for them to do this on their
own. As it has been shown, when truth is pursued as an object, all truth is
then conditional, even transcendental truth. But the Savior, by making Himself
the subject, has given humankind a great key to certitude: He is the truth.
Elder Neal A. Maxwell taught the importance of recognizing this key when he
explained:

So many other people openly hunger, soulfully and deeply, for an
understanding of how things really are and really will be, for purposes that
outlast the moment. They are kept from the truth only because they “know not
where to find it” (see Doctrine and Covenants 123:12). This search for meaning
is the search for an explanation of self and of life, and for the underlying
purposes of the universe. This deep craving for truth is expressed in many ways
by many mortals, often directly, other times indirectly; sometimes foolishly,
other times wisely. Blessed are those who have found the truth and have, thereby, been made
free, and who have learned that there is both eternal and personal purpose!18

This point was earlier made when Jesus, as Jehovah, spoke to
Moses at the burning bush:

And Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children
of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto
you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?
And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shall thou say unto
the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you (Exodus 3:13–14).

The great I AM is indeed the subject in the
truth-seeker’s search for certitude and, as such, He sets him or her
free from the prison walls of conditionality: “Ye shall know the truth, and the
truth shall make you free” (John 8:32). Kierkegaard’s question regarding when
one transcends oneself is answered as the moment approaches when the
truth-seeker realizes the overwhelming presence of “The Truth,” the
transcendental fact that Jesus is both the subject and the transmitter of a priori truth. It is
He and only He that can produce certitude. The search for truth now has a
powerful partner that empowers the truth-seeker both to use objective
inquiries to satisfy the desire for consistency and value-free
knowledge and to transcend oneself in an abrupt discovery of a priori truth. At the
same time, this partnership frees individuals from the prison walls of
conditionality. By His confronting presence, complete with values and vision of
a perfect being, the Savior not only declares Himself to be the truth, but He
invites us to become like Him. In 3 Nephi the Lord challenged us to receive
absolute truth as we receive Him:

And know ye that ye shall be judges of this people, according to
the judgment which I shall give unto you, which shall be just. Therefore, what
manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am [or
importantly, as I AM]. And now I go unto the Father. And verily I say unto you,
whatsoever things ye shall ask the Father in my name shall be given unto you.
Therefore, ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you;
for he that asketh, receiveth; and unto him that knocketh, it shall be opened
(3 Nephi 27:27–29).

This means that His values and His views are hierarchically
more important than our views and values. As He is embraced, and as men and
women knock on the door of the Father, in His name, absolute truth will be
given to them. The requirements of Taylor to order the soul to “higher morals”
are a precondition to receive this truth. The skepticism of Descartes, which
caused him to conclude that enlightened truth, truth that would not deceive his
senses, would perhaps be discovered if he could but “know himself and the
author of his being” a little better, is resolved by encountering Jesus. The
process-of-thought method has led the truth-seeker from the
value-free exercise so merited by science—which rids
the truth-seeker of imposed agendas and values—to the
companion path of confronting the Lord. By so doing, they transcend their
thoughts and frequent prejudices and replace them with His values and vision.
They are indeed set free by this encounter. Truly the Lord declared through
Isaiah, “For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways,
saith the Lord” (Isaiah 55:8).

The impact of this cognizance cannot be overstated. Again,
Elder Neal A. Maxwell emphasized the relevance of this realization:

Jesus taught us that life consists not in the abundance of the
things we possess, but in how rich we are “toward God.” (Luke 12:15 and 21).
Keeping the commandments is vital in our progress toward
God—and so is working on each thing that is
lacking—as in the case of the good, rich, and noble young man
who inquired of Jesus. (See Matthew 19:21.) We too may shrink from such
confronting moments, but they will come, and what we lack will be made plainly
and painfully clear. We will not be able to say we were not shown and reminded
repeatedly. Therefore, as we search the scriptures, our focus should be upon
that which will tell us what we must do (to become as He is) and upon that
which will stir us so to do. And the very word “search” means from the
beginning to the latest unfolding of Holy Writ.19

In their own search for truth, Latter-day Saints
can now realize the primary reason the Lord wants us to be obedient to His
commandments. It is so that we may encounter Him. The Calvinistic quest for
rewards so often offered as reasons for obedience is supplanted by the desire
to transcend the prison walls of conditional knowledge to the supernal
unconditional platform of knowledge produced by the reality of our Savior and
His “infinite and eternal” certitude (see Alma 34:10). This discovery—that
the Savior is the subject and the source of certitude—is
transcendental, a priori
knowledge acquired by the process of thought. A methodology now must be
implemented which will lead the truth-seeker to find certitude in
Christ, since all who seek this truth do not receive it by direct revelation
from Him. While it is true that such confrontation does not usually come by
penetrating the veil and entering into His presence—an event
the truth-seeker hopes one day to achieve—such
confrontation does produce the realization that for now, he or she must find
the transcendental methodology, the process of thought and prayer that will
satisfy Taylor’s condition of building a ladder to escape the Oakeshottian
prison walls of conditionality. By so doing, this absolute truth (attained by
the process of thought) can be accessed. Taylor suggested that “order must
reign in the soul” as a precondition to constructing the ladder of escape,
which order and focus come by encountering the reality of Jesus, but other
building materials must also be found to complete the process.

In confronting Christ and His values and vision, the
transcendental methodology of ladder building suggests that instead of being
invited into His presence, the truth-seeker is invited instead to
take his yoke. In Matthew the Lord says:

Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly
in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my
burden is light (Matthew 11:28–30).

By taking the yoke of our Lord, other building materials of
the ladder of transcendence appear before us. Along with the yoke, we receive
the admonition to “learn of me” because He is meek and lowly. The primary
material by which the ladder is fashioned, then, is a meek and lowly heart. To
learn from the Lord, to be able to access this a
priori source of absolute knowledge, requires as the first and most
fundamental principle a broken heart and a contrite spirit. This is the first
and most important of the building materials. Nephi said succinctly,

Behold, he offereth himself a sacrifice for sin, to answer the
ends of the law, unto all those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit;
and unto none else can the ends of the law be answered (2 Nephi 2:7).

The necessity of a broken heart and a contrite spirit in
order for the soul to transcend itself, as Taylor and Kierkegaard require, is
often overlooked. In the truth-seeker’s zeal for knowledge, this
important requirement is pushed aside in favor of “checklists of obedience,”
“self-centered service,” and “self-righteousness,” all
undertaken so as to validate our meritorious request for the Savior to
recognize our righteousness and thus qualify us to receive absolute truth;
however, these are only recipes for failure in the quest for certitude. For the
ladder to be successful, it must be fashioned with a broken heart and a
contrite spirit. King David realized this when he exclaimed to the Lord,

For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it: thou
delightest not in burnt offering. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a
broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise. . . . Then shalt
thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness, with burnt offering and
whole burnt offering: then shall they offer bullocks upon thine altar (Psalm
51:16–17, 19).

The truth-seeker must have a broken heart and a
contrite spirit so that “order might [must] reign in the soul.” Thus, the ladder
of escape from the Oakeshottian prison of conditionality is first fashioned by
developing a broken heart and a contrite spirit. The broken heart and contrite
spirit are fundamental attributes, and when possessed by the
truth-seeker, these attributes invite the Lord to respond with the
gift of faith. We are often taught that faith comes by obedience; but, more
specifically, faith is enhanced by obedience.20

Truly faith comes to us as a gift (see 1 Corinthians 12:9).
Paul taught clearly that as we embrace Christ, our lives become interwoven with
Him and with His values and vision. In Galatians 2:20, Paul explains this
relationship:

I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but
Christ liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

It is out of this relationship, forged from a broken heart
and a contrite spirit, that our souls accept His reordering of values, and
thereby we are able to receive the gift of faith. Unless our souls are ordered
by having Christ live in us, the gift of faith cannot be realized. However,
once the truth-seeker has obtained the gift of faith, he or she has
now moved into the position of transcendence from the Oakeshottian prison of
conditionality. With this in mind, the ladder begun by a broken heart and a
contrite spirit is fashioned next by faith, which faith provides the
truth-seeker the ability to, in the words of Charles Taylor, “turn
the soul’s gaze from the darkness to the brightness of true being. . . . Just
as the physical eye can only be turned by swiveling the whole body, so the
whole soul must be turned to attain wisdom.”21 Thus, the soul has now
turned from seeking objects to pursuing subjects. Paul shared the same
principle when he taught that once we find Christ, “we walk by faith, not by
sight” (2 Corinthians 5:7). Faith thus becomes the second attribute that allows
the truth-seeker to escape the walls of conditionality.

With faith, certitude is within our grasp. Alma taught that
faith was the final prerequisite to certitude produced by the
process-of-thought method. Once the truth-seeker becomes confident in
walking by faith, he or she is now ready to discover truth that is not fooled
by the senses, neither is it an object of sense. It comes from the ultimate
source of truth, the Savior Himself. Alma gives the truth-seeker this
ultimate key to certitude:

And now, behold, are ye sure that this is a good seed? I say
unto you, Yea; for every seed bringeth forth unto its own likeness. Therefore,
if a seed groweth it is good, but if it groweth not, behold it is not good,
therefore, it is cast away. And now, behold, because ye have tried the
experiment, and planted the seed, and it swelleth and sprouteth, and beginneth
to grow, ye must needs know that the seed is good. And now, behold, is your
knowledge perfect? Yea, your knowledge is perfect in that thing, and your faith
is dormant; and this because you know, for ye know that the word hath swelled
your souls, . . . that your understanding doth begin to be enlightened, and
your mind doth begin to expand (Alma 32:31–34).

These verses inform the truth-seeker that laying a
foundation of faith is an essential step on the path to certitude. Notice that
it is faith that has produced “perfect” knowledge. Once that knowledge is
obtained, faith becomes dormant. It is also important to note that faith does
not go away, but instead forms the final foundation to transcendental truth and
is the final building block to the superstructure of the bridge that transcends
the Oakeshottian prison of conditionality. Should faith be removed, the
superstructure of absolute knowledge will also collapse and leave the
truth-seeker void of certitude, in an antecedent state of a priori
conditionality.

Oliver Cowdery discovered this truth early in his experience
with the Lord. Through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord said to Oliver:

Verily, verily, I say unto thee, blessed art thou for what thou
hast done; for thou hast inquired of me, and behold, as often as thou hast
inquired thou hast received instruction of my Spirit. If it had not been so,
thou wouldst not have come to the place where thou art at this time. Behold,
thou knowest that thou hast inquired of me and I did enlighten thy mind; and
now I tell thee these things that thou mayest know that thou hast been
enlightened by the Spirit of truth (D&C 6:14–15).

Oliver was not able to recognize the fact that the Lord
spoke truth to him every
time he inquired because the nature of his faith was insufficiently strong to
bear the weight of that truth. Oliver’s soul wasn’t yet ordered by an
interwoven relationship with the Lord, and therefore he could not receive the
type of faith necessary to bear the weight of absolute truth. Oliver never
learned completely to confront the Lord in the manner discussed above and by
not doing so, he was led into the abyss of doubt. It was not until the end of
his life that he was able to transcend these walls. After Joseph Smith’s
martyrdom, Oliver “came to himself,”22 and with the right kind of
faith returned home to the outstretched arms of a forgiving Church. Even though
Oliver had many experiences that caused him to pierce the veil, to see heavenly
messengers, and to receive ordinances from on high, Oliver’s faith was never
sufficient to bear the weight of these experiences and, as his faith crumbled,
so did the perfect knowledge promised by Alma also collapse. He could never
finish the ladder necessary to transcend the Oakeshottian prison wall of
conditionality. As time passed, the certitude Oliver obtained turned to doubt
and questioning. It took Oliver Cowdery a lifetime to develop the right faith
by which the transcendental ladder could be built, which would lead him beyond
the prison walls of conditional truth.

The Book of Mormon points the truth-seeker, again
in the words of Paul, to “a more excellent way” (1 Corinthians 12:31). With
respect to developing the kind of faith that will exceed the bounds of
conditionality and lead to certitude, the experience of the brother of Jared
provides an infallible illustration of how this is done. This example is
particularly appropriate in a world that has ignored the value of a priori truth. The
brother of Jared is a particularly tender example because he seems to be like
us today in that he had little time for meditation and thought. He was abruptly
brought from the object-of-sense method of discovering truth
when the Lord rebuked him for not calling upon His name. In Ether 2:14–15
we read:

And it came to pass at the end of four years that the Lord came
again unto the brother of Jared, and stood in a cloud and talked with him. And
for the space of three hours did the Lord talk with the brother of Jared, and
chastened him because he remembered not to call upon the name of the Lord. And
the brother of Jared repented of the evil which he had done, and did call upon
the name of the Lord for his brethren who were with him. And the Lord said unto
him: I will forgive thee and thy brethren of their sins; but thou shalt not sin
any more, for ye shall remember that my Spirit will not always strive with
man.

It seems that perhaps the brother of Jared was praying, but
not “call[ing] upon the name of the Lord,” which means he was not making the
Lord the subject of his faith. The Lord was the object of his prayer, but the
brother of Jared was not confronting the Lord as The Truth and, as such, the
source of certitude. The brother of Jared was seeking solutions to the problems
of the Jaredites much as we do today: seeking knowledge by measurement, by
skill, and by wit. All of these are tools of the object-of-sense
method. He had, like Oliver Cowdery, neglected to call upon the Lord in such a
manner that the Lord could get through to him. The brother of Jared repented of
his sin, and turned his soul’s gaze, as Taylor suggested, from darkness to
light by developing the kind of faith recommended by Alma. So successful was he
that in the next chapter of Ether, we read of a consummate transcendental
experience, produced by the right kind of faith—one of the
greatest ever to be recorded in scripture. After repenting and reordering his
soul, in the third chapter of Ether, the brother of Jared was able to put
Alma’s guide to the truth-seeker to the ultimate test. As Alma
required, faith was to be the foundation to receive perfect knowledge; the
right kind of faith would produce certitude; the right kind of faith is the
attribute most required to transcend the Oakeshottian prison walls of
conditionality. The brother of Jared was able, due to his newfound faith, to
pierce the veil and obtain that perfect knowledge of which Alma spoke.

It is clear that the faith of the brother of Jared moved
from object to subject. It is that faith, formed by experiences in the past,
from both methods of inquiry, that becomes our preparatory faith. This faith,
however, is insufficient to transcend the Oakeshottian prison walls. It is
absolutely necessary, but incomplete. The required faith, which lays the final
plank, the “leap of faith” required by both Kierkegaard and Taylor, is
redemptive faith. This faith is produced by ordering the soul with preparatory
faith; then, the moment the truth-seeker crosses the bridge, lifted
up by the ladder of redemptive faith, that certitude is found. The concept of
being “lifted up” over the prison walls of conditionality is very significant
and meaningful to the humble followers of Christ. Great parallels exist in the
Savior’s own life. We see that at the very moment when the Christ was lifted up
upon the cross, doubt among the disciples was at its apex. It was then, at that
very moment, that most of them fell back on their preparatory faith. They
reordered their souls by deep self-searching23 and calling upon the Lord, and then they were able to wait for the moment of
resurrection, in which their faith became redemptive and allowed them to
transcend the prison walls of conditionality. It was then that they knew with
absolute truth that our Lord was all He said He was. This certitude needed to
be sustained by their redemptive faith, as Alma explained, for the Lord was
with them for only forty more days. It was in the crucible of doubt that
Descartes declared and acknowledged his need to know better the author of his
being so that his senses would not be deceived. It was in the crucible of
crucifixion that the Savior showed us that a contrite spirit relies totally upon
the Father; and in that same crucible the truth-seeker confronts the
reality of the resurrected Lord with the words of Thomas, upon receiving
certitude, “My Lord and my God.”24

This redemptive faith comes from deep within the soul
itself. It is produced by ordering the soul with the vision and values of our
Savior and then having the courage to accept these values as our own.
Responding to the new “gaze of the soul,” as Taylor suggests, Kierkegaard’s
“leap of [redemptive] faith” is taken when the truth-seeker allows
Christ to live within him or her and, as Paul stated earlier, the life lived in
the flesh is made alive “by the faith of the Son of God” (Galatians 2:20). Christ’s
faith becomes our faith. In receiving such certitude, Thomas was commanded to
“be not faithless.” It was then that he was admonished to receive the gift of
redemptive faith (John 20:28). Thomas’s flesh was made alive by the faith of
the Son of God. It is His faith that becomes our faith, and it is His faith
that is redemptive and causes the truth-seeker to know, with
certitude, The Truth. We have made him the object and the subject of our faith.
Moroni explains the process, which involves our being “remembered and nourished
by the good word of God, . . . to keep [us] continually watchful unto prayer,
relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of
[our] faith” (Moroni 6:4).

Moroni taught that as an expression of our preparatory
faith, we make Christ the author of our faith; but, in the confronting act,
where the truth-seeker is willing to rely alone, solely, on the
merits of Christ, reordering his or her soul with the values and vision of the
Christ, that redemptive faith becomes a reality. With this reality, Christ thus
becomes the finisher of our faith and the producer of certitude.

It is the Lord who will choose the moment of confrontation.
He will prepare us by becoming the author of our faith, and He will allow us to
grow from study, “as all have not [redemptive] faith” (D&C 88:118); and it
is He who will choose the moment to confront us, when our faith is sufficiently
prepared. As was shown in the examples above, each truth-seeker has a
personal, tailor-made path toward certitude. This unique path cannot
be encapsulated in the four or ten “steps to certitude.” Each
truth-seeker is unique, but the methodology is the same. Look at the
example of the fifty great men and women who appeared to Wilford Woodruff in
the St. George Temple in 187725 to have their saving
ordinance work done. These men and women are evidence enough to show the Lord
is no respecter of persons when it comes to eventually obtaining certitude.
Each of these men, for great purposes established by the Lord, were able to reach
an assurance, a level of certitude particular to their endeavor while on earth.
But in a final sense, the decisive certitude was provided by recognizing Christ
as the finisher of their faith—and the subject of their faith.
They came to the recognition that the Lord, as part of being the finisher of
their faith, had allowed them the certitude to proceed and receive all the
saving ordinances in the house of the Lord.

As Latter-day Saints, having had the precious gift
of the Holy Ghost conferred upon us, we have a unique benefaction that allows
Latter-day Saint truth-seekers to acquire certitude through
a confronting moment with the Author and the Finisher of our faith. The search
for this moment is intensely personal, as the Savior suggested in Luke
17:20–21, when He taught the Pharisees after they demanded that he tell
them when the kingdom of God should come. “The kingdom of God cometh not with
observation: Neither shall they say, Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is within you”
(emphasis added).

It is this personal search, the personal shift of the “gaze
of the soul” that places the feet of the truth-seeker on an
unalterable path, which if successful, will lead him or her to certitude. Then,
as we wait upon the Lord, our wait will cause us to seek Him in meekness with a
broken heart and a contrite spirit, with preparatory faith. We thereby make Him
the author of our faith. The profound leap of redemptive faith was illustrated
by President Hugh B. Brown in an address to the student body at Brigham Young
University in May 1969:

Our reactions to the ever-changing impacts of
life will depend upon our goals and ideals. “The vision that you glorify in
your mind, the ideal that you enthrone in your heart, this you will build your
life by, this you will become.” Every life coheres around certain fundamental
core ideas whether we realize it or not, and herein lies the chief value of
revealed religion. But while I believe all that God has revealed, I am not
quite sure that I understand what he has revealed, and the fact that he has promised
further revelation is to me a challenge to keep an open mind and be prepared to
follow wherever my search for truth may lead. . . . Our reactions to the
ever-changing impacts of life will depend upon our goals and our
ideals. And I would like to leave that thought with you to ponder.

Again I emphasize, there is no
final goal. Life must continue to expand, to unfold, and to grow, if
it is to continue to be a good life. These things are indispensable, and in
this connection age makes little difference (thank goodness for me!). There is
opportunity for all to expand and to grow and to be and to become. . . . 

We have been blessed with much knowledge by revelation
from God, which, in some part, the world lacks. But there is an
incomprehensibly greater part of truth, which we must yet discover. Our
revealed truth should leave us stricken with the knowledge of how little we
really know. It should never lead to an emotional arrogance based upon a false
assumption that we somehow have all the answers—that we in fact
have a corner on truth. For we do not. Whether you are in the field of
economics or political science, history or the behavioral
sciences—continue to search for the truth; and, maintain
humility sufficient to be able to revise your hypotheses as new truth comes to
you by means of the Spirit or the mind. Salvation, like education, is an
on-going process.

One may not attain salvation by merely acknowledging
allegiance, nor is it available in ready-to-wear stores or in
supermarkets where it may be bought and paid for. That it is an eternal quest
must be obvious to all. Education is involved in salvation and may be had only
by evolution or unfolding or developing into our potential. It is in large
measure a problem of awareness, of reaching out and looking up, of aspiring and
becoming, pushing back our horizons, seeking for answers and searching for
God.

In other words, it is not merely a matter of conformity to
rituals, climbing sacred stairs, bathing in sacred pools, or making pilgrimages
to ancient shrines. The depth and height and quality of life depends upon
awareness, and awareness is a process of being saved from ignorance. Man cannot
be saved in ignorance. Man is saved by inquiry, by revelation, by knowledge
borne of faith and being reconciled to God through the atonement of our Lord
and Savior, Jesus Christ.26

It can be seen in President Brown’s explanation of seeking
truth that he has suggested the quest for knowledge is eternal and that there
will be no final goal in this life. He shares an important point that the
pursuit of certitude leads us down a path in which an ongoing process is
commenced. This reach for redemptive faith is done as we look up, aspire for
answers, and become more developed in the eyes of the Lord. It is done by
pushing back the horizons of ignorance produced as we near the limits of the
Oakeshottian prison. We must continue to seek for answers by searching for God.
Salvation from ignorance transforms itself into the pursuit of exaltation,
which then becomes the ultimate goal of the truth-seeker’s
search.

The Lord has in fact made this promise to all
Latter-day Saint truth-seekers. He declared to us all, in
Doctrine and Covenants 93:

Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every
soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and
obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that
I AM (D&C 93:1; final word is not capitalized in original).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie, in his final address to the
Latter-day Saints, clarified this point when he contemplated his
impending death and said, “I testify that he is the Son of the Living God and
was crucified for the sins of the world. . . . But I shall not know any better
then than I know now that he is God’s Almighty Son.”27
For Elder McConkie, certitude was attained long before that day by sacred
moments of confrontation in which his preparatory faith was transformed into
redemptive faith. This was done in intensely private moments as a “leap of
faith,” even redemptive faith over the walls of the Oakeshottian prison. He
transcended the object of sense into confronting the subject of Christ, the
pinnacle of a priori
knowledge. Both prophets and philosophers have pointed out this path.

For the Latter-day Saint truth-seeker,
the assurance found by this consensus of the secular and the sacred, by men and
women of our faith and by those not of our faith, demonstrates that the move
from preparatory faith to redemptive faith is one of certitude produced by
making the Savior the subject of our faith. It leads to the source of absolute
truth long sought by great men from Plato until the present time. It is a long
process unique to each person, and it may not even be completed in our
lifetime. However, the methodology of how the path is engaged and traversed is
universal and can be accessed with remarkable success. For each of us, the path
is private, personal, and redemptive.

The invitation to the path of certitude is provided by
Isaiah. He counsels us, “The work of righteousness shall be peace; and the
effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever” (Isaiah 32:17). It is
this quietness and assurance forever that is produced by our redemptive faith.
It is in that moment, when we successfully transcend the Oakeshottian prison of
conditionality through redemptive faith, that we encounter thereby the Lord,
and thus come to know “The Truth.”

Notes

 1. Marx’s Critique of Hegel’s
Philosophy of Right, edited by Joseph O’Malley, translated by
Annette Jolin and Joseph O’Malley (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press, 1970).

 2. Gregory
A. Prince and William Robert Wright, David
O. McKay and the Rise of Modern Mormonism (Salt Lake City:
University of Utah Press, 2005), 40; emphasis added.

 3. Michael
Oakeshott, On Human Conduct
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1975), 27.

 4. George
Q. Cannon, in Discourses of
Wilford Woodruff and His Counselors (Salt Lake City: B.H.S.
Publishing, 1988), 2:293.

 5. James
E. Talmage, Improvement Era
4 (October 1901): 909.

 6. Bruce
R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine
(Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966), 578.

 7. Gordon
B. Hinckley, “What Are People Asking about Us?” Ensign,
November 1998, 71. In the interview with Larry King, President Hinckley stated:
“The figures I have are from—between 2 percent and 5 percent of
our people were involved in it. It was a very limited practice; carefully
safeguarded. In 1890, that practice was discontinued. The president of the
church, the man who occupied the position which I occupy today, went before the
people, and said he had prayed about it, worked on it, and had received from
the Lord a revelation that it was time to stop, to discontinue it then. That’s
118 years ago. It is behind us. . . . I condemn it, yes, as a practice, because
I think it is not doctrinal.
It is not legal.”

 8. Thomas
Kuhn, The Structure of
Scientific Revolutions (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press,
1970), 83, 98; Albert Einstein, “Autobiographical Vote,” in Albert Einstein:
Philosopher-Scientist,” edited by P. A. Shilpp (Evanston, Illinois,
1949), 45.

 9. David
Hume, An Enquiry Concerning
Human Understanding, edited by Anthony Flew (LaSalle, Illinois: Open
Court Publishers, 1988), 87.

10.  David
Hume, “Abstract of a Treatise on Human Nature,” in An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, edited
by Anthony Flew (LaSalle, Illinois: Open Court Publishers, 1988), 34–35.

11.  René
Descartes, “Sixth Meditation,” in Meditations
on First Philosophy (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press,
1996), 53–54.

12.  Soren
Kierkegaard, “Concluding Unscientific Postscript,” translated by David F.
Swensen, in Ethics and
Values—Basic Readings in Theory and Practice (Boston: Pearson
Custom Publishing, 2002), 103.

13.  Max
Weber, Selections in
Translation, edited by W. G. Runciman (Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press, 1993), 18–21.

14.  Jacobellis
v. Ohio, 378 U.S. 184 (1964) http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/ Potter_Stewart;
accessed May 14, 2007.

15.  Charles
Taylor, Sources of
Self—The Making of the Modern Identity (Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1989), 115.

16.  Plato,
“Apology,” in The Trial and
Death of Socrates, translated by 
G. M. A. Grube (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 1975), 389.

17.  Taylor,
Sources of Self, 123.

18.  Neal
A. Maxwell, Even As I Am
(Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1982), 4; emphasis in the original.

19.  Ibid.,
19.

20.  In
Luke 17, the apostles asked the Lord to increase their faith. The Lord
explained in a parable that performance of duty would enhance their faith. In
verses 7–10 He explained: 

 “But which of you,
having a servant plowing or feeding cattle, will say unto him by and by, when
he is come from the field, Go and sit down to meat? And will not rather say
unto him, Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself, and serve me, till
I have eaten and drunken; and afterward thou shalt eat and drink? Doth he thank
that servant because he did the things that were commanded him? I trow not. So
likewise ye, when ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you,
say, We are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do.”

 It is clear from the
above that keeping the commandments increases faith and produces a broken heart
and a contrite spirit. It is the broken heart that creates the condition to
receive the gift of faith.

21.  Taylor,
Sources of Self, 123.

22.  See
Luke 15:17. 

23.  The
soul-searching of the disciples is particularly poignant in Matthew’s
account of the denial of Christ by Peter: 

 “Now Peter sat
without in the palace: and a damsel came unto him, saying, Thou also wast with
Jesus of Galilee. But he denied before them all, saying, I know not what thou
sayest. And when he was gone out into the porch, another maid saw him, and said
unto them that were there, This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth. And
again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man. And after a while came
unto him they that stood by, and said to Peter, Surely thou also art one of
them; for thy speech bewrayeth thee. Then began he to curse and to swear,
saying, I know not the man. And immediately the cock crew. And Peter remembered
the word of Jesus, which said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny
me thrice. And he went out, and wept bitterly” (Matthew 26:69–75).

24.  In
John 20:24–28, Thomas’s experience is recorded: “But Thomas, one of
the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came. The other
disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord. But he said unto
them, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger
into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not
believe. And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with
them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said,
Peace be unto you. Then saith he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold
my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless, but
believing. And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord and my God” (emphasis
added).

25.  Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, 3:431–40.

26.  Hugh
B. Brown, Speeches of the
Year, Brigham Young University, May 1969.

27.  Bruce
R. McConkie, “The Purifying Power of Gethsemane,” Ensign, May 1985, 11.

 
 
© 2007 The Perpetual Education Fund, Inc 

Printed from Gospelink.com
