Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Youth/Youth

The Church defines "youth" as all men and women ages twelve to eighteen. Church policies and programs for youth are designed to help them make the transition from childhood to young adulthood with feelings of confidence and well-being, avoiding the pitfalls of adolescence, gaining more mature testimonies of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and drawing closer to their families and the Church.

The Church expects full participation from youth, who plan and administer many of their own activities, share the gospel with others, serve as examples of LDS teachings to their friends, render Christian service in the Church and community, and participate in baptisms for the dead in the temple. They also receive leadership and speaking assignments and are taught to be examples to other members of their families and wards.

Young people in the Church sometimes are referred to as "youth of the noble birthright," sons and daughters of God, born at this time in the earth's history for a sacred purpose. Although the moral climate and religious values of society seem to be weakening, the youth of the Church are asked to be "standard bearers" and lights to guide others to Jesus Christ. Each individual is considered by the Church to have a purpose for and mission in life, and adolescents are asked to draw near to the Lord to learn how best to fulfill that purpose (see Patriarchal Blessings). LDS youth are taught that they can function in and contribute to society without participating in its ills (John 17:15).

Not all LDS youth desire the same level of participation in Church programs, although the level of activity is high as compared to youth in many other religious traditions. Most LDS youth organizations try to understand and accommodate individual differences and competing claims for young people's time. However, if an individual seems to be drifting from the Church or to be involved with undesirable or dangerous activities, Church resource care is made available to aid the family in helping the youth find a healthier and happier path.

Young men and young women of the Church are guided by adult advisers, who also teach the quorums and classes. Each quorum and class has a youth presidency that conducts meetings, involves group members in class experiences, and helps plan and carry out activities. Each group follows a prescribed course of study, and group members are encouraged to build friendships with each other and to encourage and strengthen each other in keeping the standards of the Church.

Church programs for youth are designed to support parents in preparing their children to live responsible adult lives as faithful Christians (see Values, Transmission of). Parents and youth often are involved in events and activities together. Youth are encouraged to seek parental counsel, share experiences with parents and siblings, and help strengthen family bonds.

The Aaronic Priesthood and the young men and young women organizations provide the major avenues for Church-sponsored youth activity. The purpose of the Aaronic Priesthood and Young Men organizations is identical: to help each young man come to Christ, become converted to the gospel, respect and fulfill his priesthood callings, give meaningful service, and prepare to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood, serve a full-time mission, and become an honorable husband and father.

The purpose of the Young Women program is similar: Each young woman is to become converted to the gospel, strengthen her testimony of the Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ, recognize her identity as a daughter of God, and be a witness for God by living the Young Women Values: Faith, Divine Nature, Individual Worth, Knowledge, Choice and Accountability, Good Works, and Integrity. Each young woman is encouraged to keep covenants that she made at baptism, prepare spiritually for temple ordinances, and appreciate the importance of service as a wife and mother.

The missions and purposes of the youth programs are mutually supportive. As young men and women meet together to be taught, to share activities, and to give service, they gain leadership experience. This combined youth program helps young men and women learn to appreciate each other, to understand and value strengths and differences, and to prepare for responsible adulthood. Their shared values help them reinforce the commitment of all to the gospel.

Young Men-Young Women combined activities are regularly planned by the bishop or branch president and Ward Youth Council. Youth leaders represent their peers and counsel with their leaders in making the decisions and solving the problems associated with planning and implementing activities. The Church youth programs include a range of wholesome activities in addition to lessons, speakers, discussion groups, and service projects. Sports and physical fitness, camping, Boy Scouts of America, socials, conferences, skills training, and opportunities in drama, dance, and music are encouraged. Sharing such experiences helps youth to meet the social, physical, cultural, and emotional/spiritual needs. Additional study of the scriptures is provided to high school students through the Church Educational System seminary program.

Because the standards of the Church are different from the standards acceptable to much of the world, LDS youth face many significant decisions, expectations, and pressures. They are encouraged to seek all things good and virtuous both inside and outside the Church (see A of F 13) and to decide early in life to build their testimonies and remain faithful to the teachings of Jesus Christ.

Illustration

Deacon's quorum snow outing of the Holladay Ward, Salt Lake City, 1976. Each youth age group in the Church is led by a volunteer adult adviser under the direction of the ward bishop. Studies indicate that the most important influence in the religious growth of teenagers in the Church, after the influence of religious observance in the home, is the personal relationship developed between the youth and their adviser. Courtesy Craig Law.

Bibliography

Aaronic Priesthood-Young Men Handbook. Salt Lake City, 1977. Benson, Ezra T. To Young Men of the Priesthood. Salt Lake City, 1986. New Era 18 (March, 1988):5-67. Young Women Handbook. Salt Lake City, 1988. ARDETH G. KAPP

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
