Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Appendix 8 Letters of the First Presidency

The following letters of the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints were selected to illustrate some of the many interests of the Presidency in the leadership of the Church. Letters included here are of a regulatory and directive nature and represent only one facet of a wide range of responsibilities and activities.

Examples of other types of documents emanating from the First Presidency are contained in additional Appendices under the titles of Doctrinal Expositions, and Temple Dedicatory Prayers. Members of the First Presidency also deliver formal messages at General Conferences and other conferences, and publish an annual Christmas Message and statements on other occasions when needed.

Letters from the First Presidency carry the official letterhead: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints OFFICE OF THE FIRST PRESIDENCY Salt Lake City, Utah

To conserve space in this Appendix the letterhead does not appear with the individual selections. A brief notation indicates the general subject matter of each letter.

Cub Scout Program Encouraged

December 19, 1960 To the Priesthood, Primary Workers, and Cub Scout Leaders It is the desire of the First Presidency that Latter-day Saint boys have the full advantage of the Scouting program, including Cub Scouting, Boy Scouting, and Exploring. It is also the desire of the First Presidency that Latter-day Saint boys have this experience in units sponsored by the Church, under the direction of Church leaders, and according to Church policies and standards. When we do not accept this responsibility but leave it to the school, the community, or another church, we do two things: we place our boys in a situation where their activities may not be conducted according to Church standards; we may be sowing the seeds of Church inactivity at a most impressionable age.

The Cub Scout program was adopted by the Church in 1953. That year 114 Packs were organized. At the close of 1960 there were about 1,075 Packs and 28,000 Cub Scouts.

The Latter-day Saint belief in the eternal nature of the family places special emphasis on the value of this home-centered program. Cub Scouting is a potent and effective part of the youth program of the Church and must have the enthusiastic support of the priesthood and Primary workers.

We extend congratulations and commendation for the outstanding success of this program to date, and pray that the blessings of the Lord will ever be with you as you continue willingly to give of yourselves for the protection and guidance of our youth. Sincerely yours, THE FIRST PRESIDENCY David O. McKay J. Reuben Clark, Jr. Henry D. Moyle

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
