Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Proper Conversion to the Gospel

January 3, 1977 To all Mission Presidents Dear Brethren: We are pleased with the great number of stable and sound converts who are coming into the Church, and we extend our highest commendation to you, your missionaries, and all who labor with you. Your devotion, sacrifice, and achievements are deeply appreciated. We hope and pray that through your continued labors, additional worthy and honest truth seekers will receive the blessings of the gospel.

As we begin this new year of missionary efforts, we might review the revealed requirements that our Heavenly Father's children should attain to qualify for baptism:

All those who humble themselves before God, and desire to be baptized, and come forth with broken hearts and contrite spirits, and witness before the Church that they have truly repented of all their sins, and are willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end, and truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins, shall be received by baptism into His Church. (D&C 20:37)

As part of the necessary preparation for baptism, investigators should come to a knowledge of Christ and the first principles of the gospel; they should have attended Church meetings and should feel a unity and oneness with Church members; and they should desire to love and serve God with all their hearts.

New members should be carefully fellowshipped and involved in suitable activity and service in Church programs to encourage their continued growth and understanding of the gospel.

We pray that the Lord will continue to bless and prosper you, your missionaries, and all those who labor with you, that the great harvest now underway will continue, all to the honor and glory of His name. Sincerely, THE FIRST PRESIDENCY Spencer W. Kimball N. Eldon Tanner Marion G. Romney

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
