Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Fast Day and Donation to the Needy of Africa

January 11, 1985 To General Authorities, Regional Representatives, Stake Presidents, Bishops and Branch Presidents in the United States and Canada Dear Brethren: People throughout the world have been touched by the portrayal in the media of the plight of many thousands of starving people in Africa. There are others in similar circumstances in other areas. We have sent funds to assist those in need. We now feel that our people would like to participate more extensively in the great humanitarian effort to assist those in Ethiopia, other areas of Africa, and perhaps in other parts of the world.

The First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve have accordingly determined that Sunday, January 27, should be designated as a special fast day when our people will be invited to refrain from partaking of two meals and contribute the equivalent value, or more, to the Church to assist those in need. All fast offering funds contributed on this day will be dedicated for the use of the victims of famine and other causes resulting in hunger and privation among people of Africa, and possibly in some other areas. They will be placed through agencies of unquestioned integrity.

The regular February fast day will be held on the first Sunday of the month as usual and funds contributed on that day will be used in the customary way to assist those in need in the Church. We repeat, however, that all funds contributed on January 27 will be earmarked particularly to assist the hungry and needy in distressed areas regardless of Church membership.

We shall appreciate your advising the people of your wards and stakes accordingly. This letter may be read in the Sacrament meetings of all wards and branches. We are confident that there will be a great outpouring from this effort. Sincerely, your brethren, THE FIRST PRESIDENCY Spencer W. Kimball Marion G. Romney Gordon B. Hinckley

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
