Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

An Invitation to Come Back

December 23, 1985 To: All Stake Presidents Dear Brethren: There are members of the Church who have become inactive, or who have been disciplined, or who otherwise have become alienated from the Church. At this time of the year it is important that we reach out to all such persons to encourage them to return to full activity and thereby to enjoy all the blessings the Church affords.

You will find the enclosed statement from the First Presidency which was published in the December 22 issue of the Church News which elaborates on this theme. We request that you make copies of this statement available to all bishops and that you ask them to read the statement at a Sacrament meeting. At that time the bishops should also encourage the members of the Church in attendance to reach out and to endeavor to reactivate those who may have become alienated. Sincerely your brethren, THE FIRST PRESIDENCY Ezra Taft Benson Gordon B. Hinckley Thomas S. Monson

December 25, 1985 AN INVITATION FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS Come back, Come back and feast at the table of the Lord, and taste again the sweet and satisfying fruits of fellowship with the Saints.

We rejoice in the blessings that come of membership and activity in this Church whose head is the Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ. In deep sincerity we express our love and gratitude for our brethren and sisters everywhere. We are aware of some who are less active, of others who have become critical and are prone to find fault, and of those who have been disfellowshipped or excommunicated because of serious transgressions.

To all such we reach out in love. The Lord said: "I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men." (D&C 64:10)

We encourage members to forgive those who may have wronged them. To those who have ceased activity and to those who have become critical, we say, "Come back. Come back and feast at the table of the Lord, and taste again the sweet and satisfying fruits of fellowship with the saints."

We are confident that many have longed to return, but have felt awkward about doing so. We assure you that you will find open arms to receive you and willing hands to assist you.

We know there are many who carry heavy burdens of guilt and bitterness. To such we say, "Set them aside and give heed to the words of the Savior, who gave His life for the sins of all. "Come unto me, all ye that are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

"'Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. "For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light."' (Matt. 11:28-30)

We plead with you. We pray for you. We invite and welcome you with love and appreciation. Sincerely your brethren, Ezra Taft Benson Gordon B. Hinckley Thomas S. Monson

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
