Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Provo Utah Temple

Dedicated by President Harold B. Lee, February 9, 1972

O God, the Eternal Father, the Creator of heaven and earth and all things that in them are; Thou Man of Holiness who hast created us, Thy children in Thine own image and likeness, and endowed us with power and agency to follow Thee; Thou who knowest all things and hast all power, all might, and all dominion; Thou who created the universe and ruleth with justice and equity and mercy over all the works of Thy hands—hallowed be Thy great and holy name! . . .

O our Father, we seek to be like Thee; we seek to pattern our lives after the life of Thy Son; we desire righteousness, for ourselves and our children and our children's children; we turn our faces to this holy house; and we plead with Thee to make us worthy to inherit the fulness of those blessings found only in Thy holy temples—even those blessings which grow out of the continuation of the family unit forever.

Thou knowest, O Father, that we seek these blessings, not only for ourselves and our descendants, but also for our forebears; for Thou hast said that we, as saviors on Mount Zion, have power to save and redeem our worthy dead; we seek so to do, and we plead for Thy guidance and directing light as we go forward in this work—one of the greatest ever revealed to the children of men in any age of the earth. . . .

We thank Thee, O our God, that Thou didst ordain and establish the Constitution of the United States "by the hands of wise men whom" Thou didst raise up unto this very purpose. We thank Thee for the freedoms and "rights and privileges" which are guaranteed to us in this sacred document and pray that they may be established forever. . . .

Let that great temple of learning, The Brigham Young University, and all that is associated with it, and all other church schools, institutes, and seminaries—be prospered to the full. . . .

May those who teach and study in all academic fields have their souls enlightened with spiritual knowledge, so they will turn to Thy house for blessings and knowledge and learning that surpass all that may be found elsewhere.

. . . acting in the authority of that priesthood which is after the order of Thy Son and in His Holy Name, we dedicate this Temple unto Thee, the Lord.

We dedicate it as a house of baptism, a house of Endowment, a house of marriage, and a house of righteousness, for the living and the dead. . . .

O Lord God of our fathers, who sitteth upon Thy throne, and who liveth, and reigneth over all things—blessed be Thy Holy Name, both now and forever.

In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, Thine Only Son, even so, amen and amen. [Church News, pp. 4-5, February 12, 1972.]

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
