Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Adultery

Adultery constitutes a grievous violation of the law of chastity. For Latter-day Saints it is defined as sexual intercourse between a married person and someone other than his or her legal and lawful spouse, while fornication involves two unmarried parties. Both transgressions fall under condemnation in scripture and in the teachings of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

The Lord forbids adultery in the ten commandments and elsewhere in the Law of Moses (see, e.g., Ex. 20:14; Lev. 20:10; Deut. 22:22). Both in Israel and in the Western Hemisphere, Christ commanded his followers not to commit adultery in thought or deed (Matt. 5:27-28; 3 Ne. 12:27-28). In this dispensation, the Lord has again prohibited adultery, and "anything like unto it" (D&C 59:6), while reproving even adulterous thoughts as an offense against the Spirit (D&C 42:23-26). In an official pronouncement in 1942, the First Presidency of the Church decried sexual sin-including adultery, fornication, and prostitution-as an offense "in its enormity, next to murder" (IE 45 [Nov. 1942]:758; MFP 6:176).

Because adultery or fornication breaks baptismal covenants and temple vows and may involve other members of the Church, penitent offenders are to confess the sin to their bishop or other Church authority, who may convene a disciplinary council. After prayerful deliberation, the council may excommunicate or disfellowship an adulterer, or implement some type of probation to help the offender repent. The excommunication of an adulterous priesthood leader is almost certain. A disciplinary council usually requires the adulterer to seek forgiveness from the betrayed spouse and from anyone drawn into the sin. By demonstrating an abhorrence for past sin and a commitment to righteousness, the repentant adulterer may, after an adequate period of probation, become fully reconciled to Christ, rebaptized, and reinstated in the Church and find forgiveness from God (D&C 58:47-48).

Bibliography

Kimball, Spencer W. "The Sin Next to Murder." In The Miracle of Forgiveness, pp. 61-75. Salt Lake City, 1969. BRYCE J. CHRISTENSEN

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
