Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Elect of God

The elect of God are those who are heirs to all that the Father has. Although the faithful have always been the elect of God, even before Abraham, the present concept that God elects or chooses individuals or groups to whom he makes promises of eternal salvation, and in turn requires of them certain obligations, has its roots in the covenant God made with Abraham. In ancient times Abraham's descendants were considered the elect, especially through Isaac and Jacob (Israel). For disobedience, the Israelites were eventually scattered throughout the world. However, God has not forgotten his covenant with their fathers. Biblical, Book of Mormon, and latter-day prophets have declared that ultimately the Israelite people will be gathered from their dispersion and restored to favor with God (cf. Amos 9:13-15). All persons who are not literally of Israel can be brought into the elect lineage of Abraham by the Law of Adoption when they accept the gospel (Abr. 2:10; D&C 84:33-34; Gal. 3:26-29; 4:5-7).

The gospel of Jesus Christ, restored to the earth through the Prophet Joseph Smith, inaugurated the restoration and the gathering of the elect from the four quarters of the earth (D&C 33:6; 110:11). When scattered children of Israel hear the gospel message of salvation, they are invited to come into the fold of Christ, his Church, by repentance, baptism, and receiving the Holy Ghost by the laying-on of hands (MD, p. 201).

To enjoy the fulness of the covenant blessings and the eternal felicity of God in the presence of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the elect must be faithful in keeping all the covenants required of them by the Lord. Some may choose not to be so devoted, whereas others pursue such excellence in faithfulness that their calling and election are made sure (cf. 2 Pet. 1:10). These become "the elect according to the covenant" (JS-M 1:22) and are made partakers of the same eternal reward that was extended to Abraham. That is, they are assured of exaltation in God's presence with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (Luke 13:28; D&C 132:29-32, 37).

Bibliography

Richards, LeGrand. Israel, Do You Know! Salt Lake City, 1954. ARTHUR A. BAILEY

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
