Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

LDS Business College

The LDS Business College, located in Salt Lake City, Utah, is a fully-accredited, two-year institution of higher learning owned by the Church, and operated and partially funded through the Church Educational System (CES). The 800-plus students receive training for careers in business and industry.

Its forerunner, the Salt Lake Stake Academy, was founded in 1886 under the direction of Karl G. Maeser. Church leaders originally intended to establish the Academy as the Church's leading institution of higher learning, and the name of the school was changed to LDS College in 1889. When Young University (later the Church University) replaced LDS College as the "flagship" of the educational system of the Church, LDS College declined in significance. However, the Church University was closed in 1894, contributing to the subsequent growth of both LDS College and Brigham Young Academy in Provo, later Brigham Young University (1903). An early emphasis on business courses at LDS College led to the creation of a department of business in 1895. When LDS College closed in 1931, the departments of business and music continued to function separately as the LDS Business College and the McCune School of Music.

After a long period in which Church policy required the college to be financially self-sufficient, CES resumed partial funding in 1986. At that time, a project to upgrade programs and facilities was begun. LDS Business College currently offers one- and two-year programs plus short courses and professional seminars in accounting, marketing/management, computer information systems, office administration, health services, fashion merchandising, and interior design. In all courses of study along with imparting information and developing skills, a major emphasis is placed on the importance of morality and ethics in the business profession.

Bibliography

Quinn, D. Michael. "The Brief Career of Young University at Salt Lake City." Utah Historical Quarterly 41 (1973):69-89. KENNETH H. BEESLEY

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
