Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Magic

"Magic" anciently implied something akin to sorcery, and modern definitions retain this sense as well as a host of other meanings that have accrued around the term over many years and from many cultures. On one point there is general agreement: "Magic" suggests the supernatural. Pretending to use the occult when so-called magic tricks are displayed is simply part of the entertainment. When it implies governing the forces of nature through supernatural means, however, magic takes on a markedly different character.

Latter-day Saints reject magic as a serious manipulation of nature and are advised to avoid any practice that claims supernatural power apart from the priesthood and spiritual gifts of the Church (see Devils; Satanism). They are also counseled against using any fortune-telling devices. Both so-called white and black magic can be Satanic.

True miracles are done by the power of Jesus Christ. Devils may be cast out, but only in humility and by fasting, faith, and prayer, and the power of the true priesthood, with no fanfare or public acclaim (cf. Matt. 17:21; D&C 84:66-73). Regarding the discernment of true spirits from evil ones, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught that without the priesthood and "a knowledge of the laws by which spirits are governed," it is impossible to discover the difference between the miracles of Moses and the magicians of the pharaoh or between those of the apostles and Simon the sorcerer (TPJS, pp. 202-206). A test of a godly spirit is to discern whether there is "any intelligence communicated" or "the purposes of God developed" (TPJS, p. 204).

Ultimately, it is irrelevant to the determination of its sources to note that a so-called miracle is for the good of mankind. The Savior recognized that miracles may come from an evil source: "Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out devils, and in thy name done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity" (Matt. 7:22-23).

The Lord gave instruction to Israel that the righteous were to call upon him for revelation and to avoid magical devices and incantations that were prevalent among the other ancient nations (Isa. 8:19-20; Ex. 22:18). One danger of preoccupation with forms of magic based on the power of Satan is that it draws people away from the true source of inspiration and makes the worker of magic a servant of the adversary.

The Church holds that no person need unduly fear magic or those who claim magical powers, for magic can have no power over anyone unless the person believes that it can.

Bibliography

Hinckley, Gordon B. "Lord, Increase Our Faith." Ensign 17 (Nov. 1987):52. McConkie, Bruce R. "Magic." MD, pp. 462-63. Smith, Joseph F. GD, pp 375-77. JANET THOMAS

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
