Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Perpetual Emigrating Fund (PEF)

To assist Latter-day Saints in the eastern United States and Europe to gather to Church headquarters in the West (see Gathering), the Church inaugurated the Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company in 1849. It is probable that before its demise in 1887, the Emigrating Company assisted more than 30,000 individuals to travel to Utah.

The PEF used Church assets and private contributions to assist individuals commensurate with their inability to pay. With limited funds, fewer individuals could be assisted than wished to participate. Those receiving priority included individuals with skills urgently needed in the West, those whose relatives or friends had contributed to the PEF, and those with longest membership in the Church. Cost-cutting measures, including group contracting, doubling up families in wagons, and organizing handcart companies, were also adopted to make the available funds stretch as far as possible.

PEF assistance was always extended as a loan rather than as a gift. Sponsored emigrants signed a note obligating themselves to repay the PEF as they were able. Though it sometimes required years, and some never fully retired their debt, many repaid their loan in cash, commodities, or labor. In 1880, on the fiftieth anniversary of the organization of the Church, President John Taylor, in the tradition of the Israelite jubilee year, forgave half of the outstanding debt owed by the poor to the fund, while those who were able to pay were still expected to do so. In late 1887, under provisions of the Edmunds-Tucker Act (see Antipolygamy Legislation), the U.S. government dissolved both the Corporation of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and the Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company. [See also Immigration and Emigration.]

Illustration

Monarch of the Sea, the largest sailing vessel to transport LDS immigrants from Europe to America, carried the two largest companies of 955 and 974 people, in 1861 and 1864 respectively. Immigration to Utah was made possible for many more by borrowing from the Perpetual Emigrating Fund. Courtesy Peabody Museum, Salem, Massachusetts.

Bibliography

Arrington, Leonard J. Great Basin Kingdom. Cambridge, Mass, 1958. Jensen, Richard J. "The British Gathering to Zion." In Truth Will Prevail: The Rise of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the British Isles, 1837-1987, pp. 165-98. Cambridge, England, 1987. DAVID F. BOONE

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
