Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Priesthood Councils

The concept of a council in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints embodies both a philosophy of administrative behavior and an organizational body or unit. There are formally constituted councils, such as the Council of Twelve Apostles (see Quorum of the Twelve Apostles), stake high councils, and councils consisting of priesthood quorum and auxiliary officers who work together as ward councils or stake councils. To these latter councils concerned representatives (athletic, single adult, etc.) are sometimes added. Church councils coordinate and schedule activities, gather information, plan future programs or events, and make decisions and resolve problems for their units.

At the most basic level of organization-the family-a family council ideally exemplifies both the spirit and function of the whole concept of Church councils. In a family council, family members meet regularly to discuss plans, decisions, and problems that affect them individually and as a whole. Family councils reinforce shared commitment to the well-being of each individual and effective management of group activities.

The philosophy of a council is what sociologist Thomas O'Dea called a "democracy of participation" in Mormon culture (The Mormons [Chicago, 1964], p. 165). At periodic council meetings both individual and organizational needs are considered. Recognizing the unique circumstances surrounding a particular unit, geographical area, or set of individuals, the council identifies the programs and activities that need to be planned and correlated. (The council does not have final decision-making power; this resides with the unit leader, such as the stake president or bishop.)

Councils are more than operational coordinating mechanisms. They also serve as vehicles for family, ward, stake, region, area, or general Church teaching and development. As members participate in councils, they learn about larger organizational issues. They see leadership in action, learning how to plan, analyze problems, make decisions, and coordinate across subunit boundaries. Participation in councils helps prepare members for future leadership responsibilities.

Church councils are also convened for disciplinary procedures. Such councils, which may be held at the ward, stake, or general Church level, consider serious infractions where individuals may need institutional help in the repentance process beyond the personal counseling of a leader or where excommunication or other disciplinary action may be necessary. Individual circumstances are considered by the council and the final decision is made by the bishop or president, with council ratification. Disciplinary councils are set up to protect both the individual and the Church by assigning council members to represent the interests of both parties (D&C 102:15). J. BONNER RITCHIE

Illustration

Council room in the Salt Lake Temple where the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and other General Authorities meet each Thursday.

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
