Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Priesthood Executive Committee, Stake and Ward

The ward priesthood executive committee (PEC) consists of the leaders of key ward organizations. The PEC generally meets weekly under the direction of the bishop and his counselors to direct and coordinate ward priesthood programs that have been designed to promote the spiritual and temporal Welfare of each individual and family in the ward. This committee includes leaders of Melchizedek Priesthood quorums, who administer Welfare (physical and material well-being), temple, missionary, and family history (genealogy) activities, and leaders responsible for youth priesthood programs. A ward executive secretary prepares each meeting's agenda, and the ward clerk records its minutes. The PEC also coordinates ward efforts to activate its members not regularly participating in the Church.

The PEC thus provides a forum for ward priesthood officers to foster the well-being of ward members; discuss applications of Church policy; participate in and sponsor leadership training; and report their stewardship concerns to the bishop, including problems discovered through monthly home teaching visits to congregation members.

The stake presidency and high council compose the Stake Priesthood Executive Committee. They oversee the administration of all Church programs in the stake; consider issues that affect all wards in the stake; and approve nominations of members to be called for service in ward bishoprics, stake priesthood quorums, and stake auxiliary organizations. The stake PEC usually meets twice a month. The stake president presides and conducts. The stake executive secretary and stake clerk assist the stake presidency with the agenda and minutes of the meeting. Both the ward and stake priesthood executive committees are augmented periodically by leaders of the primary, young women, and Relief Society organizations to form two additional councils. [See also Home Teaching; Ward Council.] DAVID C. BRADFORD

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
