Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Prophet Joseph Smith

[Joseph Smith, Jr., Prophet and first President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, is the primary subject of several entries and is mentioned prominently in many more. For a brief biography and articles on his teachings and writings, see Smith, Joseph: The Prophet. See also History of the Church: c. 1820-1831 and c. 1831-1844 and numerous articles relating to Joseph Smith cross-referenced there. For a history of Joseph Smith's prophetic ministry prepared under his direction, see History of the Church.

Regarding Joseph Smith's early prophetic experiences, see First Vision; Moroni, Visitations of; and Sacred Grove. During one of Moroni's visits in 1827, Joseph Smith received the Gold Plates from which he translated by the "gift and power of God" the Book of Mormon; see Book of Mormon Translation by Joseph Smith. For other visions and visitations, see Visions of Joseph Smith.

In company with Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Smith received divine authority; see Aaronic Priesthood: Restoration of, and Melchizedek Priesthood: Restoration of. Thus authorized, they proceeded with the Organization of the Church, 1830. Numerous Revelations given through Joseph Smith guided the infant organization; see Book of Commandments and Doctrine and Covenants. For other scripture that came through the Prophet Joseph Smith, see Book of Abraham; Book of Mormon; Book of Moses; Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible (JST); and Pearl of Great Price.

Joseph Smith's mission focused on the Restoration of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, including the First Principles of the Gospel and its Ordinances; he encouraged the Gathering of the Saints and laid the foundation for the establishment of Zion and the New Jerusalem in preparation for the Second Coming of Christ. The Articles of Faith provides a summary statement of some of the principal doctrines of the gospel.]

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
