Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Public Speaking

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints encourages its members at all ages to express publicly not only their faith and testimony but also their wisdom, humor, and gratitude. Anyone may be invited to speak in an LDS meeting, whether man, woman, or child. Children begin their public speaking experience by sharing two or three sentences learned at home; later, talks of original construction and longer duration are given. Subject matter may be assigned or left to the selection of the speaker. Although some Latter-day Saints write out and read their speeches aloud, that practice is less common as members mature in their gospel experience and become more confident in their speaking ability. Experienced speakers, such as Church officers, often "take no thought" beforehand (Matt. 10:19) as to precisely what they will say, but "study the word of the Lord" and then speak "as they [are] directed by the Spirit" (D&C 42:12-14). Thousands of young people who serve on missions for the Church become adept at public speaking.

Typically, an LDS speaker addresses the congregation as "brothers and sisters" and may introduce the topic by using a story, humorous event, or personal experience. The speaker then presents the substance of the speech, sometimes in traditional rhetorical form, giving general thesis statements with supporting data for each, and sometimes very informally. The information is usually based on observation, logic, authority of the scriptures, personal experience, writings of Church leaders, and sometimes comparative social or religious approaches (e.g., why Mormons may live longer than others). In summary, the speaker often declares faith in the principles discussed and testifies to their truthfulness, generally concluding the talk invoking the name of Jesus Christ and saying amen. The audience affirms agreement by uttering an audible "Amen."

Latter-day Saints believe that admission to the Kingdom of Heaven is achieved through obedience to ordinances and the development of personal perfection. Such spiritual growth comes in part from individual enlightenment, which is reason to receive the spoken or written word. Inspiration often derives from hearing the oral testimony of others, for if people do not nourish the word, they "can never pluck of the fruit of the tree of life" (Alma 32:40).

Thus, public speaking is a basic LDS exercise, for "how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?" (Rom. 10:14-17). As opportunity allows, a speaker introduces the restored gospel to others and, significantly, preaches the gospel in the Church's meetings. Speaking in church carries the responsibility of teaching and inspiring others. The speaker becomes a voice for God and is expected to prepare so that the word of God can effectively be expressed. The speaker is therefore admonished to use "great plainness of speech" (2 Cor. 3:12) and to speak as "moved upon by the Holy Ghost" (D&C 68:3).

Public speaking is periodically encouraged on a local level through speech festivals and contests. These events focus on the art of speaking, involve members in refining their speaking abilities in a Church context, and provide an appropriate arena for the enjoyment and appreciation of public speaking. LAEL J. WOODBURY

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
