Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Richmond Jail

When the Latter-day Saints at Far West, Caldwell County, Missouri, surrendered to the state militia in late October 1838, seven Church leaders-Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight, Amasa Lyman, and George W. Robinson-were arrested (see Missouri Conflict). They were first taken under guard to Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, and then to Richmond, the county seat of Ray County. They were confined on November 9, not in the county jail but in a small vacant house on the town square. Here they were imprisoned for three weeks to await a court inquiry into charges of treason, murder, arson, robbery, and perjury. Other Saints were also arrested and brought to Richmond for trial.

At the inquiry on November 28, the prisoners were bound over for trial, and Joseph Smith and five others were removed to a jail in Liberty, Clay County, Missouri, to await further hearings (see Liberty Jail). Pratt and four others remained in the Richmond County Jail, some until late April 1839 and others until June 1839.

During the time Joseph Smith was incarcerated in Richmond, the prisoners were chained together under miserable conditions and constant harassment. One incident during the imprisonment has become a legend. Pratt recalled that Joseph Smith, chagrined at the verbal abuse, boasting, and obscenity by the guards, stood up in chains and commanded, "silence, ye fiends of the infernal pit. In the name of Jesus Christ I rebuke you, and command you to be still; I will not live another minute and hear such language. Cease such talk, or you or I die this instant!" (p. 221). The tormenters reportedly fell silent.

The Richmond Jail no longer stands, and no marker designates its location.

Illustration

Joseph Smith Rebuking the Guards, by Danquart Weggeland (late nineteenth century, grisaille, 36" x 46"). While incarcerated in Richmond, Missouri, in November, 1838, Joseph Smith was subjected to obscene jests, blasphemies, and boasts of rape and murder. Disgusted by their crude language, he commanded the guards in the name of Jesus Christ to be still. Parley P. Pratt wrote, "Dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure village of Missouri." Church Museum of History and Art.

Bibliography

Gentry, Leland H. "A History of the Latter-day Saints in Northern Missouri from 1836 to 1839." Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1965. LeSueur, Stephen C. "'High Treason and Murder': The Examination of Mormon Prisoners at Richmond, Missouri." BYU Studies 26 (Spring 1986):3-30. Pratt, Parley P. Autobiography of Parley Parker Pratt. Salt Lake City, 1980. HOWARD A. CHRISTY

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
