Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Socialization

In general, socialization refers to the processes used to internalize the ways of a particular group in order to function therein (Elkin and Handel, p. 4). In this light, LDS socialization faces a number of challenges in the contemporary world, notably in aiding its members to observe a health code (see Word of Wisdom); to oppose all forms of premarital and extramarital sexual behavior (see Chastity); to spend two years at their own expense in missionary work; and in the face of social pressures to the contrary, to have large families-generally two more children than the national average (Heaton; Thomas, 1983).

Many processes that lead to effective socialization within the LDS culture are similar to those found in American culture generally. Mormon parents are similar in many respects to other American parents, including the love and support they express to their children and the nurturing and disciplinary controls they exercise within the family (Kunz; Thomas, 1983). Nevertheless, some researchers contend that Latter-day Saints are more effective than some other groups in socializing their members to accept specific group values and behavior (Christensen; Smith). Some hints at possible reasons may be found in the degree to which LDS families participate in home religious observance (family prayer, scripture study, and Family Home Evening).

The influence of home religious observance is perhaps best understood through research conducted by the Church on young men between the ages of twelve and eighteen. It found that home religious observance is a reliable predictor of what an adolescent's private religious observance (individual prayer, study of the scriptures, etc.) will be. Home religious observance also somewhat predicts public religious observance, but only half as accurately as does private religious observance. In turn, private religious observance is the single best predictor of a young man's internalizing religious goals and values specific to the LDS lifestyle, such as serving a mission for the Church, temple marriage, premarital chastity, and Church activity (Thomas, Olsen, and Weed). Having these as part of one's future plans is the best predictor of both private and public religious behaviors during the young adult years, ages twenty to twenty-eight (Roghaar).

This research also indicates that LDS male adolescents decide at a relatively young age on a general lifestyle that either includes or excludes plans to serve a mission or marry in the temple. In interviews, many said they could not remember when they made their mission decision but that it was a long time ago. Some said it was made before baptism (eight years of age). Thus, many adolescents at an early time form a general view of themselves that either includes or does not include a mission, and then they construct a lifestyle consonant with that orientation.

Research shows that other dimensions of the young person's religious world are important to understanding LDS socialization. While Church programs such as participation or nonparticipation in Aaronic Priesthood activity, scouting, and daily religious education (see Seminary) during the school year has limited direct effect on socialization outcome, independent of family influences, research shows that these programs can reinforce basic orientations and internalization of values begun in the family. Cornwall shows that religiously committed LDS families usually channel their children into seminary, which in turn influences their peer associations, who then reinforce the religious values held by the parents. Roghaar further shows the positive influence of seminary education by pointing out that children from Latter-day Saint families who do not participate extensively in Church-sponsored activities will more likely remain active as young adults if they do complete four years of religious education during their adolescent years.

During the expanding social world of the late adolescent years, the family influences tend to weaken, whereas the influence of an adult adviser who represents the religious organization increases. Indeed, the influence of these adult representatives of the Church often exceeds that of the family for late adolescents between the ages of sixteen and eighteen. The crucial dimension of this relationship between the adolescent and the adult seems to center on the degree to which the adolescent has association with an adult whom he or she respects, admires, wishes to emulate, and finds easy to talk to. [See also Individuality; Values, Transmission of.]

Bibliography

Christensen, Harold T. "Mormon Sexuality in Cross-Cultural Perspective." Dialogue 10 (Autumn 1976):62-75. Cornwall, Marie. "The Influence of Three Agents of Religious Socialization: Family, Church, and Peers." In The Religion and Family Connection: Social Science Perspectives, ed. D. Thomas, pp. 207-31. Provo, Utah, 1988. Elkin, F., and G. Handel. The Child and Society: The Process of Socialization, 3rd ed. New York, 1978. Heaton, Tim B. "Four C's of the Mormon Family: Chastity, Conjugality, Children, and Chauvinism." In The Religion and Family Connection: Social Science Perspectives, ed. D. Thomas, pp. 107-24. Provo, Utah, 1988. Kunz, Phillip R. "Religious Influences on Parental Discipline and Achievement Demands." Marriage and Family Living 25 (1963):224-25. Roghaar, Bruce. "Young Men of Sound Understanding." Paper presented at Church Education System Symposium, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, Aug. 15, 1990. Smith, Wilford E. "Mormon Sex Standards on College Campuses, or Deal Us Out of the Sexual Revolution!" Dialogue 10 (Autumn 1976):76-81. Thomas, Darwin L., ed. "Family in the Mormon Experience." In Families and Religions: Conflict and Change in Modern Society, ed. William V. D'Antonio and Joan Aldous, pp. 267-88. Beverly Hills, Calif., 1983. Thomas, Darwin L., and Joseph Olsen. "Young Men Study Revisited: A Five-Year Follow-up of Priest Age Young Men's Mission Decisions." Unpublished report, Research and Evaluation Division, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Nov. 1986. Thomas, Darwin L. The Religion and Family Connection: Social Science Perspectives. Provo, Utah, 1988. Thomas, Darwin L.; Joseph Olsen; and Stan E. Weed. "Missionary Service of L.D.S. Young Men: A Longitudinal Analysis." Paper presented at the Society for the Scientific Study of Religion, Salt Lake City, Oct. 1989. Weed, Stan E., and Joseph Olsen. "Policy and Program Considerations for Teenage Pregnancy Prevention: A Summary for Policymakers." Family Perspective 22 (1988):235-52. DARWIN L. THOMAS

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
