Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Stereotyping of Latter-Day Saints

From the time Joseph Smith's visions became public knowledge, many stereotypes-pejorative and nonpejorative generalized impressions-have shaped the public image of the Church and its members. In general, stereotypes travel by word of mouth or through the media of popular culture and tend to exaggerate or to distort selected characteristics.

The Church's first century produced media stereotypes that were largely pejorative and relatively uniform. In the early years, Joseph Smith and the fundamental claims of the Church were the principal targets. The dominant images questioned prophetic credibility and impugned the validity of the Book of Mormon. Although some sympathy was evoked by the persecutions in Missouri, the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and the expulsion of Mormons from Illinois, negative stereotypes predominated.

When the practice of plural marriage was publicly announced in 1852, the stereotypes changed. From then on the dominant images in Europe as well as in the United States were of treacherous, cruel, lustful males; degraded and gullible females; and neglected, unmanageable children. Brigham Young became the major target of denunciation. He was depicted as wily and unscrupulous, and his followers as credulous and victimized.

Pejorative stereotypes peaked in conjunction with the antipolygamy legislation of the 1880s. They declined for a few years after the Church discontinued plural marriage in 1890, but reappeared in the early twentieth century. While occasional nonpejorative images were generated by travelers' accounts or other sympathetic sources, images of Latter-day Saints in the media between 1830 and 1930 were, for the most part, derogatory.

By the 1930s, however, the prevailing stereotype of Latter-day Saints had become positive. The next few decades consolidated that image, portraying the Saints as loyal citizens with a circumspect lifestyle and a communal ethic that "took care of their own." Factors supporting this stereotype included more exposure to Latter-day Saints and their lifestyle, more favorable media coverage, increasing stature as a worldwide Church, and gradual, if sometimes reluctant, acceptance into the sociopolitical, economic, and religious establishment of America. Still, pejorative images continued to compete with the more favorable versions, and most people outside the intermountain region knew little about the Church beyond the abandoned practice of polygamy, the exodus west to Utah under Brigham Young, and the weekly broadcasts of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir.

Since 1960, the substantial growth of the Church in Latin America and other parts of the world has supported the overall view that international impressions were improving. Yet Church growth was sometimes a mixed blessing, for LDS missionaries and members became stereotyped targets for those who mistakenly associated the Church with the politics of the United States. In the United States, both positive and negative views provided the public with information, true and false, about the Church and piqued their curiosities. Church positions on social issues such as abortion and the Equal Rights Amendment evoked both favor and opposition. The Church's own public relations efforts, intended to educate the public about Church doctrines and the importance of the family, have offered alternative stereotypes of the Mormons as wholesome people and good citizens.

As others become more acquainted with Latter-day Saints, they realize that Church members include the normal variety of human beings with differing personalities and interests (see Individuality). Given the vagaries of public opinion and private belief, however, stereotypes of Latter-day Saints will continue to exist, although they are becoming more positive.

Bibliography

Bunker, Gary L., and Davis Bitton. The Mormon Graphic Image, 1834-1914. Salt Lake City, 1983. "Imagemakers: Mormons and the Media." Dialogue 10 (Spring 1977):12-113. GARY L. BUNKER

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
