Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Teaching the Gospel

Among Latter-day Saints, the ultimate purpose of teaching the gospel is the transformation of lives. Neither the process of intensive study nor the knowledge gained is an end in itself. In addition to lecture and conceptual approaches, gospel teaching often follows a skill-learning model, in which a skill to be learned or quality to be developed such as prayer, kindness, or service is modeled or exemplified. Learners are encouraged to apply their new or renewed insight. As soon as possible, they become teachers themselves. Thus, teaching is the art of directing activities. Corrective responses from teacher and learner continue until the skill is incorporated into character. In the Church the gaps between priest and layman, teacher and learner, and leader and follower are all but erased. Teaching is a universal and inclusive mode of participation. Results are most impressive when family, church, and community cooperate and support each other's efforts.

Guidelines for teaching the gospel are often summarized in three imperatives: 1. Teach from the scriptures and teach the content of the scriptures. The standard works are studied systematically in recurring cycles, and this pattern is correlated for all age groups, auxiliaries, and priesthood quorums.

These imperatives are reflected in teacher development manuals and courses, which reach hundreds of thousands of members each year in group efforts to inculcate, refresh, and improve teaching skills. They are implicit also in the teacher manuals that are published with student manuals for all classes and quorums of the Church.

Church leaders and teachers constantly emphasize the scriptures as the basis of personal and Church class study. Familiarity with the scriptures is viewed as basic to understanding the gospel and to the development of faith and testimony. Daily scripture study in the home and during Family Home Evening is recommended for all members of all ages and in all Church callings.

Teaching the gospel is more than sharing knowledge. It also involves creating an atmosphere in which the spirit of the learner is touched and the intimate and ultimate strivings of the soul are related to truth. Latter-day Saints recognize that to teach knowledge and wisdom is a spiritual gift to be sought earnestly (D&C 46:16-18). Only when the Holy Ghost, or "spirit of truth"-enhancing the Light of Christ (D&C 93:2)-is present is there genuine communication. Then teacher and learner "understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together" (D&C 50:21-22).

Illustration

Classes such as this one, taught in the Hungarian branch in Vienna, Austria (1990), are integral parts of Sunday worship services. "And I give unto you a commandment that you shall teach one another the doctrine of the kingdom" (D&C 88:77). Courtesy Peggy Jellinghausen.

Because of the multicultural base of the Church and its rapid growth, gospel teachers are asked to teach a wide array of members with radically different backgrounds, needs, and levels of understanding and spiritual preparation. This continues to be a major challenge to the Church. ADRIAN P. VAN MONDFRANS

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
