Daniel H. Ludlow, Encyclopedia of Mormonism 4 vols. (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1992)

Topical Guide

The Latter-day Saint edition of the Bible, first published in 1979, includes a 598-page "Topical Guide with Selected Concordance and Index." It is designed to aid scripture study and is considered by Latter-day Saints to be a major, unique reference tool.

The Topical Guide provides 3,495 categories citing about 50,000 verses from the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. By bringing together references from all four standard works, the Topical Guide enables readers to see the unity and harmony of all these scriptures. It also shows how latter-day revelations bring greater clarity to the understanding of the word of God.

A preliminary topical guide, listing the main supporting scriptures for over 600 topics, which were selected initially with seminary students and young missionaries in mind, was published in 1977. Scripture references at first were gathered by about one hundred teachers in the Church Educational System, along with the same number of returned missionaries at Brigham Young University, who were called to render this Church service. The original number of scriptural topics grew to about 750, and over 2,500 other concordance or index categories were also added. Several committees then collated, evaluated, and selected entries to be included in the current version.

All entries are arranged alphabetically. Parenthetical cross-references to related entries and to the Bible dictionary follow the heading in many entries.

Citations within entries are listed in the following order: Bible, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, Pearl of Great Price. Each citation gives the specific chapter and verse and a brief excerpt from the passage, with the key word italicized. If the key word is identical to the entry heading, only the initial letter appears. Each citation refers to a single verse, but readers are also alerted that surrounding verses may contribute to understanding.

After certain references, cross-references to other passages containing similar wording may appear in parentheses. This allows students to see relationships among similarly worded passages. If a student cannot find a citation in its expected sequence, it may be necessary to look back through earlier references for parenthetical cross-references. Some entries conclude with a brief list of additional passages.

As a concordance and index, the Topical Guide helps readers to locate specific verses on subjects of interest. (For people and places, the Topical Guide generally refers students to the Bible Dictionary). The Topical Guide goes beyond standard concordances with its topical dimension, bringing together pertinent references on common topics of interest to Latter-day Saints (such as "Faith," "Resurrection," or "Jesus Christ, Atonement through"), whether or not the relevant passages share the same specific key word. For example, the entry "Prayer, Pray" contains 176 references not only to verses with variations of prayer and pray but also to passages with such words as call upon, inquire, ask, and seek; in addition, cross-references are given to entries on "Communication," "Faith," "God, Access to," "Meditation," and "Supplication," as well as to the Bible Dictionary entry on prayer.

The Topical Guide is not exhaustive, however, either as a concordance or as a listing of all passages on given topics. Although by necessity it is selective and somewhat interpretive, its purpose is not to define or limit thinking but to stimulate scripture study and suggest profitable directions that study may take. It strives to offer not only a quick path to specific destinations but also a gateway to deeper acquaintance with the word of God.

The combined edition of the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price published in 1981 also contains an expanded index, constructed on principles similar to those governing the Topical Guide.

Bibliography

Anderson, Lavina Fielding. "Church Publishes First LDS Edition of the Bible." Ensign 9 (Oct. 1979):9-18. Horton, George A. "I Have a Question." Ensign 16 (Apr. 1986):41. Ludlow, Daniel H. Marking the Scriptures, pp. 41-43. Salt Lake City, 1980. BRUCE T. HARPER

1992 Macmillan Publishing Company
