Monte S. Nyman, Most Correct Book ( 1991)

Introduction

Choosing the phrase The Most Correct Book for a title of a book might sound egotistical on the part of its author; but, of course, it has not been chosen here to refer to this book but to that volume of scripture known as the Book of Mormon-and in that connection the title is both accurate and appropriate. The phrase comes from an oft-quoted 1841 statement that the Prophet Joseph Smith made about the Book of Mormon: "I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book" (TPJS, p. 194).

1 To better appreciate this statement, let us remember that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was not organized until after the Book of Mormon was translated. The Prophet Joseph was given the gift to translate the book and was commanded to "pretend to no other gift until [the Lord's] purpose [was] fulfilled in this" and was told he would have no other gift until it was finished (D&C 5:4).

1 Once the Book of Mormon was translated, the Lord was ready to lay the foundation of the Church. In a revelation to Oliver Cowdery concerning the things he had written while acting as scribe for Joseph during the book's translation, the Lord had taught the connection of the Book of Mormon to the foundation of his church: "For in them [the writings of the Book of Mormon] are all things written concerning the foundation of my church, my gospel, and my rock" (D&C 18:4).

2 In our day, President Ezra Taft Benson witnessed that it was necessary to bring forth the Book of Mormon before the Church could be established:

2 A second powerful testimony to the importance of the Book of Mormon is to note where the Lord placed its coming forth in the timetable of the unfolding Restoration. The only thing that preceded it was the First Vision. In that marvelous manifestation, the Prophet Joseph Smith learned the true nature of God and that God had a work for him to do. The coming forth of the Book of Mormon was the next thing to follow.

2 Think of that in terms of what it implies. The coming forth of the Book of Mormon preceded the restoration of the priesthood. It was published just a few days before the Church was organized. The Saints were given the Book of Mormon to read before they were given the revelations outlining such great doctrines as the three degrees of glory, celestial marriage, or work for the dead. It came before priesthood quorums and Church organization. Doesn't this tell us something about how the Lord views this sacred work? ("The Book of Mormon-Keystone of Our Religion," Ensign 16 [October 1986]:4.)

2 When the Church was organized the Lord reaffirmed the importance of the Book of Mormon to the Church (D&C 20:5-36). My aim in this book is to show how the Book of Mormon verifies what the Lord said on that occasion and to support the Prophet Joseph's statement that it is "the most correct book" of any on earth, that it is the keystone of the religion of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and that anyone can come closer to God by abiding by its precepts.

2 My hope is that reading this book will motivate both members of the Church and those who are not yet members to study the Book of Mormon and learn its inspired messages.
