Monte S. Nyman, Most Correct Book ( 1991)

1

The Keystone of the Church Constitution

The Book of Mormon is the heart and core of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Early revelations given to Joseph Smith, the Prophet and founder of the Church, centered around the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. On the very date the Church was organized the Lord declared that the Book of Mormon was to play a key role in the function of the Church. A study of the book's contents, purposes, and doctrines as revealed by the Lord shows it to be the backbone and fiber of the Church organization and administration.

3 On and around the date that the Church was organized the Lord gave a series of revelations to Joseph Smith that became a constitution for the newly organized Church. The compilation of these revelations is now known as D&C 20 of the Doctrine and Covenants and is treated as one revelation. An analysis of this section sustains the premise that the Book of Mormon is the heart and core of the Church.

4 As presently constituted, D&C 20 contains eighty-four verses. The first four verses confirm the date on which Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, the first and second elders of the Church respectively, were commanded to organize the Church - 6 April 1830. The next thirty-two verses, 5 through 36, reveal the significance of the Book of Mormon to the Church collectively and to its members individually. This emphasis on the Book of Mormon is consistent with the teachings of Jesus in New Testament times concerning the latter-day Church. Jesus' parable of the mustard seed, as interpreted by the Prophet Joseph Smith, shows that the Church was to grow out of the Book of Mormon.

4 And again, another parable put He forth unto them, having an allusion to the Kingdom that should be set up, just previous to or at the time of the harvest, which reads as follows-"The Kingdom of Heaven is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and sowed in his field: which indeed is the least of all seeds: but, when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof." Now we can discover plainly that this figure is given to represent the Church as it shall come forth in the last days. Now what is like unto it?

4 Let us take the Book of Mormon, which a man took and hid in his field, securing it by his faith, to spring up in the last days, or in due time; let us behold it coming forth out of the ground, which is indeed accounted the least of all seeds, but behold it branching forth, yea, even towering, with lofty branches, and God-like majesty, until it, like the mustard seed, becomes the greatest of all herbs. And it is truth, and it has sprouted and come forth out of the earth, the righteousness begins to look down from heaven, and God is sending down His powers, gifts and angels, to lodge in the branches thereof.

The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a mustard seed. Behold, then is not this the Kingdom of Heaven that is raising its head in the last days in the majesty of its God, even the Church of the Latter-day Saints, like an impenetrable, immovable rock in the midst of the mighty deep, exposed to the storms and tempests of Satan, but has, thus far, remained steadfast, and is still braving the mountain waves of opposition, which are driven by the tempestuous winds of sinking crafts, which have [dashed] and are still dashing with tremendous foam across its triumphant brow? (TPJS, pp. 98-99.)

5This parable has been fulfilled just as Jesus prophesied. The Church of Christ has come forth, and the Book of Mormon has played a significant role in its establishment.

The Most Correct Book

The Lord revealed the significance of Joseph Smith's association with Moroni, the former Nephite prophet. The verses below explain that association and shed light on why the Book of Mormon is the most correct book:

5After it was truly manifested unto this first elder that he had received a remission of his sins, he was entangled again in the vanities of the world;

5But after repenting, and humbling himself sincerely, through faith, God ministered unto him by an holy angel, whose countenance was as lightning, and whose garments were pure and white above all other whiteness;

5And gave unto him commandments which inspired him;

5And gave him power from on high, by the means which were before prepared, to translate the Book of Mormon (D&C 20:5-8).

5The coming forth of the Book of Mormon can be seen as having occurred in two phases. The first phase was Joseph's preparation under the tutelage of the angel Moroni, which took place over a four-year period from September 1823 to September 1827. The second phase was the actual translation of the Book of Mormon. From September 1827 to April 1829, persecution and various other problems left Joseph very little uninterrupted time to work on the translation. With the arrival of Oliver Cowdery on 5 April 1829, however, and his subsequent calling as Joseph's scribe, the Prophet was able to devote himself to the translation, and the task was then completed in only two to three months, from the beginning of April to sometime in June 1829. Joseph Smith's work of translation is treated in chapter 2.

6The Lord proclaimed that the Book of Mormon contained "a record of a fallen people, and the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles and to the Jews also" (D&C 20:9). People often ignore the two statements in this revelation when they say that the Book of Mormon is a history of the ancient forefathers of the American Indians. Such a description may not only give the wrong impression but also discourage many from reading the book; those who fail to recognize the true value of history-especially the history of God's dealings with his children-may falsely perceive the Book of Mormon to be just another dull history book.

6The Lord's description of the book as a record is the correct one. A record is an official document. The Book of Mormon is an official record of a people who lived and fell on the American continent. It is official because it is a record inspired and directed by the Lord Jesus Christ. It discloses the reasons for the fall of the Nephite nation and outlines what the present-day inhabitants of the Americas must do to avoid experiencing a similar fall. This description should give incentive to every concerned American to at least examine the claims of the book. Chapter 3 elaborates on this message to the Americas.

6The Lord's second statement, that the Book of Mormon contains the fulness of the gospel, is also often misunderstood. Countless hours have been wasted in various discussions in the Church as to whether the Book of Mormon contains the fulness of the gospel. Remember that when the angel Moroni first appeared to Joseph Smith, he told him that the Nephite record contained the fulness of the gospel (Joseph Smith History 1:34), and the Lord later confirmed it (D&C 20:9). He repeatedly reconfirmed it in other revelations to the Church (D&C 27:5; D&C 35:17; D&C 42:12). Our challenge is to find out what the Lord meant by "the fulness of the gospel." Chapter 4 will discuss this challenge.

D&C 20:9 also says that the fulness of the gospel contained in the Book of Mormon is to go to the Gentiles and to the Jews. The term Jews, as used here, is a general term referring to all the various branches of the house of Israel, as it was commonly used in Joseph Smith's day. The Lord speaks to a people in the language of their day (2 Ne. 31:3; D&C 1:24). The Lord clarifies in the Book of Mormon that two of the three branches of the house of Israel, the Jews and the Lamanites, are to receive the fulness of the gospel through the Book of Mormon (Mormon 5:14-15) and that it will also be given to the third branch, the lost tribes (2 Ne. 29:13; for an analysis of the message to each of these branches of Israel, see Monte S. Nyman, An Ensign to All People [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co, 1987]).

7The Lord, in this revelation, next confirmed to the Church that the Book of Mormon was "given by inspiration" (D&C 20:10). Elsewhere in the revelations we read that scripture is produced when men are moved upon to speak by the Holy Ghost (D&C 68:3-4; 2 Pet. 1:21). An analysis of the Book of Mormon certainly confirms that it is a book of scripture. Not only were the prophets in the Book of Mormon moved upon to speak by the Holy Ghost (1 Ne. 10:17-20), but also the major writers of the final record, as indicated by several passages in the book, were commanded by the Lord to include the things which they included (2 Ne. 33:11-15; Morm. 3:17-22; Ether 12:38-40; Moro. 10:27, 34). Chapter 5 enlarges this concept.

7The Lord also tells the Church that the Book of Mormon was "confirmed to others by the ministering of angels" (D&C 20:10). This undoubtedly refers to the angel Moroni and other angels who visited the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon.

Verse 10 further states that those to whom the angels minister are to declare "unto the world" that which they learn through this ministering. Of course, the testimony of the Three Witnesses was placed in the front of the Book of Mormon and has gone forth unto the world through that means. This was interpreted by the Prophet Joseph Smith as a teaching of another of Jesus' parables of the kingdom of God: " "And another parable spake He unto them. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto leaven which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal till the whole was leavened.' It may be understood that the Church of Latter-day Saints has taken its rise from a little leaven that was put into three witnesses. Behold, how much this is like the parable! It is fast leavening the lump, and will soon leaven the whole." (TPJS, p. 100.) In the broader sense, the Book of Mormon is itself the message that should be declared to the world. Chapter 6 shows how this work is being accomplished.

8Thus D&C 20:5-11 declares five reasons why the Book of Mormon was the most correct book on earth: (1) the book was translated by the gift and power of God; (2) it is an official record of the fall of the inhabitants of ancient America, and thus warns the latter-day occupants; (3) it contains the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ; (4) it is scripture; and (5) it was declared to the world in these latter days by angels, and it carries the message of salvation to the house of Israel and the other inhabitants of the world. A study of these five reasons should enlighten and encourage all to read and live by the teachings of the Book of Mormon.

The Keystone of Our Religion

In this Church constitution revelation, the Lord next declares three major purposes of the Book of Mormon. These purposes disclose why the Book of Mormon is the keystone of our religion, that which holds the religion uniquely together.

8The first purpose is given as follows: "Proving to the world that the holy scriptures are true, and that God does inspire men and call them to his holy work in this age and generation, as well as in generations of old" (D&C 20:11). The importance of this first purpose, the proving of the Bible, may not seem too important unless one realizes what a great need exists in the world in general for this proof. With varying need for various groups of people, the Book of Mormon gives this proof in the areas of authorship, history, text, and interpretation. Rather than being contradictory to the Bible, as the uninformed are led to believe, the Book of Mormon is a companion volume to the Bible, as the Prophet Ezekiel prophesied (Ezek. 37:15-17). Chapter 7 discusses more fully the role of the Book of Mormon in sustaining the Bible.

The second purpose, that God does inspire and give revelation to men in this dispensation, openly challenges the accepted Christian dogma that the heavens are sealed and that all needed revelation is contained in the Bible. There is a further misconception among many in the world that there is a difference between inspiration and revelation. They acknowledge that men may receive guidance through prayer, which they classify as inspiration; but to them, there is certainly no open revelation, such as God speaking to man or angels ministering. In refutation of these ideas, the Book of Mormon teaches correct principles of revelation and that God, being no respecter of persons has revealed and will reveal his will to all mankind to the degree and the extent of their needs and capabilities. This concept is enlarged upon in chapter 8.

9The third purpose, that God does call men to his holy work (priesthood) in this age and generation, is also a needed principle in today's world. Traditional lines of authority in Christendom as well as the concept of "the priesthood of all believers," wherein a man responds solely to a feeling within himself, are refuted by Book of Mormon teachings. These teachings are enumerated in chapter 9.

9As a conclusion to this part of the D&C 20 revelation, the Lord declares that the contents, status, and purposes of the Book of Mormon show that God "is the same God yesterday, today, and forever" (D&C 20:12). An analysis of the Book of Mormon shows that the God spoken of in this verse is Jesus Christ. This affirms the Book of Mormon's title page declaration that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God. These evidences are the basis of chapter 10.

9The Book of Mormon is the keystone of the religion of the Latter-day Saints because it proves the truthfulness of the Bible and shows the necessity of revelation and priesthood. It also substantiates Jesus Christ as the administrative God of this world. Without these unvarying truths, the restored Church becomes little more than just another church among many, instead of "the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth" (D&C 1:30).

Precepts to Bring One Nearer to God

In what appears to be an addendum to what he had just revealed in the opening verses of D&C 20, the Lord declared that the Book of Mormon had great witnesses, which witnesses will judge the world. The Lord qualifies the meaning of the term world as "even as many as shall hereafter come to a knowledge of this work [the Book of Mormon]" (D&C 20:13). Since the Book of Mormon is to go to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people (Rev. 14:6-7), the whole world will eventually thus be judged. Judgment as used here is not to pass sentence but to be witnesses for or against, as the subsequent verses indicate. This process of judgment is discussed in chapter 11.

10Those who receive the Book of Mormon (accept it as scripture) "in faith, and work righteousness [live by the precepts which the book teaches], shall receive a crown of eternal life [if they endure to the end]." Conversely, "those who harden their hearts in unbelief [refuse the witness of the Spirit which accompanies the book], and reject it [the book as scripture], it shall turn to their own condemnation [be a witness against them at the judgment bar of God]." (D&C 20:14-15.) While the revealed consequences of accepting or rejecting the Book of Mormon are eternal, blessing and cursings also attend readers in mortality. The individual results are discussed in chapters 12 and 13, which will show how the Book of Mormon precepts will bring its reader closer to God.

10The validity of the Book of Mormon as a book of judgment for the world and its inhabitants is next affirmed in the revelation: "For the Lord God has spoken it and we, the elders of the Church, have heard and bear witness to the words of the glorious Majesty on high, to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen." (D&C 20:16.)

Before the Lord gave this revelation, he revealed several significant statements to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery regarding the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon. In addition to receiving these statements, the first two elders of the Church, Joseph and Oliver, bore witness that they heard the words of the glorious Majesty on high regarding the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon (D&C 20:16). As further evidences the Lord added another spiritual testimony to the book through three special witnesses and another temporal witness through the physical handling of the plates by the Eight Witnesses. These combined testimonies leave the world without excuse. The details of these witnesses are given in chapter 14.

11In what is apparently another addendum to what has been said about the Book of Mormon, the revelation in D&C 20 enumerates some of the doctrines taught in the Book of Mormon. These are introduced with the phrase "By these things we know," and numerous statements follow about God and Christ and the plan of salvation that they offer to mankind (D&C 20:17-28). The significance of these doctrines is another testimony to the importance of the Book of Mormon to the organization and administration of the Church.

11Through revelation the Lord had declared the intended purposes of the Book of Mormon for the newly established Church. However, the Church did not take seriously enough his divine instructions. Nearly two and a half years after the Church was organized (22-23 September 1832), the Lord pronounced that the whole Church was under condemnation for not using the Book of Mormon and living by its principles and that the Church would remain under condemnation until its members did so (D&C 84:55-57). This condemnation undoubtedly had reference to the Church membership collectively and not individually or to its leadership, as may be inferred from other revelations (D&C 1:30, 105:6-8).

11Nineteen months after the Lord condemned the Church for not using the Book of Mormon (21 April 1834), Joseph Smith made this significant statement about the relationship of the Book of Mormon to the Church:

11Take away the Book of Mormon and the revelations, and where is our religion? We have none; for without Zion, and a place of deliverance, we must fall; because the time is near when the sun will be darkened, and the moon turn to blood, and the stars fall from heaven, and the earth reel to and fro. Then, if this is the case, and if we are not sanctified and gathered to the places God has appointed, with all our former professions and our great love for the Bible, we must fall; we cannot stand, we cannot be saved; for God will gather out his Saints from the Gentiles, and then comes desolation and destruction, and none can escape except the pure in heart who are gathered. (TPJS, p. 71.)

12As the Second Coming becomes more imminent, the Lord's and Joseph Smith's warnings become more relevant. Perhaps that is why the present-day prophet of the Church has stressed the use of the Book of Mormon. Since becoming the President and prophet, seer, and revelator of the Church on 10 November 1985, President Ezra Taft Benson has constantly urged the membership of the Church to use the Book of Mormon individually and collectively. He urged study of the Book of Mormon earlier when he served as President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Why he has done so is better understood when we analyze what the Lord has said about the Book of Mormon's importance. Individually every member of the Church should take the challenge to make the Book of Mormon a part of his or her life through study and application of its principles.

12The Book of Mormon has a key role in the Church collectively and with individual Church members. A knowledge of the book's contents, purposes, and precepts for living will provide the Church and its members with a constitutional framework to prepare for the second coming of the Lord and the individual judgment that will come to every inhabitant of the earth. The following chapters are designed to help the reader analyze and apply the message of the Book of Mormon.
