Monte S. Nyman, Most Correct Book ( 1991)

I

The Most Correct Book

2

The Translation Is True

One reason why the Book of Mormon is the most correct book on the face of the earth is that it was translated under the inspiration of the Lord. The Prophet Joseph Smith did not fully reveal how he translated the Book of Mormon apparently because he did not feel it was necessary or expedient to reveal it. The Far West Record contains this interesting account of a special conference held in October 1831: "Brother Hyrum Smith said that he thought best that the information of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon be related by Joseph himself to the Elders present, that all might know for themselves.

15"Brother Joseph Smith, Jun., said that it was not intended to tell the world all the particulars of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon; and also said that it was not expedient for him to relate these things." (As quoted in HC 1:220.)

All the Prophet ever said about the translation process, although he stated it repeatedly, was that the record was translated through the medium of the Urim and Thummim and by the gift and the power of God (HC 1:12, 315; 3:28; 4:537). Many others who were closely associated with the Prophet while he was translating the record have stated or written things about the translation process. However, because these statements were made long after the time of the translation and after the Prophet's death, they must be considered as secondary sources.

16Since Joseph Smith did not describe the particulars of the translation process, the only primary sources we have for understanding it are the scriptures. They tell us of the Urim and Thummim, and also of the Liahona, another instrument used to receive revelation. However, the translated book itself may also give us some clues as we examine its various writing styles, particularly where biblical passages are quoted.

16To begin with, what do the scriptures say about the Urim and Thummim? Although it seems from reading the standard works that more than one Urim and Thummim may have been in use among the ancients, the scriptural descriptions of them are consistent. The Urim and Thummim used by King Mosiah II to translate the Jaredite record found by Limhi's people is described as "two stones which were fastened into the two rims of a bow." The Book of Mormon goes on to explain: "Now these things were prepared from the beginning, and were handed down from generation to generation, for the purpose of interpreting languages; and they have been kept and preserved by the hand of the Lord, that he should discover to every creature who should possess the land the iniquities and abominations of his people; and whosoever has these things is called seer, after the manner of old times." (Mosiah 28:13-16.)

16A similar description of a Urim and Thummim is found in the Lord's instructions to the brother of Jared: "Behold, these two stones will I give unto thee, and ye shall seal them up also with the things which ye shall write. For behold, the language which ye shall write I have confounded; wherefore I will cause in my own due time that these stones shall magnify to the eyes of men these things which ye shall write." (Ether 3:23-24.)

"Joseph Smith received the same Urim and Thummim had by the Brother of Jared," wrote Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "for it was the one expressly provided for the translation of the Jaredite and Nephite records. (D&C 10:1; D&C 17:1; Ether 3:22-28.)" ( Mormon Doctrine, 2d ed. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966], p. 818.) Hence, in September 1823 the angel Moroni, in terms consistent with the descriptions above, informed the Prophet "that there were two stones in silver bows-and these stones, fastened to a breastplate, constituted what is called the Urim and Thummim-deposited with the plates; and the possession and use of these stones were what constituted 'seers' in ancient or former times; and that God had prepared them for the purpose of translating the book"(Joseph Smith History 1:35).

17Joseph's divine calling and his legal possession of these stones qualified him to translate the Book of Mormon. A further study of scriptural passages shows that the translation process was threefold: (1) visual sight, (2) study, and (3) faith.

Sight

The sight process is shown by the Lord's chastising statement to Joseph Smith after he had lost one hundred sixteen pages of translated manuscript: "And when thou deliveredst up that which God had given thee sight and power to translate, thou deliveredst up that which was sacred into the hands of a wicked man" (D&C 3:12).

17Another example comes from the Book of Mormon. Ammon told the Lamanite king of a man (King Mosiah II) who could look at and translate all records that were of an ancient date: "Now Ammon said unto him: I can assuredly tell thee, O king, of a man that can translate the records; for he has where with that he can look, and translate all records that are of ancient date; and it is a gift from God. And the things are called interpreters, and no man can look in them except he be commanded, lest he should look for that he ought not and he should perish. And whosoever is commanded to look in them, the same is called seer." (Mosiah 8:13.)

A third example comes from the translation of the scroll of Abraham, which notes that Abraham saw the stars through a Urim and Thummim: "And I, Abraham, had the Urim and Thummim, which the Lord my God had given unto me, in Ur of the Chaldees; and I saw the stars, that they were very great, and that one of them was nearest unto the throne of God; and there were many great ones which were near unto it" (Abr. 3:1-2.)

18A fourth example of the sight process is the manner in which what is now known as D&C 7 came forth through the Urim and Thummim used by Joseph Smith. This revelation was "translated from parchment, written and hid up by himself [John the Revelator]" (HC 1:36). Apparently the Lord in some way showed Joseph the writing on the parchment, and Joseph translated it.

18Thus, in Abraham's day, among the Nephites, and in this dispensation, in each case a Urim and Thummim was used by a seer to look in and to see.

18As a corollary to the above scriptural examples, consider the following words of the Lord, as reported by Alma, spoken in connection with the translation of the twenty four Jaredite plates: "I will prepare unto my servant Gazelem, a stone, which shall shine forth in darkness unto light, that I may discover unto my people who serve me, that I may discover unto them the works of their brethren, yea, their secret works, their works of darkness, and their wickedness and abominations" (Alma 37:23.)

18With reference to "code names" formerly contained in certain Doctrine and Covenants sections (used to hide from enemies the identities of the leading brethren of the Church at that time but dropped from the 1981 and subsequent editions), Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote:

18Two of the names which identified the Prophet himself were Gazelam and Enoch (D&C 78:9; D&C 82:11; D&C 104:26,43,45,46 . . .

With reference to the name Gazelam, it is interesting to note that Alma in directing Helaman to preserve both the Urim and Thummim and the plates containing the Book of Ether, says that such record will be brought to light by the Lord's servant Gazelem, who will use "a stone" in his translation work (Alma 37:21-23). It may be that Gazelem is a variant spelling of Gazelem and that Alma's reference is to the Prophet Joseph Smith who did in fact bring forth part at least of the Ether record. Or it could be that the name Gazelem (Gazelam) is a title having to do with power to translate ancient records and that Alma's reference was to some Nephite prophet who brought the Book of Ether to light in the golden era of Nephite history. ( Mormon Doctrine, pp. 307-8.)

19Whichever interpretation is corrects it is clear that in the Lord's description as reported by Alma the sight process is operative.

Study

As previously, stated, the manner of translating consisted of more than just looking into the Urim and Thummim, as Oliver Cowdery learned (D&C 9:5-7). Oliver was told: "But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right. But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong; therefore, you cannot write that which is sacred save it be given you from me." (D&C 9:8-9.)

Faith

Study had to be accompanied by the translator's faith, an essential part of the spirit of revelation: "You shall receive a knowledge concerning the engravings of old records, which are ancient, which contain those parts of my scripture of which has been spoken by the manifestation of my Spirit. Yea, behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart. Now, behold, this is the spirit of revelation; behold, this is the spirit by which Moses brought the children of Israel through the Red Sea on dry ground." (D&C 8:1-3.)

19As the translator looked, studied, and exercised his faith, the Lord apparently revealed the characters' correct interpretation. This is also how the miraculous directors given to Lehi worked:

20And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld the pointers which were in the ball, that they did work according to the faith and diligence and heed which we did give unto them.

20And there was also written upon them a new writing, which was plain to be read, which did give us understanding concerning the ways of the Lord; and it was written and changed from time to time, according to the faith and diligence which we gave unto it. And thus we see that by small means the Lord can bring about great things. (1 Ne. 16:28-29.)

20In the case of translating the Book of Mormon, the revelation given to the translator, Joseph Smith, was then read to the scribe, Oliver Cowdery. Years later, Oliver spoke of that time while at a special conference held at Kanesville, Iowa, 13 April 1859: "I wrote with my own pen the entire Book of Mormon (save a few pages), as it fell from the lips of the Prophet Joseph Smith, as he translated by the gift and power of God, by means of the Urim and Thummim, or, as it is called by that book, Holy interpreters' " (CHC 1:128).

20Scriptural support for the Book of Mormon being translated by the gift and power of God may be drawn from Isaac's prophecy, regarding Joseph Smith's translation work after the learned (Anthon and Mitchell) had rejected Joseph's translation of some of the characters. Although this prophecy has been lost from the present day text, Isaiah foretold of the Lord's telling Joseph Smith that "the learned shall not read them, for they have rejected them, and I am able to do mine own work; wherefore thou shalt read the words which I shall give unto thee" (2 Ne. 27:20). As foretold by Isaiah, the Lord gave the words of the translation to Joseph as he studied and he read them to Oliver. The Lord does not have to rely upon the scholarship of the world. He can do his own work and reveals his words to man.

Editorial Changes

The question may arise, then, If Joseph translated the Book of Mormon through divine aid and it is considered the "most correct book," why have a number of changes been made in the Book of Mormon since the first edition?

21Editorial changes have been made for three reasons since the Book of Mormon was first printed. First, many typesetting or printing errors have been corrected as parts of the original manuscript have become available for comparison. The second edition of the Book of Mormon contained this statement in the preface: "Individuals acquainted with book printing, are aware of the numerous typographical errors which always occur in manuscript editions. It is only necessary to say, that the whole has been[carefu[l]ly re-examined and compared with the original manuscripts by Elder Joseph Smith, Jr. the translator of the Book of Mormon, assisted by the present printer, brother O. Cowdery, who formerly wrote the greatest portion of the same, as dictated by brother Smith." (For examples of manuscript corrections of unintentional mistakes, see Stan Larson's "Changes in Early Texts of the Book of Mormon" and "A Most Sacred Possession," both from the Ensign, September 1976 and September 1977, respectively.)

21Second, the way things are said in Hebrew or Egyptian (the Book of Mormon was written in reformed Egyptian) is not always the way they are best expressed in English. Therefore, occasional changes have been made to make the text read better in English. It seems that Joseph received a literal translation of the reformed Egyptian text, and that later revisions were made to make it conform to contemporary usage and understanding. The Lord reveals his will to men in the manner of their language (D&C 1:24) or according to their language and understanding (2 Ne. 31:3). As taught by the Prophet Joseph, "if he comes to a little child, he will adapt himself to the language and capacity, of a little child" (TPJS, p. 162). Therefore, Joseph received Egyptian-Hebraic expressions that were later refined for English readers. This concept is supported by a statement of President Brigham Young:

When God speaks to the people, he does it in a manner to suit their circumstances and capacities. He spoke to the children of Jacob through Moses, as a blind, stiff-necked people, and when Jesus and his Apostles came they talked with the Jews as a benighted, wicked, selfish people. They would not receive the Gospel, though presented to them by the Son of God in all its righteousness, beauty and glory. Should the Lord Almighty send an angel to re-write the Bible, it would in many places be very different from what it now is. And I will even venture to say that if the Book of Mormon were now to be re-written, in many instances it would materially differ from the present translation. According as people are willing to receive the things of God, so the heavens send forth their blessings. If the people are stiff-necked, the Lord can tell them but little. (JD 9:311.)

22A retranslation, however, would not alter the meaning of the present work but would give a refined and deeper insight into its meanings.

22Third, word meanings and usage change with time both within a language and between languages. A word understood among Old Testament Jews may have carried a different meaning in Joseph's day or even today. Joseph himself made several changes to clarify meanings in the third edition of the Book of Mormon, which stated in its preface that it had been "carefully reviewed by the translator." For example, he added the phrase "or out of the waters of baptism" to 1 Ne. 20:1 (Isa. 48:1) to clarify the meaning of the words, "waters of Judah."

22An experience related by President Harold B. Lee might help us better appreciate what may have been involved in the translation of the Book of Mormon:

22Many persons have wondered how the Prophet Joseph Smith was able to translate. He was an unschooled boy, and scientists have questioned how he was able to translate from unknown hieroglyphics or an unknown language into English. "How ridiculous can one be, to make such a claim," they have said.

Something happened at a recent general conference that will give you a key to how the Lord can open the mind of a man and give him spiritual understanding beyond his natural self. There were eleven translators or interpreters down in the basement of the Tabernacle translating in eleven different languages. For most of the talks they had scripts, so they could study them and, as the speakers spoke in English, they would repeat the words in the various languages for the benefit of those who were listening on earphones. One of these brethren was translating for the Swedish Saints. At the priesthood meeting I spoke extemporaneously, so he had no script to follow. But he reported that something miraculous happened. This is what he told me:

23"The whole conference was a spiritual experience, but at the general priesthood meeting I had an experience that I have never had before. I knew that there were some Swedish brethren attending the conference who had never been here before and perhaps would never come again. Therefore, I had a great desire that they receive everything that our prophet had to deliver. Not having a script, I commended myself into the hands of the Lord, and as you began to speak, I was startled by the fact that I knew one or two words and even three ahead of the time when you would say them. At first, I was so startled that I did not dare to pronounce them as they were given.

23"Usually I close my eyes and listen and then interpret as I hear the speakers deliver, but this time I was prompted to look at your face on the television screen. In this very unusual situation, I looked at you and began to translate the words as they came. However, to my amazement I did not receive just the words in my mind; with my inner eyes, I saw them emanating from the vicinity of the temple of your head and coming toward me. I did not see them actually as written on something, and yet, I saw them and how they were spelled, and I experienced the power of the Spirit as I received them.

23"One of the things that made it even more dramatic was that when a complex sentence was about to be delivered, I received more words so that I could reconstruct the grammar into good Swedish and deliver it at the very moment you pronounced the words. Never before had I experienced the great force with which the interpreted message was flowing as I did at that time. The same experience happened during your closing remarkes on Sunday afternoon, except that I did not see the words coming to me.

23"I have talked with the Swedish members in attendance and they have expressed awe at what they experienced. They said they heard the interpretation and understood the interpreted message delivered at the same moment as you delivered the words in English. But the interpretation was all that they heard; the message came directly from you to them. They have all expressed that their attendance at the conference was a glorious spiritual experience, never to be forgotten."

24I know that the Lord does have means of communicating with us, sending us messages that are beyond our understanding, even to translating an unknown language into our understandable language. He did it with the Prophet Joseph. He did it with King Mosiah. He has done it with others. He will do it today, as we have need. I have no doubt. My whole soul pleads that I may so live that if the Lord has any communication that He would wish me to receive for my beloved people, I will be a pure vessel through which that message might come. I do not ask for anything more than the Lord is willing to send, but I trust that I may live worthy so that I won't be a lame vessel or a broken reed that the Lord cannot use in times when He wants to communicate with his people. (Ye Are the Light of the World [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974], pp. 351-53.)

Biblical Text in the Book of Mormon

Let us now consider the Book of Mormon itself. Now that we have mentioned the grammar changes and their relationship to Hebrew, the next big question of the translation process relates to the biblical texts of Isaiah, Malachi, and Micah that are quoted within the Book of Mormon. The traditional explanation has been that Joseph, recognizing the characters on the plates as biblical texts, used the Bible text except where they differed or where changes were needed. This would explain use of the style of the King James Version in the Book of Mormon text.

Advocates of this explanation further point out that the translators of the Dead Sea Scrolls often used a similar technique, comparing the scroll with already existing texts. But there is no historical evidence to my knowledge that Joseph Smith used the Bible while translating, nor does its use seem to fit Joseph's description of translating through the Urim and Thummim and by the gift and power of God. A textual comparison is after the manner of men and also seems illogical because of the time it would take. While I have obviously not translated with a Urim and Thummim, I have had some experience in textual comparisons, though only with two texts of the same language. Considering that the bulk of the Book of Mormon was translated in little more than sixty days, a textual comparison would have greatly slowed down the Prophet's translation speed.

25A further consideration is the number of changes in the biblical texts that are included in the Book of Mormon. Of the 446 verses of Isaiah quoted in the Book of Mormon, 237 verses have changes. This does not include paraphrases. The Book of Mormon contains 24 verses of Malachi, 7 of which are different. Nine of the 12 verses of Micah quoted in the Book of Mormon are changed. There are 111 verses in the "Nephite Sermon on the Mount," 59 of which are changed from the biblical version. While there are several other biblical quotes, these are the only ones where the length would warrant a textual comparison. Thus, of the 593 verses considered here, 312 show changes from how they appear in the Bible. While many are only slight changes, many others are long and drastically affect the King James text. There are also at least 17 new verses from Isaiah (15) and Micah (2) that we must consider were once a part of the original text. All these changes would seem to support the explanation that the Prophet translated these passages without the aid of a Bible.

25Another point used to argue that Joseph was doing textual comparison in the translation is that the Book of Mormon uses the King James wording in Malachi chapter 4 instead of the different wording used by the angel Moroni when he quoted this chapter to Joseph in September 1823. Also, in his later work in translating the Bible, Joseph made further changes in the Isaiah text and in the Sermon on the Mount that differed from the way they appear in the Book of Mormon text. However, it may be that the Prophet translated the text as it was originally written, but since word usage and meanings change, the Prophet may have made modifications to make sure the reader would understand correctly.

The JST Sermon on the Mount may differ from the sermon recorded in 3 Nephi because either the sermons were actually slightly different or the Prophet enlarged or improved the JST text to ensure proper understanding. This was the Prophet's prerogative. The original words were understood by the Nephites but needed to be refined for our understanding today. This prerogative to clarify is further demonstrated by the Prophet's letter of 6 September 1842, which is now D&C 128 of the Doctrine and Covenants. After quoting Mal. 4:5-6 precisely as it is in the King James Version and the Book of Mormon-rather than as Moroni quoted it to him-he added, "I might have rendered a plainer translation to this, but it is sufficiently plain to suit my purposes as it stands" (D&C 128:18).

King James Language

The question still remains, Why is the King James style found in the Book of Mormon? The Lord revealed to Joseph that one of the major purposes of the Book of Mormon was to prove "to the world that the holy scriptures are true" (D&C 20:11). The Bible used almost exclusively in the United States in Joseph Smith's day was the King James Version. If Joseph received the translation by revelation, then obviously the Lord was confirming the Bible as used in Joseph's day, the King James Version. This seems more important in light of the many translations that would shortly follow and which, in spite of making many contributions, tend to water down the miraculous or the divine aspects of the events recorded therein (see J. Reuben Clark, Jr., Why the King James Version [ 1956; reprint, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979]). The Prophet Joseph said, "I believe the Bible as it read when it came from the pen of the original writers. Ignorant translators, careless transcribers, or designing and corrupt priests have committed many errors." (TPJS, p. 327.)

26We have no original manuscripts of either the Old or the New Testament. Although the King James translators worked with already corrupt manuscripts, it seems that the Lord, through the Book of Mormon translation, recognized the King James Version with its known limitations as the best English translation available.

26In conclusion, the exact manner of the translation has not been fully revealed. The translation process involved Joseph's looking into the Urim and Thummim and, through a combination of study and faith, receiving revelation concerning the characters engraved upon the gold plates.

27Regardless of how the Prophet Joseph Smith translated the Book of Mormon, the complexity of its text and the clarity of its message have stood the test of time and stand as witnesses to Joseph Smith's declaration that he translated it through the Urim and Thummim by the gift and power of God.

27Moroni, the last Nephite prophet, recognized the role of the Urim and Thummim as he finished his father's record. Regarding these special tools, Moroni declared:

27And now, behold, we have written this record according to our knowledge, in the characters which are called among us the reformed Egyptian, being handed down and altered by us, according to our manner of speech.

27And if our plates had been sufficiently large we should have written in Hebrew; but the Hebrew hath been altered by us also; and if we could have written in Hebrew, behold, ye would have had no imperfection in our record.

27But the Lord knoweth the things which we have written, and also that none other people knoweth our language; and because that none other people knoweth our language, therefore he hath prepared means for the interpretation thereof. (Morm. 9:32-34.)

Moroni seems to be saying that even if there were errors in the written text, the Lord would remove those errors by the translation of that text through the Urim and Thummim. This could only be done by revelation. Furthermore, the Lord has placed his stamp of validity upon the translation through latter-day revelation. Shortly after Oliver Cowdery began acting as scribe for Joseph's translating, the Lord said, "The words or the work which thou hast been writing are true" (D&C 6:17). To the Three Witnesses, prior to their viewing the plates from which the record was translated, the Lord declared, "And he has translated the book, even that part which I have commanded him, and as your Lord and your God liveth it is true" (D&C 17:6). This declaration, "as your Lord and your God liveth," was the most binding and solemn of all oaths, in ancient times when an oath was still considered sacred. The Lord does now and always has considered that oath as sacred, and his use of it regarding the translation of the Book of Mormon is most significant. While he does not say specifically that the translation of the records was correct, he certainly strongly implies that it is. A short time after the Lord made this declaration, he reminded Oliver Cowdery that he (Oliver) knew that the things he had written were true; the Lord then commanded Oliver to rely upon them (D&C 18:2-3). The Testimony of Three Witnesses in the front of every edition of the Book of Mormon declares: "And we also know that [the plates] have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a surety that the work is true." It seems unlikely that the Lord would speak so strongly about the Book of Mormon unless the translation was a correct one, and the major reason that the Book of Mormon is the most correct book is that it was translated by the gift and power of God.
