Monte S. Nyman, Most Correct Book ( 1991)

3

A Warning to This Promised Land

Another reason why the Book of Mormon is the most correct book on the face of the earth is that it explains the role of the Americas, a land that is choice above all other lands in the Lord's plan to bring about his purposes and fulfill the temporal existence of the earth. The Lord preserved the Americas for the restoration of the gospel in the last days (3 Ne. 21:1-7) and for the coming forth of this most correct book. Without this knowledge, man's understanding of the Lord's plan would be incomplete.

After Lehi and his family had left Jerusalem, under commandment of the Lord, and were camped in what Lehi called the valley of Lemuel, the Lord appeared to Nephi and promised him that they would "be led to a land of promise; yea, even a land which [the Lord had] prepared for [them]; yea, a land which is choice above all other lands" (1 Ne. 2:20). This promise was reiterated many times to Lehi and his people (for example, see 1 Ne. 13:30; 2 Ne. 1:5; 2 Ne. 10:19; Jacob 2:12). Earlier the Jaredites had also been promised that they would be led to this same "land which is choice above all the lands of the cash" (Ether 1:42).

30Both the Jaredites and the Nephites were promised that they would prosper in the land if they would serve Jesus Christ, the God of the land, and keep his commandments; but if they would not, they would be swept off the land and/or "our off from the presence of the Lord" (Ether 2:9-12; 1 Ne. 2:20-21). This conditional blessing was taught so often to the Nephites that it is the second most constant theme of the Book of Mormon, second only to its witness of Jesus as the Christ. The Book of Mormon contains two witnesses to the fulfillment of both the promised blessings and the sweeping of the wicked from the land in that both the Jaredites and the Nephites first built great nations in righteousness but then failed to keep the Lord's commandments. Thus it is a record of a fallen people (D&C 20:9).

30When the Lord gave the promise and warning to the brother of Jared, He extended them to all others who should possess this land (Ether 2:8). He repeated this same promise and warning to Lehi (2 Ne. 1:5-7).

30When the prophet Nephi spoke of "a mighty nation among the Gentiles, yea, even upon the face of this land" (1 Ne. 22:7), he undoubtedly meant the United States of America. However, the promised blessings and warnings were not limited to the United States of America. General Moroni, the ancient Nephite prophet-general, designated "all the land, both on the north and on the south-A chosen land, and the land of liberty" (Alma 46:17). The Prophet Joseph Smith also said that the prophets had spoken and written about Zion, and "the whole of America is Zion itself from north to south" (TPJS, p. 362). Therefore, the promised blessings and warning are extended to the whole of North, Central, and South America.

30This all means that we who inhabit the lands of America today are under the same promise of prospering and also face the same warning that we will be swept off the land if we do not serve Jesus Christ and keep his commandments. We today have been given a book of instructions on how to serve Jesus Christ and keep his commandments-the Book of Mormon.

Let's consider what the Book of Mormon is and is not, how the residents of the promised land prospered, and why the Nephites fell in order to see how we can avoid a present-day fall. Although the examples and applications will be primarily based upon the United States, Canada, and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saint, these principles can be applied to all nations of the Americas.

Not a History Book

Often the Book of Mormon is described as a history of some ancient inhabitants of the Americas. If it were called a spiritual history, that description might be appropriate but in the traditional use of the term it is incorrect to call the Book of Mormon a history. Neither the Book of Mormon itself nor the Doctrine and Covenants ever calls it a history book. In fact, the Book of Mormon goes to some length to say that it is not a history; the history of the Nephite people was engraved upon another set of plates, commonly referred to as the large plates of Nephi (Jacob 1:2-8; 1 Ne. 9:2-4).

31Why shouldn't we call the Book of Mormon a history of some early inhabitants of the Americas? The dictionary says that history is a systematic, written account of the story of a man or a nation. While the Book of Mormon may be the story of the Nephite nations, it certainly is not a systematic one. Let's review a few facts about the Book of Mormon.

31There are 1,021 years covered by the record of the Nephites (not counting the years of the Jaredites, which would probably be another 2,000). Those 1,021 years of the Nephites are recorded in 500 pages (the Jaredite record used the other 31 pages in the 1981 edition). Two short sections, totaling just 84 of those 500 pages, cover well over half of the entire time period. The short 4 page book of 4 Nephi begins during the year A.D. 34 and ends after A.D. 320, a total of 286 years. These 4 pages cover 28 percent of the total time period of the Nephite record. The short books of Jarom and Omni cover from 420 B.C. to about 130 B.C. This is a 290-year period recorded in just 4½ pages. Thus, 8½ of the 500 pages of the Nephite record cover 576 years of the 1,021-year reign of the Nephites. No one would argue that this is a systematic account.

32A look at the Book of Mormon's internal structure further illustrates that it is not a history book. Nephi was commanded to keep two sets of records, which were referred to as the small and the large plates of Nephi. The small plates include the books from 1 Nephi through the Words of Mormon, the first 144 pages of our present editions. These pages contain an account of the ministry of Nephi and those who succeeded him down to King Benjamin. They tell us that the large plates of Nephi contained the full account of the Nephite history (1 Ne. 6; 1 Ne. 9; 1 Ne. 19:1-6). Mormon abridged the large plates from the time of King Benjamin to his own day (around A.D. 385, Morm. 5:9) he also wrote that he could include less than a hundredth part of the proceedings of his people (3 Ne. 5:8). An analysis of our present-day Book of Mormon clearly shows that neither the small plates of Nephi nor the abridgment Mormon made of the large plates of Nephi can be called historical treatises. Let's examine the books of the small plates first.

32The book of 1 Nephi, for instance, cannot really be called a history. The first five chapters plus chapter 7 might qualify as history in that they relate the story of Lehi's being brought out of Jerusalem and of his sons' two trips back. But chapters 6 and 9 tell only that the Nephites were keeping two sets of records and have nothing else to do with the story of the people. Chapters 8 and 10-15 record Lehi's vision of the tree of life and Nephi's vision of the future. These chapters talk about only two incidents, very important incidents, but only two historical events.

32Chapters 16-18 continue the story of Lehi's journey from the valley of Lemuel, where they had those great visions, to the seashore of the land Bountiful, where they built a ship and then sailed to the promised lands Nephi uses just three verses to describe the eight years that they were in the wilderness (1 Ne. 17:4, 12-13). These three chapters, although mentioning the historical journey, center on the spiritual happenings which preceded and followed those eight wilderness years. Chapters 19-22 include the introduction and quotation of two chapters from Isaiah and follow with some interpretative comments pertaining to the future.

In summary, only nine of the twenty two chapters of 1 Nephi could possibly qualify as history. That hardly makes the Book of Mormon a history book.

33Second Nephi is even less historic. The first four chapters are based on only one historical event, recording the last blessings which Lehi gave his children. Chapter 5 could be considered historical in that it records Lehi's death and the division of his family into two major groups: Nephites-Nephi and those who believed in the things of the Lord; and Lamanites-Laman and Lemuel and those who did not believe in those things. Chapters 6-10 record Jacob's teachings, probably at some kind of conference since these chapters cover two consecutive days. Jacob's teachings prophesy of Israel's future and the atonement of Jesus Christ, and include the last few verses of Isaiah, 49:24 through 52:2. In chapters 11-24 Nephi introduces and quotes thirteen consecutive chapters from Isaiah (Isaiah 2-14). In chapters 25-30, he interprets those chapters for the future reader of his record. Knowing that he is about to complete his life here on earth, Nephi fills the last three chapters with his teachings on the doctrine of Christ. Thus, of the thirty three chapters in 2 Nephi, only one is historical, and of the fifty five chapters which make up 1 and 2 Nephi, only ten even modestly approach secular history.

33An analysis of the years covered in 1 and 2 Nephi further illustrates that Nephi did not keep his people's history on the small plates. During the fifty-five years after they left Jerusalem, until Nephi died (Jacob 1:1-12), thirty of those years are covered in 1 Ne. 1:1 through 2 Ne. 5:28. All that is recorded for the next ten years is that the Nephites had had wars and contentions with their brethren (2 Ne. 5:33-34). The remainder of 2 Nephi covers another fifteen years but says nothing of historical events. Thus, in the last twenty five years of Nephi's life, the Book of Mormon reflects no specific events and makes only one general statement about wars and contentions.

The Book of Mormon does not qualify as a history book either from an external or an internal examination of its contents. Nephi told Jacob to touch lightly concerning the history and to record "preaching which was sacred, or revelation which was great, or prophesying" on the small plates and to write "the history of his people . . . upon his other plates" (Jacob 1:2-4). Jacob says his whole purpose in writing was to persuade men to not rebel against God, but to believe in Christ (Jacob 1:8). He notes that as the prophet, he had the responsibility to warn his people of the consequences of their sins if they did not repent. The specific sins of which he warned his people-pride and immorality-are the same sins that our society faces today. President Ezra Taft Benson has labeled sexual immorality as the plaguing sin of this generation ("Cleansing the Inner Vessel," Ensign 16 [May 1986]: 4). He has also warned this generation of pride, calling it "the universal sin, the great vice," and "the great stumbling block to Zion" ("Beware of Pride," Ensign 19 [May 1989, 6-7). In addition to his teachings on pride and immorality, Jacob recorded the conflict he had with Sherem, the anti Christ who came among his people (Jacob 7:1-20). The rest of his book is an introduction to and a commentary on the allegory of the olive tree-the house of Israel-given by the ancient prophet Zenos (Jacob 4-6) and recorded on the plates of brass (Jacob 5).

34 Jacob turned over the keeping of the records to his son Enos, who contributed the account of his spiritual rebirth. We see from his experience that even though he was the son of a prophet, he had to gain his own spiritual witness and rebirth. This shows that regardless of family, everyone needs to be born again into the kingdom of God.

34The records of Jacob and Enos combine for twenty-one pages in our current editions covering 124 years and just three specific incidents during that time. Their records show that they followed Nephi's admonition not to engrave the history upon the small plates. The books of Jarom and Omni cover 290 years in four and a half pages. They both speak to just one central theme-"Inasmuch as ye will not keep my commandments ye shall not prosper in the land" (Omni 1:6). This certainly is not traditional history.

If the Book of Mormon is not a history of people in the Americas, what is it? The Lord called it a record of a fallen people (D&C 20:9). A record is an official written document, not a systematic written account or story. The abridgers included the words of Christ that were to judge the reader and all the world at the last day (2 Ne. 31:10-15; Jacob 6:8-13; Morm. 3:16-22; Moro. 10:27-34). So what we have in the small plates of Nephi is an official document from the Lord, a record given to us so we might know how we must live to prosper in Nephi's land of promise (1 Ne. 2:20).

Nephite Parallels with Modern Events

My analysis of Mosiah through 4 Nephi, Mormon's abridgment of the large plates of Nephi, shows a similar but more specific guideline than Nephi's and Jacob's for prospering in the land chosen for the restoration of the gospel. President Ezra Taft Benson has called attention to parallels between the thing that transpired before Christ's coming among the Nephites and our own day when we anticipate Christ's second coming to the earth:

35The record of the Nephite history just prior to the Savior's visit reveals many parallels to our own day as we anticipate the Savior's second coming. The Nephite civilization had reached great heights. They were prosperous and industrious. They had built many cities with great highways connecting them. They engaged in shipping and trade. They built temples and palaces.

35But, as so often happens, the people reject the Lord. Pride became commonplace. Dishonesty and immorality were widespread. Secret combinations flourished because, as Helaman tells us, the Gadianton robbers, "had seduced the more part of the righteous until they had come down to believe in their works and partake of their spoils" (Hel. 6:38). "The people began to be distinguished by ranks, according to their riches and their chances for learning" (3 Ne. 6:12). And "Satan had great power, unto the stirring up of the people to do all manner of iniquity, and to the puffing them up with pride, tempting them to seek for power, and authority, and riches and the vain things of the world," even as today (v. 15). ("The Savior's Visit to America," Ensign 17 [May 1987]:4.)

These parallels may have been why the Lord inspired Mormon to write what he did. Recognizing that it is not my calling to interpret scripture, I offer the following parallels in the spirit of Nephi's desire to "liken all scriptures unto us, that it might be four our profit and learning" (1 Ne. 19:23).

36The major problems and principles in the period preceding Christ's visit to the Nephites parallel the problems and principles that we have faced, do now face, or will yet face in a similar period preceding the second coming of Christ. Though the precise date of our Lord's second coming is not known, we can still draw a general parallel. A word of caution is given against drawing specific parallels-my intent is solely to show that the Nephites experienced similar problems in similar situations and that prophets of the Lord revealed solutions to these problems that are applicable to us today. These prophets saw our day and knew our doings (Morm. 8:26-41).

36The earliest established date in the book of Mosiah is 124 B.C., when Mosiah was made king to succeed his father, Benjamin (Mosiah 6:4). The books of Mosiah, Alma, and Helaman record the next 124 years before the Savior's birth in Jerusalem. The book of 3 Nephi starts 33 years prior to Christ's death and ends just after his visit among them following his resurrection in Jerusalem. Mosiah 6 through the end of 3 Nephi covers about 158 years.

36The book of Mosiah begins when King Benjamin is an old man, and the first six chapters record his last instructions to his people immediately prior to appointing his son Mosiah to succeed him as king. All we know of King Benjamin's earlier life is recorded in seven short verses (W of M 1:12-18). These verses note that King Benjamin, with the help of the prophets, had established peace in the land. How long it took is not given, but it could add several years to the 158 years previous to Christ's visit. When Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith on the morning of 22 September 1823, he quoted three passages of scripture relating to the second coming of Christ, which he said would soon come to pass (Joseph Smith History 1:40-41). His visit was over 165 years ago, paralleling the years covered in the Nephite record from the reign of King Benjamin to Christ's ministry among the Nephites.

One parallel of Nephite and latter day Church history is, therefore, the establishment of peace by King Benjamin and the prophets and the setting up of the kingdom of God by Joseph Smith between 1820 and 1836. Since the Nephites appear to have lived under the patriarchal order, and King Mosiah was a prophet, seer, and revelator (Mosiah 8:13-17), it is logical to assume that his father, King Benjamin, was also a prophet. The other prophets who helped King Benjamin establish peace could be compared to the Quorum of the Twelve, who were chosen and organized under the direction of the prophet, seer, and revelator, Joseph Smith, and who helped him establish the kingdom of God on the earth again. The year 1836 is used because that is the year the Kirtland Temple was completed and dedicated and the fulness of the priesthood was restored (TPJS, pp. 308, 323). The Church was organized in 1830, but the full complement came in stages: the First Presidency in 1833, the Quorum of the Twelve in 1835, and the temple in 1836. Nephi had seen in vision the establishing of the latter day mighty gentile nation and the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and had recorded his vision on the small plates of Nephi (1 1 Ne. 13). Mormon was well aware of what Nephi had written, which accounts for the brief synopsis he gave of King Benjamin's reign in the Words of Mormon.

Another parallel between the periods preceding Christ's first and second comings is contained in the historical chapters of the book of Mosiah. The record of Zeniff (Mosiah 9-22) is an account of a group of people who left the land of Zarahemla to seek the land of Nephi. Zeniff's successor, King Noah, brought his people under bondage to the Lamanites by not heeding Abinadi's warning prophecy. The prophet Abinadi was martyred by King Noah's people after he had completed his mission (Mosiah 17). The time period covered in Zeniff's record is not given. However, estimated dates that have been placed at the bottom of the pages of the Book of Mormon note that Alma hearkened to the words of Abinadi in 148 B.C. This seems a fair estimation since Alma was young man at the time (Mosiah 17:2) and he died in 91 B.C. at the age of eighty-two. That would have made him about twenty-five year old when he heard the words of Abinadi, some fifty-seven years previous to his death. If this estimate is accurate, it would establish the period of Nephite bondage to have lasted somewhere around fifty-five years, since Alma died shortly after they returned from bondage to Zarahemla.

38Does modern Church history show a similar period of bondage? Yes, that period being from the establishment of the Kingdom in 1830 until the attainment of Utah's statehood in 1896. This is supported by historical evidence as well as scriptural evidence. The Lord, in speaking to Joseph Smith about the establishment of Zion after the Saints had just been driven out of Jackson County, Missouri (1834), said: "Ye must needs be led out of bondage by power, and with a stretched-out arm." And he said he would raise up a man like unto Moses to do it. (D&C 103:16-17.)

38The Church was established in 1830 in New York, but because of persecution the Saints could not live their religion there the way it had been revealed to them, so they left and went to Ohio. The Ohio period also brought persecution, and they went into Missouri. For a short time there were two central locations of the Church, one in Ohio and one in Missouri. It's interesting to note that there were two central locations of the Church in the book of Mosiah during this parallel time: one in Zarahemla, where they had a prophet, seer, and revelator, and the other in the land of Nephi, where the prophet Alma was their head. Persecution and apostasy later moved the Church out of both Ohio and Missouri and into Illinois. Again in Nauvoo, persecution came upon the Saints. Furthermore, the Prophet Joseph Smith was martyred, just as Abinadi had been among the Nephites. Following the martyrdom of the Prophet, the Saints were driven out of Nauvoo and journeyed to the Great Salt Lake, or the valleys of the Rocky Mountains, again with the idea of living their religion without the gentile government of the United States telling them what they could and could not do.

Shortly after settling in those valleys, however, they faced bondage again. This time the United States government sent out its gentile governors to rule over them, and most of these appointees had their differences with the Saints. Some got along better with the Saints than others, but most of them were there to keep the Mormons under subjection and to help their own political reputations. Government intrusion became so bad in 1858 that Brigham Young threatened to burn down everything the Saints had built and not leave a thing to the Gentiles. They even packed up and were moving out until Brigham Young said "they were at liberty to return," so they went back and worked out their differences. But the Church had been serious in leaving and had left men behind to burn down everything that had been built (CHC 4:375-448). When the railroad came in the late 1860s, the Gentiles that lived in Salt Lake City threatened to bring in tens of thousands of non-Mormons to make the Saints the minority. But eventually they worked out those and many other differences and attained statehood in 1896, paralleling the establishment of a new system of government among the Nephites (Mosiah 29).

39The problem of bondage in other facets of life continued to face the Saints following the establishment of Utah's statehood, and we will still face many of these problems today. Consequently, the book of Mosiah is pertinent to today's reader. There are many types of bondage-financial bondage (it's easy today with our credit system to fall into a financial bondage); intellectual bondage (the learning of the world often takes precedence over the scriptures); social bondage (the styles of the world tend to dictate how we dress)to name just a few forms of bondage.

39Whatever bondage one faces, the Book of Mormon gives the solution. Limhi, the king of the Nephites who had fallen into bondage to the Lamanites, told his people, "If ye will turn to the Lord with full purpose of heart, and put your trust in him, and serve him with all diligence of mind, if ye do this, he will, according to his own will and pleasure, deliver you out of bondage" (Mosiah 7:33).

39There are four points to Limhi's formula for deliverance. First, "turn to the Lord with full purpose of heart"-recognize the problem, and have a desire to know how to get out of and stay out of bondage. Second, trust in the Lord-listen for that still small voice of revelation, and when the revelation comes, follow it. Third, serve God as he would have us serve him. Fourth-and this is perhaps the most important point-recognize that the Lord will deliver us out of bondage according to his own will and pleasure. The Lord chooses the time so he might teach us a lesson that can prevent our falling into bondage again.

40The book of Mosiah records two good examples of how the Lord does things according to his own will and pleasure. Abinadi had prophesied that all of Noah's subjects would fall into bondage. Both Limhi's people and Alma's people fell into bondage to the Lamanites-Limhi's in the land of Nephi, and Alma's in the land of Helam. The Lord did not deliver Limhi's people until they were prepared. A great war had left lots of widows and children, and the Lord had to teach the people of Limhi how to care for them before he delivered them (Mosiah 21:15-17). In the land of Helam, the Lamanites placed the wicked priests of Amulon as taskmasters over Alma's people, a kind of double bondage. But when Alma got his people to recognize their bondage and cry unto the Lord, the Lord did not deliver them immediately. He blessed them by making their burden lighter, and he also strengthened them physically because he knew they were going to have to make a very difficult journey from the land of Helam to the land of Zarahemla (Mosiah 24). The Lord has his purpose, and when we fall into bondage, he will take the time to teach his children and provide a benefit from it as well (see Monte S. Nyman, "Bondage and Deliverance," in Kent P. Jackson, ed., 1 Nephi to Alma 29, vol. 7 of Studies in Scripture [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1987], pp. 265-66).

40The book of Alma, the next book in the Book of Mormon, has four major themes and covers approximately forty years from 91 to 52 B.C. The first theme is a reformation within the Church. After all the people were reestablished in the land of Zarahemla, the Nephites set up a new government and appointed Alma as chief judge. But Alma resigned that position after eight years because of the iniquity, of his people. He then went throughout the land crying repentance to them. The reformation period within the Church is found in Alma 1-16. The second theme includes Alma 17-29 and is the account of the missionary work of the sons of Mosiah among the Lamanites. This work took place during the same years as the reformation within the Church. The third theme is found in Alma 30-42 and shows the Zoramite apostasy and the reactivation work Alma and is sons did among them. Following their labors, we have Alma's instructions to his sons. 'The fourth theme is that of war and is covered in Alma 43-62.

41With only slight modifications, latter-day Church history has the same basic themes. These themes are probably not limited to one time period but will happen to one degree or another at various times. A parallel is shown in the 1856 travels of Jedediah M. Grant, a member of the First Presidency, as he went among the Saints from St. George, Utah, to the northernmost Latter day Saint colony, Limhi, Idaho, preaching repentance to the Church. Because persecution had eased after the Saints came to the Rocky Mountains, they had become lax in living the standards of the Church, as had Alma's people (CHC 4:118f). A reformation within the Church resulted from President Grant's efforts.

41In the latter-day Church, the first foreign missionary work was done in 1837 and 1840. This work parallels the conversion of Nephites in the land of Nephi Lehi and their return to the land of Zarahemla as recorded in the book of Mosiah. While the work done in those years was somewhat different from that recorded in the book of Alma, the results are very much alike. The latter day missionary effort went to England to gather the blood of Israel, and the thousands who converted and emigrated to Zion were parallel to the people of Limhi and Alma who came out of the land of Nephi and joined the Church in Zarahemla, increasing their numbers greatly. The people of Limhi were Nephites gathering with other Nephites, just as the English converts were basically scattered Ephraimites being gathered to the already gathered Ephraimites in America.

A parallel to Alma's missionary work came in the fall of 1849 when Brigham Young called several brethren to go to Scandinavia, South America, the isles of the sea, and throughout the world to do missionary work the following spring (CHC 3:382f). That is when current missionary work really started in the foreign countries, with the missionaries learning foreign languages. This is similar to when the sons of Mosiah went among the Lamanites. The Lamanites language was different from theirs, although the priests of Amulon had been appointed to teach the Lamanites the Nephite language (Mosiah 24:4). The interesting thing is that both dispensations did their missionary work based upon the same principles. The Lord not only inspired Mormon to record a parallel account to the latter days but also furnished the guidelines for success in those parallel periods. The foreign missionary work has continued since the 1850s and still follows the basic principles taught in the book of Alma.

42The late 1860s and early 1870s parallel the third Nephite theme-the Zoramite apostasy. Some pseudointellectuals within the Church, such as the Godbeites, began to take issue with the doctrines and practices of the Church. They published their own magazine and challenged the leadership of the Church and the doctrine of the Atonement (CHC 5:258-70). Refuting these challenges brought forth some great instructions to the Church, like Alma's instructions to his sons following the Zoramite uprising. There have been other apostate movements before and after the above, but it parallels that of the Zoramites more closely and serves as a warning to our day.

42The fourth theme is a record of fourteen consecutive years of war among the Nephites and Lamanites. When did war really become an issue in the latter days? Some would say the world has always known war, which is true; but the revelation now contained in D&C 87, given Christmas Day 1832, was a prophecy of a war beginning in South Carolina that would commence a general outpouring of wars upon all nations. The fulfillment of that prophecy started in 1861 with the United States Civil War. All the major nations were involved in that war, even though some of them weren't armed. And from that time on we have had continual war on the earth. The principles to guide the members of the Church concerning war are recorded in these chapters of the Book of Mormon: the law of war-Alma 42; the cause of war-Alma 50; the effects of war-Alma 51-52. Many other parallel situations and conditions are treated in the Book of Mormon in principle if not in specific example.

The book of Helaman treats four themes. It begins with contention over government when three of Pahoran's sons want to be the chief judge. They hold an election, and the voice of the people elects one of the three. One of those defeated accepts the voice of the people, but the other rebels and tries to set himself up as the king. This contention over control of the government led to the organization of secret combinations, the second theme of the book of Helaman. These first two themes are found in the first six chapters. The third theme, found in Hel. 7-12, tells about the drought that was caused when Nephi sealed the heavens to humble his people that they might return to God. The fourth theme is found in chapters 13-16, which tell how Samuel the Lamanite stood on the walls of Zarahemla and prophesied of the birth, death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ. The whole book of Helaman covers approximately fifty years, from 52 to 1 B.C.

43Not surprisingly, modern Church history parallels these book of Helaman themes. The concept of democracy, the principle of freedom upon which the United States was established, has been altered and somewhat lost today, and we are contending over government just as the Nephites did. As evidences look at our national elections. When either major party is defeated, they do not accept the voice of the people but immediately begin work to oppose the winners and regain the power in the next election. The Book of Mormon teaches that when the voice of the people speaks, all should follow it, or at least give the elected officials a chance to lead before condemning them. In nearly everything the government faces today, there seems to be at least a two-party political argument. The concept of democracy or the voice of the people seems to have been lost, which parallels the problem recorded in the book of Helaman.

43The problem of secret combinations is also a major problem today. Hel. 3:23 says that secret combinations were found in the more settled parts of the land, that is, in the big cities. Such combinations exist in the nation today, really getting established during "the roaring twenties," although they have existed before and after this period. Not only that, but Hel. 6 briefly describes the signs and oaths of these combinations. Not many years ago, Joseph Valachi, former member of the Cosa Nostra, was arrested and imprisoned. He said that the Cosa Nostra had put "the kiss of death" on him, but if the police would protect him he'd tell them all he knew about the organization workings. The senate subcommittee on crime heard and recorded Valachi's testimony (U.S. Government, Organized Crime and Illicit Traffic in Narcotics). Hel. 6:21-25 gives a condensed version of Valachi's testimony, almost as if he had given it about the Nephites. The Book of Mormon doesn't name names as Valachi did, but it does contain the same wicked oaths and covenants.

44What followed the 1920s? The depression of the 1930s. Why? To humble the people because the Twenties was one of the most wicked periods of the nation, and the Church was much affected by it. That depression parallels the famine among the Nephites caused when Nephi sealed the heavens. As with other themes, recessions and prosperity come and go, but the cause and solution to them are given in the Nephite record (Hel. 12:1-3).

44The Lord raised up Samuel the Lamanite to warn the Nephites of their coming destruction if they did not repent. The Lord always uses prophets to warn the people (Amos 3:7). As we come nearer to the Second Coming, the Lord will continue to raise up prophets for our needs. It is evident that the Lord raised up the prophet Ezra Taft Benson to warn us today to use the Book of Mormon to prepare us for the Second Coming.

44The book of 3 Nephi also has four major themes which parallel modern Church history. The first theme is the persecution of the Saints. The believers were persecuted because they believed in the signs given by Samuel the Lamanite. Those who would not deny the Christ were harassed and threatened with death (3 Ne. 1:6-9). The second theme is the vacillation of the people between righteousness and wickedness. The signs came and the people repented, but within six years they turned back to their wickedness (3 Ne. 7:8). The third theme was that the Nephites became so wicked that the Church was broken up except among the Lamanites (3 Ne. 6:14). And the fourth theme was that the government was also broken up (3 Ne. 7:1-4). While much of these parallel themes are probably yet to come, we can see these themes beginning to happen.

44President Heber C. Kimball prophesied that the time would come when trials, troubles, and persecution would come upon the Saints; when only those who have their own testimonies would be able to endure the test; the time when, in the peaceful valleys, it would be difficult to tell the face of a Saint from that of a sinner. In October 1965, Elder Harold B. Lee quoted these prophecies of President Kimball and others as a guide to the Saints in the trials they faced ("Watch! Be Ye Therefore Ready," Improvement Era 68 [December 1965]: 1152-54).

45People read the Book of Mormon and ask how the Nephites could change so fast. Today's society vacillates as quickly as they did. Anyone who saw the revolution of the 1960s could not deny that. Many things that had been strictly taboo a few years earlier were openly flaunted on our TV and movie screens and in our magazines. And they still are.

45The Church has and will experience periods of being broken up, but perhaps not in the same way as a first reading of 3 Nephi may indicate. The Church among the Nephites did not necessarily, go into complete apostasy, but every area of the Church may have seen apostasy and excommunication. In the last few decades, stake presidents and bishops have been holding disciplinary councils and cleansing the Church at an accelerated rate. The pruning prophesied of our day in the allegory of Zenos is starting to take place (Jacob 5:65). However, the roots have enough strength to start cleaning out the decayed branches. This is seen Churchwide as those who will not repent and live the gospel are choosing to leave the Church or are being excommunicated. The Church will be cleansed before the Second Coming (D&C 112:23-26).

45The United States government of late has not broken up, but it certainly seems hampered by corruption. The parallel to the Nephites may also have a different application than a first reading of 3 Nephi might suggest. Whereas the Nephite government broke into tribal units, the Brethren have told us that Old Glory, the flag of the United States, will fly into the Millennium; however, the Constitution and its principles of freedom will be threatened and will have to be preserved by the elders of the Church (see Mark E. Petersen, The Great Prologue [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co, 1975] pp. 105-13). Because of this, there may be places in the United States and in the world where the husband will have to preside as the head of the Church and of his family because they won't be able to get to a church to worship. The correlation program is designed to prepare fathers and quorums to function through the priesthood, which may be a kind of parallel to the Nephites' tribal unity.

There is also a parallel of the 4 Nephi Zion. It is the minipattern of the Millennium and subsequent downfall of the Nephites recorded in 4 Nephi which will occur when Satan is loosed at the end of the Millennium. However, the outcome of 4 Nephi and the Book of Mormon is not the same as the end of the Millennium will bring, because then Satan, after he has been "loosed for a little season" (D&C 88:111), will be cast out and the earth will become a celestial kingdom.

A Second Witness of Blessings and Destruction

The book of Ether serves as a second witness to the Nephite record. The Jaredites had the same promises of blessings as the Nephites, and they fell for the same reasons. The secret combinations and wickedness, the forsaking and killing of the prophets-these recorded evils are abridged down to just thirty pages covering almost two thousand years. But it is the same witness. Thus we have two witnesses before us. If we let our righteous nations fall, it will be our own fault.

46These American continents form a chosen land, choice above all other lands, given to Joseph of old (3 Ne. 15:12-13). Most Church members are of the tribe of Joseph, and our patriarchal blessings tell us that. The Book of Mormon, the most correct book, has come forth and the gospel has been restored. Consequently, we have the responsibility to take the Book of Mormon to the Lamanites and to the world. We also have the responsibility, particularly those of us living in North and South America, to establish Zion. It will be established. But the big question each one of us must ask is, "Will I be a part of it?" The decision to be, or not to be a part of Zion is an individual one. If we choose to live the gospel of Jesus Christ as revealed in the Book of Mormon, we will be a part of the establishing of Zion. But if we choose to give in to Satan's influence, which is so prevalent in the land, we will not be part of Zion but will perish as others have before us. To follow the gospel of Jesus Christ, we must understand it, and studying the Book of Mormon helps us to understand it.
