Monte S. Nyman, Most Correct Book ( 1991)

4

The Book of Mormon Contains the Fulness of the Gospel

A third reason that the Book of Mormon is the most correct book on the earth is that it contains the fulness of the gospel.

47Gospel is a term used extensively in our society. It undoubtedly has several different meanings for several different people or different groups, but it is always associated with the scriptures and with organized religion. We need to understand the true meaning of the term. In Hebrew, the word for gospel is translated "glad tidings of great joy." The Greek translation is "good news." Therefore, the gospel is the glad tidings or the good news that there is a plan given by our eternal Heavenly Father for us to return to him with whom we resided before coming to this earth to experience mortality. The principles and ordinances for regaining his presence are called the principles and ordinances of the gospel.

Some gospel principles and ordinances that are taught in the scriptures or in the Church are purposeful but not essential for salvation. For example, the doctrine of anointing the sick is an accepted doctrine and practice of the Church, but if a person dies without having been anointed for the sick, his or her salvation is not in jeopardy. In other words, there are saving principles and ordinances and nonsaving principles and ordinances of the gospel.

48"The fulness of the gospel" is a phrase used frequently in the scriptures. The fulness of the gospel is the full plan necessary to enable mankind to obtain salvation in the celestial kingdom. Some people argue that because the Book of Mormon does not contain a treatise of every doctrine of the restored gospel-such as eternal marriage, three degrees of glory, or salvation for the dead it does not contain the fulness of the gospel. That depends upon the definition of "fulness," because the angel Moroni told Joseph Smith that "there was a book [the Book of Mormon] deposited, written upon gold plates . . . that [contained] the fulness of the everlasting Gospel ... as delivered by the Savior to the ancient inhabitants" of this continent (Joseph Smith History 1:34). Furthermore, in the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord says several times that the Book of Mormon contains the fulness of the gospel (D&C 20:9; D&C 27:5; D&C 35:12, 17; D&C 42:12).

The fulness of the gospel is first mentioned in the Book of Mormon when Jesus commanded the Nephites to record his words so they could be brought forth among the Gentiles in the latter days so that "the fulness of these things shall be made known among them" (3 Ne. 16:4, 7). The Lord warned the latter-day Gentiles of the day when they would sin against the gospel and reject the fulness of the gospel. He then qualified the sins against the gospel as "all manner of lyings, and of deceits, and of mischiefs, and all manner of hypocrisy, and murders, and priestcrafts, and whoredoms, and of secret abominations" and clarified that the rejection of the fulness of the gospel will cause him to bring the fulness of the gospel from among them (3 Ne. 16:8-10). Bringing the fulness of the gospel from among them seems to be a reference to the missionaries no longer taking the Book of Mormon to those gentile peoples who have rejected the missionaries and their message. Thus, the angel Moroni, the Doctrine and Covenants references, and the Book of Mormon itself all show that the Book of Mormon is the source of the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ. The fulness of the gospel and the gospel seem to be used interchangeably in the Book of Mormon.

49The gospel is defined in 3 Ne. 27:9-22 as Jesus Christ coming to the earth to do the Father's will. As he was lifted up on the cross by men, so will all people eventually be lifted up and judged by the standards that the Savior set for them. Therefore, those who meet the four conditions that the Savior set forth will be held guiltless before the Father at the judgment day: they will have (1) washed their garments in his blood through faith in his atoning sacrifice; (2) repented of all their sins; (3) been baptized in his name, which implies by the proper authority and method that he had outlined for them; and (4) been sanctified by receiving the Holy Ghost. Those who have met the above conditions, followed the Savior's example, and endured to the end will be lifted up at the last day. This definition of the gospel or the fulness of the gospel is consistent with three of the Lord's definitions of the gospel that are given in the Doctrine and Covenants (D&C 33:11-12; D&C 39:5-6; and D&C 76:40-43).

49While there are some doctrines or principles of the gospel which are not included in the Book of Mormon, all that is necessary to lead a person to salvation in the celestial kingdom-the fulness of the gospel--is included. The Lord chose to reveal some additional doctrines of exaltation within the celestial kingdom through the modern-day prophet Joseph Smith. They are now recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants. These doctrines of exaltation include eternal marriage, salvation for our dead ancestors, and three heavens or degrees in the celestial glory (D&C 131:1-4). While they are not specifically taught in the Book of Mormon, some of these doctrines are implied there (4 Ne. 1:11; see also 3 Ne. 25:5-6; Ether 12:32).

49When the Melchizedek Priesthood and the Holy Ghost are given to men, they have the power to receive all things that the Father chooses to give his children. The doctrines of exaltation are bestowed through these powers. The Book of Mormon teaches the necessity of man's receiving both the priesthood and the Holy Ghost, noting that by using these powers all mankind may be exalted (Alma 13:10-12).

A casual reading of the definition of the gospel may be misleading, however. The fourth article of faith outlines the first principles and ordinances of the gospel as taught in the Book of Mormon. All of the steps of the fulness of the gospel are ongoing and require a lifetime of dedication and effort to complete. Obedience to the first principles and ordinances places us on the path to eternal life. Studying the Book of Mormon enables us to come to a fuller understanding of the fulness of the gospel; by following its teachings, we continue on the path until we are granted eternal life.

50The Savior's definition of the gospel, as given to the Nephites, amplifies the path to eternal life. He testified that he came into the world to do the will of the Father-that he "be lifted up upon the cross" (3 Ne. 27:13-14). His being lifted up on the cross was the culminating event of his ministry following his atonement in Gethsemane. John substantiates this in the New Testament by recording that Jesus, after being lifted up, knew that all things were now accomplished (John 19:28).

50The Savior told the Nephites that "no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; ... nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith." He referred to those who had faith that he had indeed made the Atonement and had taken upon his garments all of the stain of their sins, leaving their garments white and pure. This washing was done through "the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end." (3 Ne. 27:19.)

50Because this atonement has been made (or before it was made, knowing that it would be made-Mosiah 16:6), all mankind are commanded to repent (3 Ne. 27:19-20). This principle is also amplified in the Book of Mormon. Amulek taught Zeezrom that "the Lord surely should come to redeem his people, but that he should not come to redeem them in their sins, but to redeem them from their sins" (Hel. 5:10). Thus repentance from all sins is an ongoing process.

The more we learn about the gospel, the more things we learn that we need to repent of. As we refine our lives, we hone our characters through repentance. This is exemplified in Nephi's psalm wherein Nephi bares his soul as he speaks of his iniquities, "the sins which do so easily beset me." As he continues, we find that the sins which agonize his soul are that he slackens his strength because of his afflictions and is angry because of his enemies (2 Ne. 4:15-29). Only those who have become sensitive to the things of the Spirit would recognize those feelings as sins.

51As a person obeys the initial commandment to repent, he sees that the commandment also includes coming unto Christ and being "baptized in [his] name" (3 Ne. 27:20). Just a few days prior to his giving this definition of the gospel, Jesus had given the Nephites explicit instructions regarding baptism. He had also given them power or authority to baptize, had taught them that immersion was the proper method of baptism, and had given them the exact wording to be used in the baptismal prayer (3 Ne. 11:21-27.)

51In his definition of the gospel, the Savior specifies that the purpose of baptism is to receive the Holy Ghost. The gospel plan is that the person on whom the Holy Ghost is conferred "may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost" and thus stand spotless before Christ at the last day (3 Ne. 27:20).

51Much more could be said about the Holy Ghost, but for this definition of the gospel, it is sufficient to say that a person must be born again through a baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost (3 Ne. 9:20). This baptism places that person on the path to eternal life, and he must then press forward as led by the Spirit (2 Ne. 31:17-20; Moro. 8:25-26). Through this guidance and the ordinances and blessings of the priesthood, a person can become sanctified. To become sanctified is to become "pure and spotless before God." This means being pure in thoughts and actions, not being able to "look upon sin save it were with abhorrence" (Alma 13:11-12). However, there is a difference between looking on sin with abhorrence and looking on the sinner. In the words of Joseph Smith, "God does not look on sin with allowance, but when men have sinned, there must be allowance made for them" (TPJS, pp. 240-41). Thus the fulness of the gospel, as the Lord Jesus Christ defined it to the Nephites, means a lifelong process of working toward eternal life.

After defining what the gospel is, Jesus taught the Nephites to continue doing the works in his church which they had seen him do (3 Ne. 27:21). He commanded them to write the things he had taught, which would judge the world (3 Ne. 27:23-26). These teachings are the guidelines for living. Truly following his works and his teachings includes enduring to the end (2 Ne. 9:24; 2 Ne. 31:15-16, 20; Alma 32:13, 15; 3 Ne. 15:9). Some may say that enduring is a fifth step in the gospel plan, but it is really just a part of the fourth step of becoming pure and spotless before God.

52To endure to the end, we must fully follow the example and teachings given by Jesus and his Apostles and prophets. These examples and teachings were also recorded in the Bible, but since the Bible has lost many plain and precious parts (1 Ne. 13:23-29; see also TPJS, p. 327 and A of F 1:8), the Lord has provided the Book of Mormon, the most correct book, to outline more clearly the plan given by our eternal Heavenly Father to return to his presence. Although the world does not accept the Book of Mormon as scripture, an analysis of it will show that it positively qualifies to be classified as holy scripture.
