Monte S. Nyman, Most Correct Book ( 1991)

5

The Book of Mormon Is Scripture

A fourth reason why the Book of Mormon is the most correct book on earth is that it is scripture, the word of God. The Lord declared that the book "was given by inspiration" (D&C 20:10). Its authors wrote as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost, and its translator was directed by the gift and power of God. The Lord later commanded "all those who were ordained unto this priesthood" to speak "as they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost" (D&C 68:2-3). He then said that whatever they spoke "when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation" (D&C 68:4; compare 2 Pet. 1:21; Rom. 1:16). An analysis of the Book of Mormon shows that it meets the criterion to be scripture, that it was indeed inspired by the Holy Ghost. Each aspect of the Lord's definition will be treated separately.

The Will of the Lord

The title page of the Book of Mormon, which was written by Moroni, states that the book is an "abridgment of the record of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites ... written by way of commandment." By way of commandment certainly means by the will of the Lord. The Book of Mormon bears out this title page statement.

54Speaking of the small plates, Nephi said that he had "received a commandment of the Lord" to "make these plates, for the special purpose [of engraving] the ministry of my people" (1 Ne. 9:2-3). He was commanded to keep the "more plain and precious parts" of his prophecies and ministry which "should be kept for the instruction of my people, who should possess the land, and also for other wise purposes, which purposes are known unto the Lord" (1 Ne. 19:1-3). The Lord's wise purposes were undoubtedly to use this record to instruct future inhabitants of the land, as well as for "every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people" (Rev. 14:6-7).

54 Nephi also commanded that these "more sacred things" of his people should be "handed down from one generation to another, or from one prophet to another, until further commandments of the Lord" (1 Ne. 19:4-5). Nephi's commandment to his seed was that they were not to "occupy these plates with things which are not of worth unto the children of men," and that they were to follow his pattern of not writing "things which are pleasing unto the world" but "things which are pleasing unto God [His will] and those who are not of the world" (1 Ne. 6:5-6; see also 2 Ne. 5:28-32). The prophets, or others who were literal descendants of Jacob, in each succeeding generation followed this commandment of Nephi's for about four hundred years (W of M 1:10-11).

Jacob, a younger brother of Nephi, was the first prophet to continue the record. He began his record by declaring that he had been commanded of Nephi to write "a few of the things which [he] considered to be most precious." He was instructed to include "preaching which was sacred, or revelation which was great, or prophesying ... for Christ's sake, and for the sake of our people." (Jacob 1:1-4.) That the things which Jacob included were the will of the Lord is substantiated by his recording the great sermon he preached to his people (Jacob 2-3) after "having first obtained mine errand from the Lord" (Jacob 1:17).

55 Jacob passed Nephi's commandment on to his son Enos, who promised to be obedient unto the commands (Jacob 7:27). Jarom wrote as commanded by his father, Enos (Jarom 1:1 ), and Omni, Amaron, Chemish, and Abinadom wrote briefly in fulfillment of the commandment given to their fathers (Omni 1:1-3, 9-10). Amaleki concluded the record with a fuller account, but having no seed he turned the plates over to King Benjamin (Omni 1:25).

55As Mormon abridged the large plates of Nephi, he explained how he was able to record only a small part of the proceedings of the people in his abridgment (3 Ne. 5:8-13). Mormon said it had become expedient, "according to the will of God, that the prayers of those who have gone hence, who were the holy ones, should be fulfilled according to their faith, should make a record of these things which have been done" (3 Ne. 5:14). On a later occasion, Mormon recorded that he was about to write more but the Lord forbade it. Therefore Mormon wrote "the things which [had] been commanded [him] of the Lord" (3 Ne. 26:11-12).

55As the Nephite nation became extremely wicked, the Lord commanded Mormon to "stand as an idle witness to manifest unto the world the things which [he] saw and heard, according to the manifestations of the Spirit which had testified of things to come" (Morm. 3:16). Mormon addressed his writings to the Gentiles, the house of Israel, and all the ends of the earth (Morm. 3:17-19), thus fulfilling the commandment to witness to the people of the latter days. He once more reminded the reader that his record was brief because of the Lord's commandment, who, in his wisdom, would not cause "too great sorrow because of the wickedness of this people" (Morm. 5:8-9, 13). Mormon recorded only those of the Savior's teachings to the Nephites that the Father wanted given to people in the latter days (3 Ne. 16:4; 3 Ne. 24:1). Mormon's words, the majority of our present day Book of Mormon, were written by commandment of the Lord and are thus the will of the Lord.

56As Moroni concluded his father Mormon's record, he did so by commandment of his father (Morm. 8:1). Other aspects of his writings, which will be discussed hereafter, will show that Moroni was also commanded by the Lord.

56All four of the major abridgers of the Book of Mormon wrote the will of the Lord: the Book of Mormon is scripture.

The Mind of the Lord

The mind of the Lord may be classified into two categories: that which is beyond men's understanding, and that which the Lord shows man that he could not otherwise know. Both categories may be termed the mysteries of God. Nephi demonstrated the first category when he made a second set of plates, which he acknowledged was for a wise purpose in God but which Nephi did not know. "But the Lord knoweth all things from the beginning; wherefore, he prepareth a way to accomplish all his works among the children of men; for behold, he hath all power unto the fulfilling of all his words." (1 Ne. 9:5-6.) Today we recognize that wise purpose as the replacement for the 116 pages of manuscript that Martin Harris lost (D&C 3; D&C 10).

56 Mormon included the smaller plates of Nephi for the same wise purpose, "according to the workings of the Spirit of the Lord which [were in him]." Mormon acknowledged that he did "not know all things; but the Lord knoweth all things which are to come; wherefore, he worketh in me to do according to his will." (W of M 1:7.)

56The second category is generally manifest through visions. Man cannot comprehend the future unless the Lord shows it to him. The future is therefore only in the mind of the Lord. Nephi was given a series of visions in which he saw Jerusalem at the time of Christ's birth and ministry, the future of his seed and the seed of his brethren, and the future of the nations and Kingdoms of the Gentiles (1 Ne. 11-14). Jacob was likewise shown "those who were at Jerusalem" (2 Ne. 6:8-11).

Although Mormon makes no reference to having had visions of the latter days, we can infer as much from his writing to the Jews, the Lamanites, and the Gentiles of the latter days (Morm. 3:16-20; Morm. 5:8-18).

57 Moroni was shown the last days-the days when the Book of Mormon would come forth among the Gentiles. After describing in some detail what was to transpire when the book came forth, Moroni acknowledged that the Lord had shown him great and marvelous things concerning that day and then spoke directly to the reader: "Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing." (Morm. 8:34-35.)

57Thus the major contributors to the present-day Book of Mormon all had the mysteries of the last days shown unto them and knew the mind of the Lord. This again qualifies the Book of Mormon as a volume of scripture.

The Word of the Lord

The title page states that the Book of Mormon was written "also by the spirit of prophecy and of revelation." The spirit of prophecy is a testimony of Jesus (Rev. 19:10), which comes only by the Holy Ghost (JST, 1 Cor. 12:3). The spirit of revelation is being told things "in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost" (D&C 8:1-3). Both are forms of revelation that reveal the word of the Lord. Again, the various Book of Mormon writers confirm this aspect of that scripture.

57 Nephi included in his record only those things which he considered to be sacred (1 Ne. 19:6). He concluded the record by declaring that he was not mighty in writing like he was in speaking, but that what he wrote were the words of Christ and that Christ would show "with power and great glory, that they are his words" when we stand face to face with Nephi at the judgment bar of Christ (2 Ne. 33:1, 10-11).

57 Jacob said he could write only a few words but testified that he and others had "many revelations and the spirit of prophecy" (Jacob 4:1, 6; see also Jacob 3:13). As he wrote, he testified that he was "led on by the Spirit unto prophesying," having perceived the future by "the Spirit which [was in him]" (Jacob 4:15).

Mormon testified that he was "a disciple of Jesus Christ, the Son of God." He had "been called of him to declare his word among his people, that they might have everlasting life." (3 Ne. 5:12-13.) Of course, the only way he could declare the Lord's word was through the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. A good example of this is the letter he wrote to his son, Moroni, regarding the wicked practice of baptizing little children. After Moroni had inquired of his father, Mormon said that he had "inquired of the Lord concerning the matter. And the word of the Lord came to [him] by the power of the Holy Ghost." (Moro. 8:7.)

58As Moroni concluded his writing upon the plates, he testified that the reader would see him at the bar of God, and the Lord God would say: "Did I not declare my words unto you, which were written by this man, like as one crying from the dead, yea, even as one speaking out of the dust?" Moroni said he declared these things to the fulfilling of prophecies so that the Lord's word "shall hiss forth from generation to generation." (Moro. 10:27-28, 34.)

58Thus all four of the major contributors to the plates bore witness of their having been moved upon by the Holy Ghost to record the word of the lord, thus qualifying the Book of Mormon as scripture.

The Voice of the Lord

Although the Book of Mormon obviously does not contain the Lord's actual voice, it does record the Lord's voice as spoken to the Nephite prophets. It also gives us understanding as to how that voice operates. This will be discussed further in chapter 8.

58 Nephi bore "witness that the voice of the Son and the voice of the Father came to him (2 Ne. 31:12, 15, 21). Enos testified that the voice of the Lord came into his mind (Enos 1:10), showing that the voice does not have to be heard externally.

There are two incidents on record where a group of people collectively heard the voice of the Lord. The first instance involved the Lamanites who had imprisoned Nephi and Lehi in the land of Nephi. The voice is described as "not a voice of thunder, neither was it a voice of a great tumultuous noise, but behold, it was a still voice of perfect mildness, as if it had been a whisper, and it did pierce even to the very soul" (Hel. 5:30; see verses 20-33).

59The second group who heard the Lord's voice consisted of Nephites who had assembled "round about the temple which was in the land Bountiful." The voice they heard is described as "not a harsh voice, neither was it a loud voice; nevertheless, and notwithstanding it being a small voice it did pierce them that did hear to the center, insomuch that there was no part of their frame that it did not cause to quake; yea, it did pierce them to the very soul, and did cause their hearts to burn." (3 Ne. 11:1, 3-7.)

59The voice of the Lord as a form of scripture is thus verified in the Book of Mormon.

The Power of God unto Salvation

The final phrase of the definition-the power of God unto salvation- describes the effects of scripture. The other phrases have described what scripture is, but this one tells us what it will do in our lives. Since chapter 4 outlines the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, this chapter does not treat how salvation is attained, but merely shows that the major writers upon the plates had salvation in mind as their very purpose for writing.

59The fulness of Nephi's intent was to "persuade men to come unto the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and be saved" (1 Ne. 6:4). His purpose to his children and his brethren was to persuade them "to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do" (2 Ne. 25:23). Nephi closed his writings with the admonition to "press forwards feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end" that they might have eternal life. He bore testimony that there was "none other way nor name given under heaven whereby man can be saved in the kingdom of God." (2 Ne. 31:20-21.)

60 Jacob bore witness that they labored diligently to persuade the people "to come unto Christ, and partake of the goodness of God, that they might enter into his rest" and desired to "persuade all men not to rebel against God" but to "believe in Christ, and view his death, and suffer his cross and bear the shame of the world" (Jacob 1:7-8). He further testified that the truth was "manifest unto us plainly, for the salvation of our souls" (Jacob 4:13).

60 Enos wrote that all his days he declared the truth which is in Christ and "rejoiced in it above that of the world" (Enos 1:26). Amaleki concluded his writing on the small plates of Nephi with an exhortation to all men "to come unto God, the Holy One of Israel, and believe in prophesying, and in revelations, and in the ministering of angels," and in other gifts of the Spirit so that they might "partake of his salvation, and the power of his redemption" (Omni 1:25-26).

60The engravers on the plates met all criteria for scripture. Furthermore, they did so with an eye to the day in which we are living and addressed their warnings and admonitions to us. The Book of Mormon is scripture. It gives this day and age the most correct word of the Lord. It is the will of the Lord, the mind of the Lord, the word of the Lord, the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation to us today.

60The sacredness of the Book of Mormon as scripture is further illustrated through its being restored to the earth in these latter days by the ministering of an angel. This angel, an ancient Nephite prophet named Moroni, now a resurrected being, was the guardian of the Nephite records until they were translated and made available to the world.
