Monte S. Nyman, Most Correct Book ( 1991)

6

The Book of Mormon and the Ministering of Angels

A fifth reason why the Book of Mormon is the most correct book on the earth is that it was brought forth under the supervision of an angel of God. Joseph Smith was prepared to bring it forth and was given direction every step of the way. The Lord declared that the Book of Mormon "is confirmed to others by the ministering of angels" (D&C 20:10). The reference to "Others" undoubtedly points to the angelic visit to the Three Witnesses following the translation of the book and also to the inclusion of their testimony in the printed editions of the Book of Mormon.

In 1820 the prevalent concept in the Christian world was that the heavens were sealed and that there were no longer personal visits, visions, or other forms of communications from the heavens. The claim that two heavenly personages, identifying themselves as the Father and the Son, had appeared to Joseph Smith caused a great stir in the area of western New York, because the theory that the heavens were sealed was so commonly accepted. Nephi had foretold that this theory would exist when the Book of Mormon would come forth (2 Ne. 28:5-6).

62About three and a half years following Joseph Smith's first experience with heavenly beings, the angel Moroni visited him (21-22 September 1823). Moroni told him that God had a work for him to do and instructed Joseph concerning "a book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent, and the source from whence they sprang" (Joseph Smith History 1:33-34). The translation of this book, of course, is the Book of Mormon.

62Several years after the angel Moroni first appeared to Joseph Smith, and after he and other angels had made several subsequent visits to Joseph (see Paul R. Cheesman, The Keystone of Mormonism [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1973], pp. 1-31), an angel (probably Moroni, since he holds the keys of the stick of Ephraim-D&C 27:5) appeared to three other men and showed them the plates and the engravings thereon, as well as several other sacred instruments connected with these ancient American inhabitants (June 1829). The voice of God declared unto these three men that the book had been translated by the gift and power of God (The Testimony of Three Witnesses; see also D&C 17). These angelic visitations therefore not only verify the coming forth of the Book of Mormon but also refute the prevalent concept that the heavens were sealed.

62The testimony of the Three Witnesses Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris-was recorded and has been placed in the front of every copy of the Book of Mormon. Thus, it "is declared unto the world by them" (D&C 20:10). These three men, special witnesses or Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ (D&C 18:9), were subsequently commissioned to search out twelve others who desired to take upon themselves the name of Christ and who would be "called to go into all the world to preach [Christ's] gospel unto every creature" (D&C 18:26-28, 37). These twelve were subsequently given the keys "to unlock the door of the kingdom in all places" where they were sent by the first Presidency. Whosoever was duly sent by the Twelve was to have the power to open that door also. (D&C 112:16-17, 21.)

63Thus the Three Witnesses' mission extended beyond printing their testimony in the front of the Book of Mormon to the Twelve Apostles whom they selected. Their mission extended even further to all those missionaries called and ordained to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ as contained in the Book of Mormon to all the nations of the earth under the jurisdiction of the Twelve Apostles. The voices of Nephi, Mormon, Moroni, and many others in the Book of Mormon will therefore be sent to all the ends of the earth. Without the ministering of angels, this would never have been brought to pass. Other aspects of the angels' work is also still being declared to the world.

The Purpose of the Ministering of Angels

The Book of Mormon teaches that there are three purposes for angels to minister unto man. The first reason is "to make manifest concerning the coming of Christ" (Moro. 7:22) the second reason "is to call men unto repentance" (Moro. 7:31) and the third reason is "to fulfil and to do the work of the covenants of the Father" (Moro. 7:31). There are several examples of each of these purposes in the Book of Mormon.

Nephi was shown in vision the birth and ministry of Christ (1 Ne. 11). He was told that Christ would come six hundred years from the time his father left Jerusalem (1 Ne. 19:8) and that "his name [would] be Jesus Christ, the Son of God" (2 Ne. 25:19). Jacob, Nephi's brother, was also told the name of Christ. He also spoke of Christ coming among the Jews and being crucified, but the text does not say how much of that message was delivered by an angel (2 Ne. 10:3). King Benjamin was awakened by an angel and told extensively about Christ's mission and ministry (Mosiah 3:2-22). Samuel the Lamanite was given much information by an angel concerning the coming of Christ: his birth in five years, his crucifixion, his resurrection, and his atonement (Hel. 13-16; see specifically Hel. 13:7; Hel. 14:2-26). Through this medium of angels ministering, the Nephites had a continual assurance that Christ would come and redeem his people. The Book of Mormon, the Twelve as special witnesses, and the missionaries are going throughout the world today to manifest of Jesus Christ.

64The first account in the Book of Mormon of an angel calling men to repentance concerned Laman and Lemuel. As they became angry with their younger brothers, Sam and Nephi, and smote them with a rod, an angel appeared and proclaimed that Nephi was to be a ruler over them (1 Ne. 3:28-29). This was certainly a call to repentance.

64As Alma the Younger and the sons of Mosiah went about the land of Zarahemla rebelling against God, an angel descended as in a cloud and spoke with a voice of thunder, calling them to repentance. The angel informed them that he was there because of the prayers of the people and the prayers of Alma's father. (Mosiah 27:11-17.) Later, as Alma recounted this experience to his sons, he reiterated the words of the angel regarding Alma's agency to destroy himself but not to destroy the Church (Alma 36:9). This is an important concept regarding angels ministering to the children of men.

64An angel told Alma and Amulek to call the city of Ammonihah to repentance (Alma 8:14, 20; Alma 10:7-10; see also Hel. 5:11). Samuel the Lamanite declared repentance to the city of Zarahemla as an angel directed him (Hel. 13:5-7). Nephi, son of Nephi, was ministered to daily by angels as he cried repentance unto the Nephite people (3 Ne. 7:15-18). Thus, the Book of Mormon is replete with examples of angels calling men to repentance. Its message to the reader, the ministry of the Twelve, and the message of the missionaries is a call to repentance to the world.

The appearance of angels to fulfill and do the work of the covenants of the Father made unto the children of men (Moro. 7:31-32) is a little more difficult to show from the Book of Mormon. Nonetheless, there are examples. The work of the Father is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). This is done through providing mankind with the plan of redemption. Alma explained that following the fall of Adam, God sent angels to fallen man and made known to people "the plan of redemption, which had been prepared from the foundation of the world" (Alma 12:24-30). Alma bore testimony that "the mouth of angels, doth declare it [the day of salvation] unto all nations" and "they have come unto us." He said further that "angels are declaring it unto many at this time in our land. " (Alma 13:21-26.)

65The servants of Lamoni bore witness that they had seen angels and "had conversed with them"; thus, the angels "had told them things of God, and of his righteousness" (Alma 19:34). The Lamanite converts of Ammon also bore witness that the Lord "doth visit us by his angels, that the plan of salvation might be made known unto us as well as unto future generations" (Alma 24:14). The work of the Father was carried out among the Nephites and Lamanites by the ministering of angels.

65The covenants of the Father are fulfilled through the performing of ordinances. Ordinances must be done by proper authority. Angels restore this authority when it has been lost or taken, as explained by Elder Parley P. Pratt:

65Whenever the keys of priesthood, or, in other words, the keys of the science of theology, are enjoyed by man on the earth, those this privileged are entitled to the ministering of angels, whose business with men on the earth is to restore the keys of the apostleship when lost; to ordain men to the apostleship when there has been no apostolic succession; to commit the keys of a new dispensation; to reveal the mysteries of history, the facts of present or past times; and to unfold the events of a future time. They are sometimes commissioned also to executive judgments upon individuals, cities, or nations. They can be present in their glory or they can come in the form and appearance of other men. They can also be present without being visible to mortals. (Key to the Science of Theology [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1979], pp. 69-70.)

In the Book of Mormon, there are no accounts of angels restoring keys. Christ obviously conferred them upon the Nephites when he gave them power as he visited them following his resurrection (3 Ne. 11:21; 3 Ne. 18:37). There is no account of Lehi's receiving keys, although he undoubtedly had them. Mosiah 23:10, 16-17 implies that angelic beings conferred keys on Alma, but there is no positive statement. Therefore, the best example for an understanding today is the keys delivered to Joseph Smith in the restoration of the latter days. John the Baptist brought the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood (D&C 13). Peter, James, and John restored the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood (see heading to D&C 13; D&C 27:12-13). On 3 April 1836, Moses brought the keys of the gathering of Israel, Elias committed the keys of the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, and Elijah restored the keys "to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers" (D&C 110:11-16). All other keys from Adam to the present time were also restored to Joseph Smith (D&C 128:20-21). Thus, through the ministering of angels to Joseph Smith and others, the covenants of the Father may be administered to the inhabitants of the earth as they respond to the teaching of the gospel.

66The heavens are not sealed--God has sent his angels to manifest concerning Christ and the Book of Mormon, and those to whom they ministered are to declare the glad tidings of the gospel. These same messengers of God have declared repentance and have restored the ordinances of salvation for our benefit in these latter days. Through the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, this knowledge has been restored.

66The Book of Mormon is the most correct book because it was translated by the gift and power of God to assure its message. The land where the book was restored is a choice land above all other lands and was preserved by the Lord for a place to bring forth the Book of Mormon and restore the gospel. The events of the last days cannot be correctly understood without understanding the position of this choice land in the mind and plan of the Lord. The Book of Mormon contains the fulness of the gospel, the correct and only plan of salvation for mankind. It is scripture, the Lord's word to this generation. The work of the last days was administered by angels to ensure its correctness. Once the work was completed, it was to go forth to the world to give all people an opportunity to correct their ways and conform to the Lord's teachings.

66Without the Book of Mormon, the work of the Lord could not go forth. It was written and preserved for this intent. Thus, it is also the keystone of the restoration of the last days.
