Monte S. Nyman, Most Correct Book ( 1991)

II

The Keystone of Our Religion

7

A Witness of the Truthfulness of the Bible

As stated in chapter 1, one of the primary purposes of the Book of Mormon as outlined by the Lord was to prove "to the world that the holy scriptures are true" (D&C 20:11). The Book of Mormon does this in at least four ways: (1) it proves the authorship of the Bible; (2) it sustains the historicity of the Bible; (3) it restores many plain and precious concepts and principles lost from the Bible as it has come to us; and (4) it gives the correct interpretation of many biblical passages. Without the Book of Mormon, the Church would undoubtedly be left to follow the thinking and philosophy of men regarding the Bible.

Bible Authorship

Modern biblical criticisms has attacked the authorship of nearly all of the biblical books. This work will not treat their attacks or their reasoning but will merely show that the Book of Mormon bears witness, either directly or indirectly, to the authenticity of the authorship of the Bible.

The First Five Books of Moses

The Book of Mormon record tells us that the Lord commanded Lehi and his family to leave Jerusalem (1 Ne. 2:1-2). After they left, the Lord instructed Lehi to send his sons back to Jerusalem to obtain the plates of brass, a record of the Jews and a genealogy of their forefathers (1 Ne. 3:2-3). They accomplished their mission and brought the record to their father. On examining the plates of brass, Lehi noted that they contained the five books of Moses (1 1 Ne. 5:11). The fact that they were called the books of Moses in 600 B.C. is a testimony that Moses was the author, which authorship is further attested to by the plates of brass. Lehi stated that Joseph, who was sold into Egypt, had prophesied that the Lord would raise up a Moses and "give judgment unto him in writing" (2 Ne. 3:17). A third testimony of Mosaic authorship was given by Jesus himself. When he visited the Nephites, he declared: "The law is fulfilled that was given unto Moses. Behold, I am he that gave the law." (3 Ne. 15:4-5.) Many more references in the Book of Mormon imply Mosaic authorship and also attest to the content of the Mosaic law (1 Ne. 19:23; 1 Ne. 22:20; 2 Ne. 2:17, 30; 2 Ne. 4:1-2; Alma 12:21, 23; Alma 18:36; Alma 22:12-13; Alma 33:19; Hel. 8:11-14; Ether 1:3).

70In fairness to those Bible critics who reject Moses as the author, it should be noted that the original words of Moses have been tampered with. This was revealed to Moses anciently and to Joseph Smith in this dispensation. The revelation to Joseph Smith also confirms Mosaic authorship. (Moses 1:40-42.) If they had the original text, undoubtedly the critics would not have arrived at many of the conclusions they have drawn.

The Prophets

The next division in the Hebrew Bible consists of eight books referred to as "the prophets" (Matt. 7:12; Luke 16:29-31). The Book of Mormon says that the plates of brass contained "a record of the Jews from the beginnings even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah; and also the prophecies of the holy prophets" (1 Ne. 5:12-13). This statement is sufficient to establish the traditional setting of the historical books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and Kings, called the "former prophets," and the "later or writing prophets" in the biblical scholars' world. While the Book of Mormon does not proclaim individual authorship of the "former prophets," it does support the traditional separation of the eight books. It also recognizes the existence of both prophetic groups and the acceptance of their writings as scripture prior to 600 B.C.

71The Book of Mormon's support of the "later prophets" is much more specific, probably because it is more specifically needed. The later prophets' books, particularly the book of Isaiah, have been described by many Bible scholars as the work of various authors of a later time rather than the work of the individual authors whose names the books bear.

71The Book of Mormon mentions Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Malachi by name and affirms several things about the writings of other prophets. Extensive quotes from Isaiah in the Book of Mormon confirm his authorship of many chapters.

71The brass plates contained many of Jeremiah's prophecies (1 Ne. 5:13; see also Hel. 8:20). The Book of Mormon thus verifies that at least a part of Jeremiah's writings we already accepted, or canonized, by 600 B.C. The Savior authenticated the words of Malachi to the Nephites (3 Ne. 24:1). Therefore, the Book of Mormon positively and specifically identifies these three authors and in general verifies the "prophecies of the holy prophets" as traditionally accepted holy men of God who wrote the works attributed to their names.

The Book of Mormon also verifies an important observation made by biblical critics but not recognized by the laity of the Christian world: The Old Testament is not complete but is merely a fragmentary collection of what had been written by the prophets of old (see Arthur Jeffrey, "The Canon of the Old Testament," in The Interpreter's Bible, 12 vols. [New York: Abingdon Press, 1951], 1:32ff). Many of the prophets' writings not contained in the present-day Old Testament are quoted or commented on in the Book of Mormon. These include Zenock, Neum, Zenos, and Ezias (1 Ne. 19:10; Hel. 8:20).

The New Testament

The Book of Mormon also bears testimony to New Testament authorship both generally and specifically. Nephi told of seeing in vision the record of the Jews among the Gentiles of this land. The angel who explained this vision said that this book "contained the fulness of the gospel of the Lord, of whom the twelve apostles bear record" (1 Ne. 13:24). The angel further declared that the book originally went forth in purity unto the Gentiles "by the hand of the twelve apostles of the Lamb" (1 Ne. 13:26). Nephi saw other books coming forth from the Gentiles to his seed to convince them "that the records of the prophets and of the twelve apostles of the Lamb are true" (1 Ne. 13:38-39). Again the angel explained that the purpose of these last records was to establish the truth of the first, which are of the twelve apostles of the Lamb" (1 Ne. 13:40). That the words of the Lamb are in "the records of the twelve apostles of the lamb" is mentioned again in the following verse (1 Ne. 13:41). Five times the angel stated that the records were of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. Herein is general verification that the authors of the New Testament were among or were associated with the twelve Apostles chosen by Jesus Christ in the meridian of time.

The Book of Mormon bears specific witness to the authorship of the book of Revelation. Nephi was told not to record part of a vision that covered the end of the world, because one of the Lamb's Apostles would record it. Nephi heard and bore record that this Apostle's name was John (1 1 Ne. 14:20-27). Earlier than this, the Lord had revealed the future of the world to the brother of Jared. Moroni, in abridging the Jaredite record, told of the Lord's statement to the brother of Jared concerning the time when the Lord's revelations, recorded by John, would be unfolded (Ether 4:16). Tradition has held that this same Apostle John wrote the Gospel and the Epistles of John. Since the Book of Mormon verifies the tradition of the book of Revelation, it gives indirect support that he also wrote the Gospel and the Epistles.

73The Book of Mormon indirectly testifies of the book of Matthew. Modern criticisms holds that the well known Sermon on the Mount is a collection of Jesus' sayings compiled by the author of Matthew (see Sherman E. Johnson, "The Gospel According to Matthew," in The Interpreter's Bible, 12 vols. [New York: Abingdon Press, 1951], 7:279). The Book of Mormon records basically the same sermon as found in Matthew (compare 3 Ne. 12-14 and Matt. 5-7) and then notes that the Nephites had heard the same things Christ taught in Jerusalem before he ascended to his Father (3 Ne. 15:1). If the Sermon on the Mount was a compilation, it was not made by a later writer, as the critics suppose, but by Jesus himself.

73The Book of Mormon bears testimony to New Testament authorship in general and specifically bears record of John and of the Sermon on the Mount.

Historicity

Many modern biblical scholars regard many of the Old Testament accounts as myths and legends collected and written in a later era. The Book of Mormon bears witness to the historicity of most of the prominent Old Testament figures and notes that the hand of God was involved in their lives. Without enumerating all the details, suffice it to say that Adam and Eve, Cain and Abel, Noah, the Tower of Babel, Melchizedek, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph of Egypt, Moses, Samuel, David, and Solomon are all referred to and hence verified in the Book of Mormon.

The Book of Mormon also serves as a second witness to many historical New Testament events. Lehi, the first prophet of the Book of Mormon, prophesied of the ministry of John the Baptist (1 Ne. 10:7-10). This serves as a second witness to John's ministry and to Isaiah's prophecy that he would prepare the way before the Lord. The prophet Nephi, Lehi's son, was also shown this prophet baptizing the Lamb of God (2 Ne. 31:4, 9).

74To those skeptics who question the validity of the biblical account, the Book of Mormon verifies Jesus of Nazareth's miraculous birth. Nephi saw in vision the city of Nazareth and a virgin who was carried away in the Spirit for a time. Nephi then beheld her bearing a child in her arms who was identified as "the Son of the Eternal Father" (1 Ne. 11:13-21). This vision verified not only the divine Sonship of Jesus but also Mary's residency in Nazareth at the time of the Annunciation (Luke 1:26-38). King Benjamin and the prophet Alma bore similar testimony (Mosiah 3:8; Alma 7:10; compare Matt. 1:18-21). The Book of Mormon serves as a second witness to a mortal virgin named Mary who gave birth to the Son of God.

The Book of Mormon also bears a second witness to the Savior's mortal ministry in Jerusalem and the surrounding area. Although the Book of Mormon accounts are briefs they do verify the essential elements of this ministry. Nephi beheld in vision that many worshiped Jesus as he went forth among the children of men. He further saw that he ministered with power and great glory, that multitudes gathered to hear him, and that he was cast out from among them. Nephi was shown that he healed the people of all manner of diseases and that he cast out devils and unclean spirits. He also viewed Christ's ministry ending by his being lifted up on the cross and slain (1 Ne. 11:24, 28, 31-33.) King Benjamin and the prophet Alma also testified of his ministry (Mosiah 3:5-10; Alma 7:11-13). The crowning witness of the historicity of the Son of God who came to the earth to make atonement and overcome the powers of death was his personal appearance to the Nephites following his ascension from Jerusalem. The voice of the Father preceded this appearance and declared that the man whom they would see descending was indeed his Beloved Son in whom he had glorified his name. After Jesus descended among the Nephites, he himself testified that he was Jesus Christ of whom the prophets had testified and that he had completed his mission of making the Atonement. Following this declaration, the Nephites went forth and felt the prints of the nails in his hands and feet and the wound in his side. Thus, with their ears the Nephites did hear, with their eyes they did see, and with their hands they did feel that Jesus was the Messiah spoken of by the prophets. (3 Ne. 11:1-17.) Therefore, the Book of Mormon does bear record of the divinity, the historicity, and the atonement of Jesus Christ, which is also the basic message of the New Testament Gospels.

75The Book of Mormon, in a briefer yet equally sure manner, bears record of the ministry of the Twelve Apostles chosen by Jesus to carry on the work that he had begun. This verifies the message of the Acts and the Epistles. Lehi prophesied that after Jesus' resurrection, he would manifest himself by the Holy Ghost to the Gentiles (1 Ne. 10:11). This was indeed the work of the Twelve Apostles. Nephi saw in vision that twelve others followed Jesus in his ministry and that after he was slain the multitudes of the earth gathered to fight against those twelve who had become the Apostles of the Lamb (1 Ne. 11:29, 34-36). This, again, describes the work of the Twelve following Jesus' ministry, and, in essence, confirms the record of the last half of the New Testament.

The Biblical Text

A third way in which the Book of Mormon verifies the Bible is through the text. When Nephi was shown in vision the nations and latter-day kingdoms of the Gentiles, he saw that many plain and precious parts, and also many covenants, had been taken away from the gospel of the Lamb as it was kept in the record of the Jews (1 Ne. 13:26-29). In this context, the phrase "gospel of the Lamb" seems to refer to the New Testament (vv. 24-25), and "covenants" seems to refer to the Old Testament (v. 23). While the gospel was taught in the Old Testament and covenants were made in the New Testament, we might look at the primary emphasis of the Old Testament as being covenants and that of the New Testament as being the gospel. The losses, therefore, would be in both testaments of the Bible. Joseph Smith restored much of the text in both testaments. In addition to actual biblical quotes, the Book of Mormon also makes statements about various gospel concepts and principles, which may be compared with the biblical texts. Some of these comparisons, although showing differences, are insignificant, while others are most significant. Where no changes occur, the Book of Mormon probably witnesses to the correctness of the existing biblical text.

76The most significant Old Testament textual retentions are in the book of Isaiah. There are at least eighty-five significant textual retentions in the Isaiah quotations in the Book of Mormon (see Monte S. Nyman, "Great Are the Words of Isaiah[[Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980] Appendix B, pp. 259-81). Verification of Job's testimony of a literal resurrection (Job 19:25-27) is given in 2 Ne. 9:4. The resurrection is further attested to by Jacob (2 1 Ne. 9:10-13), Amulek (Alma 11:42-45), and Alma (Alma 40:18-23).

76One of the most important Book of Mormon textual verifications of the New Testament is the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. 5-7). Christ delivered nearly the same sermon to the Nephites (3 Ne. 12-14). That the additions material given in the Book of Mormon text was at least the intended message of the Matthew account is evidenced by its inclusion in Joseph Smith's inspired translation of the Bible.

76Another example of the Book of Mormon's textual verification of the Bible concerns the ending of the Gospel of Mark. The Revised Standard Version of the Bible deletes eleven verses from the concluding chapter of Mark with the following footnote: "Other texts and versions add as 16:9-20 the following passage." A translation of the text then follows. The New Catholic and King James Versions contain the passage with no comment. Many Bible scholars today agree that this was not originally part of the text.

76The Book of Mormon does not verify, the text as part of the Gospel of Mark, but it does verify it as a part of Jesus' teachings. As Moroni concluded his father's record, he quoted the words that Jesus Christ gave to his disciples (Morm. 9:22-25). These instructions are almost identical to six of the eleven verses of Mark that are questioned by the scholars. The Book of Mormon thus witnesses that this passage was Jesus' teaching and a part of his doctrine that should not be eliminated.

Biblical Interpretation

In spite of Peter's admonition "that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation" (2 Pet. 1:20), there exist many private interpretations of biblical scriptures today. The Lord has provided the Book of Mormon for giving the correct interpretation of many verses of the Bible. By reading and considering what the ancient prophets of America said, readers can learn the correct meaning of passages such as Gen. 49:22-26 (Jacob 2:25), Ezek. 37:15-20 (2 Ne. 3:11-12), and much of Isaiah.

77Latter day Saints are quick to cite Jesus' teaching concerning other sheep (John 10:14-16). The Christian world generally interprets this passage as a declaration of Christ's concern for those not of the house of Judah (see Wilbert R. Howard, "The Gospel According to St. John," in The Interpreter's Bible, 12 vols. [New York: Abingdon Press, 1951], 8:627). However, this interpretation overlooks some very significant aspects of the passage. There is no record that the Savior taught those not of the house of Israel collectively. After Christ's ascension, Peter was shown in vision that it was now time for the Apostles to teach the Gentiles (Acts 10). In the Book of Mormon we have a record of others of the house of Israel who actually saw, heard, and touched the Savior. This record gives us the correct interpretation of the Savior's words that John recorded (3 Ne. 15:21-24).

77Another passage involving much controversy in the Christian world concerns the so called death of John the Beloved. Modern scholars suggest that Jesus' statement is not predictive but is merely a question (see Howard, "The Gospel According to St. John" pp. 809-10). Three of the Nephite disciples were given the promise of not tasting death as was John (3 1 Ne. 28:6-7). Here, again, the Book of Mormon confirms the doctrine of transfiguration and attests to the correct interpretation of the biblical text.

The Book of Mormon has been brought forth in these latter days to prove that the holy scriptures are true. It has done so by verifying authorship, history, textual accuracy, and correct interpretation of the Bible. This chapter has merely scratched the surface of the Book of Mormon proving the Bible. The Book of Mormon is indeed the keystone to the Bible, and as the two are studied together they will "grow together, unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions," as prophesied by Joseph who was sold into Egypt (2 Ne. 3:12).
