Monte S. Nyman, Most Correct Book ( 1991)

8

God Does Inspire Men--Revelation

Revelation is another keystone of our religion. Where there is no vision (revelation), the people perish (Prov. 29:18). Another purpose of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon in these latter days was to prove to the world that "God does inspire men [and women] in this age and generation, as well as in generations of old" (D&C 20:11). Inspiration is often used synonymously with revelation. God has promised to do nothing "until he revealeth the secret unto his servants the prophets" (JST, Amos 3:7). To better understand how God inspires men today, we should understand how he inspired men in generations of old. As we understand and see the process by which God inspires men of all ages, we will be in a better position to tap that source of inspiration for our own benefit and progression in the eternal scheme of life.

Revelation is communication between God and man. The Book of Mormon teaches us the role of revelation in the eternal plan of salvation. As Alma explained to the repenting Zeezrom:

79[[God] sent angels to converse with them, who caused men to behold of his glory. And they began from that time forth to call on his name; therefore God conversed with men, and made known unto them the plan of redemption, which had been prepared from the foundation of the world; and this he made known unto them according to their faith and repentance and their holy works." (Alma 12:29-30.) Revelation began with angels ministering to man and continued as man called upon God and exercised faith, repentance, and good works.

Types of Revelation

God converses with man in many ways. In addition to sending angels, God himself may appear, or man may hear audible voices or the voice of God in his mind. Inspiration may come by impressions, or the Lord's will can be made known through visions or dreams.

80An angel may appear personally--as in the cases of Laman and Lemuel (1 Ne. 3:29), or Alma (Alma 8:14) or they may minister behind the scenes without one's knowing it. President George Q. Cannon taught: "There are also angels around us. Though invisible to us they are continually inviting us and pleading with us to do that which is right." (Gospel Truth, comp. Jerreld L,. Newquist, 2 vols. in 1 [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book (Co., 1987], p. 66.) When men are properly prepared, God (Jesus Christ) may appear personally, as he did to Nephi and Jacob (2 1 Ne. 11:2-3), or he may be seen in a vision or a dream, as by Lehi (1 Ne. 1:8). Prayers may be answered by men audibly hearing God's voice, as did Alma (Mosiah 26:14), or the voice of the lord may come into man's mind, as it did with Enos (Enos 1:10). This voice in the mind may be impressions or ideas. These impressions may come into the heart as well as the mind (D&C 8:2-3). As the Prophet Joseph Smith said:

A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; (i.e.) those things that were presented unto your minds by the Spirit of God, will come to pass; and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus (TPJS, 5, p. 151).

81Of course, angels may appear to answer prayers, as one did to King Benjamin (Mosiah 3:2-4), or the word of the Lord may come by the power of the Holy Ghost, as described by Mormon (Moroni 8:7). The power of the Holy Ghost may also be called the manifestations of the Spirit (Alma 7:17). The latter is probably the most common way prayers are answered.

81 Revelation may come through dreams or visions. The Lord warned Omer in a dream to depart out of the land (Ether 9:3). Lehi received great revelations through dreams (1 Ne. 2:1; 1 Ne. 3:2; 1 Ne. 8:2). Lehi's initial experiences recorded in the Book of Mormon included a view of God and his throne (1 Ne. 1:6-13). The Lord showed him in a vision that Jerusalem had been destroyed (2 Ne. 1:4). An angel showed Alma to Amulek in a vision (Alma 8:20). Abish, a Lamanite woman, had been converted through a remarkable vision given to her father (Alma 19:16). That others among the Nephites received revelations through dreams and visions is implied by Korihor's scoffing at those who believed in dreams and visions (Alma 30:28). Since not all dreams are revelations, certain tests for the validity of possible revelations must be applied to them. The Lord declared to the Church in May 1831 that any of the Spirit must be edifying and enlightening (D&C 50:23-24). Thus, a person should ask, Did I feel the sweetness of the Spirit and was new and pertinent information given? Other questions should be taken to priesthood leaders for further clarification (see D&C 46:27; D&C 50:30-31).

Whether God chooses to inspire men is determined by the person's faith, repentance, and their good works, as Alma told Zeezrom (Alma 12:30). Man lives in a physical, tangible world. He is educated to believe in things that he can see, feel, or hear; therefore, it is difficult for him to accept revelation, which cannot be proved by empirical evidence. Nonetheless, revelation is the manner in which God inspires men. God dwells in the unseen universe, angels come from his presence, and thus revelation of all types comes from that which is unseen. Since human knowledge starts with the seen and works toward the unseen, men require faith to accept revealed knowledge, things which are not seen but which are nonetheless true (Alma 32:21), whether it be our own personal experiences or others'.

A Pattern for Receiving Revelation

In the Sermon on the Mount and in that similar sermon given to the Nephites, the Lord gave what we might call a three phase pattern for receiving revelation: "Ask, and it shall be given unto you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you" (3 Ne. 14:7; Matt. 7:7). This pattern was revealed long before the meridian of time, as shown when Nephi offered a paraphrase of it as a reason for people not being able to understand his words (2 1 Ne. 32:4). Here is another way we might view this pattern: pray (ask), study (seek), and endeavor to live by the revelations of God (knock). This pattern also seems analogous with faith, repentance, and good works, and is substantiated through the experiences taught in the Book of Mormon.

Ask and Ye Shall Receive

Although our Father in Heaven "knoweth what things [we] have need of before [we] ask him" (3 Ne. 13:8), he requires us to ask. This also implies that if we don't ask, we will not receive. This principle is best exemplified in the Book of Mormon by the experiences of the brother of Jared. At the time the great tower was built, the Lord confounded the people's language. In response to the brother of Jared's cries unto the Lord, the language of Jared and his people was not confounded. In further response to the brother of Jared's inquiries, the Lord promised to lead them "into a land which is choice above all the lands of the earth" (Ether 1:42). In fulfillment of his promises, the Lord came down in a cloud into the valley of Nimrod, where he had instructed Jared and his people to go. There the Lord talked to the brother of Jared, although he did not let him see him. The Lord commanded them that they should go forth into the wilderness, where man had never been. The Lord went before them, talked with them from a cloud, and gave directions where they should travel. They traveled in the wilderness and built barges to cross many waters, "being directed continually by the hand of the Lord." (Ether 2:4-6.)

83When they came to that great sea that divided the lands, they dwelt there for the space of four years (Ether 2:13). We do not know how long they traveled through the wilderness and across the many waters, but it must have been a considerable length of time.

83After four years, the Lord came again in a cloud: "And for the space of three hours did the Lord talk with the brother of Jared, and chastened him because he remembered not to call upon the name of the Lord" (Ether 2:14). A casual reading of verse 14 might cause one to think that the brother of Jared had not prayed to the Lord during this four year period. This is certainly not consistent with the account up to the point of their arrival in the valley. A closer evaluation of the text teaches more about the principle of asking for revelation.

83The description of the valley of Moriancumer is not given, but it must have been a very beautiful and comfortable place to them. It is easy to imagine a place similar to the land Lehi's party called Bountiful because of its much fruit and honey. The sea probably also provided a much-appreciated variety of foods. With such enjoyable surroundings and edible delicacies, no wonder they temporarily had forgotten their original objective of the land of promise. It is highly probable that the brother of Jared prayed daily unto the Lord and thanked him for the great blessings they had received and were now enjoying. They seemed to be perfectly satisfied with their new-found home in spite of the lord's desire for them to move on.

How often the Lord may have attempted to prod them on is not recorded, but after four years of patiently waiting, and undoubtedly at some opportune time, the Lord appeared in the cloud and spoke with the brother of Jared, giving him a much deserved chastisement. The Lord's exact words are not recorded but were probably directed towards the original request of their being led to a promised land and their failure to reach their goal. "Ask and ye shall receive" is a constant need in our lives. We must not settle for half reaching our goals or becoming complacent in our quests.

Seek and Ye Shall Find

As one follows the travels of the Jaredites, the principle of seek and ye shall find" is illustrated. Having exercised faith to receive revelation thus far, the brother of Jared repented and, instructed by the Lord, built barges to cross the great deep. As the brother of Jared completed the barges, he recognized two problems: first, the inability to see because of lack of light; and second, the lack of air to breathe (Ether 2:15-19). Again, the requirement was to "ask and it shall be given you." As the brother of Jared called upon the Lord, the Lord gave him instructions on how to correct the problem of getting air into the barges (Ether 2:20-21).

84After the air problem was solved, the brother of Jared called upon the Lord again and learned another principle of revelation. The brother of Jared asked again about the light problem and the Lord responded: "What will ye that I should do that ye may have light in your vessels?" (Ether 2:23.) The Lord expects us to "make use of the means which [he] has provided for us" (Alma 60:21). The Lord then reasoned with the brother of Jared and again asked him what he wanted him to do (Ether 2:24-25). The brother of Jared apparently studied it out in his mind (D&C 9:8-9), went to a mountain and produced out of a rock sixteen small stones, and asked the Lord to touch them so they would shine in the darkness (Ether 3:1-4). As the Lord did as requested, the brother of Jared was amazed to see that the Lord's finger "was as the finger of a man, like unto flesh and blood." The Lord explained: "Because of thy faith thou hast seen that I shall take upon me flesh and blood; and never has man come before me with such exceeding faith as thou hast; for were it not so ye could not have seen my finger." (Ether 3:6-9.)

The Lord then asked, "Sawest thou more than this?" (Ether 3:9). The scriptures are replete with declarations that the Lord knows all things (Abr. 2:8; see also Isa. 46:10; D&C 38:2). Certainly, the Lord knew how much the brother of Jared had seen. Why did he ask the question? Here we learn another great principle of revelation. Note the brother of Jared's response: "Nay; Lord, show thyself unto me" (Ether 3:10). The Lord then showed himself, which appearance redeemed the brother of Jared from the fall and brought him back into the presence of the Lord (Ether 3:11-14). The Lord apparently prods us to ask because, as suggested before, if we don't ask, we shall not receive. However, as a person does as the brother of Jared and repents of his slothful sins of omission and leaves his valley of comfort and supposed success, he too must do holy works or build spiritual barges under the Lord's direction-seeking constantly his guidance, making use of the means he has provided, reasoning with the Lord, and responding to his proddings until he too is ushered into his presence. All of this is available as we exercise our faith and follow the revelations from the unseen world.

Knock and It Shall Be Opened

After Nephi had recorded his admonitions about feasting upon the words of Christ, he declared that if the reader did not understand them it would be because he did not ask nor did he knock (2 Ne. 32:4). As suggested earlier, to knock is to endeavor to live by the revelations of God. Living correctly puts one in tune with the Spirit. Just prior to the Savior's ministry among the Nephites, Nephi ministered "with power and with great authority, . . . for so great was his faith on the Lord Jesus Christ that angels did minister unto him daily" (3 Ne. 7:17-18). His great faith strongly implies that he was living the gospel to the extent of his ability. That angels ministered to him is evidence that he was knocking and receiving revelation.

Jesus taught the Jews in the temple in Jerusalem that his doctrine was not his own but his that had sent him. He then testified: "If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself" (John 7:17). In modern revelation he declared: "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise" (D&C 82:10). As we live for revelation (knock), the Lord will bless us with it.

86 Nephi further lamented over those who were guilty of unbelief, wickedness, ignorance, and stiffneckeness (2 Ne. 32:7). Unbelief keeps people from praying (asking), ignorance implies they are not seeking, and wickedness means they are not living the gospel (knocking). Stiffneckedness is probably a combination of all three. People guilty of these characteristics are not living the suggested pattern for receiving revelation.

86Another Book of Mormon teaching verifies this same pattern for being inspired of God or receiving revelation. As Ammon recounted the great success that he and his brethren had had among the Lamanites, he proclaimed:

86And now behold, my brethren, what natural man is there that knoweth these things? I say unto you, there is none that knoweth these things, save it be the penitent.

86Yes, he that repenteth and exerciseth faith, and bringeth forth good works, and prayeth continually without ceasing-unto such it is given to know the mysteries of God; yea, unto such it shall be given to reveal things which never have been revealed; yea, and it shall be given unto such to bring thousands of souls to repentance, even as it has been given unto us to bring these our brethren to repentance. (Alma 26:21-22.)

86During the fourteen years the sons of Mosiah had served as missionaries among the Lamanites, they had fasted and prayed and received the spirit of prophecy and the spirit of revelation. They had asked and it had been given. They had searched the scriptures diligently and had thus become men of sound understanding. They had sought and they had found. (Alma 17:2-3.) Through their tireless good works and example under extreme trials, afflictions, and persecution, they had been the means of bringing thousands of Lamanites to understand the gospel and join the Church (Alma 26:23-34; Alma 37:9). They had knocked and it had been opened unto them; they had had the mysteries of God unfolded to them.

87The mysteries of God are those things which are not understood by the world but are unfolded by the power of the Holy Ghost (1 Ne. 10:19). Many are contained in the revelations of the Lord as recorded in the scriptures. As Nephi admonished: "Feast upon the words of Christ; for behold, the words of Christ will tell you all things what ye should do" (2 Ne. 32:3). To feast is to partake abundantly of quality goods. All are invited to partake freely of the feast of the gospel of Jesus Christ (2 Ne. 9:50-51). To those who deny themselves this feast, Moroni spoke directly: "And again I speak unto you who deny the revelations of God, and say that they are done away, that there are no revelations, nor prophecies, nor gifts, nor healing, nor speaking with tongues, and the interpretation of tongues; behold I say unto you, he that denieth these things knoweth not the gospel of Christ; yea, he has not read the scriptures; if so, he does not understand them" (Morm. 9:7-8).

87Not all the mysteries of God are recorded in the scriptures. The Savior taught his Apostles concerning the kingdom of God for forty days after his resurrection, none of which is recorded in the New Testament (Acts 1:3). However, the study of the scriptures opens the mind to receive revelation, even "things which never have been revealed" (Alma 26:22). As Lehi read the book given him by the one who descended from the throne of God [Christ], he was filled with the Spirit of the Lord and saw "many great and marvelous things" (1 Ne. 1:9-14). Ezekiel and John the Revelator had similar experiences (Ezek. 3:1-3; Rev. 10:9-10; D&C 77:14). These mysteries are not limited to Church leaders. Joseph Smith taught that "God hath not revealed any thing to Joseph, but what He will make known unto the Twelve, and even the least Saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them, for the day must come when no man need say to his neighbor, Know ye the Lord; for all shall know Him (who remain) from the least to the greatest. How is this to be done? It is to be done by this sealing power, and the other Comforter spoken of, which will be manifest by revelation." (TPJS, p. 149.)

As any Saint (member of the Church) exercises faith, repents of his sins of omission as well as commission, and comes to know the Lord, he may come back into the presence of the Lord and fully understand the mysteries of God (D&C 93:1-5). God does inspire men "in this age and generation, as well as in generations of old" (D&C 20:11).

88 Revelation is a keystone of the Restoration. It is a keystone of the administration of the Church. It operates in and through the lives of those who are called to serve in the Church.
