Monte S. Nyman, Most Correct Book ( 1991)

9

God Does Call Men to His Holy Work

Another purpose of the Book of Mormon was to prove to the world that God does "call [men] to his holy work in this age and generation, as well as in generations of old" (D&C 20:11). This is also a keystone of our religion. A church without authority is just another one of many religions. Throughout the history of the world, God has called men to his work of bringing "to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). The Bible records many accounts of God calling such servants in the Eastern Hemisphere. The Book of Mormon witnesses that God also called men to be his servants in the Western Hemisphere.

According to Book of Mormon terminology, a call to the work of God is a priesthood call to be "an instrument in the hands of the Lord." Lehi reminded Laman and Lemuel that Nephi had become an instrument in God's hands in bringing them into the land of promise (2 Ne. 1:24). Alma's accepting the Lord's call to organize the Church made him "an instrument in his hands" (Mosiah 23:10). The sons of Mosiah prayed for the Spirit so they might be instruments in God's hands in bringing the Lamanites to the truth, and they were promised that they would become such (Mosiah 27:36; Alma 17:9-11; Alma 26:3, 15; Alma 35:14). Alma also wished that he might "be an instrument in the hands of God to bring some soul to repentance" (Alma 29:9).

90A call to the Lord's work in this generation should be similar to callings in generations of old (D&C 20:11). The "generations of old" are those recorded in the Bible and the Book of Mormon. Thus, the call of Joseph Smith and others in this dispensation must be consistent with the teachings of both the Bible and the Book of Mormon.

90Joseph Smith was first called of God through a personal visit from the Father and the Son (Joseph Smith History 1:17-20, 28). He was later informed by the angel Moroni, "a messenger sent from the presence of God," that God had a work for him to do (Joseph Smith History 1:33). The first part of this work was to translate the Book of Mormon and then proclaim its message to the world.

90Although the Lord may use people who are not members of his church to bring about his purpose (Isa. 44:28-45:1 D&C 35:4), those who are called to do the official work of the kingdom are ordained to the priesthood or work under priesthood direction. Although Joseph Smith was called to translate the Book of Mormon before the priesthood was restored, he was later ordained an Apostle and called to the work of delivering the gospel to the world (D&C 5:4-6; D&C 20:2). This ordination came through the ancient Apostles Peter, James, and John (D&C 27:12; compare Joseph Smith History 1:68-72; D&C 20:2). Joseph Smith's calling and ordination is the prototype of the Church's beliefs and procedures in this dispensation as given in the fifth article of faith: "A man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof."

To be called by prophecy is to be called by one of the Lord's servants based on revelation from their Master. The pattern of Joseph Smith's call is consistent with that taught in the Book of Mormon. The first Book of Mormon prophet, Lehi, was called by a personal visitation and vision shown him by the Lord (1 Ne. 1:6-14). His son Nephi was also visited of the Lord and called to be a ruler and a teacher over his people (1 Ne. 2:16, 19-22). The first Jaredite prophet, the brother of Jared, was called by personal revelation from the Lord (Ether 1:34-43). Jacob and Joseph, the youngest sons of Lehi, were called and dedicated by their prophet-brother Nephi to be priests and teachers (2 Ne. 5:26). Jacob recognized this as a call from God (2 Ne. 6:2). Alma organized a church in the land of Lehi-Nephi, having probably received the priesthood earlier in the land of Zarahemla, as an answer to his prayers to become an instrument in God's hands (Mosiah 23:10). He later gave others authority from God to preach and teach (Mosiah 23:16-17). Thus, the Book of Mormon clearly teaches that a call to the Lord's work comes by prophecy, a personal visitation from the Lord, or by revelation to his chosen servant.

91One of the Book of Mormon's greater contributions to our understanding of a man's being called of God is the doctrine that priesthood holders were foreordained to hold the priesthood. In Alma's great discourse on priesthood (Alma 13), he said men were called and prepared from the foundation of the world: "And this is the manner after which they were ordained being called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God, on account of their exceeding faith and good works; in the first place [in premortality] being left to choose good or evil; therefore they having chosen good, and exercising exceedingly great faith, are called with a holy calling, yea, with that holy calling which was prepared with, and according to, a preparatory redemption for such" (Alma 13:3).

91This doctrine is also taught in the Bible, although it is not as readily recognized (Jer. 1:4-5; Acts 17:26; see also Deut. 32:7-8). It was also taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith: "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. I suppose I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council." (TPJS, P. 365.) Alma added some further enlightenment on this important doctrine:

92And thus they have been called to this holy calling on account of their faith, while others would reject the Spirit of God on account of the hardness of their hearts and blindness of their minds, while, if it had not been for this they might have had as great privilege as their brethren.

92Or in fine, in the first place they were on the same standing with their brethren; thus this holy calling being prepared from the foundation of the world for such as would not harden their hearts, being in and through the atonement of the Only Begotten Son, who was prepared. (Alma 13:4-5.)

92The Lord desires to grant all men the privilege of receiving and using the priesthood, but, as in all things, he gave them agency to accept or reject this and other opportunities. The priesthood was restored in this dispensation to again give the opportunity "that every man might speak in the name of God the Lord, even the Savior of the world" (D&C 1:20). But because everyone has his own agency, many who were foreordained to receive that great blessing of bearing the priesthood will reject their opportunity here. This is evident from the number of unordained members and prospective elders who have chosen to follow, the ways of the world rather than to qualify themselves to receive their foreordained blessings and privileges. It appears, then, that many of those who were foreordained and have received priesthood ordination on earth will not have priesthood power in the hereafter because they have not appreciated this sacred privilege here. The Lord told the Prophet Joseph Smith:

92Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen?

92Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson--

92That the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness.

That they may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify, our pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man. (D&C 121:34-37.)

93A person is ordained to the priesthood by the laying on of hands. So was it done among the Nephites. Alma ordained priests and elders by laying his hands on them (Alma 6:1). Jesus instructed the Nephite elders of the Church to ordain priests and teachers in the same way (Moro. 3:1-3). Thus, the Nephites ordained men to the priesthood just as Joseph Smith was instructed.

93The Book of Mormon teaches that the high priesthood is after the order of the Son of God (Alma 13:6-7; compare D&C 107:1-6). It further enlightens us on the greatness of Melchizedek. Although only six verses in the Book of Mormon discuss Melchizedek (Alma 13:14-19), we know more about him from those six verses than from all that is said about him in the Bible. This undoubtedly comes from many plain and precious parts having been removed from that record (1 Ne. 13:23-29; compare JST, Gen. 14:25-40). Alma probably took his information from the plates of brass, as he taught that Melchizedek is a prime example of how to use the priesthood to bring people back into "the rest of the Lord." He recorded that Melchizedek taught his people to look forward to the Son of God and to receive a remission of their sins through the ordinances of the priesthood. Because he brought his people to repentance and established peace, he was called the prince of peace. (Alma 13:10-12, 13-18.) Alma concluded the following regarding Melchizedek: "Now, there were many before him, and also there were many afterwards, but none were greater; there fore, of him they have more particularly made mention" (Alma 13:19).

After the exodus from Egypt, Moses and the Melchizedek Priesthood were taken out of the midst of Israel and only the Aaronic Priesthood remained (D&C 84:23-26). The Levites were commissioned to assist Aaron and his sons in administering the Aaronic Priesthood (Num. 3:5-13). And yet, all of the prophets received the higher priesthood (TPJS, P. 181). However, as explained by President Joseph Fielding Smith, the Nephites officiated under the Melchizedek Priesthood rather than the Aaronic as in Jerusalem (Answers to Gospel Questions, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith, Jr., 5 vols. [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1957-66], 1:123-26). Lehi's group had no Levites among them. Lehi was of Manasseh (Alma 10:3), and Ishmael was of Ephraim (JD 23:184). Alma's reference to the high priesthood after the holy order of God, or "the order of his Son," confirms that the Nephites had the Melchizedek Priesthood (Alma 13:6-7).

94The Book of Mormon teaches that the priesthood originates with God. Alma said that the priesthood is "without beginning of days or end of years, being prepared from eternity to all eternity, according to [God's] foreknowledge of all things" (Alma 13:7). Thus, the priesthood is the eternal power of God granted to man here upon the earth. It existed before this earth was created and will continue to exist after the earth's mortal existence is over. In the words of President David O. McKay: "Priesthood is power and authority inherent in the Godhead. In man it is always delegated authority-it cannot be assumed with efficacy." (Gospel Ideals [Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953], P. 168.)

The Book of Mormon also teaches the purposes of the priesthood. One of its purposes is to teach the commandments of God unto the children of men so that they might know in what manner to look to the Son of God for redemption: "And again, my brethren, I would cite your minds forward to the time when the Lord God gave these commandments unto his children; and I would that ye should remember that the Lord God ordained priests, after his holy order, which was after the order of his Son, to teach these things unto the people. And those priests were ordained after the order of his Son, in a manner that thereby the people might know in what manner to look forward to his Son for redemption." (Alma 13:1-2.) The call is to teach others in such a manner that they might be prepared to enter into the rest of the Lord, which is "the fulness of his glory" (D&C 84:24). "And thus [they were] called by this holy calling, and ordained unto the high priesthood of the holy order of God, to teach his commandments unto the children of men, that they also might enter into his rest" (Alma 13:6).

95Another purpose of the priesthood is to perform the ordinances necessary for salvation. The priesthood has the power and authority to perform the necessary ordinances to bring people into the Lord's rest. Nephi, son of Lehi, taught that it was necessary to be baptized and receive the Holy Ghost to be able to endure to the end and receive eternal life (2 Ne. 31). Alma was given authority to baptize and administer in the Church (Mosiah 18:13-18). Throughout the Book of Mormon account, thousands of Nephites and Lamanites were so baptized and thus placed on the path to eternal life. When Jesus Christ appeared among the Nephites following his resurrection, he gave the Nephite Twelve power to baptize, to administer the sacrament, and to confer the Holy Ghost as he had done with his Twelve Apostles in Jerusalem (Matt. 10:1; Matt. 16:19; John 15:16; 3 Ne. 11:18-22; 3 Ne. 18:5, 37; Moro. 2; Moro. 4; Moro. 5). Thus, he gave the priesthood to men so they could administer the saving ordinances.

95The Book of Mormon relates that the lord gave Nephi, son of Helaman, the same power to seal on earth and in heaven and to loose on earth and in heaven as he gave to Peter:

95Behold, I give unto you power, that whatsoever ye shall seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven; and thus shall ye have power among this people.

95And thus, if ye shall say unto this temple it shall be rent in twain, it shall be done.

95And if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou cast down and become smooth, it shall be done.

95And behold, if ye shall say that God shall smite this people, it shall come to pass. (Hel. 10:7-10; see Matt. 16:19; Matt. 18:18.)

95 Nephi (the son of the above-mentioned Nephi), who was presiding over the Nephite church just prior to the Savior's birth, was given so much power that the people could not disbelieve his words or his miracles in spite of their wickedness:

96And it came to pass that they were angry with him, even because he had greater power than they, for it were not possible that they could disbelieve his words, for so great was his faith on the Lord Jesus Christ that angels did minister unto him daily.

96And in the name of Jesus did he cast out devils and unclean spirits; and even his brother did he raise from the dead, after he had been stoned and suffered death by the people.

96And the people saw it, and did witness of it, and were angry with him because of his power; and he did also do many more miracles, in the sight of the people, in the name of Jesus. (3 Ne. 7:18-20.)

96A call to bear the priesthood is a call to receive the responsibility of serving others through teaching and performing the ordinances of salvation. As Jacob stated, to perform this service is to magnify one's calling: "And we did magnify our office unto the Lord, taking upon us the responsibility, answering the sins of the people upon our own heads if we did not teach them the word of God with all diligence; wherefore, by laboring with our might their blood might not come upon our garments; otherwise their blood would come upon our garments, and we would not be found spotless at the last day" (Jacob 1:19).

96The responsibility for a priesthood holder to be accountable for all those under his stewardship was also taught by the Old Testament prophet Ezekiel (Ezekiel 3:17-21; Ezek. 33:1-9). Placed against this background, the meaning of Jacob's words to his people in the days of Nephi become more clear:

96O, my beloved brethren, remember my words. Behold, I take off my garments, and I shake them before you; I pray the God of my salvation that he view me with his all-searching eye; wherefore, ye shall know at the last day, when all men shall be judged of their works, that the God of Israel did witness that I shook your iniquities from my soul, and that I stand with brightness before him, and am rid your blood....

96But behold, my brethren, is it expedient that I should awake you to an awful reality of these things? Would I harrow up your souls if your minds were pure? Would I be plain unto you according to the plainness of the truth if ye were freed from sin?

97Behold, if ye were holy I would speak unto you of holiness; but as ye are not holy, and ye look upon me as a teacher, it must needs be expedient that I teach you the consequences of sin. (2 Ne. 9:44, 47-48; see also Jacob 2:6-11.)

97The Book of Mormon bears witness that through the proper use of the priesthood a sanctification process takes place that purifies and prepares people to enter into the rest of the Lord. It further testifies that there were a great many who attained this celestial status through magnifying their priesthood (Alma 13:11-12). Since it was done in past generations, the Lord promised it can also be done in this generation (D&C 20:11).

97Thus, the teachings of the Book of Mormon regarding priesthood are a keystone for individual salvation and for the proper functioning of the Church. The priesthood is an order or brotherhood of Christ in which men are called to be "instruments in the Lord's hand" to use the power of God in blessing others' lives. Men have been called to this priesthood in this generation; without the authority of Christ, the Eternal God, the Church cannot bring eternal life to men.
