Monte S. Nyman, Most Correct Book ( 1991)

10

The Same God Yesterday, Today, and Forever

A subtitle, "Another Testament of Jesus Christ," was officially added to the Book of Mormon in 1982. This illustrates the most important reason why the Book of Mormon is the "keystone of our religion"--its testimony of Jesus Christ. The title page of the Book of Mormon lists as one of the major purposes of the book "the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that JESUS is the CHRIST, the ETERNAL GOD, manifesting himself unto all nations. "

98As a concluding comment on the content and purposes of the Book of Mormon, the Lord declared that this sacred book shows "that he is the same God yesterday, today, and forever. Amen." (D&C 20:12.) This God is Jesus Christ. The Bible carries the same message (Heb. 13:8). Let us now examine the meaning of "yesterday, today, and forever" in the context of the Book of Mormon and other modern day revelation.

There are seven references in the Book of Mormon to God's being the same yesterday, today, and forever. One of these references concerns the Zoramites' use of the phrase to substantiate their erroneous belief in the doctrine of election and does not help us find the true meaning (Alma 31:17). These six references show the eternal principles through which God manifests himself to men on earth. One reference shows that his ministering to men in the flesh is always the same (2 Ne. 2:4). Another shows that God is always the same because he is no respecter of persons and speaks the same words to all nations (2 Ne. 29:7-9). A third reference states that the mysteries of God are unfolded at all times by the power of the Holy Ghost (1 Ne. 10:17-19). Two other references declare that God's miracles are invariably dependent on the faith of the children of men (2 Ne. 7:23; Morm. 9:9-10). The last reference associates Christ's eternal nature with the spiritual gifts he gives to those who have faith (Moro. 10:19).

99The eternal nature of Jesus Christ as the same yesterday, today and forever will be examined in three different time periods of the world.

99These six references also imply three ways by which God manifests himself. One reference shows that his personal appearances to man are the same whether he appears in the spirit body or in the flesh (2 Ne. 2:4). Another shows that God is always the same because he is no respecter of persons and speaks the same words to all nations (2 Ne. 29:7-9). The other four references show that the manner in which he manifests himself is always the same regardless of the time period (1 Ne. 10:18; 2 Ne. 27:23; Morm. 9:9; Moro. 10:19).

99An examination of each of these three time periods confirms that Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever.

The Premortal Christ, or Old Testament God

Personal Appearances

Nephi, the son of Helaman, testified that all of the prophets from the days of Moses to the days of Abraham had testified of Christ. He said further that many prophets before the days of Abraham had so testified and that many prophets since then had testified and had been persecuted for so doing. He then made this provocative declaration: "And behold, he is God, and he is with them, and he did manifest himself unto them, that they were redeemed by him; and they gave unto him glory, because of that which is to come." (Hel. 8:13-23.) Nephi thus declared that Jesus Christ is a God and implies that Christ personally appeared on both continents to those prophets of the Old Testament period.

100Nephi, son of Lehi, testified that he and his brother Jacob had seen Christ, even as had Isaiah (2 1 Ne. 11:2-3). Lehi likewise testified that Jacob beheld the glory of the premortal Christ (2 Ne. 2:4). Earlier Christ had appeared to the brother of Jared and told him he had been redeemed (Ether 3:13-14). From this account we learn that whether a person sees Christ in the spirit or in the flesh, he looks the same: "Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh" (Ether 3:16).

100Moroni, while abridging the record of the Jaredites, made this general statement to the Lord: "For thus didst thou manifest thyself unto thy disciples; for after they had faith, and did speak in thy name, thou didst show thyself unto them in great power" (Ether 12:31).

100Book of Mormon prophets testified that Jesus Christ personally appeared to individuals who had qualified themselves to receive him. Whether these appearances were in the spirit or in the flesh, the results were the same.

No Respecter of Persons or Nations

In response to those who would reject the Book of Mormon on the grounds that there should be only one Bible, Nephi quotes the Lord's reasoning as follows:

Know ye not that there are more nations than one? Know ye not that I, the Lord your God, have created all men, and that I remember those who are upon the isles of the sea; and that I rule in the heavens above and in the earth beneath; and I bring forth my word unto the children of men, yea, even upon all the nations of the earth?

101Wherefore murmur ye, because that ye shall receive more of my word? Know ye not that the testimony of two nations is a witness unto you that I am God, that I remember one nation like unto another? Wherefore, I speak the same words unto one nation like unto another. And when the two nations shall run together the testimony of the two nations shall run together also.

101And I do this that I may prove unto many that I am the same yesterday, today, and forever; and that I speak forth my words according to mine own pleasure. (2 Ne. 29:7-9.)

101The evidence that God speaks to "one nation like unto another" is, of course, the Book of Mormon. It recognizes Jesus Christ as the God of the whole world. Nephi calls him the God of Israel, the God who led the children of Israel out of Egypt and preserved them in the wilderness, "yea, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob" (1 Ne. 19:7-10). In other words, Jesus Christ directed the affairs of Moses and the great patriarchs of the Old Testament. Nephi, in refuting the murmuring of Laman and Lemuel, recognized the same God who had directed Moses and the children of Israel as the one who had covenanted with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and had led Lehi out of Jerusalem. He testified that God could and would direct him in building the ship which he was commanded to build. (1 Ne. 17:23-33, 40-51.) Nephi further qualified how the agency of man determined whether he would be directed by the Lord: "Behold, the Lord esteemeth all flesh in one; he that is righteous is favored of God. But behold, this people had rejected every word of God, and they were ripe in iniquity; and the fullness of the wrath of God was upon them; and the Lord did curse the land against them, and bless it unto our fathers; yea, he did curse it against them unto their destruction and he did bless it unto our fathers unto their obtaining power over it.... And he loveth those who will have him to be their God." (1 Ne. 17:35, 40.)

Jesus confirmed that he had directed the work of Old Testament times as he entered Jerusalem he the last week of his ministry, in the flesh. As he wept over Jerusalem, he said: "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto you, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! " (Matt. 23:37.)

102Jesus taught this same principle as he ministered among the Nephites (3 Ne. 10:4-5).

102Thus, the Bible and the Book of Mormon bear witness to Jesus Christ's being the administrator of the earth in the Old Testament time, and the Book of Mormon adds significant insights to the relationship of God and man.

Manner of Manifesting

The Book of Mormon calls Jesus Christ the God of nature (1 Ne. 19:12), for through the acts of nature, the Lord often speaks to his people. Mormon's message to the latter-day reader was: "And thus we see that except the Lord doth chasten his people with many afflictions, yea, except he doth visit them with death and with terror, and with famine and with all manner of pestilence, they will not remember him" (Hel. 12:3; see the entire chapter).

102The Book of Mormon also bears witness that Christ speaks by his own voice. Nephi, son of Lehi, testified that the voice of the Son had taught him concerning baptism and the Holy Ghost (2 Ne. 31:12-14). The voice of the Lord came to Alma and covenanted with him that he should have eternal life and instructed him on how to deal; with unrepentant transgressors (Mosiah 26:14-32). Alma testified to the people of Ammonihah that the Nephites were a highly favored people because, among other manifestations, they had "been spoken unto by the voice of the Lord" (Alma 9:20-21).

102While the Lord gives revelation in many ways, his personal manifestations are enumerated above. The manner in which Christ manifested himself in the Old Testament time period is best summarized by Mormon: "There were divers ways that [God] did manifest things unto the children of men, which were good; and all things which are good cometh of Christ" (Moro. 7:24.)

The Resurrected Christ, or New Testament God

Personal Appearances

The Book of Mormon plainly teaches that all of the Old Testament prophets testified of Jesus Christ (2 Ne. 25:18-19; Jacob 4:4; Jacob 7:11; see also Luke 24:27). Most, if not all, of their testimony was of his coming to earth, dwelling in the flesh, making the Atonement, and breaking the bands of death through the Resurrection. As Abinadi taught this, he quoted the prophet Isaiah to prove his point, and added this enlightening commentary:

103I would that ye should understand that God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people.

103And because he dwelleth in flesh he shall be called the Son of God, and having subjected the flesh to the will of the Father, being the Father and the Son-

103The Father, because he was conceived by the power of God; and the Son, because of the flesh; thus becoming the Father and Son-

103And they are one God, yea, the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth. (Mosiah 15:1-4.)

103The first verse confirms that the God of the Old Testament era would live among men in the flesh. The second one describes his ministry on earth as the Son of God, here to fulfill and do the will of the Father in carrying out the Atonement. The third describes his nature in the flesh, having power of immortality given unto him through his Eternal Father and also the elements of mortality through his earthly mother, Mary. Thus, he had the power to lay down his life and to take it up again, or be resurrected (John 10:17-18). And the fourth confirms that the God who had been administering the affairs of heaven and earth was the God who was to come and dwell in the flesh in the New Testament era or the meridian of time.

The Nephite prophets had foretold that God would appear to the Nephites as well as unto the Jews (1 Ne. 13:35; 2 Ne. 9:5; 2 Ne. 25:12-13; 2 Ne. 32:6; Enos 1:8). The Book of Mormon records "that soon after the ascension of Christ into heaven he did truly manifest himself unto them-showing his body unto them, and ministering unto them" (3 Ne. 10:18-19). That appearance and ministry are detailed in 3 Ne. 11-26. Christ's initial appearance was to about twenty-five hundred men, women, and children gathered about the temple in the land of Bountiful. This multitude heard a voice declare that the personage they were seeing descend was "my Beloved Son" (3 Ne. 11:7). The personage also identified himself as "Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world" (3 Ne. 11:10). He invited the multitude to "arise and come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world" (3 Ne. 11:14).

104Thus, the resurrected Jesus appeared to individuals as he had done as a spirit prior to his birth into mortality.

The Book of Mormon obviously does not record any personal appearances of Jesus in the time period of the Restoration because it was written hundreds of years before those events took place. However, it does teach that Christ will manifest himself to all nations, as well as to individuals. Nephi foresaw the time when Christ would manifest himself unto the Jews (undoubtedly referring to all the house of Israel) and also to the Gentiles (1 Ne. 13:42). That Christ would personally appear to both the Gentiles and Israel is shown by Moroni's commendation to the latter day reader to "seek this Jesus of whom the prophets and apostles have written, that the grace of God the Father, and also the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of them, may be and abide in you forever" (Ether 12:41). There are many recorded instances of personal appearances to those who have sought this Jesus, and undoubtedly many more unrecorded ones. Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, Lorenzo Snow, and Melvin J. Ballard are just a few of those in our day who have left such records. The resurrected Jesus Christ has appeared in this last dispensation, as well as in the earlier New Testament period.

No Respecter of Persons

That Jesus is no respecter of persons is shown by his ministering to all of the house of Israel in the meridian of time and by the fact that through their testimony the rest of the world may come to know of him. The Lord undoubtedly gave all nations all that he saw fit they should have (Alma 29:8).

105Jesus personally ministered among the three groups of the house of Israel who were gathered together as peoples. Although the Jews did not understand him, he told them that he had other sheep that he had to visit (John 10:14-16; 3 Ne. 15:15-24). He also told the Nephites that he would make subsequent visits among the Lost Tribes of Israel (3 Ne. 16:1-3; 3 Ne. 17:4). A record of these visits was to be kept for the benefit of the Gentiles and the future generations of Israel (2 Ne. 29; 3 Ne. 16:4). Through this, all the nations of the earth may be blessed.

105 John the Revelator spoke of the time when the everlasting gospel would be preached to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people (Rev. 14:6). This work commenced with the visit of the angel Moroni to Joseph Smith in September 1823, and will not be completed until the second coming of Christ (D&C 88:103; D&C 133:16). Joseph Smith was the choice seer whom Joseph of Egypt had prophesied would do a great work in having the Messiah manifest unto his seed in the latter days to bring them out of darkness and captivity (2 Ne. 3:5-7ff).

Bringing Joseph's seed out of captivity would be accomplished through the books which the Lord would command to be written. These books would include the record of the Jews, the record of the Nephites, and the record of the lost tribes of Israel. Each group would have the records of the other two, and these three records will prove unto many that Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and that he speaks his word through them to all nations (2 Ne. 29:7-14). As these records are accepted and believed, further records will come forth and testify that Christ is no respecter of persons (3 Ne. 26:8-12; Ether 4:4-7). All of this great and marvelous work will eventually be manifest to everyone and will lead every knee to bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is God of all people and of all times (Mosiah 27:30-31).

Manner of Manifesting

Jesus used the same methods of manifesting himself in the meridian of time as he had in the Old Testament era. Among the Nephites, Mormon recorded that following Christ's ministry among them "he did show himself unto them oft" (3 Ne. 26:13). As the twelve disciples were united in fasting and prayer, Jesus appeared to them and granted them the promise of eternal life in his kingdom, nine at the conclusion of their ministry and three when Christ would come again in his glory (3 Ne. 27-28). Some four hundred years later, Moroni, the last surviving prophet of the Nephites, testified: "I have seen Jesus, and . . . he hath talked with me face to face" (Ether 12:39). The Lord was certainly the same in the New Testament era as he was in the Old Testament era.

106 Nephi foresaw the day when the Lamb of God would manifest himself in word and power to those Gentiles who hearken unto him (1 Ne. 14:1). Through the Book of Mormon, he would manifest himself unto them in word (3 Ne. 16:4; Ether 2:11-12), while the manifestation in power will come through personal appearances and the power of the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost's manifestations of power were to come through the various gifts of the Spirit (Moro. 10:7-18). These spiritual gifts were never to be done away as long as the world should stand, which again testifies that Jesus is the same yesterday, today, and forever (Moro. 10:19). These gifts will produce the mighty miracles, signs, and wonders of which the Gentiles must be convinced. All nations, kindreds, tongues, and people will know that Jesus Christ is the ETERNAL, GOD, who is unchanging, who appears to all people who meet the conditions, and who manifests himself as he sees fir in various but consistent ways in all times and places upon the face of the earth.

The Glorified Christ, or Millennial God

Personal Appearances

The first personal appearance of Christ in this time period will be his second comings. As quoted by Nephi, son of Lehi, but now lost from the present day text, the prophet Isaiah described the destruction of the wicked and the preservation of the righteous at the last days (1 Ne. 22:15-17). Jacob, brother of Nephi, also quoted the prophet Isaiah and said the Messiah would manifest himself in power and great glory, unto the destruction of their (the covenant people's) enemies, when the day comes that "they shall believe in him; and none will he destroy that believe in him" (2 Ne. 6:14). Those who "believe not in him shall be destroyed, both by fire, and by tempest, and by earthquakes, and by bloodsheds, and by pestilence, and by famine. And they shall know that the Lord is God, the Holy One of Israel." (2 Ne. 6:15.) From these verses we learn that the destruction of the wicked will commence before his personal appearance, but will culminate with his appearance.

107Following his quoting of Malachi, which included many almost identical prophecies (compare 3 Ne. 25; Mal. 4), the Savior expounded all things "until the time that he should come in his glory . . . and the heavens and the earth should pass away; and even unto the great and last day," or end of the Millennium (3 Ne. 26:3-4). However, Mormon did not include these teachings in his abridgment (3 Ne. 26:11). There will undoubtedly be many personal appearances to individuals, because Christ will reign personally upon the earth over his people (D&C 38:21; D&C 58:22; D&C 76:63; see also Rev. 19:16).

No Respecter of Persons or Nations

The Book of Mormon bears only brief testimony of the Millennium. After describing the destruction of the wicked at the last day and the binding of Satan by the righteousness of the people under the reign of the Holy One of Israel (1 Ne. 22:26), Nephi testified: "But, behold, all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people shall dwell safely in the Holy One of Israel if it so be that they will repent" (1 Ne. 22:28). The millennial reign is not expanded upon in the Book of Mormon but the equality of all men in the Lord's eyes is verified.

Manner of Manifesting

Once more after quoting Isaiah that during the Millennium "the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord" (2 Ne. 20:15; Isa. 11:9), Nephi adds his commentary: "Wherefore, the things of all nations shall be made known; yea, all things shall be made known unto the children of men. There is nothing which is secret save it shall be revealed; there is no work of darkness save it shall be made manifest in the light; and there is nothing which is sealed upon the earth save it shall be loosed. Wherefore, all things which have been revealed unto the children of men shall at that day be revealed." (2 Ne. 30:16-18.)

108The manifestations of the spiritual gifts through the Holy Ghost-personal and other forms of revelation-will increase (Isa. 30:19-21). Joseph Smith said there would be a return of the pure language and the earth filled with sacred knowledge (TPJS, p. 93). A major source of the knowledge referred to by Nephi and by Joseph Smith will be through a restoration of the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon (D&C 5:9) and of the records of former dispensations, according to Elder Orson Pratt (JD 16:49). It will be a period of great revelation.

Thus, the Book of Mormon stands as a witness to Jesus' true position among the nations of the earth. It testifies of his eternal nature as well as his infinite involvement in the Nephite record. There are more than one hundred different designations of Christ in the Book of Mormon. By analogy, a piano has eighty-eight different keys. Just as each piano key gives a different and definite tone, each name of Christ gives a further insight into his nature and attributes. There are 531 pages in the current edition of the Book of Mormon, divided into 239 chapters. Four hundred ninety six of those 531 pages and 233 of those 239 chapters say something about Jesus Christ. Some are entirely about Christ, while others contain only brief comments concerning him. Those pages and chapters that do not say anything about Christ are basically historical accounts about dissenters from the Nephites or other problems among the people (the six chapters that do not mention Jesus Christ are Mosiah 19, Mosiah 22; Alma 51-52; and Hel. 1-2). Without question, the Book of Mormon is another testament of Jesus Christ. It bears positive and extensive testimony that Jesus is the ETERNAL GOD, manifesting himself to all nations in the Old Testament era, during the New Testament era through the time of the Restoration in the latter days, and at his second coming and through the Millennium.
