Monte S. Nyman, Most Correct Book ( 1991)

III

Precepts to Bring One Nearer to God

11

The World to Be Judged by the Book of Mormon

John the Revelator saw in vision an angel flying "in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people." The angel proclaimed in a loud voice that they were to "fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come." (Rev. 14:6-7.)

113Members of the Church generally refer to these two verses as a prophecy that the angel Moroni would bring forth the Book of Mormon. While Moroni's visits may well fulfill the beginning of that prophecy, a careful examination reveals that there is much more involved in its fulfillment.

113The passage also suggests that the Lord's judgment at his coming is tied with proclaiming the Book of Mormon to all nations. It also refers to other aspects of the restoration of the gospel. While it is probable that the prophecy's complete fulfillment will include several more angelic ministrations, only that work begun by Moroni in bringing forth the Book of Mormon in judgment of the world will be considered here.

Phase One-The Book of Mormon Preached

Mormon wrote of his role in bringing forth the Book of Mormon to judge the world. As his people's destruction was imminent, he was commanded of the Lord to "stand as an idle witness to manifest unto the world the things which [he] saw and heard, according to the manifestations of the Spirit which had testified of things to come" (Morm. 3:16). He then testified that he wrote to the Gentiles and to the house of Israel who would be on the earth when the gathering of Israel from among the Gentiles would begin. That work would prepare them to return to the land of their inheritance (Morm. 3:17). Mormon's work is the first phase of the angel's bringing "the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth." While the everlasting gospel as contained in the Book of Mormon and the work of teaching is to commence among the Gentiles, it is eventually to go "to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people." (Rev. 14:6). Mormon said he wrote to "all the ends of the earth" but specifically to the twelve tribes of Israel, the remnant of the Nephite people, and the Jews (Morm. 3:18-21). His purpose in writing was to warn and to try to "persuade all [the] ends of the earth to repent and prepare to stand before the judgment-seat of Christ" (Morm. 3:20-22). The Book of Mormon will go to the various nations at different times as the first phase of the hour of God's judgment.

114That the work of the angel was a part of the Lord's judgment was confirmed in a revelation given to Joseph Smith on 3 November 1831:

114And now, verily saith the Lord, that these things might be known among you, O inhabitants of the earth, I have sent forth mine angel flying through the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel, who hath appeared unto some and hath committed it unto man, who shall appear unto many that dwell on the earth.

114And this gospel shall be preached unto every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.

114And the servants of God shall go forth, saying with a loud voice: Fear God and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come;

115And worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters. (D&C 133:36-39.)

115Many accounts verify that the angel Moroni appeared to others besides Joseph Smith, and other accounts foretell of promised future appearances (see H. Donl Peterson, Moroni-Ancient Prophet, Modern Messenger [Bountiful, Utah: Horizon Publishers, 1983], pp. 114-19, 154-62). D&C 133:38 notes that the servants of God, not the angel, will carry forth the message (the Book of Mormon) to the inhabitants of the world. As our missionaries go forth declaring the message of the Book of Mormon, they are thus helping to fulfill John's prophecy in the book of Revelation. The work of the angel Moroni and of others that is going on behind the veil in preparing the nations for the preaching of the Book of Mormon message or appearances to present-day mortals is implied and certainly is taking place. Although that work cannot be documented, and personal appearances are sacred experiences not usually disclosed to the world, evidence of such preparatory activities is periodically noted by those associated with the opening of new nations to the preaching of the gospel. The first phase in the Book of Mormon's being a judge of the world will not be completed until every nation, kindred, tongue, and people have had an opportunity to receive it. The sequence of these opportunities will not be treated here, but all people will have a chance to accept or reject the Book of Mormon (see Monte S. Nyman, An Ensign to All People [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1987], pp. 29-32). When that is accomplished, the angel who was ultimately responsible for bringing it to the world will announce the coming of the Lord in judgment:

115And another trump shall sound, which is the fifth trump, which is the fifth angel who committeth the everlasting gospel-flying through the midst of heaven, unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people;

And this shall be the sound of his trump, saying to all people, both in heaven and in earth, and that are under the earth for every ear shall hear it, and every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess, while they hear the sound of the trump, saying: Fear God, and give glory to him who sitteth upon the throne, forever and ever; for the hour of his judgment is come (D&C 88:103-4).

116Thus, through the Book of Mormon, the believers in the true gospel will gather into the wards and branches of the Church to prepare individually and collectively for Christ's second coming.

Phase Two-A Division among the People

The second phase of bringing the judgment upon all nations will be the separation of the righteous and the wicked, or the fulfillment of the parable of the wheat and the tares (Matt. 13:24-30; D&C 86:1-7). The righteous and the wicked will grow together until the time of the harvests which will be completed just prior to the Second Coming. The division will come in part as Israel and others are gathered into the various stakes in the lands of their inheritance. It will also come at different times in different places. The division will probably come about gradually and in such a natural way that many people will not realize it is taking place. The Savior taught in the parable of the net that the bad are cast away (Matt. 13:47-50), or in Joseph Smith's words, "The angels shall come forth and sever the wicked from among the just" (TPJS, p. 102).

A more specific way of how this division would take place was taught by Jesus to the Nephites in America in A.D. 34, when he foretold that the servant (Joseph Smith) of the Father would accomplish a great and marvelous work (including but not limited to the bringing forth of the Book of Mormon) among the Gentiles. Those who do not believe the words of Jesus Christ that the servant was give power to bring forth, the Book of Mormon, will "be cut off from among [the covenant] people." (3 Ne. 21:9-11). 'This division that will come by cutting off those who reject Christ and the Book of Mormon was originally prophesied of by Moses (Deuteronomy 18:19), reemphasized by Peter on the day of Pentecost (Acts 3:23), and confirmed that it "soon would come" by the angel Moroni to Joseph Smith on 21-22 September 1823 (Joseph Smith History 1:40). The preface to the Doctrine and Covenants also referred to the coming day when "they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people" (D&C 1:14).

117The Lord has also confirmed this principle in latter day revelation. In a revelation to Thomas B. Marsh, the President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, the Lord revealed that he had been "chosen to hold the keys of my kingdom, as pertaining to the Twelve, abroad among all nations" (D&C 112:16). The Lord then announced that his vengeance was speedily coming upon the inhabitants of the earth because of the darkness that covered the earth and the gross darkness that covered the minds of the people, causing all flesh to be corrupted before him. Then he said that his vengeance would commence at and go forth from his house, meaning those who have joined the Church but have not lived up to their covenants would also be cut off from the Lord's people. (D&C 112:23-26.)

117The Twelve were then admonished to purify their hearts and go forth preaching Christ's "gospel unto every creature who has not received it." Those who believed and were baptized would be saved and those who believed not and were not baptized would be damned. (D&C 112:28-29.)

117This admonition to the Twelve also confirms that the first phase is the coming forth of the Book of Mormon to judge the world. Christ's gospel as contained in it is to go forth under the direction of the Twelve Apostles to gather Christ's covenant people (the baptized) together. Following their gathering, the people are to cleanse themselves in preparation for his coming, for only the more righteous will be spared, as shown in phase three.

The Lord promised Nephi that his writings would be preserved to fulfill the promise given to Joseph of Egypt that his seed would never perish as long as the earth shall stand (1 Ne. 13:26-29; 2 Ne. 25:21; and Alma 46:23-26). To fulfill this promise, Nephi proclaimed: "Wherefore, these things shall go from generation to generation as long as the earth shall stand; and they shall go according to the will and pleasure of God; and the nations who shall possess them shall be judged of them according to the words which are written" (2 Ne. 25:22).

118After summarizing the effects of the Book of Mormon's going forth among the Gentiles, the Lamanites, and the Jews (2 Ne. 30:1-7), Nephi noted that the Lord's "work among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, [was] to bring about the restoration of his people upon the earth" (2 Ne. 30:8). This reflects the same concept found in John the Revelator's prophecy of the angel flying through the midst of heaven (Rev. 14:6). Nephi continues his analogy by quoting and interpreting the prophet Isaiah: "And with righteousness shall the Lord God judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth. And he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth; and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked." (2 Ne. 30:9; Isa. 11:4, The righteousness that the Lord brings forth will include the Book of Mormon and its message for those who are poor in spirit and meek or teachable of heart. The rod of the Lord's mouth is the word of God sent forth, which is the Book of Mormon (compare JST, Rev. 19:15; 1 Ne. 15:23-24; D&C 6:2), followed by destruction upon those who reject it.

118Before continuing his quotation of Isaiah, Nephi notes that the time "speedily cometh" when the Lord will cause a great division among the people, destroying the wicked and sparing his people (2 Ne. 30:10). This division must result from the going of the Book of Mormon Nephi earlier declared that his father Lehi had seen "that the justice of God did also divide the wicked from the righteous" (1 Ne. 15:30). The justice of God would certainty be represented in the everlasting gospel contained in the Book of Mormon.

The ancient prophet Enoch also foreknew this great latter day movement. The Lord told him that wickedness as a veil of darkness would covert the earth but noted that the Lord's people would be preserved. He spoke further that righteousness would be sent down out of heaven, and truth would come forth out of the earth that would "sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth" to "an Holy City" in preparation for his second coming. This city was to be called Zion, a new Jerusalem (Moses 7:60-62).

119The Prophet Joseph Smith said the Book of Mormon was the truth coming out of the earth, and righteousness was the power, gifts, and angels coming down from heaven (TPJS, p. 98). He had earlier declared that men and angels would be co-workers in bringing to pass righteousness and truth to sweep the earth as a flood and preparing Zion, even a New Jerusalem (TPJS, p. 84). President Ezra Taft Benson has commended the leaders and teachers of the Church for their inspired use of the Book of Mormon in helping to rear a generation that can redeem Zion and called for a massive flooding of the earth with the Book of Mormon ("Flooding the Earth with the Book of Mormon," Ensign 18 [ November 1988]: pp. 4-6). The Book of Mormon is the primary tool to fulfill the prophecies of the establishment of Zion.

119Ether, another ancient prophet, had also prophesied that the New Jerusalem would be built upon this land (America) by a remnant of the seed of Joseph (Ether 13:6-8). Nephi, son of Lehi, had seen that those who sought to bring forth Zion "would have the gift and the power of the Holy Ghost" (1 Ne. 13:37). Jesus Christ made a covenant with Jacob, father of Israel, that the New Jerusalem would be built in the Americas (3 Ne. 20:22). He later enlarged upon how and when this would be done as he ministered among the Nephites after his resurrection (3 Ne. 21:22-29; see also Monte S. Nyman, A Ensign to All People, pp. 84-93). Thus the righteous who are separated out from the wicked and cleansed from their iniquities will bring about a Zion city of the Lord, a New Jerusalem. This concept was introduced to the believers in the Book of Mormon even before the Church was organized in this dispensation (D&C 6:6; D&C 11:6; D&C 12:6; D&C 14:6).

Those who accept the Book of Mormon will separate themselves from the world and will gather together. Those who separate themselves from the world will be judged further by the Book of Mormon, for they cannot treat lightly the things (such as the Book of Mormon) they have received (D&C 84:54-88). After the Church is cleansed and Zion, or the New Jerusalem, is established, the final judgment will come upon the world. The Lord will come in glory and destroy all the wicked who remain. The world will be judged by the coming forth of the Book of Mormon.
