Monte S. Nyman, Most Correct Book ( 1991)

12

A Crown of Eternal Life

In D&C 20:14-15, the Lord promises all those who receive the Book of Mormon (and, by inference, all those truths and ordinances associated with the Restoration) and do not harden their hearts against it but to do the works of righteousness will receive a crown of eternal life. This same message is given with the Book of Mormon.

121Concluding his writing on the small plates, Nephi admonished everyone everywhere to believe in Christ. After equating believing in Christ to believing the words that Nephi had written because he had received them from Christ, he testified that they "teach all men that they should do good" (2 Ne. 33:10). To do good is to do the works of righteousness. This all leads to the crown of eternal life.

121 Mormon admonished his descendants to "repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus, and lay hold upon the gospel of Christ, which shall be set before you, noting that it will be well with those who work righteousness in the Day of Judgment (Morm. 7:8-10).

122 Moroni was the third Nephite abridger to bear witness of the positive consequences of accepting the Book of Mormon. He testified that it was by the faith of his Nephite fathers that they had obtained a promise that the Book of Mormon would come to their seed through the Gentiles (Ether 12:22). In response to Moroni's concern that the Gentiles might mock his writing, the Lord told him: "Fools mock, but they shall mourn; and my grace is sufficient for the meek, that they shall take no advantage of your weakness; and if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." (Ether 12:26-27.)

122 Moroni concluded his words and the entire Book of Mormon by exhorting the latter day Lamanites to "come unto Christ, and lay hold upon every good gift" (works of righteousness) and promising that those who did so would be "sanctified in Christ by the grace of God" (Moro. 10:30, 32-33). Thus they would receive a crown of eternal life.

Precepts to Bring One Nearer to God

The promise of the crown of eternal life comes to those who follow or apply the teachings of the Book of Mormon to their lives. The Prophet Joseph Smith said that a man would get nearer to God by abiding by the precepts of the Book of Mormon than by those of any other book (TPJS, p. 194). A precept is a command or principle intended to be a general rule of action or behaviors To follow and apply the Book of Mormon precepts in our lives and thus work righteousness involves a three-step process. First, we have to recognize the precepts; second, we have to understand them; and third, we have to incorporate them into our lives.

The first step, the recognition of a precept, has been made much easier by the writers and abridgers of the Book of Mormon. Each of the major writers wrote to future generations, knowing the problems which those readers of the Book of Mormon would be facing (see chapter 5). These writers were cognizant of the needs of our clay and were qualified to point out the saving principles that applied to those needs. These men all followed a similar procedure, although they used a slight variation in their wording. A few examples will illustrate this.

123Nephi, to prepare the reader for precepts to be drawn from incidents he was about to record, introduced those precepts with a phrase such as "I will show unto you" (1 Ne. 1:20). To help the reader recognize precepts involved in an incident he had just recorded, he wrote, "thus we see that" (1 Ne. 16:29).

123 Jacob addressed the reader directly with introductions such as "now, beloved" (Jacob 4:12) "behold my brethren" (Jacob 4:13) or "O, my beloved brethren" (2 Ne. 9:44).

123 Mormon extensively used the introductory phrases "I will show unto you" (Mosiah 23:13) and "thus we see (Alma 24:19, 27; Alma 28:13-14; Alma 30:60; Alma 50:19; Hel. 3:27-29; Hel. 6:34-36, 40), as well as others such as "now I would that ye should see" (Alma 3:19) or "thus we can plainly discern" (Alma 24:30) (We can only surmise that the "thus we see" passages in Alma 17-44 are Mormon's, but they could be Alma's.)

123 Moroni likewise uses the introductory phrase "thus we see" (Ether 14:25) or "and now, we can behold" (Ether 2:9-12, plus direct addresses to the Gentiles and to his Lamanite brethren of the latter days (Ether 8:23; Moro. 10:1). In fact, the entire book of Ether might be regarded as an example of precept writing. Moroni briefly abridged the Jaredite record and inserted his commentary of precepts periodically throughout his text as illustrated below:

123 Abridgment Commentary 1:1-2:8 2:9-12 2:13-3:28 4:1-5:6 7:1-8:17 8:18-26 9:1-12:5 12:6-13:14 13:15-14:24 14:25 14:26-15:34

123Readers should be cognizant of these precept designations, note their messages, and endeavor to apply them to their lives.

124There are, of course, other less obvious precepts pointed out by the writers in appropriately less obvious ways. As the reader becomes aware of these signal phrases, he can readily recognize dozens of precepts. There are also many other precepts which are not specifically identified by the writer within the record that will bring the reader nearer to God as he recognizes and abides by them. Just as Nephi likened all scripture unto his people for their profit and learning (1 Ne. 19:23), the modern reader should liken the Book of Mormon unto him or herself.

124After recognizing a precept, the reader must understand the principle. This takes reading the Book of Mormon from the mechanical into the intellectual and spiritual realms. A person attains the spirit of understanding only through study and prayer. For instance, Alma reminded his sons that he would not have understood the things of God had he not been born of God (Alma 36:4-5). Today, the same rebirth can come through reading the Book of Mormon, thus preparing the reader to further understand the Book of Mormon precepts as he reads and rereads. Just as Nephi said that when a man speaks by the power of the Holy Ghost the Holy Ghost carries it into the hearts of men (2 Ne. 33:1), so Moroni promises that when one prayerfully reads the Book of Mormon and ponders it in his heart the Holy Ghost will manifest the truth of it unto him (Moro. 10:3-5). Again, through continued prayer and study, one can come to understand the precepts given in the Book of Mormon.

124As the reader progresses in understanding, the real challenge is to make that precept or principle a part and portion of life. This point was emphasized by King Benjamin, "and now, if you believe all things see that ye do them" (Mosiah 4:10; italics added). Teaching us exactly bow or what to do is another function of the Holy Ghost. Nephi explained that if we all ask and receive the Holy Ghost, it will show us what to do (2 Ne. 32:4-5).

Several things can prevent a reader from applying the precepts to his or her life, but the sincere person who has come to understand Book of Mormon principles encounters only two basic problems: a previous way of life or habit, and fear or lack of courage. The solution to both problems is to continue to read the Book of Mormon. As King Benjamin admonished his sons to continually have God's commandments before their eyes (Mosiah 1:5), the reader should have the precepts or commandments of the Book of Mormon continually before his eyes. President Benson has directed: "We need to read daily from the pages of the book that will get a man 'nearer to God by abiding by its precepts than by any other book' ("Flooding the Earth with the Book of Mormon," Ensign 18 [November 1988]: 4). Lehi undoubtedly gained courage by learning from the plates of brass that he was a descendant of Joseph whom God had preserved in Egypt and apparently reasoned that God would therefore also preserve him. This apparent reasoning led him to prophesy concerning his seed and gave him and his seed the needed confidence to continue to keep the lord's commandments. (1 Ne. 5:14-20; 1 Ne. 7:1.) Nephi received courage from his knowledge of what the Lord had done for Moses and attempted to transfer that courage to Laman and Lemuel by reasoning with them that if the Lord had done it for so many others, he could do it for Nephi also (1 Ne. 17:23-51). Likewise, whoever reads the Book of Mormon can gain courage by seeing what great things the Lord did for the Nephite people and realizing that he too is a part of another great movement of the Lord in these latter days. Through his faith the Lord will enable him to accomplish whatever he is commanded to do. These accomplishments are attained precept upon precept, and the Book of Mormon is the conveyor of the precepts needed in his life to be a part of this latter-day kingdom. Nephi did not write the things of the world, "but the things which are pleasing unto God and unto those who are not of the world" (1 Ne. 6:5)

A Crown of Eternal Life

Jesus told his disciples in the meridian of time that they should be of good cheer, for he had overcome the world (John 16:33). He told the elders of this dispensation that it was his will that they should overcome the world (D&C 64:1-2). A crown is a reward of victory or mark of honor. Therefore, the promise of the Lord to those who fully accept the Book of Mormon and live accordingly throughout their days is that they will receive "a crown of eternal life" (D&C 20:14). That crown is their reward for having won the victory over the world, a mark of honor they will receive upon their return to his presence. Though this promise of eternal life is clearly conditional, those Saints who diligently strive to live the fulness of gospel law can receive the assurance that the reward will be theirs-that is, they can have their calling and election made sure. This is what is known as the more sure word of prophecy, or "a man's knowing that he is sealed up unto eternal life, by revelation and the spirit of prophecy, through the power of the Holy Priesthood" (D&C 131:5; see the discussion in Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3 vols. [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965-73], 3:323-55).

126The Book of Mormon does not explain directly how one's calling and election is made sure, but it does suggest that many attained this eternal status among the Nephites and in some instances tells why. Father Lehi testified to his sons a few days prior to his mortal death that "the Lord hath redeemed my soul from hell; I have beheld his glory, and I am encircled about eternally in the arms of his love." He then told his sons of his desire that they "remember to observe the statutes and the judgments of the Lord." (2 Ne. 1:15-16.) Certainly Lehi's redemption came because of his observance of these statutes and judgments.

126Lehi's son Nephi bore a similar witness: "I glory in plainness; I glory in truth; I glory in my Jesus, for he hath redeemed my soul from hell" (2 Ne. 33:6). He then spoke of his great faith in Christ and of his charity for his people, the Jews, and the Gentiles. He admonished all the ends of the earth to hearken unto his words (the Book of Mormon) and believe in Christ. (2 Ne. 33:7-10.) Thus, great faith in Christ and charity will qualify one for eternal glory, and the Book of Mormon will help one attain them.

Alma, the priest of Noah who was converted by Abinadi's words, was also assured of eternal life. As he poured out his whole soul to God concerning the transgressors in the Church in Zarahemla, the voice of the Lord declared: "Thou art my servant; and I covenant with thee that thou shalt have eternal life; and thou shalt serve me and go forth in my name, and shalt gather together my sheep" (Mosiah 26:20). The Lord implies that he bestowed this great promise upon Alma because of his exceeding faith and his willingness to heat the name of Christ as his servant (Mosiah 26:15-20).

127Nephi, son of Helaman, was blessed forever and promised that "all things shall be done unto thee according to thy word." The Lord knew that Nephi would "not ask that which is contrary to [his] will." He was also given power over the people and the earth to seal on earth and in heaven and to loose on earth and in heaven. (Hel. 10:5-7.) Although not directly stated, it seems reasonable to conclude that his calling and election was made sure. The Lord's promises were based on Nephi's unweariness in declaring the word that Jesus had given him. He had not feared the people and had not sought his own life but had instead sought the Lord's will and to keep his commandments. (Hel. 10:3-4.)

127It appears that Moroni, the last Nephite prophet to record on the Book of Mormon plates, was also assured that he would have eternal life. As he was completing the abridgment of the Jaredite records, he prayed to the Lord for the Gentiles "that he would give unto the Gentiles grace, that they might have charity" (Ether 12:36). In response, the Lord told him that because he had been faithful his garments would be made clean. He further promised him that he would be made strong and receive a place he had prepared in the mansions of the Father. These promises came to Moroni because of his personal charity for the Gentiles, his faithfulness, and his recognition of his weaknesses. Moroni further testified that he saw and talked with Jesus face to face. (Ether 12:36-39.)

Many other Nephite prophets as well as some Jaredite prophets undoubtedly also attained the more sure word of prophecy. This assumption is based upon their implied statements or the appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ to them. These would include Jacob, brother of Nephi (2 1 Ne. 2:3-4; 2 Ne. 11:3) Enos (Enos 1:27); Alma the Younger (Alma 36:28) Mormon (Mormon 2:19); the brother of Jared (Ether 3:19-20) Emer (Ether 10:22) and Ether (Ether 13:1-13). The twelve disciples chosen among the Nephites were all given this same assurance (3 Ne. 28:1-8).

128The Book of Mormon teaches that the promise of eternal life was not limited to the prophets. Alma taught that many, an exceeding great many, in the days of Melchizedek were sanctified, became pure and spotless before God, and entered into his rest (Alma 13:10-12). Having one's calling and election made sure is available to all faithful members.

The Book of Mormon as the Key

The Book of Mormon is replete with promises of eternal life to those who follow the word of God. Nephi explained this to his brethren as he told them that the rod of iron "was the word of God; and whoso would hearken unto the word of God, and would hold fast unto it, they would never perish; neither could the temptations and the fiery darts of the adversary overpower them unto blindness, to lead them away to destruction" (1 Ne. 15:24). The rod of iron led to the "tree of life, whose fruit is most precious and most desirable above all other fruits; yea, and it is the greatest of all the gifts of God" (1 Ne. 15:36).

128 Nephi concluded his writing with a promise to his people that "the words which I have written in weakness will be made strong unto them; for it persuadeth them to do good; it maketh known unto them of their fathers; and it speaketh of Jesus, and persuadeth them to believe in him, and to endure to the end, which is life eternal" (2 Ne. 33:4).

Alma taught his son Helaman that the Liahona, the compass the Lord prepared to lead Lehi and his people through the wilderness, was a type and shadow of the word. He said: "It is as easy to give heed to the word of Christ, which will point to you a straight course to eternal bliss, as it was for our fathers to give heed to this compass, which would point unto them a straight course to the promised land. And now I say, is there not a type in this thing? For just as surely as this director did bring our fathers, by following its course, to the promised land, shall the words of Christ, if we follow their course, carry us beyond this vale of sorrow into a far better land of promise." (Alma 37:44-45.)

129And Mormon, as he abridged the book of Helaman, taught "that whosoever will may lay hold upon the word of God, which is quick and powerful, which shall divide asunder all the cunning and the snares and the wiles of the devil, and lead the man of Christ in a strait and narrow course across that everlasting gulf of misery which is prepared to engulf the wicked-and land their souls, yea, their immortal souls, at the right hand of God in the kingdom of heaven, to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and with Jacob, and with all our holy fathers, to go no more out. (Hel. 3:29-30)

129The Lord has given the Book of Mormon to this dispensation to more clearly direct all who will accept it in faith and work righteousness to gain the crown of eternal life. It will go forth to all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people so that all will eventually have this opportunity to accept it and learn the way through its word. Some will accept, but many will reject.
