Monte S. Nyman, Most Correct Book ( 1991)

13

A Warning Against Rejection

The four major writers or abridgers of the Book of Mormon gave warnings to those who rejected the book, just as they had each promised blessings and rewards to those who would accept it. Having seen the last days when the book would be among the inhabitants of the earth, they were well aware of the reasons, excuses, and objections that would be used to oppose the book, and they responded to those excuses and answered those objections. When we take all their comments into consideration, we see that they left the world without an excuse to reject the Book of Mormon.

Nephi's Warnings

Writing specifically to those who would "not partake of the goodness of God, and respect the words of the Jews [the Bible], and also my words [the Book of Mormon], and the words which shall proceed forth out of the mouth of the Lamb of God [other latter-day scripture]," Nephi bade "an everlasting farewell, for these words shall condemn you at the last day." The Lord had commanded him to testify that the record he sealed on earth would "be brought against" those who rejected it when they came to the judgment bar of God. (2 Ne. 33:14-15.)

131 Nephi responded to several situations that he had seen would arise with the publication of the Book of Mormon. Lehi and Nephi had both seen various people's reactions to the iron rod (the word of God) in the vision of the tree of life. One of these groups started on the path to eternal life (the tree), but when the mist of darkness arose, representing the temptations of the devil, they wandered off and were lost (1 Ne. 8:21-23; 1 Ne. 12:17). A close look at this group discloses that they never really took hold of the rod of iron. They were nonreaders who relied upon others' words, and when they commenced on the path they had nothing firm to grasp when the temptations of the devil arose. These are the same kind of people that Jesus described in the parable of the sower, when the seeds that fell by the wayside were devoured by the fowls. They had beard the word but did not understand it, and the devil took away that which was sown in their hearts (Matt. 13:4, 19). Many people have opportunity to receive the Book of Mormon but never read or study it for themselves, and so they are taken off the path by on temptation of the devil or another.

131 Nephi also said that his writings speak "harshly against sin, according to the plainness of the truth; wherefore, no man will be angry at the words which I have written save he shall be of the spirit of the devil" (2 Ne. 33:5). Many reject the Book of Mormon because it testifies against their life styles. As Nephi told Laman and Lemuel when they complained that he spoke hard things to them, "the guilty taketh the truth to be hard, for it cutteth them to the very center" (1 Ne. 16:2).

The second group that Lehi and Nephi saw in vision were those who caught hold of the end of the rod of iron (the word of God) and pressed "forward through the mist of darkness, clinging to the rod of iron, even until they did partake of the fruit of the tree" (1 Ne. 8:24). After partaking of the fruit, they were ashamed because those in the great and spacious building (the pride and wisdom of the world) were scoffing at them, and they fell away and were lost (1 Ne. 8:25-28). These people became ashamed of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and their acceptance by the world became more important to them than their eternal salvation. That they earlier were clinging to the rod suggest that they may not have had a firm grasp of the scriptures, perhaps reading only occasionally. That they had partaken of the fruit strongly suggests they had received a witness that the Book of Mormon was true. In the parable of the sower, this class was represented by the seeds that fell upon stony places but "had no deepness of earth." Lacking depth, these had no root and they withered in the sun. (Matt. 13:5-6.) The Savior said that such received the word with joy and endured for a while but were offended by the tribulation or persecution of the world (Matt. 13:20-21). Thus they are people who are not valiant in their testimony.

132The Book of Mormon teaches that these kinds of people are worse off than the other two classes of people described in the dream or vision. Alma teaches us this precept: "And thus we can plainly discern, that after a people have been once enlightened by the Spirit of God, and have had great knowledge of things pertaining to righteousness, and then have fallen away into sin and transgression, they become more hardened, and thus their state becomes worse than though they had never known these things" (Alma 24:30).

132The basis of this precept is that very few apostate Nephites in the Book of Mormon record were ever reconverted (Alma 24:14). Not only were they not reconverted, but they almost always ended up fighting against the Church (Alma 21:2-3; Alma 24:1-2; Alma 27:2). These people would seem to fir the following description given by the Lord: "After ye have repented of your sins, and witnessed unto the Father that ye are willing to keep my commandments, by the baptism of water, and have received the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost, and can speak with a new tongue, yea, even with the tongue of angels, and after this should deny me, it would have been better for you that ye had not known me" (2 Ne. 31:14; see Matt. 26:24).

Another group seen by Lehi and Nephi were those pressing toward the great and spacious building, some getting lost along the way, but many entering the building and then pointing their fingers in scorn at those who were partaking of the fruit (1 Ne. 8:31-33). The great and spacious building represents the pride and wisdom of the world (1 Ne. 11:35-36; 1 Ne. 12:18). The people represented here have no interest in the things of God other than to find satisfaction in ridiculing those who do. They are like the seed that fell among thorns and was choked out by the thorns, or the care of the world and the deceitfulness of riches (Matt. 13:7, 22). They are so concerned with the material things of life that they will not even listen to more than an initial invitation or introduction to the gospel. Nevertheless, they were given an opportunity.

133The pride and wisdom of the world may be represented in many ways. To those who refuse to receive all the Lord would give them and say, "We have received the word of God, and we need no more of the word of God, for we have enough," Nephi warned that "from them shall be taken away even that which they have" (2 Ne. 28:29-30). They do not understand that the Lord reveals his will line upon line and promises that those who receive it will be given more.

133 Nephi prophesied further that some would react to the Book of Mormon by saying, "A Bible! A Bible! We have got a Bible, and there cannot be any more Bible." (2 Ne. 29:3.) Nephi said that this would be a foolish reaction that comes from not understanding the law of witnesses. He then noted that the Bible is a witness to the Book of Mormon and the Book of Mormon is a witness to the Bible and that there will yet be a third witness from the lost tribes of Israel. (2 Ne. 29:4-14.)

Jacob's Warnings

Jacob also closed his record with a declaration that he would meet the reader at "the pleasing bar of God, which bar striketh the wicked with awful dread and feat" (Jacob 6:13). Preceding this declaration, he had warned against rejecting the words of the allegory of the house of Israel, the words of the prophets, and all the words spoken concerning Christ (Jacob 6:8). Al though Jacob didn't specify, that he was speaking of the Book of Mormon record, it's obvious that he was. In verse 9 he warned that those who did reject these things would be brought through "the power of the redemption and the resurrection, which is in Christ, . . . to stand with shame and awful guilt before the bar of God."

134Earlier, Nephi had quoted Jacob's warnings against being puffed up in learning and ignoring the counsel of God, being rich and despising the poor, being spiritually deaf and blind, being uncircumcised of heart, being liars and murderers, committing whoredoms (external uncleanness) and worshipping idol and being carnally minded and reviling against the truth (2 Ne. 9:27-40). Such behavior would logically include rejecting the Book of Mormon.

Mormon's Warnings

As Mormon was abridging the record of the Savior's earthly ministry among the Nephites, he paused to inform the reader that he could include less than "a hundredth part of the things which Jesus did truly teach unto the people" (3 Ne. 26:6). He noted that what he did abridge served as a test of faith that greater things would be manifest. Then he warned those who did not believe what he had written that the greater things would "be withheld from them, unto their condemnation," noting that he wrote those things which had been commanded him of the Lord (3 Ne. 26:10, 12). Therefore, rejecting the Book of Mormon, even without fighting against it, stops a person's progression and prevents him from attaining the eternal blessings available.

Mormon did not specify, what would cause a person to reject the Book of Mormon. However, he did warn all the ends of the earth that they would have to "stand before the judgment-seat of Christ, yea, every soul who belongs to the whole human family of Adam ... to be judged of [their] works, whether they be good or evil," desiring to persuade them "to repent and prepare to stand before the judgment-seat of Christ" (Morm. 3:20-22). He concluded his record by admonishing "the remnant of this people who are spared: (Morm. 7:1) to repent and believe the teachings in the Bible and the Book of Mormon, that it might "be well with [them] in the day of judgment" (Morm. 7:8-10).

Moroni's Warnings

Moroni gave two farewells to the reader in the Book of Mormon record, one as he finished his father's record (Morm. 8-9) and the second after he had abridged the Jaredite records and added a few items of his father's and his personal writings (Moro. 10:27-34). In both of these farewells, he warns the reader against rejecting the Book of Mormon.

135As a second witness to his father's declaration, Moroni promises that those who do not condemn the record will know of greater things (Morm. 8:12; see also 3 Ne. 26:10). He then gives several warnings that seem based upon his having seen our day and his knowing the reasons and excuses that people will use in rejecting his record (Morm. 8:34-35). His first warning is to those who find fault with the book. Acknowledging that he and his father are human and could have made mistakes, he notes that he knows of no faults and warns those who receive the book that if they judge it rashly, they will be judged by the same rash judgment (Morm. 8:17-20).

135As an extension of his comments regarding rash judgment, Moroni warns: "And he that shall breathe out wrath and strifes against the work of the Lord, and against the covenant people of the Lord who are the house of Israel, and shall say: We will destroy the work of the Lord, and the Lord will not remember his covenant which he hath made unto the house of Israel-the same is in danger to be hewn down and cast into the fire" (Morm. 8:21). Only those people moved upon by the devil will judge rashly and choose to fight against the Book of Mormon (2 1 Ne. 28:20; 2 Ne. 33:5).

136As Mormon notes, because all people are born with the Light of Christ they may judge correctly if they have retained that light in their hearts (Moro. 7:15-16). Those who judge through other means will reap the consequences.

136In describing the day when the Book of Mormon will come forth, Moroni warns against denying the prophecies of Isaiah concerning the coming forth of the book and denying the miracles associated with it (Morm. 8:23-26). He further warns that pride and corruption in the existing churches and the secret combinations will cause people to resist accepting the book (Morm. 8:27-28). He also warns against denying Christ, revelation, and miracles in general, because none "can stand against the works of the Lord" (Morm. 9:1-26). This warning section would be sufficient, but Moroni took a second opportunity to warn his readers.

136Addressing the ends of the earth, as had his father (Morm. 3:18), Moroni warned mankind against denying the gifts of God and dying in their sins (Moro. 10:24-26). He testified that he Would be at the bar of God and the Lord God would say to the reader: "Did I not declare my words unto you, which were written by this man, like as one crying from the dead, yea, even as one speaking out of the dust?" (Moro. 10:27.) He then declared, as he had in his previous farewell, that the coming forth of the book fulfilled the prophecies and quoted from Isaiah as evidence, bidding farewell to the reader until they met at "the pleasing bar of the great Jehovah, the Eternal Judge of both quick and dead" (Moro. 10:28-34).

136In a vision Nephi heard the Lamb of God declare: "For the time cometh ... that I will work a great and a marvelous work among the children of men; a work which shall be everlasting, either on the one hand or on the other-either to the convincing of them unto peace and life eternal, or unto the deliverance of them to the hardness of their hearts and the blindness of their minds unto their being brought down into captivity, and also into destruction, both temporally and spiritually, according to the captivity of the devil, of which I have spoken" (1 Ne. 14:7).

137This great and marvelous work is the Restoration, which includes as one of its key elements the Book of Mormon. In light of the testimonies of all four major contributors to the Book of Mormon-Nephi, Jacob, Mormon, and Moroni-the decision is up to the reader whether to reject or accept the Book of Mormon. Those who reject it might be compared to the ancient Amlicites, who, in rejecting the things of God, "brought upon themselves the curse; and even so doth every man that is cursed bring upon himself his own condemnation" (Alma 3:19). May we all read the Book of Mormon carefully and prayerfully, and may we be receptive to the Spirit, which will bear witness of the truthfulness of this marvelous work and a wonder.
