Monte S. Nyman, Most Correct Book ( 1991)

14

The Lord Has Spoken It, and the Elders Bear Witness

The Lord has revealed the contents and the purposes of bringing forth the Book of Mormon. The elders of the Church "heard and bear witness to the words of the glorious Majesty on high, to whom be glory forever and ever" (D&C 20:16). Apparently these elders included Joseph Smith the translator, Oliver Cowdery the scribe and special witness, and David Whitmer and Martin Harris, the other special witnesses whose testimony is printed in the front of each copy of the Book of Mormon. Even though other witnesses were also provided, these are the ones spoken of on the day the Church was organized as having heard and bearing witness to the Lord's words.

The Book of Mormon is not on trial; the people of the world and the members of the Church are on trial by how they use it or ignore it. The Lord has declared to the members of the Church that the Book of Mormon is true, and has commissioned the members to take his declarations to the world (D&C 20:10, 16). The Lord is the judge, the Book of Mormon is the testimony of Jesus Christ, and the elders of the Church are the witnesses of that testimony. As established in the previous two chapters, the verdict of this trial will be either eternal life or eternal condemnation.

The Lord Has Spoken

The Book of Mormon bears record of itself as the Lord's word. In his message to the future translator, Moroni declared: "And in the mouth of three witnesses shall these things be established; and the testimony of three, and this work, in the which shall be shown forth the power of God and also his word, of which the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost bear record-and all this shall stand as a testimony against the world at the last day" (Ether 5:4; italics added). As one reads the Book of Mormon, the power of God is manifested by the words and also by the Spirit that accompanies it. In the words of Brigham Young: "There is not a man or woman that loves the truth, who has heard the report of the Book of Mormon, but the Spirit of the Almighty has testified to him or her of its truth; neither has any man heard the name of Joseph Smith, but the Spirit has whispered to him--'He is a true Prophet' " (JD 1:93).

139In addition to the witness of the book itself, the Lord has repeatedly declared the truth and importance of the Book of Mormon. Some examples from the Doctrine and Covenants will verify this concept. While Joseph Smith was translating the Book of Mormon, the Lord revealed to him that he was to have no other gift until the translation work was finished, and added: "Woe shall come unto the inhabitants of the earth if they will not hearken unto my words; for hereafter you shall be ordained and go forth and deliver my words unto the children of men" (D&C 5:5-6). Also speaking of the Book of Mormon, the Lord continued by declaring to Joseph, "This generation shall have my word through you" (D&C 5:10).

As Oliver Cowdery began to act as Joseph's scribe, the Lord told him "that the words or the work which thou hast been writing are true" (D&C 6:17). As the work was being completed, the Lord revealed to Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris that Joseph "has translated the book, even that part which I have commanded him, and as your Lord and your God liveth it is true" (D&C 17:6). Shortly after he gave this revelation, the Lord again revealed to Oliver, "Behold, I have manifested unto you, by my Spirit in many instances, that the things which you have written are true; wherefore you know that they are true. And if you know that they are true, behold, I give unto you a commandment, that you rely upon the things which are written." (D&C 18:2-3.) Soon after this, Martin Harris was commanded to finance "the printing of the Book of Mormon, which contains the truth and the word of God-which is my word to the Gentile, that soon it may go to the Jew, of whom the Lamanites are a remnant, that they may believe the gospel, and look not for a Messiah to come who has already come" (D&C 19:26-27). These revelations appear to have been given to prepare Oliver, David, and Martin to become the three special witnesses to the Book of Mormon.

140The Lord periodically reminded the Church of the role of the Book of Mormon in the Church. In August 1830 he revealed that it contained the fulness of the gospel and that it was indeed the stick of Ephraim prophesied by Ezekiel (D&C 27:5; Ezek. 37:15-20). In October 1830 the Lord declared that the book, along with the holy scriptures, was for the instruction of the Church (D&C 33:16). In February 1831 he revealed the law of teachings to the Church, instructing the various priesthood offices to "teach the principles of my gospel, which are in the Bible and the Book of Mormon, in the which is the fulness of the gospel" (D&C 42:12). We see from these revelations how the Lord looks upon the Book of Mormon in these latter days. The elders of the Church were special witnesses of his work.

The Elders Bear Witness

Joseph Smith bore witness that the angel Moroni called him to the work of God, showed him the plates, and instructed him in preparation to translate (Joseph Smith History 1:29-54). Joseph's entire life's work is a testimony to the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon-the two cannot be separated. While he spoke often of the book, the following two comments bear repeating:

141Take away the Book of Mormon and the revelations, and where is our religion? We have none; for without Zion, and a place of deliverance, we must fall. (TPJS, p. 71.)

141I told the brethren that the Book of Mormon was the most correct of any book on earth, and the keystone of our religion, and a man would get nearer to God by abiding by its precepts, than by any other book (TPJS, p. 194).

141A second elder to testify was Oliver Cowdery. He was the scribe for Joseph Smith in translating most of the book. In addition, he was one of three special witnesses. He testified of his work as a scribe: "I wrote with my own pen the entire Book of Mormon (save a few pages), as it fell from the lips of the Prophet Joseph Smith, as he translated by the gift and power of God, by the means of the Urim and Thummim, or, as it is called by that book 'Holy Interpreters' " (CHC 1:28).

141Following the revelations given to Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris spoken of above (D&C 6, D&C 17, D&C 18, D&C 19), these three men were privileged to become the Three Witnesses promised in the Book of Mormon to behold the record by the power of God (2 Ne. 27:12; Ether 5:3). 1 They testified that they were privileged to see the plates and other sacred objects through the ministering of an angel and heard the voice of God declare that the plates had been translated by the gift and power of God; therefore they knew of a surety that the work was true (HC 1:52-59; see The Testimony of Three Witnesses in the prefatory pages of the Book of Mormon). This privilege of seeing by the power of God made them special witnesses, unlike other witnesses.

Other Witnesses

In addition to referring to the three special witnesses, the Book of Mormon promised that a few others "according to the will of God" would be privileged to view the plates (2 Ne. 27:13). Moroni, in writing to the future translator, specified that he may be privileged to "show the plates unto those who shall assist to bring forth this work" (Ether 5:2). These references point to the Eight Witnesses, whose testimony also accompanies that of the Three Witnesses in each copy of the Book of Mormon (HC 1:57-58). (Apparently Mary Whitmer, wife of Peter Whitmer, Sr., also had the privilege of seeing the plates. See H. Donl Peterson, Moroni-Ancient Prophet, Modern Messenger [Bountiful, Utah: Horizon Publishers, 1983], pp. 114, 116.) Although the Eight Witnesses were not shown the plates by an angel nor did they hear the voice of God, their witness plays an important role in the trial of the world by the Book of Mormon. As B. H. Roberts points out, in the case of the Book of Mormon the Lord provided two types of witnesses, a spiritual one and a temporal one: the Three Witnesses had a spiritual manifestation, and the Eight had a temporal witness in a natural setting. This was apparently by design. For those who challenge the spiritual witness as a hallucination or delusion, the temporal witness offsets their accusation. To those who challenge the temporal witness with a charge of fabrication or deceit, the spiritual witness offsets their accusation. These corroborating witnesses leave the world without justification for rejecting the witness. (See CHC 1:153-55.) But there is yet another witness.

142The Book of Mormon promises each individual reader a witness of the Holy Ghost of the book's truthfulness if the person seeks it through sincere prayer (Moro. 10:3-5). The Doctrine and Covenants also testifies that a manifestation of the Spirit will come to those who believe the book (D&C 5:16). The Lord has furnished the evidence: the collective and individual witnesses. Whether one is a member of his church or not, he must meet the test of faith to gain the witness: "Ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith" (Ether 12:6).

143President Ezra Taft Benson has given this fitting admonition, which will serve as a conclusion to this chapter and to this book:

143We are not required to prove that the Book of Mormon is true or is an authentic record through external evidences-though there are many. It never has been the case, nor is it so now, that the studies of the learned will prove the Book of Mormon true or false. The origin, preparation, translation, and verification of the truth of the Book of Mormon have all been retained in the hands of the Lord, and the Lord makes no mistakes. You can be assured of that.

143God has built in His own proof system of the Book of Mormon as found in Moroni, chapter 10, and in the testimonies of the Three and the Eight Witnesses and in various sections of the Doctrine and Covenants.

143We each need to get our own testimony of the Book of Mormon through the Holy Ghost. Then our testimony, coupled with the Book of Mormon, should be shared with others so that they, too, can know through the Holy Ghost of its truthfulness. ("The Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants," Ensign 17 [May 1987]: 83-84.)
