Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 2 ( 1997)

Three Steps to Know Our Father

In D&C 67 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Prophet received a revelation in Hyrum, Ohio, about knowing God. Verse 10 is especially beautiful because it relates specifically to missionaries: "And again, verily I say unto you that it is your privilege, and a promise I give unto you that have been ordained unto this ministry [It's our privilege. We've been ordained and set apart to this ministry. It's you and me; it's us. This is our privilege], that inasmuch as you strip yourselves from jealousies [which are very bad] and fears [which are not very good], and humble yourselves before me, for ye are not sufficiently humble, the veil shall be rent and you shall see me and know that I am--not by the carnal neither natural mind, but with the spiritual." In other words, we can never know our Father until we overcome jealousies and fears, and humble ourselves.

1) Destroy Jealousy with Love

What would you say is the absolute antithesis, or opposite, of jealousy? It is love and charity, because jealousy cannot coexist with those feelings. If you find yourself feeling jealous of anybody for their intellect, their looks, their clothes, or their possessions, you know that in your heart you have a lack of the love of God or the love of Christ. It will be like a barometer. When you see somebody doing something good or doing something better than you, maybe looking better or wearing a nicer suit, you say, "Isn't that nice! Isn't that beautiful! Boy, they did well on that, didn't they!" Just watch yourself grow. You see, in the hereafter nobody is going to ask you what car you drove, or how big your house was, or what kind of hair you had (or, in my case, didn't have).

Look for opportunities to praise people rather than tear them down. When you tear somebody down, you go down with them. You dig your own pit. When you build somebody up, you rise with them. Jealousy can be destroyed through the power of love.

2) Five Ways to Overcome Fear

As I have searched the scriptures, I have discovered five things that conquer fear. Love, faith, knowledge, preparation, and experience will conquer fear.

Now, I know what fear is. As a little boy, I was afraid of the dark and would always ask my mother: "Can the light be on? Momma, can you leave the hall light on and leave the door open just a little bit?"

"Yes, Ed, my sweet darling," she would answer.

I can remember as a ten-year-old boy working on the farm. Once in a while, if we were really good, we'd get to see a movie on Saturday. I'll never forget the movie The Werewolf Meets the Mummy with Frankenstein. Can you imagine what that did to a ten-year-old?

Unfortunately, that night was the time for our water turn. For you city slickers, let me explain. To make fruit trees grow, you have to water them. You send water down the furrows that surround the trees, the trees grow, and then you harvest the crops.

We knew the schedule, so Daddy said, "Boys, go out and start the water turn."

James and Glen were big, and I was little, so they got to be in charge. "Ed, you go down alone to the end of the furrow," they directed, "and when the water gets there, let us know so we can change the dam and move it along so we get the water in each row."

On this night there was a full moon. Now you know the werewolf folklore: when the moon is full, the werewolf is out. He was out that night, I was sure. To make matters worse, I was equally certain that Frankenstein was on the loose and the mummies were stumbling around the fruit trees. It was dark, and the moon went behind a cloud, and the trees were there, and once in a while a little pheasant flew by.

"Oh, boy," I thought. And when it's dark, what do you do? You kind of hum and you whistle. Why do you whistle and hum when you're in the dark? Because you're afraid, and somehow whistling and humming makes you feel a little better. And why was I afraid? It was dark and it was silent. All I knew was that I could not see clearly. When I could not see, I had no knowledge. I just didn't have enough faith.

Now, in that little humorous vignette is the essence of fear in your lives. When you feel fear through lack of knowledge, faith, or love, you will not have the capacity to effectively go to your Father. If you want to know God, then you must pay the price by studying. You need to search the scriptures and live the scriptures. You must have knowledge, faith, love, preparation, and experience, and then your fear will be gone.

3) The Last Step: Humbling Ourselves

The last step is humility. Until we humble ourselves, there will be no spiritual growth. It's interesting to note that in Hel. 3:35, the Nephites did fast and pray oft, waxing stronger and stronger in their humility. If you want to be strong in humility, pray with real intent and you'll have that humility. By exercising humility, love, faith, and knowledge--combined with mighty prayer--we will learn to know our Father.
