Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 2 ( 1997)

The Love of Our Father Helps Us Communicate

When we communicate with our Father, we know how he feels, and through that communication, we also discover how we should feel. If you were to describe Heavenly Father's greatest feeling, what would it be? Love. That's the great motive in his eternal plan. And how is that feeling manifest? Where does it fit in the grand plan our Father has outlined? In his children.

Heavenly Father's greatest feeling is his love for his children. John 3:16 describes the great love our Heavenly Father and the Savior have for us: "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life."

In other words, when you truly love, you empathize and feel for other people. The love that God the Father, Elohim, gave to us was his Son. Christ's love for us is explained clearly in 2 Ne. 26:24: "He doeth not anything save it be for the benefit of the world; for he loveth the world, even that he layeth down his own life that he may draw all men unto him. Wherefore, he commandeth none that they shall not partake of his salvation." He gave his life for us; he atoned. So love, then, becomes understanding this feeling, this empathy toward one another.

Now, if we've prayed to our Heavenly Father and communicated, do we know what we are seeking in our communication with Heavenly Father? Think about it; don't answer yet. What are you seeking when you pray to Heavenly Father? If you were to seek any kind of knowledge, or anything else for that matter, what would you seek? Hopefully, you would seek the Spirit.

What would the Spirit tell you? Think of the Savior in the garden and his submission to the will of the Father. Our insatiable desire should be the same--to do the will of the Father. And what is the will of the Father? The scriptures teach that the thing of greatest worth to our Father is the worth of the soul (see D&C 18:10). Thus we can deduce that the will of the Father is simple: That all mankind might be taught the gospel of his Son and have an opportunity to be baptized and come into his church.

Now that we understand this communication with the Father, we're moving to the next level. When we seek first to understand, then we will be more easily understood. When we understand, we can more easily empathize. Empathy simply means feeling how other people feel. When we empathize, we know we are communicating. If we haven't done that yet, then we haven't communicated, and we may just have a verbal barrage going back and forth. Remember, seek first to understand, then to be understood, and finally to feel how others feel. Then we will be communicating.

So in communication, we want to use our ears and our hearts so we can listen in order to know and to understand. Think of your own life when you've had a tough day. You felt misunderstood and unloved, didn't you? We've all had days like that. It really helps to have someone understand the way we feel.

Communication becomes the most important thing we will do on this earth to bring happiness--both to ourselves and to others. If we don't communicate our message, our message is not heard. Later in life, you will understand the importance of communication when you get married. For now, you should just be prepared to communicate or perish.
