Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 2 ( 1997)

Communicating with Your Companion: Express Your Love

We must understand that everybody really wants to be loved, and the people who seem the most cocky are often the ones who are the most in need of love. Take the time to get down on the root level with your companion and your district and show love.

I had some glorious experiences with the youth in our stake when we went on a pioneer, or wilderness, trek. We divided up into "families." There was simply no one else for us to talk to but each other. And all of a sudden, we were all forced to learn the process of communicating.

After three days in the wilderness, a testimony meeting was held. I'll never forget one boy who thought he was pretty cool. He stood up and said, "I was with old Jason in our ward. I always thought that Jason was so stupid and so dozy, I wouldn't have given him the time of day. But let me tell you, Jason was in our family on this trek, and I got to know him, and now I love Jason. He is my dear pal, and we'll be friends forever. Oh, I love that guy! I wish I had taken the time before this to become his pal."

You can save yourselves a lot of problems during this earth life by expressing the love of God and the love of Christ through communication. Whether it be verbal, whether it be by touch, or whatever it be, please communicate your love. (See John 3:34-35.) I know it takes time and it takes effort, but nothing else you do during your mission will bring greater rewards. And without communicating your love, true communication simply won't occur.

Of course you won't meet your companion and immediately say, "Oh, you're my companion, and I love you!" That doesn't happen. Neither does "Oh, we're married in the temple. Great! That's it for eternal life, super!" It's like the man who said to his wife when she was feeling unloved and unappreciated, "I told you that I loved you and that if it ever changed, I'd let you know. So why are you so upset?" We all need more than that. Even I need to be told every day that I'm loved.

I have a fourteen-year-old daughter, Tricia, and every night when I get home she greets me with "Hi, Daddy, I love ya!" My heart warms, my mouth smiles, and my burdens are lifted.

In your communication, start the process now of working with yourself and with your companion and learning to express your love for each other and the great work that you are doing together.
