Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 2 ( 1997)

Build Trust and Prepare to Accept Loving "Feedback"

In communication, one of the most difficult things to deal with is when we are doing something that may not be perfect, and we need counsel on it, and everyone else can see it except us. Let me tell you how it started in our family.

"Sweetheart," my wife said to me one day, "I think we need to take time to evaluate each other and how we're doing." So we had our first big evaluation (we call it companionship inventory).

We sat down and I said, "Honey, how are you doing? How am I doing? What could I work on?"

"Oh you're fine, sweetheart," she answered. "But it might be nice if you'd work a little more in the yard."

"What do you mean?" I bristled. "I've been slaving in mouths [I'm a dentist], filling cavities, taking out wisdom teeth, foraging in the field for food, and you're worried about whether or not I'm working in the yard!?" I didn't say that, but I thought that!

I simply wasn't ready to accept any constructive criticism. Feedback requires a person to say, "Tell me what I can change; I am ready and open and willing to listen." It almost takes the courage of David because our hearts are so very sensitive and vulnerable. What you have to do is establish trust in your relationship first. Once you build up a relationship of trust, then you can communicate and say, "Help me." And when you do that in your companionship, you will really begin to grow.

My wife can tell me anything now, and I'm so grateful because we have a relationship in which I can say, "Sweetheart . . ." and she understands what I'm trying to communicate.

The other day I was having a tough day, feeling a little sick and weak and powerless. I came into the house, found my darling wife, and said, "Sweetheart . . ." I was totally exhausted and I wanted to go to sleep, yet I knew I couldn't. She saw that, heard the plea in my voice, and gave me a hug.

"Honey, I just need some strength," I said. "I'm getting weak." I felt her strength in that hug pouring into me, sustaining me, and carrying me through the rest of the day. She understood my troubles, and loved and supported me with the love of Christ. She didn't say, "Why don't you do this?" or "Why don't you do that?" She didn't find fault with me or scold my weakness. She simply loved me because we share a deep trust in our relationship.

We will never be able to give productive feedback until we build a relationship of trust. After we have reached that level, then we can be open and candid, saying, "Help me, Elder (or Sister), what do I really need?"

It's so wonderful now when my wife says, "Sweetheart, it would really help if you would . . ." And I can answer, "Oh honey, thank you, I'll be so much better." Feedback is the essence of humility.

After we have a relationship of trust in our communication, we have enough humility to say, "Okay, tell me because I want to grow." If we have an insatiable desire to be like the Savior, people can say, "Hey, you've got to change that, you need to shape up." And we'll be able to answer, "Okay, okay, I'll be better." As missionaries, when you can do that, you will change, and the communication in your companionship will be open, candid, and honest.
