Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 2 ( 1997)

The Example of Couple Missionaries

Now, you senior couples will witness some of the most beautiful things you've ever seen in your lives. There will be less-active members who have been less-active for five or ten years, and something like this will happen almost daily when senior couples are working for the Lord: You will knock on a door and introduce yourself. "Hello Mr. Jones, we're Brother and Sister Woodbury. We have just come here on our mission, and we would love to drop in and see you. You are members of the Church."

"Yeah, well, we don't go anymore."

"Oh, could we just come in and visit with you for a minute, just to let you know how things are?"

"Sure, come on in."

Then you share your experience with the bishop, who says: "How'd you get into that house? There hasn't been anybody in that house for ten years." I tell you, mission presidents will do anything to have you.

Couples have the maturity of life and the capacity to love because they've had us as their children. They have the power of love that radiates from their entire beings. When this love is in you, it radiates from you, too. The words I've used in these sample opening conversations are fine, but if love isn't there, the words won't do anything. You see, when we really have that love, the people we meet will feel it. If we don't have it, we can pray for it with all our heart until we receive it (see Moro. 7:48). Then, when we approach others with love, the message will be communicated.

But beware! If we understand these principles and say, "Oh, I love everybody," yet live a hermit's life, it's like being a monk and saying, "Oh yes, I'm anxious to spread the gospel." Do you see the problem? Love isn't love until you give it away! Communications become the essence of your power to influence and strengthen others. "Therefore, strengthen your brethren in all your conversation, in all your prayers, in all your exhortations, and in all your doings" (D&C 108:7).
