Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 2 ( 1997)

Make Communication Bless Others' Lives

The greatest thing we'll ever do to help other people is to use our personal influence, and our personal influence is directly proportional to our ability to radiate the love of God or the love of Christ that is within our very being.

It doesn't take a mommy or a daddy very long to learn that what they are is what they teach their children. We may use a thousand words, but it's our actions that teach our children. By the same token, what we are is what teaches our investigators, so we need to understand and build our ability to communicate in order to let the love come through.

When we love a person enough, we'll communicate according to their needs. Let me give you an example. I taught seminary for five years when I was a dental student and before I went to work as a dentist. I was teaching New Testament, and I always had my students fill out a little form with their likes, dislikes, hobbies, etc. A young man was in one class. He always sat off to the side, and nobody really talked to him. However, he was always early for class, coming up to the front and sitting down.

"How are you doing, Mike?" I always asked.

The reply was always the same: "Good."

We had a relationship of trust, but it was only because I was his seminary teacher. Everyone always likes their seminary teacher; we're just nice, likable people! But Mike and I had no common denominator. We had nothing in common. So I looked at Mike's likes/dislikes chart. I noted that his favorite TV show was Hogan's Heroes.

That night I watched Hogan's Heroes. The next day Mike came into class and sat down. "Hey, Mike, what did you think of old Shultz?" I asked. "Was that a crackup last night or what?"

"Oh, Brother Ed, you mean you watch Hogan's Heroes?" he replied. "Hey, Brother Ed, you're okay. You like what I like."

At that point, my communication with Mike met his needs. Now, this doesn't mean we talk about bad things with others in order to establish a common denominator; this just means we take enough time to care about people and the things they care about.
