Ed J. Pinegar, Especially for Missionaries, vol. 2 ( 1997)

Conclusion

When we choose to communicate with love, knowledge, faith, and skills, caring so much for our brothers and sisters that we'd do anything so that others might not endure endless torment, we will pay the price to communicate, no matter how steep. We must pay the price, and it can be tough. There will be times when you want to walk away, when you want to say, "I don't care." That's the biggest mistake of all! I hope you understand that as we grow in the gospel, as we gain a greater desire to show and give love, we must become great communicators by and through the Spirit. When the Spirit comes upon us, we will communicate.

I pray that we will pay the price and that we will care enough to communicate in love, thereby becoming great disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ. I know what we are doing is the Lord's will. I know it is important. I know the transcending events of our lives are when we communicate with people to bless them. I would hope that we would often get on our knees and pray to our Father. Ponder with your companion; maybe tonight will be the first night you can say, "Hey, I feel like I'm brave enough. Open up, give me just a little feedback. Not too much. Just enough to . . .well, first of all, why don't you tell me about something I'm doing good?"

"Okay, I like the way you smile."

"That's good, I'll smile a little more." And take the time to tenderly, lovingly help each other. If you're feeling especially brave, you might try this: Write five things that are neat about your companion. "I like you because you are bald." Or, "I like you because you've got a high, raspy voice." (Those were some reasons that my companion liked me.) Just give each other five reasons why you like each other. Post those lists above your beds, or right by the mirror, or wherever you want, and then look at them.

The next day, write three or four things that could possibly use improvement."Maybe here's something you might maybe possibly perhaps if convenient, you might, you know, maybe, uh, tract." And who knows? You might help somebody. Love each other enough to help each other, but love each other enough not to destroy each other. Don't hurt anybody; this is a tender time, but it can be a growing time.

I love missionaries dearly, and I pray that the Lord will bless you. My wish and my desire is that we will pray for each other to do the Lord's will. I bear witness to you that we are about his work and pray that we may be Christ's disciples.
